
UNDERSTANDING PHYSICS
Series Editors
John P. Ertel
Robert C. Hilborn
David Peak
Thomas Rossing
Cindy Schwarz
Springer
New York
Berlin
Heidelberg
Hong Kong
London
Milan
Paris
Tokyo

UNDERGRADUATE TEXTS IN CONTEMPORARY PHYSICS
Cassidy, Holton, and Rutherford, Understanding Physics
Enns and McGuire, Computer Algebra Recipes: A Gourmet's Guide to the 
Mathematical Models of Science
Hassani, Mathematical Methods: For Students of Physics and Related Fields
Holbrow, Lloyd, and Amato, Modern Introductory Physics
Roe, Probability and Statistics in Experimental Physics, Second Edition
Rossing and Chiaverina, Light Science: Physics and the Visual Arts

UNDERSTANDING 
PHYSICS
David Cassidy
Gerald Holton
James Rutherford
With 571 Illustrations, with 6 in Full Color
123

David Cassidy
Gerald Holton
Professor of Natural Science
Mallinckrodt Professor of Physics and History 
Natural Science Program
of Science, Emeritus
Hofstra University
358 Jefferson Physical Laboratory
Hempstead, NY 11549
Harvard University
USA
Cambridge, MA 02138
chmdcc@Hofstra.edu
USA
James Rutherford
Education Advisor
American Association for Advancement 
of Science
Washington, DC 20005
USA
Series Editors
John P. Ertel
Robert C. Hilborn
Cindy Schwarz
Department of Physics
Department of Physics
Department of Physics and 
United States Naval Academy
Amherst College
Astronomy
572 Holloway Road
Amherst, MA 01002
Vassar College
Annapolis, MD 21402-5026
USA
Poughkeepsie, NY 12601
USA
rchilborn@amherst.edu
USA
jpe@nadn.navy.mil
schwarz@vaxsar.vassar.edu
David Peak
Thomas Rossing
Department of Physics
Department of Physics
Utah State University
Northern Illinois University
Logan, UT 84322
De Kalb, IL 60115
USA
USA
peakd@cc.usu.edu
rossing@physics.niu.edu
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Cassidy, David C., 1945-
Understanding physics / David Cassidy, Gerald Holton, F. James Rutherford.
p.
cm. — (Undergraduate texts in contemporary physics)
Rev. ed. of: The project physics course. 1971.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-387-98756-8 (pbk. : acid-free paper)
1. Physics.
I. Holton, Gerald James.
II. Rutherford, F. James (Floyd James), 1924-
III. Harvard Project Physics. Project physics course.
IV. Title.
V. Series.
QC23.2 .C37 2002
530—dc21
2002020937
ISBN 0-387-98756-8
Printed on acid-free paper.
© 2002 Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the written
permission of the publisher (Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010,
USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis. Use in connection with
any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed is forbidden.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they
are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are
subject to proprietary rights.
Printed in the United States of America.
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
SPIN 15110102
Springer-Verlag
New York Berlin Heidelberg
A member of BertelsmannSpringer ScienceBusiness Media GmbH

To the students and instructors whose advice, while using 
the draft versions of the text and guides, helped to improve our work greatly; 
and to Joan Laws, whose quiet expertise all these years 
helped to bring the project to success.

This page intentionally left blank 

Science is an adventure of the whole human race to learn to live in and perhaps
to love the universe in which they are. To be a part of it is to understand, to un-
derstand oneself, to begin to feel that there is a capacity within man far beyond
what he felt he had, of an infinite extension of human possibilities. . . . 
I propose that science be taught at whatever level, from the lowest to the high-
est, in the humanistic way. It should be taught with a certain historical under-
standing, with a certain philosophical understanding, with a social understanding
and a human understanding in the sense of the biography, the nature of the peo-
ple who made this construction, the triumphs, the trials, the tribulations.
—I.I. Rabi, Nobel Laureate in Physics

This page intentionally left blank 

Preface
Understanding Physics is a completely revised, updated, and expanded edi-
tion of the Project Physics Course. It is an integrated introductory physics
course, developed with funding from the Carnegie Corporation and the
Sloan Foundation and with the close cooperation of Springer-Verlag 
New York.
In approach and content, Understanding Physics follows the trail blazed
by the earlier versions, but it includes more recent developments in physics
and a stronger emphasis on the relationships among physics, technology,
and society. We have sought especially to incorporate the salient lessons of
recent physics education research and practical experience gained in the
classroom.
The Audience
Understanding Physics is written primarily for undergraduate college stu-
dents not intending (at least initially) to enter careers in science or engi-
neering. These may include liberal-arts students, business majors, prelegal,
and prospective architecture students. We have found that when the course
is taken with laboratory work, it has been deemed suitable by medical
schools for premedical students.
An important group that this course is intended to serve are persons who
plan to teach, or are already teaching, in K-12 classrooms. As has been
widely discussed, there is a special need for improvement in the science 
education of current and future teachers as an important step toward achiev-
ing greater scientific literacy in general. Many states have recently incor-
porated the contextual approach used in Understanding Physics into state sci-
ence education criteria. It is in part to meet the challenges of teacher
education that this course was developed as a resource, along with the usual
pedagogical training.
Since college students in introductory science courses usually represent
a wide spectrum of expertise in science and mathematics, this book assumes
ix

no prerequisites in science or mathematics beyond high-school algebra,
geometry, and general science. In this text we have taken great care to de-
rive all necessary equations very patiently, but whenever possible we have
used narrative text instead of equations to convey the meanings of laws and
concepts. Even if students have taken physics in high school, they often
still lack proficiency in even the most basic concepts and techniques. One
of the aims of this course is to enable all students to gain experience and
confidence with physical-science concepts and quantitative methods, and
with an understanding of the nature of science itself. Of course, for classes
in which the students are sufficiently prepared, instructors may decide to
place more emphasis on quantitative or other aspects of physics as appro-
priate. The course is designed with such flexibility in mind.
The Approach
A unique feature of this text, like its predecessor, is that it places the fun-
damental concepts of physics within the broader humanistic and historical
contexts in which they arose, but without handicapping students in tests
that compare their performance with students who have taken a less broadly
conceived, conventional physics course. Research has shown that students
exposed to our approach gain a much deeper understanding of both the
content and the processes of scientific research, as well as an appreciation
not only of what we know, but also of how and why we think we know it.
This approach has been endorsed by several national organizations, in-
cluding the National Science Foundation, the Research Council of the 
National Academy of Sciences, and Project 2061 of the American Associ-
ation for the Advancement of Science. The National Research Council
stated in its National Science Education Standards:*
In learning science, students need to understand that science re-
flects its history and is an ongoing, changing enterprise. The stan-
dards for the history and nature of science recommend the use of
history in school science programs to clarify different aspects of  sci-
entific inquiry, the human aspects of science, and the role that sci-
ence has played in the development of various cultures.
Thus, Understanding Physics operates on two levels, providing both the
fundamental concepts of physics and the humanistic and intellectual con-
texts in which the concepts developed. In addition to the necessary con-
cepts and equations, intentionally developed patiently, and using easy-to-
visualize examples, it aims to convey a real sense of the nature of scientific
x
PREFACE
* Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1996; p. 107.

thinking, the way intuitions about science had to be, often painfully, ac-
quired by scientists, and what our current concepts really mean. However,
this text is not intended to be used by itself, but rather as part of a pro-
gram as integrated as possible with hands-on activities, small-group dis-
cussions either in or out of class, and other encouragements to active learn-
ing that enable the subject matter to come alive. Some of these and other
possible activities are suggested in the accompanying Student Guide.
Understanding Physics is divided into two parts. Each part is self-
contained, with enough material for a course lasting at least one semester.
Each part encompasses topics in classical physics along with one of the two
contemporary nonclassical physics: relativity theory and quantum mechan-
ics. Both parts taken together may serve for a full one-year course. We have
sought from the beginning to provide instructors with maximum flexibil-
ity in adapting the course to students of different backgrounds, to differ-
ent educational settings, to different semester time frames, and to differ-
ent preferences for course topics. Some suggestions for different scenarios
are provided in the accompanying Instructor Guide. All of the course's
printed materials, as well as links to many related Web sites for both in-
structors and students, may also be accessed on the World Wide Web via
the publisher's site at http://www.springer-ny.com/up.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Carnegie Corporation of New York and to the Sloan
Foundation for their generous and timely support. Thomas von Foerster
and the staff of Springer-Verlag New York provided much-appreciated en-
couragement, support, and helpful advice during the years of preparation
and testing of these materials in draft form. We also thank David Couzens,
our developmental editor, whose outstanding work on the illustrations and
his suggestions regarding the content contributed greatly to this work, and
Edwin F. Taylor for his very helpful comments regarding the chapter on
relativity theory. We are indebted to our colleagues at Hofstra University
and to the other instructors who thoroughly tested the draft of the text and
guides in their classes, and offered many helpful comments and sugges-
tions. We also thank our colleagues and the individuals who carefully re-
viewed the materials and provided insightful suggestions. Last but not least,
we thank the students at all testing sites for their valuable suggestions and
encouragement. Without the contributions of all of these individuals and
institutions, this work would not have been possible.
David Cassidy
Gerald Holton
James Rutherford
PREFACE
xi

This page intentionally left blank 

Brief Contents
Preface   ix
PART ONE: MATTER AND MOTION
Prologue to Part One   3
1
Motion Matters   15
2
Moving the Earth   57
3
Understanding Motion   117
4
Newton's Unified Theory   171
5
Conserving Matter and Motion   211
6
The Dynamics of Heat   253
7
Heat: A Matter of Motion   293
8
Wave Motion   331
9
Einstein and Relativity Theory   405
PART TWO: FIELDS AND ATOMS
Prologue to Part Two   451
10
Electricity and Magnetism   459
11
The Electric Age   505
12
Electromagnetic Waves   549
13
Probing the Atom   585
14
The Quantum Model of the Atom   621
15
Quantum Mechanics   661
16
Solids Matter   693
17
Probing the Nucleus   723
18
The Nucleus and Its Applications   763
Illustration Credits   819
Index   829
xiii

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
Preface   ix
PART ONE:  MATTER AND MOTION
PROLOGUE TO PART ONE
3
1 Living Ideas   3
2 Our Place in Time and Space   4
3 First Things First   6
4 Aristotle's Universe   9
CHAPTER 1.  MOTION MATTERS
15
1.1
Motion   15
1.2
Galileo   16
1.3
A Moving Object   18
1.4
Picturing Motion   25
1.5
Speed and Velocity   30
1.6
Changing the Speed   31
1.7
Falling Freely   36
1.8
Two New Sciences
38
1.9
Falling Objects   41
1.10 The Consequences   47
xv

CHAPTER 2.  MOVING THE EARTH
57
2.1
Astronomy, Motion, and Mechanics   57
2.2
The Scientific Revolution   58
2.3
Copernicus   59
2.4
The Geocentric View   61
2.5
Copernicus versus Ptolemy   75
2.6
Arguments for the Heliocentric System   79
2.7
Arguments against the Heliocentric System   82
2.8
Carrying Forth the Revolution   86
2.9
New Data   88
2.10 New Orbits   92
2.11 New Observations   102
2.12 Galileo Condemned   109
CHAPTER 3.  UNDERSTANDING MOTION
117
A.
THE THREE LAWS OF MOTION   117
3.1
Natural Motion and Newton's First Law   117
3.2
Forces in Equilibrium   123
3.3
More about Vectors   125
3.4
Newton's Second Law of Motion   128
3.5
Measuring Mass and Force   132
3.6
More about Weight, and Weightlessness   136
3.7
Newton's Third Law of Motion   140
B.
THE THREE LAWS IN ACTION   143
3.8
Projectile Motion   143
3.9
The Earth Can Move!   146
3.10 Galilean Relativity   149
3.11 Orbiting Satellites   150
3.12 Circular Motion   156
xvi
CONTENTS

CHAPTER 4.  NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY
171
4.1
Newton and Seventeenth-Century Science   171
4.2
Isaac Newton   173
4.3
Newton's Principia
176
4.4
The Inverse-Square Law   179
4.5
The Law of Universal Gravitation   182
4.6
Newton's Syntheses   185
4.7
Newton and Hypotheses   186
4.8
The Magnitude of the Gravitational Force   188
4.9
The Value of G, and Some Consequences   192
4.10 Further Successes   198
4.11 The Nature of Newton's Work   204
CHAPTER 5.  CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
211
5.1
Conservation of Mass   211
5.2
Collisions   217
5.3
Conservation of Momentum   219
5.4
Momentum and Newton's Laws of Motion   223
5.5
Isolated Systems   226
5.6
Elastic Collisions   228
5.7
Leibniz and the Conservation Law   231
5.8
Work   233
5.9
Work and Kinetic Energy   235
5.10 Potential Energy   236
5.11 Conservation of Mechanical Energy   239
5.12 Forces that Do No Work   243
CHAPTER 6.  THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
253
6.1 Heat as a Form of Energy   253
6.2 The Steam Engine and the Industrial Revolution   258
6.3 Power and Efficiency of Engines   267
CONTENTS
xvii

6.4 Carnot and the Beginnings of Thermodynamics   269
6.5 Arriving at a General Conservation Law   273
6.6 The Two Laws of Thermodynamics   278
6.7 Faith in the Laws of Thermodynamics   282
CHAPTER 7.  HEAT: A MATTER OF MOTION
293
A.
THE KINETIC THEORY   293
7.1 An Ideal Gas   293
7.2 A Model for the Gaseous State   300
7.3 The Speeds of Molecules   302
7.4 The Sizes of Molecules   305
B.
APPLYING THE KINETIC THEORY   308
7.5 Kinetic-Theory Explanation of the Ideal Gas Law   308
7.6 Kinetic-Theory Explanation of the Second Law   313
7.7 Maxwell's Demon and the Statistical View 
of the Second Law   315
7.8 Two Challenges   319
CHAPTER 8.  WAVE MOTION
331
A.
WAVES   331
8.1
What Is a Wave?   331
8.2
The Properties of Waves   332
8.3
Wave Propagation   336
8.4
Periodic Waves   338
8.5
When Waves Meet   342
8.6
A Two-Source Interference Pattern   345
8.7
Standing Waves   350
8.8
Wave Fronts and Diffraction   354
8.9
Reflection   360
8.10 Refraction   366
8.11 Sound Waves   370
xviii
CONTENTS

B.
LIGHT   373
8.12 What Is Light?   373
8.13 Propagation of Light   375
8.14 Reflection and Refraction   378
8.15 Interference and Diffraction   382
8.16 What Is Color?   386
8.17 Why Is the Sky Blue?   390
8.18 Polarization   392
8.19 The Ether   395
CHAPTER 9.  EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
405
9.1
The New Physics   405
9.2
Albert Einstein   408
9.3
The Relativity Principle   410
9.4
Constancy of the Speed of Light   415
9.5
Simultaneous Events   418
9.6
Relativity of Time   420
9.7
Time Dilation   424
9.8
Relativity of Length   428
9.9
Relativity of Mass   431
9.10 Mass and Energy   433
9.11 Confirming Relativity   434
9.12 Breaking with the Past   441
PART TWO: FIELDS AND ATOMS
PROLOGUE TO PART TWO
451
1 A Revolution in Science   451
2 The Mechanical World View   455
3 Energy and Atoms   455
CONTENTS
xix

CHAPTER 10.  ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
459
10.1
Gilbert's Magnets
459
10.2
Electric Charges and Electric Forces   462
10.3
Forces and Fields   472
10.4
Electric Currents   479
10.5
Electric Potential Difference   482
10.6
Electric Potential Difference and Current   486
10.7
Electric Potential Difference and Power   487
10.8
Currents Act on Magnets   488
10.9
Currents Act on Currents   492
10.10 Magnetic Fields and Moving Charges   495
CHAPTER 11.  THE ELECTRIC AGE
505
11.1
Transporting Energy from One Place to Another   505
11.2
Faraday's First Electric Motor   506
11.3
The Discovery of Electromagnetic Induction   507
11.4
Generating Electricity: The Generator   512
11.5
Putting Electricity to Work: The Motor   516
11.6
The Electric Light Bulb   520
11.7
AC versus DC: The Niagara Falls Power Plant   525
11.8
The Energy Picture Today   528
11.9
Conservation   531
11.10 Renewable and Alternative Energy Sources   537
CHAPTER 12.  ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
549
12.1 Faraday's Suggestion   549
12.2 Maxwell's Principles of Electromagnetism   551
12.3 The Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves   556
12.4 Hertz's Experimental Confirmation   560
12.5 The Electromagnetic Spectrum   563
12.6 What About the Ether Now?   578
xx
CONTENTS

CHAPTER 13.  PROBING THE ATOM
585
13.1 The Periodic Table   585
13.2 The Idea of Atomic Structure   589
13.3 Cathode Rays   590
13.4 The Smallest Charge   594
13.5 Thomson's Model of the Atom   596
13.6 The Photoelectric Effect   598
13.7 Einstein's Theory of the Photoelectric Effect   602
13.8 X Rays   608
CHAPTER 14.  THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
621
14.1
Spectra of Gases   621
14.2
Regularities in the Hydrogen Spectrum   626
14.3
Rutherford's Nuclear Model of the Atom   630
14.4
Nuclear Charge and Size   635
14.5
Bohr's Theory: The Postulates   637
14.6
The Size of the Hydrogen Atom   640
14.7
Other Consequences of the Bohr Model   641
14.8
Bohr Accounts for the Series Spectra of Hydrogen   642
14.9
Do Stationary States Really Exist?   647
14.10 Constructing the Periodic Table   648
14.11 Evaluating the Bohr Model   654
CHAPTER 15.  QUANTUM MECHANICS
661
15.1 The Quantum   661
15.2 The Particle-Like Behavior of Light   662
15.3 The Wave-Like Behavior of Particles   665
15.4 Constructing Quantum Mechanics   669
15.5 The Uncertainty Principle   673
15.6 Origins and a Consequence of the Uncertainty Principle   676
15.7 The Probability Interpretation   679
CONTENTS
xxi

15.8 The Complementarity Principle   682
15.9 Some Reactions   685
CHAPTER 16.  SOLIDS MATTER
693
16.1
The Success of Quantum Mechanics   693
16.2
Forming a Solid   694
16.3
Quantum Solids   697
16.4
Conducting Electrons   699
16.5
Banding Together   702
16.6
Superconductors   705
16.7
Semiconductors   707
16.8
Introducing Impurities   709
16.9
Semiconductor Devices   710
16.10 Transistors   714
16.11 Some Applications of Transistors   717
CHAPTER 17.  PROBING THE NUCLEUS
723
17.1
Questions about the Nucleus   723
17.2
Becquerel's Discovery   724
17.3
The Curies Discover Other Radioactive Elements   728
17.4
Identifying the Rays   733
17.5
The Charge and Mass of the Rays   734
17.6
Rutherford's "Mousetrap"   737
17.7
Radioactive Transformations   739
17.8
Radioactive Decay Series   740
17.9
Decay Rate and Half-Life   743
17.10 The Concept of Isotopes   746
17.11 Transformation Rules   749
17.12 Summary of Notation for Nuclides and 
Nuclear Reactions   751
17.13 Some Useful Applications of Radioactivity   753
xxii
CONTENTS

CHAPTER 18.  THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
763
18.1
The Problem of Nuclear Structure   763
18.2
The Proton-Electron Hypothesis   764
18.3
The Discovery of Artificial Transmutation   766
18.4
The Discovery of the Neutron   769
18.5
The Proton-Neutron Model   773
18.6
The Neutrino   775
18.7
The Need for Particle Accelerators   777
18.8
The Energy of Nuclear Binding   780
18.9
Nuclear Binding Energy and Stability   783
18.10 Nuclear Fission: Discovery   786
18.11 Controlling Chain Reactions   791
18.12 Nuclear Power Plants   797
18.13 Nuclear Weapons   799
18.14 Nuclear Fusion   805
Illustration Credits   819
Index   829
CONTENTS
xxiii

This page intentionally left blank 

MATTER 
AND
MOTION
MATTER 
AND
MOTION
P
A
R
T
O
N
E

This page intentionally left blank 

1 Living Ideas
2 Our Place in Time and Space
3 First Things First
4 Aristotle's Universe
1. LIVING IDEAS
The purpose of this course is to explore the development and content of
the major ideas that have led to our understanding of the physical universe.
As in any science course you will learn about many of the important con-
cepts, theories, and laws that make up the content of the science, physics
in this case. But this course goes beyond that; it presents science as experi-
ence, as an integrated and exciting intellectual adventure, as the product of
humankind's continual drive to know and to understand our world and our
relationship to it.
Not only will you learn about the many ideas and concepts that make
up our understanding of the physical world today but, equally important,
these ideas will come alive as we look back at how they arose, who the peo-
ple were who arrived at these ideas in their struggle to understand nature,
and how this struggle continues today. Our story has two sides to it: the
ideas of physics and the people and atmosphere of the times in which these
ideas emerged. As you watch the rise and fall of physical theories, you will
gain an appreciation of the nature of science, where our current theories
came from, the reasons why we accept them today, and the impact of these
theories and ideas on the culture in which they arose.
Finally, you will see how physics came to be thought of as it is today: as
an organized body of experimentally tested ideas about the physical world. Infor-
mation about this world is accumulating ever more rapidly as we reach out
into space, into the interior of matter, and into the subatomic domain. The
3
Prologue to 
Part One

great achievement of physics has been to find a fairly small number of ba-
sic principles which help us to organize and to make sense of key parts of
this flood of information.
2. OUR PLACE IN TIME AND SPACE
Since the aim of this course is to understand the physical world in which
we live, and the processes that led to that understanding, it will help to be-
gin with some perspective on where we are in the vast ocean of time and
space that is our Universe. In fact, the Universe is so vast that we need a
new yardstick, the light year, to measure the distances involved. Light in
empty space moves at the fastest speed possible, about 186,000 miles every
second (about 300,000 kilometers every second). A light year is not a mea-
sure of time but of distance. A light year is defined as the distance light
travels in one year, which is about five trillion miles. The tables that fol-
low provide an overview of our place on this planet in both space and time.
Current Estimates of Our Place in Time and Space
Time
Years since start
Age of the Universe
about 15 billion years
Age of our Sun and Earth
5 billion
Beginning of life on Earth
3.5 billion
Extinction of dinosaurs ( Jurassic Age)
65 million
First humanoids
5 million
First modern humans
100,000
Rise of civilization
30,000
End of the last Ice Age
12,000
Height of Hellenic Greece
2500
Rise of modern science
400
Distance (from the center of the Earth)
Edge of the Universe
about 15 billion light years
Nearest spiral galaxy (Andromeda)
2.2 million light years
Radius of our galaxy (Milky Way)
100,000 light years
Nearest star (Alpha Centauri)
4.3 light years, or 25 trillion miles
Distance to the Sun
93 million miles (150 million kilometers)
Distance to the Moon
239,000 miles (384,000 kilometers)
Radius of the Earth
3963 miles (6,370 kilometers)
(about 1.5 times the distance between
New York and Los Angeles)
You may be amazed to see from these tables that, within this vast ocean
of the Universe measuring billions of light years across, a frail species evolved
4
PROLOGUE TO PART ONE

on a ball of mud only about 4000 miles in radius, orbiting an average star,
our Sun, in an average corner of an average galaxy—a species that is nev-
ertheless able, or believes it is able, to understand the most fundamental
properties of the universe in which it lives. Even more astonishing: this frail
species, which first appeared in contemporary form only about 100,000 years
ago, invented an enormously successful procedure for focusing its mind and
its emotions on the study of nature, and that procedure, modern science, is
now only a mere 400 years old! Yet within that brief span of just four cen-
turies science has enabled that species—us—to make gigantic strides toward
comprehending nature. For instance, we are now approaching a fairly good
understanding of the origins of matter, the structure of space and time, the
genetic code of life, the dynamic character of the Earth, and the origins and
fate of stars and galaxies and the entire Universe itself. And within that same
period we have utilized the knowledge we have gained to provide many
members of our species with unparalleled comforts and with a higher stan-
dard of living than ever previously achieved.
Take a moment to look around at everything in the room, wherever you
are right now. What do you see? Perhaps a table, a chair, lamp, computer,
telephone, this book, painted walls, your clothes, a carpet, a half-eaten
sandwich . . . . Now think about the technologies that went into making
each of these things: the electricity that makes the light work; the chemi-
cal processes that generated the synthetic fabrics, dyes, paints, plastics,
processed food, and even the paper, ink, and glue of this book; the micro-
transistors that make a computer work; the solid-state electronics in a tele-
vision set, radio, phone, CD player; the high-speed networking and soft-
ware that allows you to read a Web page from the other side of the Earth.
All of these are based upon scientific principles obtained only within the
past few centuries, and all of these are based upon technologies invented
within just the past 100 years or so. This gives you an idea of how much
our lives are influenced by the knowledge we have gained through science.
One hardly dares to imagine what life will be like in another century, or
even within a mere 50, or 25, or 10 years!
Some Discoveries and Inventions of the Past 100 Years
airplane
structure of DNA
automobile
microchip
expansion of the Universe
organ transplants
penicillin
first human landing on the Moon
motion picture with sound
laser
elementary particles
MRI and CT scan
plate tectonics
personal computers
nuclear weapons
Internet
polio vaccine
planets around stars other than our Sun
first artificial satellite (Sputnik)
human genome
2. OUR PLACE IN TIME AND SPACE
5

Let's look at some of the fundamental ideas of modern physics that made
many of these inventions and discoveries possible.
3. FIRST THINGS FIRST
The basic assumptions about nature, the procedures employed in research
today, and even some of our theories have at bottom not changed much
since the rise of modern physics. Some of these assumptions originated
even earlier, deriving from the ancient world, especially the work of such
Greek thinkers as Plato, Aristotle, and Democritus.
What set the Greeks apart from other ancients was their effort to seek
nonanimistic, natural explanations for the natural events they observed and
to subject these explanations to rational criticism and debate. They were
6
PROLOGUE TO PART ONE
The five "regular solids" (also
called "Pythagorean figures" or
"Platonic solids") that appear in
Kepler's Harmonices Mundi (Har-
mony of the World). The cube is a
regular solid with six square faces.
The dodecahedron has 12 five-sided
faces. The other three regular
solids have faces that are equilat-
eral triangles. The tetrahedron has
four triangular faces, the octahedron
has eight triangular faces, and the
icosahedron has 20 triangular faces.

also the first to look for rational, universal first principles behind the events
and phenomena they perceived in nature. On the other hand, the use of
experimental investigation, now a fundamental tool of modern science, was
invoked by only a few of the Greek thinkers, instead of being built in as
an indispensable part of their research.
In seeking the first principles, Greek thinkers utilized the notion that all
things are made up of four basic "elements," which they called earth, wa-
ter, air, and fire. In many ways they viewed these elements the way we might
view the three states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas, with heat (fire) serv-
ing as the source of change. (Some added a fifth element, called "quintes-
sence," constituting the celestial objects.) The Greek philosopher Plato
(427?-347 B.C.), regarded mathematical relationships as constituting the
permanent first principles behind the constantly changing world that we
observe around us. As such, Plato associated the five elements with the five
Platonic solids in solid geometry. (Refer to pg. 6.) Although we no longer
hold this view, scientists today often do express physical events, laws, and
theories in terms of mathematical relationships. For instance, the physicist
Albert Einstein wrote in 1933:
I am convinced that we can discover by means of purely mathe-
matical constructions the concepts and the laws connecting them
with each other, which furnish the key to the understanding of nat-
ural phenomena. . . . Experience remains, of course, the sole crite-
rion of the physical utility of a mathematical construction. But the
creative principle resides in mathematics. In a certain sense, there-
fore, I hold it true that pure thought can grasp reality, as the an-
cients dreamed.*
The Greek thinker Democritus (fl. c. 420 B.C.) and his followers offered
a quite different account of the permanent first principles constituting the
elements that give rise to observed phenomena. For them, the elements are
not made up of abstract geometrical figures but of individual particles of
matter that they called "atomos," Greek for "indivisible." Democritus is
said to have thought of the idea of atoms when smelling the aroma of freshly
baked bread. He surmised that, in order to detect the smell, something had
to travel from the bread to his nose. He concluded that the "something"
must be tiny, invisible particles that leave the bread carrying the smell of
the bread to his nose—an explanation that is quite similar to the one we
have today! For the "atomists" down through the centuries, all of reality
3. FIRST THINGS FIRST
7
* A. Einstein, Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown, 1982), p. 274.

and everything that can be perceived with their senses could be explained
in terms of an infinite number of eternally existing indivisible atoms, mov-
ing about and clumping together in infinite empty space to form stars, plan-
ets, and people.
Like Plato's notions, the views of the ancient atomists bore some strik-
ing similarities to our current views. We too have a relatively small num-
ber of "elements" (92 naturally occurring elements) which we associate with
different types of atoms, as you can see from the periodic table. And we
too attribute the properties of everyday matter to the combinations and in-
teractions of the atoms that constitute the matter. However, our atoms have
been shown to be divisible, and they, along with the elements, behave quite
differently from Greek atoms and elements. Moreover, our atomic idea is
no longer just a speculation but an accepted theory based firmly upon ex-
perimental evidence. Since the days of Plato and Democritus, we have
learned how to bring reason and experiment together into the much more
powerful tool of research for exploring and comprehending atomic prop-
erties underlying the phenomena we observe in nature.
Unfortunately, both Plato and Aristotle rejected the atomic hypothesis
of Democritus and his followers. Aristotle, Plato's pupil, also rejected Plato's
8
PROLOGUE TO PART ONE
Albert Einstein (1879-1955). 

theory. Instead, he offered a much more appealing and more fully worked-
out system as an alternative to both Plato and the atomists. As a result,
Aristotle's views dominated scientific thought for centuries, and Plato's pen-
chant for mathematics and Democritus's atomic hypothesis were set aside
for centuries.
4. ARISTOTLE'S UNIVERSE
The Greek philosopher Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) argued that we should rely
on sense perceptions and the qualitative properties of bodies, which seem
far more real and plausible than abstract atoms or mathematical formulas.
4. ARISTOTLE'S UNIVERSE
9
PLATO'S PROBLEM
Like many ancient thinkers, Plato believed
that the celestial bodies must be perfect
and divine, since they and their motions
are eternal and unchanging, while the
components of the earthly, terrestrial
world are constantly changing. Thus, for
him, analysis of the motions of the heav-
enly bodies according to mathematical
principles became a quest for divine truth
and goodness. This was the beginning 
of modern mathematical astronomy—
although of course we no longer seek di-
vine truth and goodness in celestial mo-
tions. But his idea was also the beginning
of a split in the physical world between the
Earth on the one hand and the rest of 
the Universe on the other, a split that 
was healed only with the rise of modern
science.
It is said that Plato defined an astro-
nomical problem for his students, a prob-
lem that lasted for centuries until the time
of Johannes Kepler and Galileo Galilei,
over 350 years ago. Because of their sup-
posed perfection, Plato believed that the
celestial objects move around the Earth
(which he regarded as the center of the
Universe) at a perfectly uniform, un-
changing speed in what he regarded as the
most "perfect" of all geometrical figures,
the circle. He chose the circle because it
is unending yet bounded, and encom-
passes the largest area inside a given pe-
rimeter. The problem Plato set for his fol-
lowers was to reduce the complicated
motions of the Sun, Moon, planets, and
stars to simple circular motions, and to
show how the complexity of their ob-
served motions can arise from the inter-
action of mathematically simple perfect
circles rotating with constant speeds.
Plato's problem, applied to the ob-
served motions of the planets, as well as
to the other celestial objects, was a prob-
lem that occupied most of the best math-
ematical astronomers for centuries. Dur-
ing the Renaissance, people found that
Plato's assumption of perfectly circular
motions at constant speed was no longer
useful and did not agree with more pre-
cise observations.

After all, we can see and touch a glob of earth, and feel the wetness of wa-
ter or the heat of fire, but we can't see or touch an atom or a triangle. The
result was an amazingly plausible, coherent, and common-sense system that
naturally appealed to people for centuries.
As did Plato, Aristotle divided the Universe into two separate spheres:
the celestial sphere, the heavens above where unchanging perfection re-
sides; and the terrestrial sphere here below, where all change and imper-
fection and corruption and death are found. The upper boundary of the
terrestrial sphere is the Moon, which is obviously imperfect, since one can
see dark blotches on it. All change, such as comets, novae (exploding stars),
and meteors, must occur below the Moon, which is also the limit of the
reign of the four basic elements. Above the Moon are the perfect celestial
bodies. These, to the naked eye, display no markings at all. So Aristotle at-
tributed to them Plato's fifth element, quintessence, which fills all of space
above the Moon. One of the assumed properties of quintessence was that
it moves by itself in a circle. (In one of Aristotle's other writings he further
argued that since every motion requires a mover, there must be a divine
being—an "unmoved mover"—outside the whole system, who keeps it 
spinning.)
Aristotle argued that the spinning motion of the heavens around the
Earth at the center caused a spinning motion of the terrestrial sphere—like
an object in a giant washing machine—which in turn caused the four ele-
ments to separate out according to their weight (or density). In this system
the "heaviest" element, Earth, coalesced in the center. On top of that came
the next heaviest element, water, which covers much of the Earth in the
form of oceans, lakes, and rivers. Then comes air, and finally fire, the light-
est element. The terrestrial sphere is completely filled with these four el-
ements, while the celestial sphere from the Moon outward is completely
filled with quintessence. There is no empty space, or vacuum, anywhere.
Aristotle's system seemed quite plausible. A natural vacuum is extremely
rare in daily experience, while in the whirling motion of a system of tiny
objects of different densities (representing different elements) the objects
actually do separate as he indicated. Einstein later explained that the pres-
sure in a fluid mixture during rotation of materials of various densities forces
the most dense material to the center, followed by the next dense material,
and so on—resulting in layers of materials according to density, just as 
Aristotle had argued!
Aristotle applied his arrangement of the elements to explanations of prac-
tically everything. According to Aristotle, as a result of the whirling mo-
tion of the cosmos, each of the four elements ended up in a special place
where it "belongs" according to its "weight" (really density): earth at the
center, followed by water, then air, then fire, just as we see around us. How-
ever, because of imperfections in the system below the celestial objects, the
10
PROLOGUE TO PART ONE

separation of the four terrestrial elements was not quite complete, trapping
some of the elements in the "wrong" place. If they are freed, they will head
straight "home," meaning to the place where they belong—straight being
in a vertical direction, either straight up or straight down. Such motions
require no explanation; they are simply natural. (This is discussed further
in Section 3.1.)
Mixing the elements and their natural motions helped to explain some
of the changes and events one can see all around us. For instance, a stone
lifted from the earth and released will drop straight down through air and
water to reach the earth where it "belongs" at the bottom of a pond. A
4. ARISTOTLE'S UNIVERSE
11
The four ancient "elements," shown superimposed on the Earth at the
center of the whole Ptolemaic Universe.

flame lit in air will move straight upward, as does a bubble of air trapped
under water. Water trapped in the Earth will emerge onto the surface as
springs or geysers; air emerges from the Earth by causing earthquakes; fire
trapped in the Earth breaks forth in volcanoes. Oil, he believed, contains
air in addition to earth and water, so it floats on water. Clouds, according
to Aristotle, are condensed air mixed with water. They are densest at the
top, Aristotle claimed, because they are closest to the source of heat, the
Sun. Wind and fire squeezed out of the cloud produce thunder and 
lightning—a far cry from an angry Zeus hurling thunderbolts!
As you can see, Aristotle's explanations are all "commonsensical"—
plausible, and reasonable, if you don't ask too many questions. Everything
fit together into a single, rational cosmic scheme that could explain almost
everything—from the behavior of the cosmos to the appearance of springs
of water. Although the wide acceptance of Aristotle's system discouraged
the consideration of more fruitful alternatives, such as those of Plato and
the atomists, the dominance of his views for centuries encouraged the domi-
nation of the search for rational explanations of natural events in plausible,
human terms that is one of the hallmarks of modern science. Aristotle was
considered such an authority on the rational workings of nature that he was
called for centuries simply "the Philosopher."
But This Is Not What We Today 
Would Call Science
Seen from today's perspective, the problem is not chiefly with the content
but with the approach. For Aristotle, a theory was acceptable if it was log-
ically sound, if all of the ideas were consistent with each other, and if the
result was plausible. That is fine as far as it goes, and it is found in all the-
ories today. But he did not take a necessary step further. He could not pro-
vide precise, perhaps even quantitative, explanations of the observed events
that could be tested and confirmed, for example, in a laboratory. He of-
fered only qualitative descriptions. For instance, things are not just hot or
cold, but they have a precise temperature, say 16°C or 71°C. Nor did
Aristotle think of explanations of events, no matter how logically sound, as
being tentative hypotheses that must be tested, debated, and compared with
the experimental evidence. Also, he rejected the approach of Plato and the
atomists in which explanations of phenomena should involve the motions
and interactions of invisible individual elements. Without resting on ex-
perimental research or more general underlying principles, Aristotle's phi-
losophy lacked the capability of modern science, in which experiment,
mathematics, and the atomic hypothesis are brought together into a pow-
erful instrument for the study of nature.
12
PROLOGUE TO PART ONE

And when these elements were brought together, especially in the study
of motion, modern physics emerged.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
animism
first principles
atoms
terrestrial sphere
elements
FURTHER READING
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure, From Copernicus to Ein-
stein and Beyond (Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2001), Chapters 1
and 3.
D.C. Lindberg, The Beginnings of Western Science (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1992).
K. Ferguson, Measuring the Universe: Our Historic Quest to Chart the Horizons of
Space and Time (New York: Walker, 1999).
FURTHER READING
13
WHAT IS SCIENCE?
The American Physical Society, the lead-
ing society of professional physicists, has
issued the following statement in answer
to the question "What is Science?":
Science extends and enriches our lives,
expands our imagination, and liberates
us from the bonds of ignorance and su-
perstition. The American Physical Soci-
ety affirms the precepts of modern sci-
ence that are responsible for its success.
Science is the systematic enterprise
of gathering knowledge about the Uni-
verse and organizing and condensing
that knowledge into testable laws and
theories.
The success and credibility of science
are anchored in the willingness of scien-
tists to:
1. Expose their ideas and results to
independent testing and replica-
tion by other scientists. This re-
quires the complete and open ex-
change of data, procedures, and
materials.
2. Abandon or modify accepted con-
clusions when confronted with
more complete or reliable experi-
mental evidence.
Adherence to these principles pro-
vides a mechanism for self-correction
that is the foundation of the credibility
of science.

STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1. Living Ideas
1.
What are the "living ideas"? What makes them alive?
2.
What is the twofold purpose of this course?
3.
Why did the authors of this book choose this approach, instead of the stan-
dard emphasis on laws, formulas, and theories that you may have encountered
in other science courses?
4.
What is your reaction to this approach?
2. Our Place in Time and Space
1.
How would you summarize our place in time and space?
2.
In what ways is technology different from science? In what ways is it the same?
3. First Things First
1.
Why, in this chapter, did we look back at the Ancient Greeks before intro-
ducing contemporary physics?
2.
What was so special about the Ancient Greeks, as far as physics is concerned?
3.
What types of answers were they seeking?
4.
What did the word "elements" mean to the Greeks?
5.
What are the two proposed solutions to the problem of change and diversity
examined in this section?
4. Aristotle's Universe
1.
What did Aristotle think was the best way to find the first principles?
2.
What types of principles did he expect to find?
3.
Describe Aristotle's cosmology.
4.
Why is Aristotle's system not yet what we call science? What are the charac-
teristics of science as presently understood?
5.
Describe how Aristotle explained one of the everyday observations.
6.
How would you evaluate Aristotle's physics in comparison with physics today?
7.
A researcher claims to have reasoned that under certain circumstances heavy
objects should actually rise upward, rather than fall downward on the surface
of the Earth. As a good scientist, what would be your reaction?
14
PROLOGUE TO PART ONE

1.1
Motion
1.2
Galileo
1.3
A Moving Object
1.4
Picturing Motion
1.5
Speed and Velocity
1.6
Changing the Speed
1.7
Falling Freely
1.8
Two New Sciences
1.9
Falling Objects
1.10 The Consequences
1.1 MOTION
One of the most important properties of the objects that make up our phys-
ical world is the fact that they can move. Motion is all around us, from
falling leaves and tumbling rocks, to moving people and speeding cars, to
jet planes, orbiting space satellites, and planets. Understanding what mo-
tion is, how it can be described, and why it occurs, or doesn't occur, are
therefore essential to understanding the nature of the physical world. You
saw in the Prologue that Plato and others argued that mathematics can be
used as a tool for comprehending the basic principles of nature. You also
saw that we can use this tool to great advantage when we apply it to pre-
cise observations and experiments. This chapter shows how these two fea-
tures of modern physics—mathematics and experiment—work together in
helping us to understand the thing we call motion.
Motion might appear easy to understand, but initially it's not. For all of
the sophistication and insights of all of the advanced cultures of the past,
a really fundamental understanding of motion first arose in the scientific
15
Motion
Matters
C
H
A
P
T
E
R11

"backwater" of Europe in the seventeenth century. Yet that backwater was
experiencing what we now know as the Scientific Revolution, the "revolv-
ing" to a new science, the science of today. But it wasn't easy. At that time
it took some of the most brilliant scientists entire lifetimes to comprehend
motion. One of those scientists was Galileo Galilei, the one whose insights
helped incorporate motion in modern physics.
1.2 GALILEO
Galileo Galilei was born in Pisa in 1564, the year of Michelangelo's death
and Shakespeare's birth. Galileo (usually called by his first name) was the
son of a noble family from Florence, and he acquired his father's active in-
terest in poetry, music, and the classics. His scientific inventiveness also be-
gan to show itself early. For example, as a medical student, he constructed
a simple pendulum-type timing device for the accurate measurement of
pulse rates. He died in 1642 under house arrest, in the same year as New-
ton's birth. The confinement was the sentence he received after being con-
victed of heresy by the high court of the Vatican for advocating the view
that the Earth is not stationary at the center of the Universe, but instead
rotates on its axis and orbits the Sun. We'll discuss this topic and the re-
sults later in Chapter 2, Section 12.
16
1. MOTION MATTERS
FIGURE 1.1
Galileo Galilei (1564-1642).

After reading the classical Greek philosopher-scientists Euclid, Plato,
and Archimedes, Galileo changed his interest from medicine to physical
science. He quickly became known for his unusual scientific ability. At the
age of 26 he was appointed Professor of Mathematics at Pisa. There he
showed an independence of spirit, as well as a lack of tact and patience.
Soon after his appointment he began to challenge the opinions of the older
professors, many of whom became his enemies and helped convict him later
of heresy. He left Pisa before completing his term as professor, apparently
forced out by financial difficulties and his enraged opponents. Later, at
Padua in the Republic of Venice, Galileo began his work on astronomy,
which resulted in his strong support of our current view that the Earth ro-
tates on its axis while orbiting around the Sun.
A generous offer of the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who had made a for-
tune in the newly thriving commerce of the early Renaissance, drew Galileo
back to his native Tuscany, to the city of Florence, in 1610. He became
Court Mathematician and Philosopher to the Grand Duke, whose gener-
ous patronage of the arts and sciences made Florence a leading cultural
center of the Italian Renaissance, and one of the world's premier locations
of Renaissance art to this day. From 1610 until his death at the age of 78,
Galileo continued his research, teaching, and writing, despite illnesses, fam-
ily troubles, and official condemnation.
Galileo's early writings were concerned with mechanics, the study of the
nature and causes of the motion of matter. His writings followed the stan-
1.2 GALILEO
17
FIGURE 1.2
Italy, ca. 1600
(shaded portion). 

dard theories of his day, but they also showed his awareness of the short-
comings of those theories. During his mature years his chief interest was
in astronomy. However, forbidden to teach astronomy after his conviction
for heresy, Galileo decided to concentrate instead on the sciences of me-
chanics and hydrodynamics. This work led to his book Discourses and Math-
ematical Demonstrations Concerning Two New Sciences (1638), usually referred
to either as the Discorsi or as Two New Sciences. Despite Galileo's avoidance
of astronomy, this book signaled the beginning of the end of Aristotle's cos-
mology and the birth of modern physics. We owe to Galileo many of the
first insights into the topics in the following sections.
1.3
A MOVING OBJECT
Of all of the swirling, whirling, rolling, vibrating objects in this world of
ours, let's look carefully at just one simple moving object and try to de-
scribe its motion. It's not easy to find an object that moves in a simple way,
since most objects go through a complex set of motions and are subject to
various pushes and pulls that complicate the motion even further.
Let's watch a dry-ice disk or a hockey puck moving on a horizontal, flat
surface, as smooth and frictionless as possible. We chose this arrangement
18
1. MOTION MATTERS
FIGURE 1.3
Title page from Galileo's
Discourses and Mathematical Demonstra-
tions Concerning Two New Sciences Pertain-
ing to Mechanics and Local Motion (1638).

so that friction at least is nearly eliminated. Friction is a force that will im-
pede or alter the motion. By eliminating it as much as possible so that we
can generally ignore its effects in our observations, we can eliminate one
complicating factor in our observation of the motion of the puck. Your in-
structor may demonstrate nearly frictionless motion in class, using a disk
or a cart or some other uniformly moving object. You may also have an op-
portunity to try this in the laboratory.
If we give the frictionless disk a push, of course it moves forward for a
while until someone stops it, or it reaches the end of the surface. Looking
just at the motion before any remaining friction or anything else has a no-
ticeable effect, we photographed the motion of a moving disk using a cam-
era with the shutter left open. The result is shown in Figure 1.4. As nearly
as you can judge by placing a straight edge on the photograph, the disk
moved in a straight line. This is a very useful result. But can you tell any-
thing further? Did the disk move steadily during this phase of the motion,
or did it slow down? You really can't tell from the continuous blur. In or-
der to answer, we have to improve the observation by controlling it more.
In other words, we have to experiment.
1.3 A MOVING OBJECT
19
FIGURE 1.4
Time exposures of disk set in motion.
(a)
(b)
(c)

It would be helpful to know where the disk is at various times. In the
next photograph, Figure 1.4b, we put a meter stick on the table parallel to
the expected path of the disk, and then repeated the experiment with the
camera shutter held open.
This photograph tells us again that the disk moved in a straight line, but
it doesn't tell us much more. Again we have to improve the experiment. In
this experiment the camera shutter will be left open and everything else
will be the same as last time, except that the only source of light in the
darkened room will come from a stroboscopic lamp. This lamp produces
bright flashes of light at short time intervals which we can set as we please.
We set each flash of light to occur every tenth of a second. (Each flash is
so fast, one-millionth of a second, that its duration is negligible compared
to one-tenth of a second.) The result is shown in Figure 1.4c.
This time the moving disk is seen in a series of separate, sharp expo-
sures, or "snapshots," rather than as a continuous blur. Now we can actu-
ally see some of the positions of the front edge of the disk against the scale
of the meter stick. We can also determine the moment when the disk was
at each position from the number of strobe flashes corresponding to each
position, each flash representing one-tenth of a second. This provides us
with some very important information: we can see that for every position read-
ing of the disk recorded on the film there is a specific time, and for every time
there is a specific position reading.
Now that we know the position readings that correspond to each time
(and vice versa), we can attempt to see if there is some relationship between
them. This is what scientists often try to do: study events in an attempt to
see patterns and relationships in nature, and then attempt to account for
them using basic concepts and principles. In order to make the discussion
a little easier, scientists usually substitute symbols at this point for differ-
ent measurements as a type of shorthand. This shorthand is also very use-
ful, since the symbols here and many times later will be found to follow
the "language" of mathematics. In other words, just as Plato had argued
centuries earlier, our manipulations of these basic symbols according to the
rules of mathematics are expected to correspond to the actual behavior of
the related concepts in real life. This was one of the great discoveries of
the scientific revolution, although it had its roots in ideas going back to
Plato and the Pythagoreans. You will see throughout this course how help-
ful mathematics can be in understanding actual observations.
In the following we will use the symbol d for the position reading of the
front edge of the disk, measured from the starting point of the ruler, and
the symbol t for the amount of elapsed time from the start of the experi-
ment that goes with each position reading. We will also use the standard
abbreviations cm for centimeters and s for seconds. You can obtain the val-
20
1. MOTION MATTERS

ues of some pairs of position readings d and the corresponding time read-
ings t directly from the photograph. Here are some of the results:
Position
d (in centimeters)
t (in seconds)
1
6.0
0.1
2
19.0
0.2
3
32.0
0.3
4
45.0
0.4
5
58.0
0.5
6
71.0
0.6
7
84.0
0.7
From this table you can see that in each case the elapsed time increased
by one-tenth of a second from one position to the next—which is of course
what we expect, since the light flash was set to occur every one-tenth of a
second. We call the duration between each pair of measurements the "time
interval." In this case the time intervals are all the same, 0.1 s. The dis-
tance the disk traveled during each time interval we call simply the "dis-
tance traveled" during the time interval.
The time intervals and the corresponding distances traveled also have
special symbols, which are again a type of shorthand for the concepts they
represent. The time interval between any two time measurements is given
the symbol t. The distance traveled between any two position readings is
given the symbol d. These measurements do not have to be next to each
other, or successive. They can extend over several flashes or over the en-
tire motion, if you wish. The symbol  here is the fourth letter in the Greek
alphabet and is called "delta." Whenever  precedes another symbol, it
means "the change in" that measurement. Thus, d does not mean " mul-
tiplied by d." Rather, it means "the change in d" or "the distance traveled."
Likewise, t stands for "the change in t" or "the time interval." Since the
value for t or d involves a change, we can obtain a value for the amount
of change by subtracting the value of d or t at the start of the interval from
the value of d or t at the end—in other words, how much the value is at
the end minus the value at the start. In symbols:
d  dfinal  dinitial,
t  tfinal  tinitial.
The result of each subtraction gives you the difference or the change 
in the reading. That is why the result of subtraction is often called the 
"difference."
1.3 A MOVING OBJECT
21

Now let's go back and look more closely at our values in the table for
the position and time readings for the moving disk. Look at the first time
interval, from 0.1 s to 0.2 s. What is the value for t? Following the above
definition, it is tfinal  tinitial, or in this case 0.2 s  0.1 s, which is 0.1 s.
What is the corresponding change in the position readings, d? In that
time interval the disk's position changed from 6.0 cm to 19.0 cm. Hence,
the value for d is 19.0 cm  6.0 cm, which is 13.0 cm.
What would you expect to find for d if the disk had been moving a lit-
tle faster? Would d be larger or smaller? . . . If you answered larger, you're
right, since it would cover more ground in the same amount of time if it's
moving faster. What would happen if it was moving slower? . . . This time
d would be smaller, since the disk would cover less ground in the given
amount of time. So it seems that one way of describing how fast or how
slow the disk is moving is to look at how far it travels in a given time in-
terval, which is called the "rate" that the distance changes.
Of course, we could also describe how fast it goes by how much time it
takes to cover a certain fixed amount of distance. Scientists in the seven-
teenth century made the decision not to use this definition, but to use the
first definition involving the distance traveled per time interval (rather than
the reverse). This gives us the "rate" of motion, which we call the speed.
(The idea of rate can apply to the growth or change in anything over time,
not just distance; for example, the rate at which a baby gains weight, or the
rate of growth of a tomato plant.)
We can express the rate of motion—the speed—as a ratio. A ratio com-
pares one quantity to another. In this case, we are comparing the amount
of distance traveled, which is represented by d, to the size of the time in-
terval, which is represented by t. Another way of saying this is the amount
of d per t. If one quantity is compared, or "per," another amount, this
can be written as a fraction
speed 
.
In words, this says that the speed of an object during the time interval t
is the ratio of the distance traveled, d, to the time interval, t.
This definition of the speed of an object also tells us more about the
meaning of a ratio. A ratio is simply a fraction, and speed is a ratio with
the distance in the numerator and time in the denominator. As you know,
a fraction always means division: in this case, the rate of motion or the
speed given by distance traveled, d, divided by the time interval, t.
There is still one small complication: we don't know exactly what the
disk is doing when we don't see it between flashes of the light. Probably it
is not doing anything much different than when we do see it. But due to
d

t
22
1. MOTION MATTERS

friction it may have slowed down just a bit between flashes. It could also
have speeded up a bit after being hit by a sudden blast of air; or perhaps
nothing changed at all, and it kept right on moving at the exact same rate.
Since we don't know for certain, the ratio of d to t gives us only an "av-
erage," because it assumes that the rate of increase of d has not changed at
all during the time interval t. This is another way of getting an average
of similar numbers, rather than adding up a string of values and dividing
by the number of values. We give this ratio of d to t a special name. We
call it the average speed of the disk in the time interval t. This also has a
special symbol, vav:
 vav.
These symbols say in words: The measured change in the position of an object
divided by the measured time interval over which the change occurred is called the
average speed.
d

t
1.3 A MOVING OBJECT
23
The Tour de France is a grueling test of en-
durance over the varied terrain of France.
The total distance of the bicycle race is 
3664 km (2290 mi). Lance Armstrong, can-
cer survivor and winner of the 1999 Tour de
France, set a new record in covering this dis-
tance in 91.1 hr of actual pedaling. The race
included breaks each night along the way.
From the data given, what was Armstrong's
average speed for the entire race while he was
riding? (This speed broke the old record for
the course of 39.9 km/hr.) He repeated his
win in 2000.
■NOW YOU TRY IT
FIGURE 1.5
Lance Armstrong. 

This definition of the term average speed is useful throughout all sciences,
from physics to astronomy, geology, and biology.
To see how all this works, suppose you live 20 mi from school and it
takes you one-half hour to travel from home to school. What is your av-
erage speed?
Answer: The distance traveled d is 20 mi. The time interval t is 
0.5 hr. So the average speed is
vav 

 40 
.
Did you actually travel at a steady speed of 40 mi/hr for the entire half-
hour? Probably not. There were probably stop lights, slow traffic, corners
to turn, and stretches of open road. In other words, you were constantly
speeding up and slowing down, even stopping, but you averaged 40 mi/hr
for the trip. Average speed is a handy concept—even though it is possible
that very rarely during your travel you went at exactly 40 mi/hr for any
length of the road.
Back to the Moving Disk
Let's go back to the disk to apply these definitions. (See the table on page
21.) What is the average speed of the disk in the first time interval? Sub-
stituting the numbers into the formula that defines average speed
vav 

 130 
.
What about the next interval, 0.2 s to 0.3 s? Again, t is 0.1 s and d is
32.0 cm  19.0 cm  13.0 cm. So,
vav 

 130 cm/s.
The average speed is the same. Notice again that in finding the change in
d or in t, we always subtract the beginning value from the ending value.
We don't have to consider only successive time readings. Let's try a larger
time interval, say from 0.2 s to 0.7 s. The time interval is now t  0.7 
s  0.2 s  0.5 s. The corresponding distance traveled is d  84.0 cm 
19.0 cm  65.0 cm. So the average speed is
vav 

 130 cm/s.
65.0 cm

0.5 s
d

t
13.0 cm

0.1 s
d

t
cm

s
13.0 cm

0.1 s
d

t
mi

hr
20 mi

0.5 hr
d

t
24
1. MOTION MATTERS

What can you conclude from all of these average speeds? Our data in-
dicate that the disk maintained the same average speed throughout the en-
tire experiment as recorded on the photograph (we don't know what it did
before or after the photograph was made). We say that anything that moves
at a constant speed over an interval of time has a uniform speed.
1.4
PICTURING MOTION
Most sports involve motion of some sort. Some sports, such as swimming,
jogging, bicycling, ice skating, and roller blading, involve maintaining speed
over a given course. If it's a race, the winner is of course the person who
can cover the course distance in the shortest time, which means the fastest
average speed. Here the word "average" is obviously important, since no
swimmer or biker or runner moves at a precisely uniform speed.
Let's look at an example. Jennifer is training for a running match. 
Recently, she made a trial run. The course was carefully measured to be
5000 m (5 km, or about 3.1 mi) over a flat road. She ran the entire course
in 22 min and 20 s, which in decimal notation is 22.33 min. What was her
average speed in kilometers per minute during this run?
1.4 PICTURING MOTION
25
FIGURE 1.6

The distance traveled d was 5 km; the time interval t was 22.33 min.
So her average speed was
vav 

 0.224 km/min
Did Jennifer actually run the 5 km at the constant speed of 0.224 km/min?
Very likely not. To find out more about her average speed on different parts
of the road, let's compare her overall average speed with her average speed
during different segments of the run, just as we did earlier with the disk—
only this time the distance covered (d) will be fixed, rather than having a
fixed time interval t. To do this, we stationed five observers at 1-km in-
tervals along the course. d will be the distance between neighboring ob-
servers. Each had a stopwatch that started at the start of her run. As Jen-
nifer passed each position, the observer there read on the stopwatch the
elapsed time from the start and recorded the results. The results, in deci-
mals, are shown below. Take a moment to study this table and try to un-
derstand what each column refers to and how these numbers were obtained.
d (in km)
t (in min)
d (km)
t (min)
vav (km/min)
0.00
0.00
—
—
—
1.00
4.40
1.00
4.40
0.227
2.00
8.83
1.00
4.43
0.226
3.00
13.40
1.00
4.57
0.219
4.00
18.05
1.00
4.65
0.215
5.00
22.33
1.00
4.28
0.234
Once you understand these data you can, for instance, determine 
Jennifer's average speed for the first kilometer and for the last kilometer
separately:
average speed for the first kilometer is

 0.227 km/min,
average speed for the last kilometer is

 0.234 km/min.
1.0 km

22.33 min  18.05 min
d

t
1.0 km

4.40 min  0.00 min
d

t
5.00 km

22.33 min
d

t
26
1. MOTION MATTERS

The results for vav for each 1-km distance are given in the table on page
26, rounded off to the third decimal place. As you can see, none of these
average speeds for each kilometer distance turned out to be exactly the
overall average, 0.224 km/min. You can also see that Jennifer varied her
speed during the run. In fact, on the average she slowed down steadily from
the first to the fourth kilometer, then she speeded up dramatically as she
approached the end. That last kilometer was the fastest of the five. In fact,
it was faster than the overall average, while the intermediate length seg-
ments were covered more slowly.
Another way of observing Jennifer's run—a way favored by athletic 
trainers—is not just to look at the position and time readings in a table,
but to look at the pattern these pairs of numbers form in a picture or "graph-
ical representation" of the motion, called a "graph." By placing the posi-
tion readings along one axis of a sheet of graph paper and the corresponding
time readings along the other axis, each pair of numbers has a unique place
on the graph, and together all the pairs of numbers form an overall pat-
tern that gives us a picture of what happened during the overall motion.
Usually the time is placed on the horizontal axis or x-axis, because as time
increases to the right we think of the pattern as "progressing" over time.
(Some common examples might be daily temperature data for a period of
time, or sales of products by quarters for the past years.)
Two graphs of Jennifer's run are shown in Figures 1.7 and 1.8. The first
shows the labeled axes and the data points. The second shows line seg-
ments connecting each pair of dots and the "origin," which is the point 
d  0, t  0 in the lower left corner, corresponding to the start of the run.
1.4 PICTURING MOTION
27
5
4
3
Distance (kilometers)
2
1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (minutes)
14
16
18
20
22
24
FIGURE 1.7
Distance vs.
Time graph.

What can you observe, or "read," from the second graph? First of all,
you can see (by putting a straight edge to it) that the first line segment is
fairly steep, but that the last one is the steepest of all. There was a com-
paratively short time interval for the first leg of 1 km, and an even shorter
one for the last leg of 1 km in length. In other words, Jennifer got off to
a relatively fast start during the first kilometer distance; but she went even
faster during the last one. In between, the steepness of each line declines,
indicating that it took her longer and longer to cover the same distance of
1 km. She was slowing down. You can also obtain this result from the fourth
column in the table (t). Notice how, for each kilometer covered, the time
intervals t increase in the middle, but are less for the first and last kilo-
meters. The distance covered stays the same, but the time to do so varies.
This is seen as a change in average speed for each kilometer, as you can
see from the last column of the table, and this agrees with the changing
steepness of each line segment. We can conclude from this: The steepness of
each line segment on the graph is an indication of the average speed that Jennifer
was moving in that interval. The faster she ran, the steeper the line segment.
The slower she ran, the less steep the line segment.
Looked at in this way, a graph of distance readings plotted on the y-axis
against the corresponding time readings on the x-axis provides us with a
visual representation of the motion, including the qualitative variations in
the speed. But this kind of representation does not tell us directly what the
quantitative speed was at any particular moment, what we can think of as
the actual momentary speed in kilometers per minute, similar to the in-
28
1. MOTION MATTERS
5
4
3
Distance (kilometers)
2
1
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (minutes)
14
16
1.0 km
0.226
4.43 min
=
=
18
20
22
24
∆d
∆t
∆t = 4.43 min 
∆d = 1.0 km
km
min
0.234
=
∆d
∆t
∆t = 4.28 min 
∆d = 1.0 km
km
min
FIGURE 1.8
Distance vs. Time graph with slopes.

formation on the speedometer of a moving car. We will come back to this
notion later, but for now we will look only at the average speed in each
time interval. Since the steepness of the graph line is an indication of the
average speed during that segment of the graph, we need a way of mea-
suring the steepness of a line on a graph. Here we must turn again to math-
ematics for help, as we often will.
The steepness of a graph line at any point is related to the change in
vertical direction (y) during the corresponding change in horizontal di-
rection (x). By definition, the ratio of these two changes is called the
"slope":
Slope can be used to indicate the steepness of a line in any graph. In a
distance-time graph, like the one for Jennifer's run, the distance from the
start is plotted on the vertical axis (d in place of y) and the corresponding
times are plotted on the horizontal axis (t in place of x). Together, d and t
make a series of points forming a line in the plane of the graph. In such a
graph, the slope of a straight line representing the motion of a person or
an object is defined as follows:
slope 
.
Does this ratio look familiar? It reminds us of the definition of average
speed, vav  d/t. The fact that these two definitions are identical means
d

t


x
y
  slope of a line.
1.4 PICTURING MOTION
29
Distance (km)
Time (min)
FIGURE 1.9 Distance vs. Time graphs
for runners at two different speeds.
Which one is faster? 

that vav is numerically equal to the slope on distance-time graphs! In other
words, the slope of any straight-line part of a graph of distance versus time gives
a measure of the average speed of the object during that time interval.
In short, we can use simple geometry to "capture" an observed motion.
1.5
SPEED AND VELOCITY
You may wonder why we used the letter v instead of s for speed. The rea-
son is that the concept of speed is closely related to the concept of velocity,
from which the symbol v arises. However, these two are not the same when
used in precise technical terms. The term "velocity" is used to indicate speed
in a specified direction, such as 50 km/hr to the north or 130 cm/s to the
right. Speed indicates how fast something is moving regardless of whether
or how it may change in direction. But velocity indicates how fast it is mov-
ing and the direction it is moving. In physics, anything that has both a size
or magnitude and a direction is called a vector. Since a vector points in a
definite direction, it is usually presented by an arrow in diagrams, such as
the one in Figure 1.10. The direction of the arrow indicates the direction
of the velocity. The length of the arrow indicates its magnitude, the speed.
Here is an example: one car is traveling west on a road at 40 mi/hr. An-
other identical car is traveling east on the same road at 40 mi/hr. Is there
any difference between the motions of these two cars? Both are going 
at 40 mi/hr, so there is no difference in their speeds. The only difference
is that one car is going west and the other is going east. That difference is
obviously important if the two cars happen to be traveling on the same side
of the road and meet! Obviously, the direction of the motion of each car,
as well as its speed, is important in describing what happens in situations
such as this. That is why it is necessary to use the velocity vector, which
incorporates both speed and direction, in situations where both of these
factors are important. When the direction of the motion is not important,
the scalar speed is usually sufficient.
The velocity vector also has a special symbol. Following standard prac-
tice in textbooks, we will represent the velocity, or any vector, in bold font.
30
1. MOTION MATTERS
v
FIGURE 1.10
Cart traveling at ve-
locity v. 

So the symbol for the velocity vector is v. You will see other examples of
vectors in this and later chapters.
When a direction is not specified, and only the size, or magnitude, is of
interest, we'll remove the bold font and just use the italic letter v, which is
the speed. This symbol represents only the magnitude of the velocity—how
fast it is regardless of the direction. Speed is an example of what is known
in technical terms as a scalar. It has no direction, just a reading on some
scale. Some other examples of scalars are mass, temperature, and time.
1.6
CHANGING THE SPEED
In the previous sections we looked at two examples of motion. One was a
disk moving, as far as we could tell, at constant or uniform speed; the other
was a runner whose speed clearly varied as she went over a given distance.
There are many examples in nature of moving objects that undergo changes
of speed and/or direction. As you walk to class, you may realize you are
late and pick up your pace. An airplane landing at an airport must decrease
its altitude and slow its speed as it lands and comes to a halt on the run-
way. Cars going around a curve on a freeway usually maintain their speed
but change the direction of their motion. A growing tomato plant may spurt
up over a number of days, then slow its growth in height as it starts to bud.
Many other such examples come to mind.
Motions that involve changes in speed and/or direction over a period of
time are obviously an important part of the motions that occur in nature.
A change in the velocity of a moving object, during an interval of time, is
known as the acceleration. Since an interval of time is the amount of time
that elapses from one instant to another, we need to know the velocity of
the object at each instant of time, in order to find the acceleration. How
can we examine changes of speed from one instant to another? So far, we
have talked only about average speeds over a time interval. One way to study
changes of speed from one instant to another is to take advantage of a mod-
ern device that measures speed at any given time for us by converting the
speed of, say, the wheels of a car into a magnetic force that turns a needle
on a dial. This is the basic principle behind the speedometer. Although this
refers only to the motion of a car, the general principles will be the same
for other moving objects.
The speedometer in Figure 1.11 reads in kilometers per hour. This car
was driven on an open highway in a straight line, so no changes of direction
occurred. As the car was traveling on the road, snapshots were made of the
speedometer reading every second for 10 s after an arbitrary start, where we
1.6 CHANGING THE SPEED
31

set t  0. Some of the snapshots are shown below. Similarly to the earlier
distance and time readings for the disk and runner, this experiment provides
us with ten pairs of speed and time readings for the motion of this car. We
have no data or snapshots for the motion of the car before or after this ex-
periment. The results are given in the table below:
v (km/hr)
t (s)
10
0
18
1
26
2
34
3
42
4
50
5
50
6
50
7
35
8
20
9
5
10
We have to determine first what these numbers really mean before we
can analyze what the car was actually doing. This is a common procedure
in scientific research: determine first the precise meaning of the data be-
32
1. MOTION MATTERS
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
km/hr
t = 0 s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
km/hr
t = 2 s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
km/hr
t = 5 s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
km/hr
t = 8 s
0
FIGURE 1.11
Speedometer snapshots. t  0 s at an arbitrary point when car already in 
motion.

fore attempting to analyze them. As you know from
the previous sections, the average speed is defined
as the ratio of the distance traveled to the time in-
terval. In this case, the speedometer mechanism used
very small increments of time to obtain these speeds.
The increments of time and the corresponding dis-
tances the car traveled are so small that, within the
limits of precision of this experiment, we can assume
that for all practical purposes they are zero.
So we can say that, within the limits of accuracy of this experiment, the
speeds shown in the table on page 32 indicate the "instantaneous speed" of
the car, and the speed at the instant of time shown in the second column.
Of course, with faster photographic equipment or a faster speedometer
mechanism, we might see a slightly different instantaneous speed, but that
would be beyond the limits of accuracy of this experiment.
Now we are ready to interpret what this car was actually doing, accord-
ing to the data that we have. Similarly to the case of distance and time for
the disk or runner, we can look at the change in speed in each time inter-
val, which will help us to see how the motion is changing. Let's add three
more columns to the table. The first will be the change v in the instan-
taneous speeds measured by the speedometer; the second will be the time
interval, t, as before; and the third will be their ratio, v/t.
v (km/hr)
t (s)
v (km/hr)
t (s)
v/t (km/hr/s)
10
0
—
—
—
18
1
8.0
1.0
8.0
26
2
8.0
1.0
8.0
34
3
8.0
1.0
8.0
42
4
8.0
1.0
8.0
50
5
8.0
1.0
8.0
50
6
0.0
1.0
0.0
50
7
0.0
1.0
0.0
35
8
15.0
1.0
15.0
20
9
15.0
1.0
15.0
5
10
15.0
1.0
15.0
At first glance this looks really puzzling! What was this car doing? To
find out, let's "analyze" the motion, that is, let's take a closer look at the
motion piece by piece. Starting at the top (when the experiment began) at
time 0, the car was already going at 10 km/hr. From 0 to 5 s, the speed in-
creased by an additional 8.0 km/hr in each time interval of 1.0 s (see the
third column). As with distance and time, the ratio of v to t gives us a
1.6 CHANGING THE SPEED
33
The instantaneous speed may be
defined as the limit, as the time
interval approaches zero, of the
ratio of distance traveled per
time interval, or:
v  lim
t0 

d
t
.

quantitative value for the average rate of change of the speed in each time
interval. As you can see from the last column, during the first 5 s the speed
of the car increased at the average rate of 8.0 km/hr/s, that is, 8.0 km/hr
in each second.
Since it is so important in describing changing speeds, the ratio v/t
also has been given a special name. It is called the average acceleration in
each time interval. This has the symbol aav:
These symbols say in words: The change in the instantaneous speed of an ob-
ject divided by the time interval over which the change occurs is defined as the 
average acceleration of the object. In this case, the car maintained a constant
average acceleration for the first 5 s. This behavior is called "uniform 
acceleration."
We have to add just one more idea. Since the speeds above were all in
the same direction, we didn't need to refer to the velocity. But sometimes
the direction of motion does change, as when a car goes around a corner,
even though the speed stays the same. We can expand our definition of ac-
celeration to include changes of direction as well as changes of speed by
simply replacing the speed v in the above formula by the velocity vector,
v. Since velocity is a vector, the acceleration is also a vector, so we have the
following definition:
These symbols say in words: The change in the velocity of an object divided by
the time interval over which the change occurs is defined as the average accelera-
tion vector. In the example so far, we can say that the car velocity increased
uniformly in the forward direction, so it maintained a uniform average ac-
celeration vector of 8 km/hr/s in the forward direction for the first 5 s.
Now let's go on to the sixth and seventh seconds. What is the car do-
ing? The change in the speed is zero, so the ratio of v/t gives zero, while
the direction remains unchanged. Does that mean the car stopped? No,
what it means is that the acceleration (not the speed) stopped; in other words,
the car stopped changing its speed for 2 s, so the average speed (and aver-
age velocity) remained constant. The car cruised for 2 s at 50 km/hr.
Now what happened during the last 3 s? You can figure this out 
yourself . . . but, here's the answer: the car is moving with negative accel-



v
t
  aav.



v
t
  aav.
34
1. MOTION MATTERS

eration. (This is sometimes called the "deceleration.") Probably the driver
put on the brakes, slowing the car down gradually to 5 km/hr over 3 s.
How do we know this? Since  always means the ending value minus the
beginning value, a negative result for v means that the final speed was less
than the initial speed, so the car slowed down. This leads to a negative value
for v/t. Since the speed decreased at the same rate for the last 3 s, this
was uniform negative acceleration, i.e., deceleration. If we look at the vec-
tors involved, the negative value of the acceleration means that the accel-
eration vector is now opposing the velocity vector, not helping it. So the
two vectors point in the opposite directions, as in Figure 1.12.
Can you summarize what the car was doing during this entire experi-
ment? . . . Here is one way of putting it: When the experiment began, the
car was already going at 10 km/hr, and accelerated uniformly to 50 km/hr
in 5 s at an average rate of 8.0 km/hr/s (8.0 km/hr in each second). The
acceleration and velocity vectors pointed in the same direction. It then
cruised at that speed for 2 s, so the acceleration was zero. Then it braked
uniformly at the average rate of 15 km/hr/s for 3 s, ending with a speed
of 5 km/hr. The acceleration and velocity vectors were pointing in the op-
posite directions during the slowing of the car.
Just as with distance and time, we can obtain a "picture" of the speed
during this overall motion by drawing a graph of the motion, with the in-
stantaneous speeds (neglect direction for now) on the vertical axis and the
corresponding times on the horizontal axis. The result for this example is
shown in Figure 1.13. We have also connected the data points together
with straight lines. Again, the steepness of the lines has an important mean-
ing. We can see that the graph starts out at 10 km/hr on the v-axis and
climbs steadily upward to 50 km/hr at 5 s. During this time it had positive
acceleration. Then the graph becomes "flat." As time increases, the speed
does not change. There is no rise or fall of the line, so the acceleration is
zero. Then the graph starts to fall. Speed is changing, but the change in
values is downward, so the motion involves slowing, so the acceleration is
negative. The steepness of the line and its upward or downward slopes ap-
pear to indicate the amount of positive or negative acceleration. When it
is horizontal, the acceleration is zero.
As you learned earlier, we can obtain a quantitative measure of the "steep-
ness" of any line on a graph by obtaining the "slope." Remember that the
1.6 CHANGING THE SPEED
35
v
a
FIGURE 1.12
Cart traveling at v with acceleration
opposite. 

slope is defined as the change in the y coordinate divided by the change in
the x coordinate, slope  y/x. In this case v is along the y-axis and t is
along the x-axis, so the slopes of the line segments, v/t, are equal to the
average acceleration, aav, as we discussed before. In other words, the slope
of any straight-line part of a graph of instantaneous speed versus time gives a
measure of the average acceleration of the object during that time interval.
You can confirm the results in the last column of the table on page 33
by calculating the slopes of the lines in the graph.
1.7
FALLING FREELY
One of the most common occurrences of accelerated motion—yet one of
the most difficult to study—is free fall, an object falling freely to the ground.
An example is a ball dropped to the floor from a certain height. Just watch-
ing it fall, it is extremely difficult to see what is going on without modern
equipment, since the ball drops so quickly. Happily today we do have equip-
ment that helps us analyze the motion. The picture in Figure 1.14 is taken
with the stroboscopic flash set at intervals of just 0.035 s and a camera with
36
1. MOTION MATTERS
−15.0 km/hr
−15.0 km
hr
= −14.3
1.05 s
∆t = 1.05 s
=
0
1
2
3
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4
5
Time (seconds)
Speed (km/hr)
6
7
8
9
10
∆v
∆t
km/h
s
∆v =
FIGURE 1.13
Speed vs. time graph.

an open shutter. This shows the position of the ball every 0.035 s against
a metric ruler in the background.
How do you know that this ball is accelerating? Go back to the defini-
tion of acceleration in the previous section: a constantly increasing speed
during equal time intervals. You can tell that the average speed is increas-
ing because the distance traveled in each time interval is getting larger and
larger. Free fall is an example of acceleration. In fact, as you will see, it is
ideally an example of uniform acceleration. But to understand all of this,
and without access to modern-day cameras and stroboscopic flashes, it took
a person of the stature and genius of Galileo Galilei, who lived in Italy dur-
ing the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. What made Galileo
different from many of his predecessors, especially those who followed Aris-
totle, and enabled his breakthrough, is his discovery that experimentation
is the proper way to investigate nature, and that mathematics is the proper
language for understanding and describing the laws of physics. "The book
of nature is written in mathematical symbols," Galileo once said. Rather
than qualitative arguments, Galileo relied upon the quantitative investiga-
1.7 FALLING FREELY
37
We can obtain some simple equations for the
case of uniform acceleration. If the average ac-
celeration aav is uniform, we can treat it as a
mathematical constant and give it the sym-
bol a. Thus,
 aav  a
if aav is uniform.
So,
v  a t
or
v  v0  a t.
In words, this result says that—for uniform
acceleration—the instantaneous velocity (v)
after a time interval of t is equal to the ini-
tial instantaneous velocity (v0) plus the uni-
form acceleration (a) times the time interval
(t).
Now, if the initial velocity was zero and 
if the clock was started at a reading of 0 s,
this can be reduced even further to the sim-
ple formula
v  at.
But, as before, in order to use this simple for-
mula the situation must satisfy all of the "ifs"
in the discussed text (such as time starting at 
0 s). Otherwise, when we don't know if the
situation satisfies all of these "ifs," or when
it satisfies only some of them, we must use
the most general formula to define accelera-
tion, which is
aav 
.
v

t
v

t

tion of physical events, just as physicists do today. We will follow his rea-
soning and discoveries, because he was the one who laid the foundations
for the modern science of motion. In so doing, his view of nature, his way
of thinking, his use of mathematics, and his reliance upon experimental
tests set the style for modern physics in general. These aspects of his work
are as important for understanding today's physics as are the actual results
of his investigation.
1.8
TWO NEW SCIENCES
Galileo was old, sick, and nearly blind at the time he wrote Two New Sci-
ences, which presented the new understanding of acceleration and free fall,
and many other topics regarding motion. Yet, as in all his writings, his 
style is lively and delightful. He was also one of the very few authors of
that time to write and publish in the vernacular, that is in Italian, rather
than in the scholarly Latin. This indicated that he was writing as much for
the educated Italian public as he was for a circle of academic specialists.
38
1. MOTION MATTERS
FIGURE 1.14
Stroboscopic photograph of
a ball falling next to a vertical meter stick.

Probably influenced by his reading of Plato's dialogues, Galileo presented
his ideas in Two New Sciences in the form of a dialogue, or conversation,
among three fictional speakers. One of the speakers, named Simplicio, rep-
resented Aristotle's views. The proximity of his name to "simplicissimo,"
"the most simple one" in Italian, was surely no accident, although he was
not made out to be a fool but a sophisticated Aristotelian philosopher. The
other two fictional characters were Salviati, who represented Galileo him-
self, and Sagredo, a man of good will and open mind, eager to learn. Even-
tually, of course, Salviati leads Sagredo to Galileo's views and away from
Simplicio's Aristotelian ideas.
The three friends first tackle the difficult problem of free fall. Aristotle's
views on this subject still dominated at that time. According to Aristotle,
each of the four elements has a natural place where it "belongs" and to
which it will return on a straight line if removed from its natural place.
Thus, a stone raised up into the air will, when released, drop straight down
to the Earth. The heavier it is, the faster it will drop because it has more
"earth" element in it, although air resistance will slow it down a little. Thus,
Simplicio argued in Galileo's book, when a cannonball and a bird shot are
dropped simultaneously from the same height, the cannonball will hit the
ground much sooner than the bird shot.
This does sound very reasonable, and in fact different bodies falling
from the same height may not reach the ground at exactly the same time.
But the difference is not the huge difference predicted by Aristotle, but
a minor difference which Galileo correctly attributed to the effect of air
resistance on bodies of different size and weight. It is a further charac-
teristic of Galileo's genius that he was able to recognize that the effects
of air resistance and friction, though present in most real experiments,
should be neglected so that the important feature of free fall—that in the
absence of air resistance all objects fall with the same acceleration—is 
not overlooked. (We, too, neglected any friction and air resistance in the
earlier disk experiment in order to observe the essential features of 
the motion.)
Aristotle regarded air resistance as such an important component of free
fall that for him it had a major impact on the motion. He was right when
we compare, for instance, a falling sheet of paper with a falling book. The
book does reach the ground long before the paper does! But here again, it
takes a special insight to realize that, while air resistance is a major factor
for the falling paper, it is not so for the falling book.
Hence the book and the paper are falling under two
different circumstances, and the result is that one
hits the ground a lot sooner than the other. Make
the air resistance on the paper equivalent to that on
1.8 TWO NEW SCIENCES
39
Aristotle: Rate of fall is propor-
tional to weight divided by resis-
tance.

the book by crumpling the paper into a tight ball and then try the experi-
ment again. You will see a big difference from the previous case!
Galileo's conclusion that all falling objects fall with the same accelera-
tion if air resistance is neglected depended on his being able to imagine
how two objects would fall if there were no air resistance. His result seems
simple today, when we know about vacuum pumps and the near vacuum of
outer space, where there is no air resistance. But in Galileo's day a vacuum
could not be achieved, and his conclusion was at first very difficult to 
accept.
A few years after Galileo's death, the invention of the vacuum pump al-
lowed others to show that Galileo was indeed right! In one experiment, a
feather and a heavy gold coin were dropped from the same height at the
same time inside a container pumped almost empty of air. With the effect
of air resistance eliminated, the different bodies fell at exactly the same rate
40
1. MOTION MATTERS
FIGURE 1.15
A falling leaf. 

and struck the bottom of the container at the same instant. Centuries later,
when the Apollo astronauts landed on the Moon, they performed a famous
experiment in which they dropped a feather and a hammer (a gold coin was
not available . . . or deemed too expensive) simultaneously from the same
height in the vacuum of space on the surface of the Moon. Just as Galileo
would have predicted, the feather and the hammer hit the Moon's dusty
surface at the exact same time!
1.9
FALLING OBJECTS
After establishing that under ideal conditions falling objects hit the ground
at the same time when dropped from the same height, Galileo then had his
alter ego, Salviati, hypothesize that a freely falling cannonball or any heavy
object falls at uniform acceleration. But how exactly should one define uni-
form acceleration (after all, Galileo was the first one to put these ideas on
paper)? Should one base the definition on the distance the object travels,
or on the time it takes to travel? It was up to Galileo to decide, and he
chose the definition that has been accepted ever since. Galileo declared in
the book, Two New Sciences:
A motion is said to be uniformly accelerated when, starting from
rest, it acquires equal increments of speed v during equal time in-
tervals t.
In other words, for uniform acceleration the ratio v/t would be constant
during any portion of the accelerated motion.
Galileo then set out to show that this definition held in the case of falling
objects. But he knew that there was a practical problem. Suppose you drop
a heavy ball from a given height to test whether the ratio v/t for its mo-
tion really is constant for the entire path of the falling ball. To obtain the
value of the ratio, you would have to measure the instantaneous speed of
the ball and the corresponding elapsed time at different points along the
path of fall. You would then obtain the values of v and t for pairs of
points along the path and divide the results to see if they yield the same
constant value.
In reality this experiment was impossible to perform. Even with mod-
ern instruments, such as those that enabled us to create the earlier photo-
graphs, it is difficult to measure the speed of a falling object. Furthermore,
the time intervals involved are so short that Galileo could not have mea-
sured them accurately with the timing devices available to him. Even a ball
1.9 FALLING OBJECTS
41

dropped off a 10-story building takes less than 6 s to cover the entire dis-
tance to the ground. So a direct test of the ratio v/t was impossible then,
and it is not easy even today.
This did not stop Galileo. He turned to mathematics, the "language of
nature," in order to obtain from his hypothesis that uniform acceleration
governs the fall of objects some other relationship that could be checked
by measurements with the equipment available to him. Using a little bit of
geometry then—we would use algebra today (see the discussion in the Stu-
dent Guide)—Galileo eliminated the change of speed v from the defining
formula for acceleration. He did this by expressing the uniform accelera-
tion a for an object starting from rest in a relationship involving the dis-
tance traveled d and the elapsed time t, both of which are quantities that
are easier to measure than v:
d  1⁄2 a(t)2
or, regrouping terms,
a 
.
This is the kind of relation Galileo was seeking. It relates the total distance
traveled d and the total elapsed time t to the acceleration a, without in-
volving any speed term.
Before finishing, though, we can simplify the symbols in either equation
to make the equations easier to use. If you measure distance and time from
the position and the instant that the motions starts, then dinitial  0 and 
tinitial  0. Thus, the intervals d and t have the values given by dfinal and
tfinal. We can then write the first equation above more simply as
dfinal  1⁄2 atfinal2.
Or, if we simply write dfinal as d and tfinal as t, we have
d  1⁄2 at2.
This is the most well-known form of Galileo's famous result, but re-
member that it is a very specialized equation. It gives the total distance
fallen as a function of the total time of free fall, but it does so only if the 
motion starts from rest (vinitial  0), if the acceleration is uniform (a  con-
stant), and if time and distance are measured from the start of the fall 
(tinitial  0 and dinitial  0).
2d

t2
42
1. MOTION MATTERS

The Meaning of Galileo's Result
Let's take a moment to look at what the equation d  1⁄2 at2 really means.
It says in words that, for constant acceleration (in free fall or any other mo-
tion), the total distance traveled is equal to one-half the acceleration times
the square of the total elapsed time. Since a is a constant, the equation can
also be expressed as a proportion, using the proportionality sign  :
d  t2.
In this case, 1⁄2 a is the constant of proportionality. For example, if a uni-
formly accelerating car moves 10 m in the first second, it will move 40 m
in the second second, 90 m in the third second, and so on. All objects ac-
celerating with an acceleration equal to that of this car will have the same
results. Or, expressed differently, the ratio of d to t2 will have the same value
 constant  1⁄2 a.
Conversely, any motion for which this ratio of d and t2 is constant for dif-
ferent distances and their corresponding times is a case of uniform acceler-
ation. Galileo used this last statement to test if the acceleration of free fall
is indeed uniform.
Galileo Turns to an Indirect Test
Galileo encountered another practical problem in examining the accelera-
tion of free fall: how to measure the very short time intervals as an object
fell the different distances? (See the insert "Dropping a ball from the Lean-
ing Tower of Pisa.") A direct test of the hypothesis was still not possible.
Ingeniously, Galileo turned to a clever indirect test. He decided to test an
object that was falling under the influence of gravity but not falling freely.
He proposed a new hypothesis:
If a freely falling body has uniform acceleration, then a perfectly
round ball rolling down a perfectly smooth incline will also have a
constant, though smaller, acceleration.
Galileo's Salviati described just such an experimental test in Two New Sci-
ences. Others who repeated this experiment have obtained results very sim-
ilar to those he described. (You might perform this experiment yourself, or
a similar one, in the laboratory.)
d

t2
1.9 FALLING OBJECTS
43

First, keeping a constant angle on an inclined plane, Galileo allowed a
smooth round ball to roll different distances down the inclined plane from
rest. He measured the elapsed time in each case using a water clock, a de-
vice that measures elapsed time by the amount of water that flows at a
steady rate from a vessel. If d1, d2, and d3 represent distances reached by
the ball, measured from the starting point on the incline, and t1, t2, and t3
represent the corresponding times taken to roll down these distances, then
he could see whether the accelerations had the same value in each of the
cases by dividing each d by the corresponding t2. If these ratios all had the
same value, then, as just discussed, this would be a case of uniform accel-
44
1. MOTION MATTERS
t3
t2
t1
d1
d2
d3
FIGURE 1.16
Ball rolling down
inclined plane. 
DROPPING A BALL FROM 
THE LEANING TOWER OF PISA
Although there is no certain evidence that
Galileo actually dropped a ball from the
Leaning Tower of Pisa, we can use his
equation to find out how long it would
take for a ball to reach the ground.
The Leaning Tower is about 58.4 m in
length, but the actual distance to the
ground is less, because of the lean. Today
the amount of lean of the top with respect
to the base is about 5.20 m (this may
change soon, when efforts are made to sta-
bilize the tower). Using the Pythagorean
theorem, today the distance straight down
from the top can be calculated to be 
58.2 m. The acceleration of the ball is the
acceleration of gravity, which has the 
symbol g. The acceleration of gravity is 
g  9.8 m/s2.
Using Galileo's equation for a ball
dropped from rest, d  1⁄2at2, the time for
the ball to fall this distance, neglecting air
resistance, may be found as follows:
d  1⁄2at2,
t  
 11.9 s
2
 3.5 s.
How fast would the ball be moving the
instant before it hits the ground (again,
neglecting air resistance)?
v  at  gt  (9.8 m/s2)(3.5 s)
 34.3 m/s.
This is very fast, indeed!
2(58.2 m)

9.8 m/s2
2d

g

eration. (In another account, Galileo kept time by singing a song and beat-
ing time with his fingers while rolling cannonballs on the inclined plane.
Whichever method he used for measuring time, Galileo obtained pre-
cisely the predicted result for the relationship between the distance trav-
eled and the elapsed time when the angle of the incline is unchanged. He
concluded from this that since the value of d/t2 was constant for a given
angle of incline, the acceleration for each incline is indeed uniform.
1.9 FALLING OBJECTS
45
FIGURE 1.17
This 1841 painting by Guiseppi Bezzuoli attempts to re-
construct an experiment Galileo is alleged to have made during his time
as lecturer at Pisa. Off to the left and right are men of ill will: the blasé
Prince Giovanni de Medici (Galileo had shown a dredging machine in-
vented by the prince to be unusable) along with Galileo's scientific op-
ponents. These were leading men of the universities; they are shown
here bending over a book of Aristotle, in which it is written in black
and white that bodies of unequal weight fall with different speeds.
Galileo, the tallest figure left of center in the picture, is surrounded by
a group of students and followers. 
FIGURE 1.18
Ball rolling
down inclined planes. 

In a second series of experiments, Galileo examined what happens when
the angle of inclination of the plane is changed. As the angle of incline in-
creased, Galileo reported that the ratio d/t2 also increased.
After obtaining his results for small inclines, Galileo then tried a "thought
experiment," that is, an experiment that he performed only logically in his
mind, since it could not be carried out in reality. In this thought experi-
ment, Galileo extrapolated his results for small angles of incline to steeper
and steeper angles where the ball moves too fast for accurate measurements
of t, and finally to the angle of inclination of 90°, when the ball would be
moving straight down as a freely falling object. Since this was just the ex-
treme case of motion on the incline (an "incline" that is actually vertical),
he reasoned that d/t2 would still be constant even in that extreme case.
In short, by the experiment on the inclined plane Galileo had found that
a constant value of d/t2 would be characteristic of uniform acceleration
46
1. MOTION MATTERS
FIGURE 1.20
Spheres rolling down planes of in-
creasingly steep inclination. For each angle, the ac-
celeration has its own constant value. At 90 degrees,
the inclined plane situation looks almost like free
fall. Galileo assumed that the difference between
free fall and "rolling fall" is not important (in most
real situations, the ball would slide, not roll, down
the steep inclines).
FIGURE 1.19
An early water clock. 

starting from rest. By extrapolation that experimental situation which he
could measure, he concluded at last that free fall, which he could not ex-
amine directly, was an example of uniformly accelerated motion. There-
fore, neglecting air resistance, Galileo concluded:
all freely falling objects, whether heavy or light, will cover the same
distance in the same amount of time, moving with the same con-
stant acceleration. They will hit the ground together if they are
dropped together from the same height.
This conclusion has been tested many times with modern apparatus (e.g.,
Figure 1.21), and it is sometimes called "Galileo's law (or rule) of free fall."
1.10
THE CONSEQUENCES
The results of Galileo's work on speed, acceleration, and falling bodies were
most important to the development of physics, and they are now a funda-
mental part of today's physics. But they could scarcely have brought about
a revolution in science by themselves. No sensible scholar in the seven-
teenth century would have given up a belief in Aristotle's cosmology only
because some of its predictions had been disproved. Moreover, Galileo did
not explain why objects fall and move as they do; he was providing only a
1.10 THE CONSEQUENCES
47
FIGURE 1.21
Two falling balls (unequal weights) in vacuum.

description of these motions. In technical terms, Galileo provided what is
known as the kinematics (description) of motion, not the dynamics (causes)
of motion. Together, kinematics and dynamics form the field of mechanics
in physics.
Still, even without going further, Galileo's understanding of free-fall mo-
tion helped to prepare the way for a new kind of physics, and indeed for a
completely new cosmology, by planting the seeds of doubt about the basic
assumptions of Aristotle's science and providing an alternative description.
The most disputed scientific problem during Galileo's lifetime was not
in mechanics but in astronomy. A central question in astronomy was
whether the Earth or the Sun was at the center of the Universe. Galileo
supported the view that the Earth and other planets revolved around the
Sun, a view entirely contrary to Aristotle's cosmology in which the Earth
was at the center and the Sun and planets revolved around it. But the new
astronomy required a new physical theory of why and how the Earth itself
moved. Galileo's work on free fall and other motions turned out to be just
what was needed to begin constructing such a theory. His work did not
have its full effect, however, until it had been combined with studies of the
causes of motion (forces) by the English scientist Isaac Newton. As Galileo
had done earlier, Newton combined reason, mathematics, and experiment
into the extremely capable tool of research in physics that we have today.
Galileo himself foresaw that this was going to happen. In his book Two New
Sciences, after summarizing the new method, Galileo had his alter ego
Salviati, proclaim:
We may say the door is now opened, for the first time, to a new
method fraught with numerous and wonderful results which in fu-
ture years will command the attention of other minds.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
acceleration
scalar
average speed
speed
dynamics
thought experiment
Galileo's law of free fall
uniform
instantaneous speed
vector
kinematics
velocity
mechanics
48
1. MOTION MATTERS

SOME FORMULAS FOR MOTION 
AND THEIR MEANING
This list is provided only as a reference. It is not intended that you merely
memorize these formulas; but you should know what they mean.
d  dfinal  dinitial
The distance traveled is the final position minus
the initial position.
t  tfinal  tinitial
The time interval is the finishing time minus the
starting time.
vav 
The average speed is the ratio of the distance
traveled per time interval.
slope 
The slope of a line on a graph between two points
is defined as the ratio of the change in the y coor-
dinate to the change in the x coordinate between
the two points.
v  lim
t  0
The instantaneous speed is the limit, as the time
interval approaches zero, of the ratio of the dis-
tance traveled per time interval.
aav 
The average acceleration is the ratio of the change
in speed and the time interval.
aav 
The average vector acceleration is the ratio of the
change in velocity per time interval.
v  at
If an object is accelerating uniformly from zero
initial speed starting at time zero, the speed at
time t is the acceleration times the time.
d  1⁄2 a(t)2
For uniform acceleration only and an object start-
ing from rest, the distance traveled is one-half the
acceleration times the square of the time interval.
d  1⁄2 at2
For objects accelerating uniformly from rest and
from an initial distance and time of zero, the dis-
tance traveled during time t is one-half the accel-
eration times the square of the elapsed time.
v

t
v

t
d

t
y

x
d

t
SOME FORMULAS FOR MOTION AND THEIR MEANING
49

FURTHER READING
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapters 6 and 7.
Web site
See the course Web site at: http://www.springer-ny.com/up.
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS*
1.
Summarize in writing the main points of each section.
2.
Compare the sections on the basic concepts of motion in this chapter with
your laboratory work.
3.
Write down any concepts or formulas or paragraphs that you do not under-
stand and ask your instructor for help.
4.
Look at each of the tables in this chapter. Explain each of these tables to a
friend, including the meaning of each row and column and how the numbers
were obtained.
Sections 1.1-1.7
1.
What is meant by the Scientific Revolution?
2.
Who was Galileo and what did he do?
3.
Why didn't Galileo continue to write about astronomy during his lifetime?
4.
Define in your own words the following terms: speed, velocity, average speed,
average acceleration, uniform acceleration, and the symbol d.
5.
Give an example of each of the concepts in Question 4.
6.
What is free fall? What is "free" about free fall? Why is it so difficult to de-
termine if free fall is an example of uniform acceleration?
7.
How did Galileo's approach to the problem of motion differ from that of
Aristotle and of the Aristotelians in his own day?
8.
Which of the following properties do you believe might affect the observed
rate of fall of an object: weight, size, mass, color, shape, or density.
9.
A ball is rolling on the floor with a constant speed of 130 cm/s. It starts rolling
at time 0.0 s and at distance 0.0 cm.
(a) Calculate where it would be at every one-tenth of a second up to 1.0 s.
Construct a table of distance and time to show your results.
(b) Add additional columns to your table showing the distance covered in
each time interval, and the average speed in each time interval.
50
1. MOTION MATTERS
* These questions are intended as an aid to study. Your instructor may ask you to work on these in
groups, or individually, or as a class.

(c) Draw a graph of total distance traveled against the elapsed time.
(d) From the table, predict what the slope of the line should be.
(e) Find the slope of the line and compare the result with your prediction.
Explain your result.
10.
A car is increasing its speed uniformly at the rate of 8.0 km/hr each second.
It starts out at 0 km/hr at time 0 s.
(a) Calculate what its instantaneous speed would be at every second up to 
10 s. Construct a table of speed and time to show your results.
(b) Add additional columns to your table showing the increase of speed in
each time interval, and the average rate of increase in each time interval.
(c) Draw a graph of instantaneous speed against the elapsed time.
(d) From the table, predict what the slope of the line should be.
(e) Find the slope of the line and compare with your prediction. Explain your
result.
Sections 1.8-1.10
1.
What was Aristotle's theory about falling objects?
2.
What did Galileo claim would happen if he dropped two different heavy ob-
jects simultaneously from the same height?
3.
Why was Galileo slightly wrong? Why didn't this force him to change his
mind?
4.
If you drop a sheet of paper and a book simultaneously from the same height,
they don't reach the ground together. Why not? Could one change the ex-
periment so that they do reach the ground together?
5.
What is the definition that Galileo chose for uniform acceleration?
6.
What was Galileo's hypothesis about free fall?
7.
Why couldn't Galileo test his hypothesis directly?
8.
What procedure did he use to test it indirectly?
9.
What is Galileo's law of free fall and how did he arrive at this conclusion?
10.
What are some of the consequences of Galileo's work?
11.
What are some important elements that go into scientific research? How are
they represented in Galileo's work?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS*
†1.
Why do you think motion is so important to understanding nature?
†2.
During the course of one day notice the different types of motion that you
encounter and write down your observations in a notebook. Try to classify
these motions according to the type of motion involved: uniform speed, uni-
form velocity, accelerated motion, or combinations of these.
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
51
* Some of these questions go beyond the text itself.
† These may be performed before or during the reading of this chapter.

3.
Which of the two graphs below, for two different objects, has the greater
slope.
4.
Explain the difference between average speed and instantaneous speed.
5.
Shown below are graphs representing different motions of a disk on a table-
top. Explain what is happening in each case, and how you arrived at your an-
swer. The axes and the slope of the lines will help to answer this question.
6.
Make up a story to go along with the motion that is represented by the 
distance-time graph below.
7.
Galileo wrote: "A motion is said to be uniformly accelerated when, starting
from rest, it acquires during equal time intervals, equal increments of speed."
Using modern symbols, this says: uniform acceleration involves equal values
d
t
0
d
t
(a)
d
t
(b)
d
t
(c)
d
t
(d)
v
t
(e)
v
t
(f)
v
t
(g)
v
t
(h)
d
t
d
t
52
1. MOTION MATTERS

of v in equal time intervals t. Which of the following are other ways of ex-
pressing the same idea?
(a) v is proportional to t;
(b) v/t  constant;
(c) the speed-time graph is a straight line;
(d) v is proportional to t.
8.
Suppose Galileo performed his famous inclined plane experiment on the
Moon, where the acceleration owing to gravity is less. Would he have ob-
tained the same law of free fall?
Quantitative
1.
Time yourself in going from one class to another, then the next time pace off
the distance to obtain a rough estimate of the total distance. Find your aver-
age speed from these results.
2.
A certain person who walks for exercise usually walks 2 mi (3.23 km) in about
28 min. What is his/her average speed in kilometers per second and miles
per hour?
3.
Amtrak runs a high-speed train, the Acela Express, between New York and
Washington. The train can cover the distance of 194 mi in 2 hr, 43 min. What
is its average speed?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
53
4.
(a) A world record for the mile, set in 1999, was 3 min, 43 s. What was the
average speed of the runner in miles per hour?
(b) The cheetah is the fastest animal on Earth. It can run at a sustained av-
erage speed of 80 mi/hr. What would be its time for 1 mi?
Amtrak Acela Express. 

6.
What is the average acceleration of an airplane that goes from 0 to 100 km/hr
in 5 s during take off? What is the average acceleration during landing, 
going from 200 km/hr in 12 s?
7.
(a) A rollerblader starts out at the top of a hill with a 200 m slope. She 
rolls, without skating, to the bottom of the hill in 15 s. What was her 
acceleration?
5.
The winner of the last stage of the 1999 Tour de France, a French cyclist,
covered the distance of 143.5 km from Arpajon to Paris in 3 hr 37 min 39 s.
What was his average speed in kilometers per hour?
54
1. MOTION MATTERS

DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
55
(b) What was her speed at the bottom of the hill?
(c) The rollerblader skates halfway back up the hill, then rolls down to the
bottom. What was her acceleration on the way down? What was her speed
at the bottom?
8.
(a) Light waves travel through a vacuum in a straight line at a speed of about
3  108 m/s. How far is a "light year"?
(b) The nearest star, Alpha Centauri, is about 4  1016 m distant from Earth.
This star does not have any planets, but if it did and intelligent beings
lived on them, how soon, at the earliest, could we expect to receive a re-
ply after sending them a light signal strong enough to be received there?
9.
The speed of sound in air is about 330 m/s (0.33 km/s). Suppose lightning
strikes 1 km away. How long does it take before you see the flash? (The speed
of light is given in 8a.) How long before you hear the thunder? On the ba-
sis of your results, can you set up a rule for determining how far away a light-
ning flash occurred if you count the seconds between the sight of the flash
and the arrival of the sound of thunder?
10.
Ask a friend who has access to a car to drive with you on a quiet stretch of
straight road with little or no traffic or pedestrians. Take data on the car's
speed. After attaining a speed of about 30 mi/hr, ask that the car slow down
and record the speedometer readings in 5-s intervals.
(a) After returning, create a table of speed and corresponding time incre-
ments.
(b) Add the following columns to your table: the change in speed v, the
time interval t, and the average acceleration in each time interval v/t.
(c) Create a graph of speed and time for the motion of the car. Find the av-
erage acceleration of the car from the graph. How does it compare with
the results from your table?

This page intentionally left blank 

2.1
Astronomy, Motion, and Mechanics
2.2
The Scientific Revolution
2.3
Copernicus
2.4
The Geocentric View
2.5
Copernicus versus Ptolemy
2.6
Arguments for the Heliocentric System
2.7
Arguments against the Heliocentric System
2.8
Carrying Forth the Revolution
2.9
New Data
2.10 New Orbits
2.11 New Observations
2.12 Galileo Condemned
2.1 ASTRONOMY, MOTION, AND MECHANICS
Galileo's discoveries about motion formed a major part of a much larger
development across all of the sciences, a development now known as the
Scientific Revolution. In the study of the physical world, the science of mo-
tion, or mechanics, joined with the science of astronomy to form the basic
approach to modern physics. Paralleling the revolution in mechanics, the
revolution in astronomy involved an extremely difficult transition for most
people from the common-sense view of the Universe in which the Earth
is stationary at the center of the Universe to our current, more abstract,
view that the Earth is actually spinning on its axis as it orbits around a star,
our Sun, as the third planet. Since the Earth was now seen as a moving ob-
ject, the revolution in mechanics helped to encourage the revolution in as-
tronomy, and vice versa. This chapter looks at the parallel developments
in astronomy, before turning to the causes of motion in the next chapter.
57
Moving
the Earth
C
H
A
P
T
E
R 22

Once again, Galileo played a key role in terms of both the new science and
the new issues that it raised.
2.2 THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION
Think back to what you may have learned in a social studies or history
course about the period from A.D. 1550 to about 1700. This was the pe-
riod of the Renaissance—the word for "rebirth" in French—that spread out
from Italy across the Western world. The Renaissance movement brought
new forms of art, music, and courageous new ideas about the Universe and
humanity's place in it. Curiosity and a questioning attitude became ac-
ceptable, even prized.
The art of Botticelli, Rembrandt, and other great masters showed an en-
thusiasm for exploring the natural world that paralleled a similar enthusi-
asm in science and the actual explorations and discoveries of the seafaring
explorers. New instruments, such as the telescope and the microscope,
58
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.1
Rembrandt's The Three Trees (1643). 

opened up new worlds that had never been seen before. New devices, such
as the barometer, thermometer, vacuum pump, and mechanical clock, en-
abled more sophisticated experimental research, and the invention of the
printing press enabled the rapid dissemination of a researcher's works to an
ever-growing audience. Among these works were also the newly discovered
writings of such important Greek thinkers as Plato and Archimedes. Many
of these were first encountered by Europeans in Arabic translation during
and after the Crusades. In awe of what they found, European scholars ea-
gerly translated and studied these ancient works, both as curiosities and as
alternatives to Aristotle. Within a few generations there arose a new ideal
of humankind, the confident individual full of curiosity and the joy of 
living.
Along with the new enthusiasm for learning about the natural world
came a new freedom of thought encouraged by the Protestant Reforma-
tion and a new freedom from economic and social constraints encouraged
by the rise of a new commercial middle class. The growth of cities as com-
mercial centers in Europe and the breakdown of the hierarchical feudal or-
der in society enabled the rise of a middle class that could afford to send
its sons to the universities to learn about the heavens, instead of sending
them to the fields to work from dawn to dusk. The growing numbers of
these young men (there were only a few women in science at that time),
their growing science, and their growing economic and cultural impact led
to the founding of state-sponsored societies and academies of science. Here,
amidst debate and critical peer review, the new scientists established the
methods and the content of today's physics and many other contemporary
sciences. From Europe the new sciences and the new scientific approach
quickly spread throughout the entire world, constantly growing and pro-
gressing ever since through the contributions of many different cultures
and peoples around the globe.
Let's look at one of the beginnings of the new physical sciences: 
astronomy.
2.3 COPERNICUS
Within the emerging Renaissance culture lived a Polish church official and
mathematical astronomer named Nikolaj Koppernigk (1473-1543), better
known as Nicolas Copernicus. Copernicus became famous for presenting
the first viable, quantitative argument for the so-called heliocentric theory
of the Sun and planets, which we accept today. In the heliocentric theory
(from the Greek word "helios," for sun), the Earth is not the center of the
2.3 COPERNICUS
59

Universe, but instead it and all the other planets orbit the Sun. The Earth
orbits the Sun in one year, while at the same time the Earth rotates on its
axis once a day. Copernicus's ideas were so revolutionary at the time that
his work is often known as the Copernican Revolution.
Copernicus was a student in Poland when Columbus discovered Amer-
ica in 1492. An outstanding astronomer and mathematician, he was also a
talented and respected churchman, jurist, diplomat, physician, and econo-
mist. During his further studies in Italy he had read the newly discovered
writings of Plato and other early philosophers and astronomers. Plato pro-
vided a welcome alternative to Aristotle for those seeking new answers.
What better way to challenge one old master (Aristotle) than with another
(Plato)!
As a canon (priest) at the Cathedral of Frauenberg, Copernicus was busy
with church and civic affairs, but he found time to work on astronomy and
calendar reform. It is said that on the day of his death in 1543 he saw the
first copy of the great book on which he had worked most of his life. It was
this book, On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, that opened a whole
new vision of the Universe.
60
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.2 Nicolaus Copernicus
(1473-1543). 

We will look briefly at the old vision of the Universe in order to see
what was new about Copernicus's new vision.
2.4 THE GEOCENTRIC VIEW
Since we live on Earth and observe the motions of objects in the heavens
from Earth, we naturally tend to think of ourselves as being at rest on Earth
while everything else is moving around us and that we are at the center of
the Universe. Since the heavenly objects appear to move around us on cir-
cular paths centered on Earth, we naturally tend to think of ourselves as
being at the center of the Universe. This is called the geocentric view of the
Universe, from the Greek word "geo" for "earth" (from which we also have
the words "geology" and "geography"). If you have had an opportunity to
study relative motion in the laboratory or to observe the motion of the Sun
or Moon, you will know that it is not possible through direct observation
to decide if it is we who are at rest and the stars and Sun that are moving,
2.4 THE GEOCENTRIC VIEW
61
FIGURE 2.3
Page from Copernicus's On the
Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres.

or if it is we who are moving and the stars and Sun that are at rest. For in-
stance, when the Sun "sets" on the horizon, is it the Sun that is moving
down below the stationary horizon, or is it the horizon that is moving up
to the stationary Sun as the Earth rotates?
No wonder Aristotle's very plausible and well-constructed theory of the
Universe was so well received and widely accepted for so long (see the Pro-
logue). But there was one problem with Aristotle's cosmology (theory of
the Universe): it was not quantitative; it was only qualitative. It did not pro-
vide a precise, mathematical account of the observed positions and motions
of the Sun and Moon and planets, and that is what astronomers really
wanted—since astronomy at that time was a considered a branch of math-
ematics, and astronomers were employed in calculating celestial phenom-
62
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.4
Time exposure showing
stars' trail around the north celestial
pole. The diagonal line represents the
path of an artificial earth satellite.
(a)
(b)
Horizon
Which is correct?
S
S
FIGURE 2.5
Sun vs. Earth: which is
moving? 

ena, reforming the calendar, and performing astrological calculations, which
involved a mathematical study of the planets. (However, because it also as-
sumes the influence of the planets on human affairs, an assumption that is
not confirmed by the evidence, astrology is not considered a science.)
The Observations
What do you actually see when you look up at the sky?
You see a lot of different celestial objects. Every object in the sky can be
located by angles. The two most common angles are the angle above the
horizon, called the altitude, and the angle clockwise from due north, 
the azimuth.
Figure 2.6 depicts what the sky looks like to anyone even today who
stands outside, at night for a while, away from lights and buildings: the sky
is seemingly a large dome, centered on us. The part we see is part of a 
celestial sphere. If you wait long enough, or come back in an hour, the stars
and Sun and Moon (when visible) appear to move slowly from east to west,
where they then "set" (go over the horizon).
If you try looking at the positions of the Moon and Sun, each at the
same time every day, you will notice something strange. From the Earth,
they both seem to circle overhead more slowly than the stars. The Sun
seems to fall about 1° behind where it was the day before at the exact same
time, while the Moon falls about 12° behind. The next day they are again,
respectively, another 1° and 12° behind; after a week the Sun is 7° behind,
and so on. How long will it take for the Sun and Moon to slide all the way
around a 360° circle and be in line again with the same stars? For the Sun
it would take about 360 days, moving at about 1° per day (more precisely,
2.4 THE GEOCENTRIC VIEW
63
Horizon
W
E
Horizon
FIGURE 2.6
Seen from the Earth on a clear night, the stars appear to lie
on a large dome that rotates slowly from east to west around a fixed star,
Polaris.

it is 365.24220 days). In other words, it would take one full year for the
Sun to be "lapped" by the stars; indeed, this is how we define our year. As
seen from the Earth the Moon would take nearly 30 days (more precisely,
29.57333 days) for a complete lunar phase cycle, (or about 27.32152 days
as seen from the stars)—about 1 month.
The slipping of the Sun and Moon around the 360° of the celestial sphere
suggested to early observers that the dome of the sky is closed, and that it
is in fact a sphere. Seen from the Earth, such as outside your building, this
dome appears to circle around us once a day from east to west. To the an-
cients it seemed that the celestial objects are actually on the celestial sphere,
which rotates around us once every 24 hr, with the Sun and Moon slipping
behind in their own way.
The ancient picture of the Universe is presented in Figure 2.7. This
shows a closed celestial sphere centered on a spherical Earth with north
and south poles and an equator in line with the celestial poles and equa-
tor. You may be surprised to see that they thought of the Earth, not as a
flat disk, but as a round sphere, just as we do today.
The Round Earth
Contrary to common opinion, it was not Columbus who discovered that
the Earth is round when he landed in America in 1492. It was already known
to the ancient Greeks, as well as in Columbus's day, that the Earth is round,
although the common folk among the sailors on his ships may have be-
lieved otherwise. (What Columbus did not know, but which was also known
64
2. MOVING THE EARTH
N
S
S
N
Equator
Earth
Celestial
equator
FIGURE 2.7
The celestial sphere
and Earth as conceived starting
about 500 B.C. 

to the Greeks, is how big the Earth is. Columbus thought it was so small
that by sailing west he could reach India more quickly than by traveling
east, and thereby find a shorter route for the lucrative spice trade.) Today
we know from air travel, satellites, and the impressive pictures of Earth sent
back to us from the Moon and outer space that the Earth, our home, can
be thought of as a beautiful, round blue ball. But even without airplanes
and space flight or sailing trips around the world, we can tell that the Earth
really is round—and in the way known to the Greeks over 2000 years ago.
As seafarers, the Greeks knew that when a ship leaving a harbor reaches
the horizon, it does not fall over the horizon, but rather it sails out further
into the ocean. From the harbor the ship appears to "sink" into the ocean,
suggesting that the ship simply goes over the convex curvature of the Earth
(see Figure 2.10). Those who traveled in the north-south direction by land
or sea noticed that as they traveled north from the equator, the north star 
(Polaris), which remains fixed over the north pole, seemed to rise in the
sky. As Figure 2.11 shows, this could happen only if the Earth is curved
outward in the north-south direction. Taking all of these observations into
account, people concluded that the Earth must be spherical in shape. These
same observations can be made today.
Even though the stars, Sun, and Moon appear to circle around us on the
round Earth, someone could still argue that this is just an illusion. The Sun
2.4 THE GEOCENTRIC VIEW
65
FIGURE 2.8
Geocentric scheme of
Petrus Apianus (from his Cosmographia
of 1551). The Earth is fixed at the cen-
ter of concentric rotating spheres. The
sphere of the Moon ("lune") separates
the terrestrial region (composed of con-
centric shells of the four elements Earth,
Water, Air, and Fire) from the celestial
region. In the celestial region are the
concentric spheres carrying Mercury,
Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and
the stars. 

and Moon and stars are really fixed, and it is we who are rotating on a
north-south axis through the spherical Earth once every day. But there
were strong arguments against this interpretation (even though we now
know it is the correct one). For instance, common sense seems to tell us
that it's impossible for the Earth to be rotating. If the Earth really is a
sphere of about 4000 miles in radius (as the Greeks knew), then you can
figure out (details in Chapter 3) that people at the equator must be spin-
ning at about 1000 mi/hr through space! Why aren't they hurled off into
space, along with assorted animals, rocks, trees, houses, etc? No, common
sense seems to agree with the observation that the Earth really is station-
ary at the center of the Universe and that a celestial sphere carrying the
stars and other objects is rotating around it. Anyone who argues differently
66
2. MOVING THE EARTH
W
E
Line of sight
Horizon
FIGURE 2.10
Ship "sinking" off horizon. 
FIGURE 2.9 Earthrise over
moon. 

had better have some very good arguments, if they want to convince peo-
ple that it is really the Earth that is moving and the Sun that is stationary.
The Sun and Seasons
Since each day the position of the Sun, compared with the position of the
stars just before sunrise or sunset, appears to have slipped behind the stars
1° per day (actually this observation arises from the Earth's motion around
the Sun), the Sun appears to move around the celestial sphere once every
year in the backward direction, that is, from the west to the east. This back-
ward motion (relative to the stars) is called "eastward drift." The path—
called the ecliptic—that the Sun traces out on the celestial sphere is not
aligned with anything. Rather, the Sun follows a circle tilted at an odd an-
gle, 23.5°, to the circle formed by our equator and the equator of the ce-
lestial sphere, as shown in Figure 2.12. The existence of this tilt is extremely
important. It is the origin of the seasons.
Let's look at the motion of the Sun from a place on the northern hemi-
sphere of the Earth (the seasons described here will be reversed for the
southern hemisphere). For simplicity we will briefly adapt the Earth-
centered view. We will follow the apparent path of the Sun along the path
shown in Figure 2.13. At position VE, the Sun is just crossing above the
equator, and its rays are hitting equally the northern and southern hemi-
spheres of the Earth. There are exactly 12 hr of daylight and 12 hr of night.
The time of year when this happens is called an equinox, meaning "equal
2.4 THE GEOCENTRIC VIEW
67
To North Star
FIGURE 2.11
Observer looking upward 
towards North Star at three different 
positions.

night." Since the Sun is headed higher in the sky above, it passes through
the position VE on the celestial sphere; the position VE is called the ver-
nal (or spring) equinox. It is the first day of spring, and the beginning of the
old astrological calendar year, according to which nature is born anew every
spring.
As the Sun appears to move gradually toward the point labeled SS, the
days get longer and the nights shorter. The angle of incidence of the Sun's
rays on the ground below become more direct and thus cause more heat.
When the Sun reaches the position labeled SS, that moment is called the
summer solstice; it is the first day of summer. From there the days start to
get shorter and the nights longer as the Sun moves
toward the position AE, the autumn equinox. Finally,
winter arrives as the Sun travels to its lowest point
in the sky at WS, the winter solstice, the first day of
winter. Now the rays of the Sun at noon come in at
68
2. MOVING THE EARTH
N
W
E
Earth
Sun
Celestial
equator
Solar
ecliptic
FIGURE 2.12
Solar ecliptic vs. celestial
equator. 
Sun
Celestial
equator
AE
SS
WS
VE
Solar
ecliptic
231/2"
FIGURE 2.13
Diagram showing equinoxes. 
This description is for observers
in the northern hemisphere. For
observers south of the equator,
exchange "north" and "south."

the most oblique angle, and leave the ground far less hot than before. The
ancient tribes made urgent sacrifices to the Sun at this time in order to in-
duce the sun god not to let the Sun disappear altogether. Apparently the
sun god was pleased enough every year to allow the Sun to continue on its
journey back to the point VE, where all of nature burst forth once again
into a new annual cycle of birth, life, and death.
Notice from Figure 2.13 that at the summer solstice, the point SS, the
Sun would be directly overhead at noon to anyone who is 23.5° north of the
equator. At the winter solstice, WS, it would be directly overhead at noon
to anyone at 23.5° south latitude. The region between these two latitudes is
called the tropic zone. For those who do not live within the tropic zone, the
Sun is never directly overhead at any time during the year. Instead, seen from
the northern hemisphere, the Sun reaches its highest point in the sky at noon
on the summer solstice, SS, and its lowest point in the sky at noon on the
winter solstice, WS. (Your laboratory and demonstration activities may in-
volve your making some of these observations yourself.)
Eclipses and the Phases of the Moon
As discussed earlier, the Moon shares the general east-to-west daily motion
of the Sun and stars. But (owing to its own motion around the Earth) the
Moon also slips eastward against the background of the stars. It does so
much faster than the Sun does, rising each night nearly 1 hr later. When
the Moon rises in the east at sunset (opposite the setting Sun in the west),
it is a bright, full disk—the "full Moon." Each day after that, it rises later
and appears less round. Finally, after about 14 days, it has waned to a thin
crescent low in the sky at dawn; when the pale Moon is passing near the
bright Sun in the sky and rising with it, you cannot see the Moon at all.
At this point it is called "new Moon." After new Moon, you first see the
Moon as a thin crescent low in the western sky at sunset. As the Moon
moves eastward from the Sun, it gradually fattens until it reaches full Moon
again. After full Moon, the cycle repeats itself.
As early as 380 B.C., Plato recognized that the phases of the Moon could
be explained by thinking of the Moon as a globe reflecting sunlight and
moving around the Earth in about 29 days.
The Moon's path around the sky is very close to the yearly path of the
Sun; that is, the Moon is always near the ecliptic. But the Moon's path tilts
slightly with respect to the Sun's path. If it did not, the Moon would come
exactly in front of the Sun at every new Moon, causing an eclipse of the
Sun, a "solar eclipse." In addition, it would be exactly opposite the Sun at
every full Moon, moving into the Earth's shadow and causing an eclipse of
the Moon, a "lunar eclipse."
2.4 THE GEOCENTRIC VIEW
69

70
FIGURE 2.14
The Moon as it looks 26 days after New Moon (left); 17 days after New Moon (middle); and three days after New Moon (right). Cour-
tesy of Mount Wilson Palomar Observatory.
(a)
(b)
(c)

The Planets
Five other objects were also observed on the celestial sphere in antiquity,
in addition to the Sun, Moon, and fixed stars. These objects seemed to be
stars since, to the naked eye, they appeared as pinpoints of light with no
visible disk. But even though they looked like stars, they did not act like
stars. As observed over a number of days, a planet, like all other celestial
objects, does rise in the east and sets in the west each day, but each day in
its rising and setting it falls a few degrees to the east behind the fixed stars,
as do the Sun and Moon. This is called "eastward drift." Moreover, occa-
2.4 THE GEOCENTRIC VIEW
71
Eastward drift
Retrograde
Eastward drift
W
E
Mo
tio
n
of
st
ar
s
FIGURE 2.15
Diagram of retrograde
motion of a planet. 
FIGURE 2.16
Babylonian clay
tablet recording the observed
positions of Jupiter. 

sionally something very strange happens; the planet appears to speed up
relative to the stars and begins moving faster than the stars toward the west,
before it settles back into drifting once again toward the east each day. This
sudden motion to the west is called "retrograde motion," since the planet
seems to be regressing from its eastward drift. In this strange type of mo-
tion, the planet forms a looping or S-shaped path against the background
of the stars. This apparent motion is now understood, in our present sys-
tem, in which the Earth and planets orbit the Sun, as an optical illusion
(see Figure 2.19b). It occurs whenever the Earth in its orbit passes an outer
planet, or an inner planet passes the Earth in its orbit. Because of this seem-
ingly strange behavior, these five objects were called planets, which is Greek
for "wandering stars." We know today that they are not stars at all but large
masses orbiting the sun just like the Earth.
Since the planets seemed to perform their puzzling motion entirely on
their own, which only living beings can do, the ancients believed them to
be living gods (since they also seemed to be eternal). They also believed
that these planet-gods were influential on human affairs. According to the
appearance and motions of each planet, the Greeks named the five visible
planets for the gods Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. (There are
three other planets, in addition to Earth—Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto.
They are not visible without powerful telescopes. Some astronomers do
not regard Pluto to be a planet.)
Although the planets were called "wandering stars," they did not wan-
der at random all over the place. They stayed within a narrow band of con-
stellations along the Sun's annual path along the celestial sphere. The an-
cient Babylonians, who first identified all of our present constellations, also
72
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.17 Stonehenge,
England. 

identified those that lay at that time on the Sun's annual path, the ecliptic.
The Greeks called the set of these constellations the zodiac. Since the plan-
ets stayed within this narrow band of constellations, the zodiac had special
significance for ancient believers in astrology. Beginning with our March
21, the first day of nature's "rebirth" in spring, they divided the zodiac into
the 12 astrological signs, or constellations, of the zodiac, corresponding to
12 lunar months of about 30 days each. An astrologer could then relate the
positions of the planets as they moved within the zodiac to the position of
the Sun within each sign of the zodiac, and then pronounce conclusions
about human affairs based upon astrological beliefs. As you can see, an as-
trologer had to be adept at mathematical astronomy, and he would want to
see improvements in mathematical astronomy in order to predict the po-
sitions of the planets more precisely. But, as noted earlier, there is absolutely
no evidence that the planets actually have any effect at all on human af-
fairs. For this reason, the science of astronomy eventually split from the
superstition of astrology during the course of the Scientific Revolution.
2.4 THE GEOCENTRIC VIEW
73
FIGURE 2.18
Aztec stone cal-
endar. 

74
2. MOVING THE EARTH
Earth
Planet
E
W
Earth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
5
Planet
4
3
2
7
1
6
S
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 2.19
Retrograde motion:
Ptolemaic (a) and Copernican (b)
views.

2.5 COPERNICUS VERSUS PTOLEMY
Long before the time of Copernicus, the Greek astronomer Claudius
Ptolemy, who lived in Egypt during the second century A.D. and was re-
lated to the Ptolemy dynasty of pharaohs who ruled Egypt at that time,
created a mathematical theory, or model, of all of the observed celestial
motions outlined in the previous section. In fact, he nearly succeeded in
reproducing the exact observations of the celestial motions on the basis of
a geocentric model of the Universe. Ptolemy saw his work as a solution to
Plato's problem, discussed in the Prologue: to provide a model of the Uni-
verse in which all of the observed motions can be explained by referring to
combinations of perfect circles rotating with uniform speed.
For instance, Ptolemy's explanation of the so-called retrograde motion
of the planets is shown in Figure 2.20. He explained the apparent "loop-
ing motion" of the planets by placing the center of one rotating circle,
called the "epicycle," which carried the planet, on another rotating cir-
cle, called the "deferent," so that together the motions of the two circles,
the epicycle-deferent, produced the observed looping motion of the planet.
By choosing the proper circles and speeds, Ptolemy could reproduce these
and other observed motions almost exactly! Moreover, the model accounted
for the observation that each planet looks nearer to us (bigger and brighter)
while in retrograde motion than when it's not in retrograde, since it is closer
to us when it is on the inside of the larger circle.
But think about Ptolemy's theory, indicated in Figure 2.20, as a theory of
nature. Is it what you would expect for the actual motion of a planet? Would
anyone actually believe that this is the way the planets really move? Isn't this
just an invention to reproduce the observations without worrying if these
are actual motions? Also, aren't there some unresolved problems with this
theory, such as: What holds the planet on the epicycle, and what holds the
epicycle on the deferent? How can the epicycle cut through the deferent
2.5 COPERNICUS VERSUS PTOLEMY
75
Earth
Mercury
Venus
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
S
FIGURE 2.20
Simplified representation of
the Ptolemaic system.

without breaking it? Moreover, shouldn't all of the circles actually be cen-
tered on the Earth? Is this really a satisfactory solution to Plato's problem?
Copernicus did not think so. Raising some of these very same questions
in his book, he wrote: "Hence a system of this sort seemed neither suffi-
ciently absolute nor sufficiently pleasing to the mind." Even though it
worked, it didn't seem "real" (absolute) to him. Nor was there the harmony,
simplicity, or "beauty" to Ptolemy's system that Plato had believed to exist
in nature. It wasn't "pleasing to the mind." So Copernicus began looking
for an alternative. Apparently he found encouragement in an alternative
that had already been considered and rejected in ancient times because it
was not fully worked out. Copernicus revived an old proposal (attributed
to the Greek Aristarchus, ca. 281 B.C.) in which it is the Earth that moves,
while the Sun and stars remain fixed. And he fully developed it into the
first viable alternative to Ptolemy's system in 1400 years! In its basic fea-
tures, it is the system we use today.
Copernicus's Alternative
Instead of interpreting the motions of the celestial objects as revolving
around the fixed Earth each day from east to west, Copernicus realized that
these observed motions would appear exactly the same for an observer on
the Earth if the Sun and stars are stationary and it is the Earth that rotates on
its axis once a day from west to east.
Copernicus had discovered an ambiguity in the concept of relative mo-
tion. Think about this for a moment. As suggested earlier, we can see the
Sun rise in the east every morning, but is it the Sun that is rising from the
fixed eastern horizon, or is it the horizon that is falling away as the Earth
rotates, while the Sun remains fixed? Ptolemy and most people believed
the former, Copernicus argued the latter. The Earth, he stated, is rotating
west to east while the Sun remains stationary in space. Because the appar-
ent motion of the Sun is an example of relative motion—motion that is rel-
ative to an object that itself may in fact be in motion—all of the celestial
observations would be exactly the same in either view.
In addition, instead of placing the Sun on a circle centered on the Earth,
he realized that the annual path of the Sun against the background of the
stars could be obtained equally well by placing the rotating Earth on a circu-
lar orbit that revolves around the stationary Sun once every year. Our seasons,
as caused by the annually changing position of the Sun in the sky, he said,
are due to the tilt of the Earth's axis from the perpendicular to the plane
of its orbit—not the tilt of the Sun's path (the ecliptic) from the perpendi-
cular to the plane of the Earth's equator. The Earth's tilted axis gives us
the seasons. As the Earth orbits the Sun each year, the north pole always
76
2. MOVING THE EARTH

points toward the star Polaris—the "north star"—no matter where the
Earth is on its orbit (see Figure 2.21).
In Copernicus's system, only the Moon orbits the Earth, as the Earth
orbits the Sun. The Sun remains stationary. (We now know that the Sun
too is moving as part of our rotating galaxy, which, in addition, is moving
away from other galaxies as the Universe expands. But this does not change
the observations within the solar system of planets.) The other planets then
also orbit the Sun in the order they are known to have today: Mercury,
Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn (and, as later discovered, Uranus, 
Neptune, and Pluto). This entire system is called a heliocentric system or a
solar system ("sol" means "sun" in Latin), because the Sun is at the center.
To see how well the new perspective accounts for the observations of the
seasons, let's compare the seasons as observed from the moving Earth with
the seasons as observed from the perspective of a stationary Earth (review
the description in "the Sun and seasons" in Section 2.4). We will be in the
northern hemisphere of the Earth and observe the Sun at noon every day
as the Earth orbits the Sun once a year, starting from the point labeled VE
in Figure 2.13. At this point the Sun's rays are hitting equally the north-
ern and southern hemispheres of the Earth, so this is the Vernal Equinox.
In this part of the orbit, as the Earth turns each day, the Sun remains longer
in view, and the Sun's rays hit the northern hemisphere more directly. The
Earth is heading into summer.
As the Earth moves on its orbit toward the position labeled SS, the north
pole of the Earth always remains pointed toward Polaris, so the northern
hemisphere begins to tilt toward the Sun: the days grow longer and the
nights grow shorter. The position SS is the Summer Solstice, or the first
day of summer. From there the days start to get shorter and the nights
longer as the Earth moves to AE, the Autumn Equinox. Finally, as the Earth
2.5 COPERNICUS VERSUS PTOLEMY
77
N
SS
VE
AE
WS
N
S
S
N
S
N
S
231/2°
S
FIGURE 2.21
Copernican view of Earth's revolution about
the Sun.

moves into the part of its orbit where the northern hemisphere is tilted
away from the Sun, the days get shorter, the nights longer, the rays of the
Sun are less direct, and the Sun does not rise as high in the sky as seen by
an observer on the Earth. This is winter, and the point WS is the Winter
Solstice. After that, the Earth continues on its journey to the Vernal Equinox
when the entire cycle is repeated for another year.
You can see from this that, as far as the seasons are concerned, Coper-
nicus's heliocentric theory is just as capable of explaining the observations
as is Ptolemy's geocentric theory.
Copernicus's Solar System of planets, including the Earth as the "third
rock" from the sun, also provided a wonderfully simple explanation for the
puzzling motion of the planets, and without Ptolemy's fictitious circles upon
circles. In accounting for retrograde motion, Copernicus replaced all five
of the planets' major epicycles with a single circle: the Earth's orbit around
the Sun. The numbered lines in Figure 2.19b indicate the lines of sight
from the Earth to an outer planet. Most of the time, the outer planet ap-
pears to be moving normally on its path against the background of the stars
(eastward drift). But the path that we see from the Earth gradually begins
to change as the Earth catches up to and passes the outer planet. If you
78
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.22
Page from On the
Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres
showing the solar system accord-
ing to Copernicus. Courtesy of
Jagiellonian Library, Krakow.

follow the progression of the lines as the Earth passes the planet, you will
see a simple explanation of the observed retrograde motion. The planet
seems to "regress" (move west) for a while then proceed again to the east,
creating the appearance of a looping motion, simply because we are pass-
ing the planet as the Earth moves along in a different orbit. Since the Earth
and the planet are at their closest approach to each other when retrograde
occurs, the planet looks bigger and brighter because it is nearer to us. The
same thing occurs with the observed retrograde motion of an inner planet,
Venus or Mercury, only in this case it is the inner planet that is passing us.
(However, it should be noted that, in the end, Copernicus found it neces-
sary to reintroduce small epicycles for each of the planets in order to ac-
count for the nonuniformity of each planet's motion around the Sun.)
Once again, the two perspectives involved in relative motion are at work:
either the planets can be considered to be moving, while the Earth is at
rest, or the Earth can be considered to be moving, while the regressing
planet is also moving but at a different speed as seen from the fixed Sun.
Without further information, both views are equally valid. As a result, we
now have two radically different yet equally capable explanations for one
set of observations: Ptolemy's geocentric theory and Copernicus's helio-
centric theory. Both of these are equally viable, and so far neither one has
a clear advantage over the other.
2.6 ARGUMENTS FOR THE 
HELIOCENTRIC SYSTEM
You can see how revolutionary Copernicus's ideas were. The centuries-old
geocentric system was now, for the first time, under serious challenge by
the completely different heliocentric system proposed by Copernicus. Most
new theories in science arise from new experimental evidence indicating
that the current theory needs to be drastically revised or even replaced by
a new theory. However, in this case, there was no new observational evi-
dence leading Copernicus to suggest his new theory. Instead, for him, and
for the few others who followed him at first, the most important arguments
in its favor were those emphasized centuries earlier by Plato and the
Pythagoreans—beauty, harmony, and simplicity.
Like Ptolemy and other mathematical astronomers, Copernicus followed
Plato in attempting to account for the observed data in terms of simple
mathematical (geometrical) relationships underlying the observations.
Copernicus was trying to solve Plato's problem on the basis of motions that
were perfectly circular and with perfectly uniform speed, but without re-
2.6 ARGUMENTS FOR THE HELIOCENTRIC SYSTEM
79

sorting to some of the imaginary circles-upon-circles that Ptolemy had in-
troduced to make his theory work. The resulting alternative to Ptolemy's
theory could do everything that Ptolemy's theory could do in reproducing
the quantitative observations—but no better, nor no worse. Most times sci-
entists have only one theory to account for the observed data; this time
they had two equally viable, yet incompatible contenders for the same set
of data!
But Copernicus did not stop there. He pointed out what he believed to
be the simplicity, harmony, and "beauty" that Plato required of any theory
of nature. The theory was simple because Ptolemy's circles-upon-circles
and similar contrivances were no longer necessary (except when he got to
the finer details of the system); just the rotation of the tilted Earth and the
orbits of the Earth and planets were all that were needed to obtain the main
observations.
The heliocentric theory had the advantage for Copernicus that it placed
the Sun—the symbol of truth and divinity, the giver of light, warmth, and
life—in a privileged position. In a statement worthy of a true follower of
Plato, some of whose ideas bordered on Sun worship, Copernicus pro-
claimed in his book:
In the midst of all, the Sun reposes, unmoving. Who, indeed, in
this most beautiful temple would place the light-giver in any other
part than whence it can illumine all other parts? . . . So we find un-
derlying this ordination an admirable symmetry in the Universe and
clear bond of the harmony in the motion [period] and magnitude
[radius] of the spheres, such as can be discovered in no other wise.
The Sun at the center provided a focus to the entire system. As the quo-
tation indicates, there was also a numerical harmony that Copernicus saw
in his system when he considered that not only the Earth but all of the
other five visible planets also revolved around the Sun. Assuming that all
of the observed motions involve primarily perfect circles and uniform
speeds, Copernicus used the simple geometry of circles and tangents to de-
termine the radii and periods (time for one revolution) of the orbits of the
planets around the Sun as seen from a rotating, orbiting Earth. Analyzing
the data on the planets' orbits that had been gathered for centuries, Coper-
nicus used the Earth's day and year as measures of time and the Earth's or-
bital radius as the unit of distance. Since he didn't know how large the
Earth's orbital radius actually is, it could be called one astronomical unit,
or 1 AU. This is still used today as a convenient measure for distances
within the Solar System. Not only was Copernicus the first to obtain the
present-day order of the planets—which Ptolemy did not know—but his
results were very close to the modern values for the orbital periods and rel-
80
2. MOVING THE EARTH

ative radii of the planets (as well as the Sun and stars at the two extremes),
which are given in the table below. (See the insert for an example of how
Copernicus obtained the radius of Venus in relation to the radius of the
Earth's orbit.)
Object
Period
Radius of Orbit (in AU)
Sun
0.00
0.00
Mercury
87.97 d
0.39
Venus
224.70 d
0.72
Earth
1.00 yr
1.00
Mars
1.88 yr
1.52
Jupiter
11.86 yr
5.20
Saturn
29.46 yr
9.54
The above table exhibits the harmony that Copernicus so admired in the
heliocentric system. Notice that, starting from the Sun, as the relative radii
get larger so do the periods for all of the planets, right out to the stars.
2.6 ARGUMENTS FOR THE HELIOCENTRIC SYSTEM
81
FINDING THE RELATIVE RADIUS OF A PLANET'S ORBIT
Let angle SEP be the angle of maximum
"elongation" of the planet, say Venus,
away from the Sun, as viewed from the
Earth. Line segment PE is then a tangent
to the circle of the orbit of Venus. So an-
gle SPE must be a right angle. Hence the
ratio SP/SE must be equal to the sine of
the angle SEP. Angle SEP was observed to
be 46°, so
sin 46°  0.72  SP/SE.
Copernicus defined the distance from the
Sun to Earth, SE, to be 1 AU. So the dis-
tance from the Sun to Venus, SP, is 0.72 AU.
A direct observation of the maximum
elongation of Mercury or Venus can
therefore be used to compute the relative
radius of each of these planets. The rela-
tive distances of the outer planets from the
Sun can be found by a similar, but some-
what more complicated, method.
Modern tables of planetary positions as
seen from the Earth are computed from a
geocentric model using mathematical
techniques that might be considered the
equivalent of Ptolemy's epicycles. (See, for
example, T.S. Kuhn, The Copernican Rev-
olution, pp. 175-176.)
S
E
P
FIGURE 2.23
Method for computing distances.

This may seem obvious to us today, but for Copernicus, who was the first
to notice this relationship, such harmony and simplicity of his system were
not merely convenient but also "pleasing to the mind," and therefore an
indication of truth. The pleasure which scientists find in the harmony and
simplicity of their models is one of the most powerful experiences in sci-
ence. For instance, one of the leading physicists of the twentieth century,
Richard P. Feynman, has written:
What is it about nature that lets this happen, that it is possible to
guess from one part what the rest is going to do? That is an un-
scientific question: I do not know how to answer it, and therefore
I am going to give an unscientific answer. I think it is because na-
ture has a simplicity and therefore a great beauty.*
2.7 ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE 
HELIOCENTRIC SYSTEM
Not everyone prized the harmony, beauty, and simplicity that Copernicus
saw in his new theory. Such aesthetic qualities were not enough to con-
vince anyone who did not think this way. What was also needed was hard
evidence about a crucial difference, yet there was no outstanding hard ob-
servational evidence that pointed to the heliocentric theory and away from
the geocentric theory. Even worse, there were extremely powerful argu-
ments against such a revolutionary idea as a rotating and revolving Earth.
First of all, as noted earlier, simple common sense seems to tell us that
the Earth cannot be moving. And a moving Earth would raise a host of ex-
cellent questions, such as, if the Earth is spinning on its axis once a day,
then why don't objects fly off it? Why aren't there perpetual hurricane-
force winds sweeping across the surface of the Earth due to its rotation?
Why aren't birds swept from the sky? We now have answers for all of these
questions (mainly by using Newtonian mechanics, as we shall see). Coper-
nicus himself attempted to answer some of them, but he worried greatly
that, because of such "common-sense" questions, when he published his
new theory people "will immediately shout to have me and my opinion
hooted off the stage. For my own works do not please me so much that I
do not weigh what judgments others will pronounce concerning them."
Perhaps for this reason he waited until he was in failing health before pub-
lishing his book.
82
2. MOVING THE EARTH
* R.P. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1967), p. 173.

Second, the heliocentric model raised questions about certain natural
phenomena. For instance, how does a falling stone know where to land, if
the Earth is in constant motion? One of the most cogent of such questions
concerned what is known as stellar parallax. Why don't the stars appear to
shift in the sky if we see them from different angles as we orbit the Sun,
much as the angle to an object in the distance shifts as we move our posi-
tion? If the Earth is indeed revolving around the Sun, as in Figure 2.25c,
then the angle representing the position of a star in the sky as seen from
the Earth should gradually shift during the course of a year, as the Earth
moves along its orbit. However, careful observations made at that time
yielded no such shift in the angle of any star; no stellar parallax could be
observed. Hence, many concluded, the Earth cannot be orbiting the Sun.
Of course, we know today that the Earth is indeed orbiting the Sun, and
Copernicus and his followers would have responded with the answer we
have today: the stars are so far away from the Earth and Sun that this ef-
fect cannot be observed without powerful telescopes. In other words, if Fig-
ure 2.25c were drawn to scale, the orbit of the Earth would appear as a dot
on the page, and the parallax effect would be impossible to discern. To this
argument, Copernicus's contemporaries responded by wondering why God
would waste his creative power in creating so much empty space between
the Earth and the stars, when much less will do.
Third, in addition to these arguments, there were also major philo-
sophical objections to the heliocentric model. Ptolemy's theory had 1400
years of tradition behind it and Aristotle's Earth-centered cosmology to
back it up. Aristotle's entire cosmology, which was the "world view," or
2.7 ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE HELIOCENTRIC SYSTEM
83
Venus
Earth
(a)
S
Venus
Earth
(b)
S
FIGURE 2.24
Changing the frame of reference from Earth to Sun: (a) Venus as
seen from a stationary Earth; (b) Venus as seen from a moving Earth in a he-
liocentric system.

84
2. MOVING THE EARTH
1
0
0
0
m
p
h
S
Star
lines of sight
E
E
S
FIGURE 2.25
Arguments against the helio-
centric system. (a) refers to the rapidly spin-
ning Earth; (b) what was believed to happen
if a ball is dropped from a tower as the Earth
moves; (c) the supposed shifting position of a
star as seen from the moving Earth.
(a)
(b)
(c)

philosophical outlook, of the day, would collapse if the Earth is not at the
center of the Universe and if the celestial sphere of stars and planets is not
moving. How will the four elements know their proper place if the Earth
is not at the center? Moreover, if the Earth is also a planet, then should
the realm of the eternal heavens now be considered imperfect, as is the
Earth?
Fourth, there were no clear scientific advantages to Copernicus's theory
over Ptolemy's—nor was Ptolemy's theory any better at explaining the ob-
servations than Copernicus's theory. No known observation or prediction
of planetary position was explained by one system and not by the other.
Copernicus had a different viewpoint, as equally well-argued as Ptolemy's,
but it was no better than Ptolemy's in predicting the precise positions of
the planets, and precision was necessary for the astronomers, astrologers,
and calendar-makers of the day. Nevertheless, Copernicus's theory was 
easier to use, so some astronomers used Copernicus for their calculations
but, nevertheless, they continued to believe in the systems of Ptolemy and
Aristotle.
Finally, Copernicus's challenge to Aristotle's cosmology also brought his
theory sooner or later into conflict with the religious authorities, not only
regarding the vastness of outer space. Most learned Europeans at that time
recognized the Bible and the Church Fathers on the one hand, and the
writings of Aristotle and his followers on the other hand, as the two supreme
sources of authority, and both seemed to agree that we humans living on
the Earth are at the center of Creation. Copernicus was now attempting to
displace the Earth and human beings from the center, rendering the Earth
merely the third of six visible planets orbiting a fiery object, the Sun. As a
result, many scholars and all of the religious faiths in Europe, including the
new Protestants, sooner or later opposed Copernicus. They used biblical
quotations (e.g., Joshua 10:12-13) to assert that the Sun and Moon are
moving and that the Divine Architect must have worked from a Ptolemaic
blueprint. In 1616 (during the Counter Reformation), the Inquisition placed
Copernicus's book on the Index of Forbidden Books as "false and altogether
opposed to Holy Scriptures." Some Jewish communities also prohibited the
teaching of Copernicus's theory. Since one of the results of science is a
change in knowledge about ourselves and our place in the Universe, it some-
times happens that we don't like what we discover. In fact, often the more
we learn about our world, the humbler our place in it seems to be. Many
times this results in cultural and religious upheaval and even in attempts to
suppress the new theories.
In short, the Sun-centered Copernican scheme was scientifically equiv-
alent to the Ptolemaic scheme in accounting for the observed motions of
celestial objects in terms of perfect circles turning at uniform speeds. It had
2.7 ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE HELIOCENTRIC SYSTEM
85

the advantage over the Ptolemaic system in its simplicity, harmony, and
beauty, but little else. At the same time, important arguments of science,
common sense, and belief were raised against it. The bottom line: There
were now two equally viable yet incompatible theories for one set of data;
and one theory (Ptolemy's) was in accord with tradition, common sense,
and everything people believed at the time about themselves and the Uni-
verse in which we live.
Nevertheless, as we have long since discovered, and by arguments we
shall encounter later, Copernicus was indeed right:
The Sun is at the center of the solar system, the Earth does rotate on
its axis once a day, and the Earth and planets do orbit the Sun.
But at that time the theory seemed false, absurd, and even dangerous.
2.8
CARRYING FORTH THE REVOLUTION
Following Copernicus's death, many astronomers regarded his heliocentric
model as a useful hypothesis for calculations, but most people rejected it
86
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.26
Tycho Brahe's observatory
on the island of Hven. 

as a physical reality. There was no instant revolution. In fact, it took nearly
a century and a half of further hard work and brilliant discoveries to dis-
mantle the geocentric theories of Aristotle and Ptolemy and to build up
the heliocentric system of today, and with it the physics of today, piece by
piece.
Looking back on the period after Copernicus, we can see that Coperni-
cus's ideas about truth and beauty, although important then and now, were
simply not enough to induce people to switch suddenly to a radically dif-
ferent point of view, even if, as we now know, it was the correct one. What
was needed to accomplish the transition to the heliocentric system was fur-
ther scientific evidence. First, much more precise astronomical data were
needed that would enable astronomers to decide between these two theo-
ries. Up to that point in time, the available data that had been used for 
centuries were too imprecise to enable a decision one way or the other.
2.8 CARRYING FORTH THE REVOLUTION
87
FIGURE 2.27
The hall containing Tycho
Brahe's great quadrant. The rest of the
laboratory is shown, with Brahe making
an observation (aided by assistants).

Fortunately, Tycho Brahe, the greatest observer before the invention of 
the telescope, was able to provide such data within a few decades after
Copernicus's death.
Second, mathematical analysis of Brahe's data was necessary in light of
the two competing celestial theories. It was again fortunate that Brahe's
data came into the hands of one of the greatest mathematical astronomers,
Johannes Kepler. Kepler's lifelong analyses of Brahe's data resulted in new
laws of planetary motion that went far beyond Plato's simple assumptions
of perfect circles turning at constant speeds.
Third, a new understanding of motion on the Earth was also needed,
and this was provided in large part by Galileo and Newton.
Fourth, since science is also a cultural phenomenon, the educated pub-
lic needed to be brought behind the new theory, and new generations ed-
ucated into the new theory, and this began to occur through Galileo's pop-
ular writings on his sensational discoveries with the telescope.
Finally, we can see that all of these aspects, and many other elements,
had to come together into a new alternative for a unified view of nature,
to replace the Aristotelian world view. This Isaac Newton provided in one
of the greatest scientific books ever written, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
Mathematica (1687), usually refered to as the Principia or the Mathematical
Principles, in which he presented a unified theory of the physical world
united by the law of universal gravitation. Looking back over his work and
that of his predecessors, Newton once wrote to a friend that if he had been
able to see farther than others it was because he had been standing on the
shoulders of giants.
Let's look closer at some of these giants.
2.9 NEW DATA
Tycho Brahe was born in 1546 of a noble, but not particularly wealthy,
Danish family. By the time he was 14 he had become intensely interested
in astronomy. Although he was studying law, the studious lad secretly spent
his allowance on astronomical tables and books. Later he observed a bright
nova, or new star (actually it was a supernova, which is an exploding star).
It appeared in the constellation Cassiopeia, then
faded over several years. He also observed a comet
that he determined to be at least several times far-
ther away from the Earth than the Moon. Aristotle
and the ancients had taught that all change must oc-
cur below the Moon, while the region beyond the
88
2. MOVING THE EARTH
Although there were precision
sighting instruments, all observa-
tions were with the naked eye.
The telescope was not to be in-
vented for another 50 years.

2.9 NEW DATA
89
FIGURE 2.28
Tycho Brahe (1546-
1601).  
FIGURE 2.29
A comet like the one Brahe observed in his student days.

Moon is perfect, therefore unchanging. Yet here were two events that in-
dicated that the heavens do change! Evidently at least one assumption of
the ancients was wrong; perhaps other assumptions were wrong, too.
As a student, Brahe had read the works of both Ptolemy and Coperni-
cus. Soon he discovered that both men had relied upon tables of observed
planetary positions that were not very accurate. He concluded that astron-
omy needed a complete new set of observations of the highest possible pre-
cision, gathered over many years. Only then could a satisfactory theory of
planetary motion be created. He decided to devote his life to the task.
With the support of the King of Denmark, Brahe set up the first state-
sponsored astronomical observatory, from which he made daily readings of
the positions of all of the planets and all visible celestial objects. With state
funding, able assistants, and his mechanical skill, Brahe greatly improved
the available astronomical instruments, chiefly by making them much
larger. This was before the invention of the telescope, so observations did
not involve magnifying the observed objects. Instead, the goal was to mea-
90
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.30
One of Tycho Brahe's
sighting devices. Unfortunately, all of
Brahe's instruments were destroyed in
1619 during the Thirty Years' War. 

sure the position of the celestial objects in the sky as precisely as possible.
The larger the measuring instrument, the more precise the angles of the
object's position against the background of the celestial sphere could be
read. Some of Brahe's instruments were huge. For instance, one of his early
instruments was so large that it took several workers to set it into position;
but readings with it were accurate to within two minutes of arc. The data
Brahe compiled during his decades of nightly observations with these in-
struments constituted the most accurate measurements of planetary posi-
tions ever assembled up to that time.
Four years before his death in 1601, Brahe moved from Denmark to
Prague, where the Emperor of Bohemia promised him new support. Not
being a mathematician himself, since he was trained in law, Brahe hired a
recently graduated German mathematical astronomer, Johannes Kepler, to
begin analyzing his years of data in order to decide among the opposing
theories of the solar system. There were by then three candidates: Ptolemy's
geocentric theory, Copernicus's heliocentric theory, and a hybrid "com-
promise theory" proposed by Brahe himself.
According to Brahe's proposed theory, the planets orbit the Sun, but the
Sun orbits the stationary Earth (see Figure 2.31). It was a lawyer's brilliant
compromise: it maintained the harmony of the planetary orbits and a priv-
ileged position for the Sun, but it also maintained the stationary Earth.
Many researchers who liked the harmony of Copernicus's theory, but could
not yet accept the moving Earth, welcomed Brahe's compromise as an in-
termediate theory. It eventually served as a stepping stone from Ptolemy
to Copernicus.
When Brahe died unexpectedly in Prague in 1601, a court battle ensued
between Kepler and Brahe's heirs over possession of Brahe's lifelong data.
Kepler won out in the end. Fortunately for the future of science the data
compiled by the world's greatest naked-eye observer now fell into the hands
of the world's greatest mathematical astronomer of the day.
2.9 NEW DATA
91
Earth
FIGURE 2.31
Main orbits in Tycho Brahe's system of
the Universe. The Earth was fixed and was at the cen-
ter of the Universe. The planets revolved around the
Sun, while the Sun, in turn, revolved around the fixed
Earth.

2.10 NEW ORBITS
Johannes Kepler (1571-1630) was born into a Protestant German family
known equally for its dysfunction as for its mysticism. His mother was ac-
cused of being a witch. His father narrowly escaped hanging and later aban-
doned the family. Kepler attended the University of Tübingen where he
studied mathematics, which at that time encompassed mathematical as-
tronomy. Greatly moved by Plato as well as Protestant theology, Kepler
became convinced of the Copernican system, in part because he believed
that the Sun is the symbol of God and must therefore be at the center of
the Universe. Moreover, like Plato, he believed not only that God had used
mathematical principles to create the Universe, but also that God and math-
ematics were in fact identical: "Why waste words?" he wrote. "Geometry
existed before the Creation, is coeternal with the mind of God, is God
Himself." Kepler became the first astronomer to support Copernicus 
publicly.
After graduating, Kepler worked as a mathematics teacher, calendar
maker, and (to make ends meet) as a court astrologer. He devoted himself
to an attempt to discover what he called the "cosmic mystery," the geo-
metrical blueprint according to which God had created the solar system.
He wanted to know the mathematical reasons why there are six, and only
six, visible planets (the three others being discovered later), and why the
planets are in the precise orbits they currently occupy. There must be an
undiscovered harmony that accounted for this, he reasoned, since God does
nothing by chance. Kepler thought he found the answer to his questions
in the five regular solids, also known as the "Platonic solids." Look back at
the five regular solids (shown in the Prologue) that Plato had used to ac-
count for the five elements. Kepler believed that there are six planets, and
only six planets, because God had set up the solar system so that these five
solids fit within the five spaces between the six planets. By trial and error,
Kepler found that within about 5% accuracy the six planetary orbits could
be fit within and around the five solids if they are taken in order of size,
as shown in Figure 2.32.
Kepler's idea of using Plato's solids to explain why there are six, and only
six, planets (published in 1597) sounds eccentric today, but it was an ingen-
ious one for its time, and it demonstrated Kepler's
mathematical capabilities. In fact, Brahe was so im-
pressed by Kepler's abilities that he hired the young
man as his assistant. At Brahe's request, Kepler set to
work on a careful analysis of the orbit of just one
planet, Mars, searching for the geometrical figure
92
2. MOVING THE EARTH
In keeping with Aristotelian
physics, Kepler believed that
force was necessary to drive the
planets along their circles, not to
hold them in circles.

that best represented its orbit. Once he found the best fit, he might then be
able to apply this geometrical figure to describe better the orbits of the other
planets. This would ultimately lead, he hoped, to an understanding of the
hidden harmony behind the orbits of the entire solar system.
Kepler naturally began by attempting to fit a circle to the orbit of Mars
as seen from the supposed circular orbit of the Earth. He displayed ex-
traordinary tenacity in the work, for after 70 attempts spanning five years,
all done by tedious pen-and-paper calculations (of course, no hand calcu-
lators or computers in his day!), he was still no closer to the solution. In a
book on the eventual solution, titled New Astronomy, in 1609, he painfully
described every dead-end for his readers, then he wrote:
If thou, dear reader, art bored with this wearisome method of calcu-
lation, take pity on me who had to go through with at least seventy
repetitions of it, at a very great loss of time; nor wilst thou be sur-
prised that by now the fifth year is nearly past since I took on Mars.
2.10 NEW ORBITS
93
FIGURE 2.32
Kepler's model from Mys-
terium Cosmographicum explaining the
spacing of the planetary orbits by means
of the regular geometrical solids. No-
tice that the planetary spheres were
thick enough to include the small epicy-
cle used by Copernicus.

The difficulty for Kepler was that he could make
the orbit almost fit a circle—but not quite. It fit a cir-
cle to within an accuracy of about 8 of arc. This was
better than the fit to any previous data, but Kepler
knew that Brahe's data were even more accurate than
this, to within 2 of arc. To his credit, Kepler reluc-
tantly gave up his commitment to circular orbits, and
with it over twenty centuries of tradition. After fur-
ther tedious calculations, Kepler finally arrived at a
result that was so universal that it is called a "law of
nature."
A law of nature is different from a theory, since a
theory encompasses data and assumptions and hy-
potheses that can in principle be altered and im-
proved or abandoned as new data and ideas become available. A scientific
law is a statement about nature. It can be accepted or rejected, and some-
times expanded to include other circumstances, but it does not contain hy-
potheses or assumptions. Kepler's laws of planetary motion are still valid
today for planets, moons, satellites, and any object orbiting any other ob-
ject under the action of gravity. But these laws must be modified slightly
to take into account additional effects due to gravity and relativity theory.
The First Law
What Kepler discovered from his analysis of Brahe's data is that the plan-
ets do not orbit on circles but on ellipses. Kepler's result was the first of
what we now call Kepler's three laws of planetary motion. They are still
valid today.
Kepler's first law of planetary motion, the law of ellipses: The plan-
ets orbit the sun on ellipses, with the sun at one focus and nothing at the
other focus.
What is an ellipse? You may have learned in geom-
etry that an ellipse can be drawn when a string is at-
tached to two points and then stretched taut by a
pencil. As the pencil moves, it traces out an ellipse
(Figure 2.33). The two points, F1 and F2 are called
the foci (singular: focus). If there are walls around
the edge of the ellipse, sound or light emanating
from one focus will bounce around the ellipse and
94
2. MOVING THE EARTH
Fortunately, Kepler had made a
major discovery earlier that was
crucial to his later work. He
found that the orbits of the
Earth and other planets were in
planes that passed through the
Sun. Ptolemy and Copernicus
required special explanations for
the motion of planets north and
south of the ecliptic, but Kepler
found that these motions were
simply the result of the orbits 
lying in planes tilted to the
plane of the Earth's orbit.
Kepler was fortunate to have
chosen Mars for analysis. Its or-
bit is the second most elliptical
among the planets then known.
If he had chosen Venus, which is
nearly circular, he would not
have obtained the First Law.

eventually converge at the other focus. The closer the foci are to each other,
the closer the ellipse comes to being a circle. The farther apart they are,
the flatter the ellipse, until finally a straight line is formed. The amount of
"flatness" of an ellipse is known as its eccentricity. A measure of the ec-
centricity of the ellipse is the ratio of the distance F1F2 and the long axis
of the ellipse. If we call the distance between F1 and F2 2c, and if we call
the length of the long axis 2a, then the eccentricity e is defined by the equa-
tion e  c/a. If c is zero, the foci are together and the eccentricity is zero;
the ellipse is a perfect circle. Also note that the greatest possible eccen-
tricity for an ellipse is e  1.0. In this case, the ellipse becomes so flat that
it approaches a straight line.
Eccentricities of the visible planets
Mercury
0.206
Venus
0.007
Earth
0.017
Mars
0.093
Jupiter
0.048
Saturn
0.056
Note that all of the orbits are nearly
circular except for Mercury's.
We have since discovered that all objects on closed orbits in space travel
on ellipses. This includes not only all comets and planets, including Earth,
but also the Moon, and satellites in orbit around the Earth or other planets.
The Second Law
Further analyzing Brahe's data, Kepler examined the speed of the planets
as they orbited the Sun on their ellipses. He discovered that, here too,
2.10 NEW ORBITS
95
P
2c
F1
a
b
F2
FIGURE 2.33
An ellipse. 

96
FIGURE 2.34
Ellipses of different eccentricities (the pictures were made by photographing a saucer at
different angles).
(e)
(f)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)

Plato's assumption about planetary motions and centuries of tradition had
to be given up. The planets do not travel at uniform speed, but at chang-
ing speeds in accordance with a new law, the law of areas:
Kepler's second law of planetary motion, the Law of Areas: An imag-
inary line from the sun to the moving planet sweeps out equal areas in
equal amounts of time.
To see what this means, refer to Figure 2.36. Both of the shaded parts
cover equal areas, and the times for a planet to move between the two points
on the orbit (AB and CD) are equal. For example, suppose it takes a planet
1 month to travel from point A to point B on the right side of the orbit,
when it is nearest the Sun. It also takes the planet 1 month to travel from
point C to point D on the other side of the orbit, when it is farthest from
the sun. Since the times are equal in each case, this law says that the areas
swept out will also be equal to each other. The only way to have both the
times and the areas equal to each other is if the distances between these
pairs of points are different in each case. As if moving along a giant ellip-
tical pizza pie, the planet sweeps out a short and fat slice of area when near-
est the Sun, and a long, thin slice of area when farthest from the Sun. The
2.10 NEW ORBITS
97
Parabola
Hyperbola
e = 1
e > 1
Circle
e = 0
Ellipse
0 < e < 1
FIGURE 2.35
The conic sections, as shown in the diagram, are figures
produced by cutting a cone with a plane. The eccentricity of a figure
is related to the angle of the cut. In addition to circles and ellipses,
parabolas and hyperbolas are conic sections, with eccentricities greater
than ellipses. Newton eventually showed that all of these shapes are
possible paths for a body moving under the gravitational attraction of
the Sun.

amount of "crust," orbital distance, in each case is different—but the time
of travel is the same. As you know, speed is equal to the distance over the
time taken. So a larger distance of travel involves a faster speed, while a
shorter distance of travel in the same time involves a slower speed. The net
result? In moving from A to B near the Sun, the planet moves the fastest.
In moving from C to D farthest from the Sun, the planet moves the slow-
est. And in between, it constantly changes speed as an imaginary line from
the Sun to the planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
We can now see better why the seasons on Earth differ a little in length.
It is not because the Sun is speeding up and slowing down as it orbits the
Earth, but because it is the Earth that is doing so as it orbits the Sun on
its ellipse. At the same time, the motion of the planets on ellipses with
changing speeds put an end to over 2000 years of Plato's problem. In the
end, there simply was no problem, because there are no perfect circles and
no uniform speeds in the heavens!
Although these Kepler's laws of planetary motion had destroyed Plato's
problem, Plato would probably not be too upset, because they provided a
much simpler mathematical account of the observed motions of the plan-
ets than even Copernicus had provided. With just the simple ellipse and
the variable speeds of the planets according to the law of areas, Kepler could
do everything that Ptolemy and Copernicus could do. Yet Kepler still sought
another harmony that would answer his old question why the planets move
as they do in the orbits in which they are found.
The Third Law
Further years of analysis finally led Kepler to his third law of planetary mo-
tion, known as the harmonic law. This law did not give the reason "why,"
but it did reveal a new quantitative relationship between the periods of the
planets—the period being the time it takes to complete one orbit—and
98
2. MOVING THE EARTH
Sun
B
C
D
1 Month
1 Month
A
FIGURE 2.36
Kepler's law of areas. A planet (shown here with
exaggerated eccentricity) moves along its orbit at such a rate that
the line from the Sun to the planet sweeps over areas which are
equal for equal time intervals. The time taken to cover AB is the
same as that for CD. 

their average distances from the Sun. (He could use the average distance,
since all of the orbits are nearly circular.) It also tied together all of the
planets, including the Earth, despite their different ellipses. Kepler's third
law is an arithmetic law, not a geometric law:
Kepler's third law of planetary motion, the harmonic law: The
squares of the periods of the planets are proportional to the cubes of their
average distances from the Sun, for all of the planets.
If we call the period of a planet T, and its average distance from the Sun
Rav, this law can be expressed in symbols in several different, but equiva-
lent ways, as follows:
T 2  R3av,
or
T 2  kR3av,
or
 k.
Here k is a constant, the same constant for all of the planets. This law ap-
plies to all the planets as well as to all comets, asteroids, and any other bod-
ies in a closed orbit around the Sun. It also applies to objects orbiting the
Earth or any other planet, but in those cases there is a different value for
k for each planet.
Let's see what k would be for the planets orbiting the Sun. Of course,
the value of k depends upon the units chosen for T and Rav. Following stan-
dard practice since the days of Copernicus and Kepler, we'll use the Earth's
average radius and period as our unit of measure. For the Earth, the pe-
riod is 1 yr and the average radius is defined as 1 astronomical unit, or 
1 AU. So, we can find the value of k in these units by substituting into the
expression above:
 k,
 k.
(1 yr)2

(1 AU)3
T 2

R3av
T 2

R3av
2.10 NEW ORBITS
99

Using this value of k and all periods and radii in these units, all of the other
planets should have this same ratio. Let's see if we can confirm this, using
the data in the table of periods and radii obtain by Copernicus, Section 2.6.
For example, for Saturn, T  29.46 yr, Rav  9.54 AU:


 0.999 yr2/AU3.
For Mercury, T  87.97 d  0.24 yr, Rav  0.39 AU:


 0.983 yr2/AU3.
So within the limit of uncertainty, k for Saturn and Mercury are equal.
Hence, if you know the average radius of a planet, you can find its period,
and vice versa.
Evaluating Kepler's Work
Kepler's system was vastly simpler and more precise than the multitude of
geometrical devices in the planetary theories of Ptolemy, Copernicus, and
even Brahe. Kepler's three laws are so simple that their great power may
be overlooked. Combined with his discovery that each planet moves in a
plane passing through the Sun, their value is greater still. It is almost as if
the solar system is like a gigantic mechanical machine, perhaps a clock, tick-
ing away in precise, predictable fashion according to Kepler's laws of plan-
etary motion. Kepler was among the first astronomers to suggest such a
simile. In fact, he was the first to call this a "clockwork universe," a uni-
verse, he thought, wound up by God in the beginning and allowed to run
like a mechanical clock according to a few laws of motion until the end of
time. This was a powerful image, and one which we will encounter again
and again.
Although Kepler believed that a magnetic "force" emanating from the
Sun was the underlying origin of his laws of planetary motion, these laws
are grounded in his painstaking analysis of the data. Data that are obtained
from experimental research are often called empirical data, and laws ob-
tained from such data are often called empirical laws. They are an impor-
tant step toward obtaining a theory, but usually they cannot form a theory
themselves, since we want a theory to do much more. We want an expla-
nation why these laws occur in the data as they do.
Kepler did try to provide such an explanation by speculating about the
action of the supposed magnetic force emanating from the Sun. In doing
0.058 yr2

0.059 AU3
(0.24 yr)2

(0.39 AU)3
T 2

R3av
867.9 yr2

868.3 AU3
(29.46 yr)2

(9.54 AU)3
T 2

R3av
100
2. MOVING THE EARTH

this he was the first mathematical astronomer to go beyond an analysis of
the observations in an attempt to create a physics of the planetary motions—
obtaining not just a mathematical description of the motions but the cause
of the motions. In fact, the full title of his book reporting his work and dis-
coveries was New Astronomy: A Celestial Physics.
In obtaining his second law of planetary motion, Kepler realized that the
planets move fastest when they are closest to the Sun and slowest when far-
thest away. He reasoned from this that there might be a force from the Sun
that causes the planets to speed up as they move closer. Kepler thought
that this force might be a magnetic force of attraction, since recent dis-
coveries had shown that the Earth is a large magnet, and that the strength
of a magnet's effect increases as the distance to it decreases. Perhaps the
Sun exerts a magnetic attraction on the Earth and other planets as they re-
volve around the Sun, speeding them up as they approach.
2.10 NEW ORBITS
101
FIGURE 2.37

Kepler was almost right! There is an attractive force between the Sun
and the planets that does account for his laws. In one of the most impor-
tant theories ever developed, Newton showed that the attractive force is
not magnetism but another force, the force of gravitation between all mat-
ter, whether on the Earth, in the solar system, or across the Universe (fur-
ther discussed in Chapter 4). But Kepler was not able to carry his prescient
idea beyond the qualitative stage.
As you will see in Chapter 4, when Newton obtained his theory of uni-
versal gravitation, he used Kepler's empirical laws as a guide. His deriva-
tion of these laws from the new theory helped to confirm the theory. The
power of empirical laws such as Kepler's is in their ability to help guide to
general theories from which these laws can be derived. Only then do we
believe we have an understanding of the physical processes that give rise
to these empirical laws. One may say empirical laws tell us "how"; theories
tell us "why."
2.11 NEW OBSERVATIONS
One of the scientists with whom Kepler corresponded was his Italian col-
league Galileo. Like Kepler, Galileo was opposed by scholars who believed
that the heavens were eternal and could not change. Galileo therefore took
special interest in the sudden appearance in 1604 of a new star, a nova.
Where there had been nothing visible in the sky, there was now a brilliant
star that gradually faded away. Like Brahe and Kepler, Galileo realized that
such events conflicted with the then current idea that the stars could not
change. Similar to the experiences of Brahe and many future scientists at
a young age, this nova awakened in Galileo an interest in astronomy that
lasted his entire life.
Four or five years later, as Galileo tells it, he learned that a Dutch lens
maker "had constructed a spy glass by means of which visible objects,
though very distant from the eye of the observer, were distinctly seen as if
nearby." Galileo worked out some of the optical principles involved. Hav-
ing established a scientific instrument shop in order to supplement his mea-
ger income as a professor, he set to work to grind the lenses and to build
such an instrument himself. While others used the telescope primarily as
a military instrument, for sighting enemy ships and invading armies, Galileo
was the first to turn the instrument to the heavens. What he saw there as-
tonished him and the public to whom he reported his observations, as it
will amaze you if you have the opportunity to observe the night sky through
a telescope.
102
2. MOVING THE EARTH

Imagine being the first person ever to look at the stars through a tele-
scope! For thousands of years people could learn about the heavens only
from what they could see with their own eyes, and then only if they had
good eyesight. Suddenly a whole new world opened to human eyes for ex-
ploration and study. Within a few short weeks in 1609 and 1610 Galileo
used his telescope to make a series of major discoveries. First, he pointed
his telescope at the Moon. Here is what he saw:
. . . the surface of the Moon is not smooth, uniform, and precisely
spherical as a great number of philosophers believe it (and other
heavenly bodies) to be, but is uneven, rough, and full of cavities and
prominences, being not unlike the face of the Earth, relieved by
chains of mountains and deep valleys.
He did not stop with that simple observation; he supported his conclusions
with several kinds of evidence, including ingenious measurements of the
heights of the lunar mountains.
Next Galileo looked at the stars. To the naked eye about 3000 stars are
visible in the night sky (if you are away from city lights), while the Milky
2.11 NEW OBSERVATIONS
103
FIGURE 2.38
Two of Galileo's tele-
scopes. 

Way (now understood to be the major part of our galaxy) seems to be a
continuous blotchy band of faint light, almost directly overhead and to 
either side. Wherever he pointed the telescope, Galileo saw many more
stars than had ever been seen before, and he observed the Milky Way to
consist of thousands of faint stars. Today, with powerful telescopes such as
the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers can see many billions of stars
and other objects—and there is as yet no end in sight.
By projecting an image of the Sun on a screen in order to protect his
eyes (never look directly at the Sun!), Galileo observed dark spots on the
Sun. These seemed to indicate that the Sun, like the Moon, was not per-
fect in the Aristotelian sense. He also noticed that the sunspots moved
104
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.39
Two of Galileo's early drawings of the Moon from Siderius Nuncius
(The Starry Messenger). 
FIGURE 2.40
Image of stars from Hubble
Space Telescope. 

across the face of the Sun in a regular pattern. He concluded from further
study that this motion indicated that the Sun itself rotated on its axis with
a period of about 27 days. If the Sun can rotate, he asked, why can't the
Earth?
Writing in Italian for the general educated public, Galileo reported on
these and his many other discoveries over the following years. Among the
most important was, in his words, "the disclosure of four Planets never seen
from the creation of the world up to our time." He was referring to his
discovery of four of the moons that orbit Jupiter. Here, before his eyes, was
a miniature solar system, with its own center of revolution—a model for
the entire solar system. He named these moons the Medician Planets, in
honor of his benefactor in Florence, Cosimo dé Medici. Centuries later, 
in the 1990s, the first satellite sent to Jupiter for long-term study of the
planet and its moons was named Galileo in honor of the moons' discoverer.
Galileo also observed that Saturn seemed to carry mysterious "bulges"
or "ears" around its equator. The magnification of his telescopes was not
large enough to show that these were really the rings of Saturn. In photo-
graphing the rings of Saturn during space missions centuries later, the 
Voyager spacecraft revealed these rings to be among the most beautiful ob-
jects in the solar system. Yet in some ways—for instance, their fine struc-
ture and delicately preserved equilibrium—they still remain mysterious.
2.11 NEW OBSERVATIONS
105
FIGURE 2.41
Solar disk with sunspots. 

So far, none of Galileo's observations was a clear contradiction of the
Ptolemaic theory, although they did raise serious doubts. The greatest
threat came with Galileo's discovery of the phases of Venus, which are also
visible only through a telescope. Like the Moon, Venus shows all phases,
and they are of different sizes depending upon the phase, full phase oc-
curring with the smallest size, as shown in Figure 2.45. Galileo pointed out
that the full phase should not be observed if Ptolemy's theory is valid, be-
cause in it Venus moves always between the Earth and the Sun. But Coper-
nicus's theory can account for all of these phases, and also the different
sizes, as indicated in Figure 2.46. This, he told his audience, was clear proof
that Ptolemy was wrong and Copernicus was right. But in his eagerness to
convince the public, he failed to mention that Brahe's "compromise the-
ory" (see Section 2.9) also accounted for the observations of Venus, and
this was still a geocentric theory (although a lopsided one), since the Earth
was stationary at the center and all celestial objects orbited about it.
Having collected an impressive array of new information about the heav-
ens with his telescopes, Galileo used it to maximum advantage. He had be-
come convinced of Copernicus's heliocentric system earlier in his career
because, like Copernicus, he found it simpler and more pleasing. Now he
had observations as well as conviction. A masterful writer and debater,
Galileo portrayed his observations to his Italian audience in his Dialogue
Concerning Two Chief World Systems (1632) and earlier writings as providing
irrefutable evidence in favor of Copernicus and against Ptolemy. In fact,
while they certainly caused problems for Aristotle's cosmology, they were
106
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.42
Galileo's drawings of Jupiter (the large circle) and its moons (the dots) on
different days (from The Starry Messenger). 

2.11 NEW OBSERVATIONS
107
FIGURE 2.43
Palomar Observatory, located on Palomar Mountain in southern Califor-
nia, houses the 200-inch Hale reflecting telescope. 
i
ii
iii
iv
v
vi
vii
FIGURE 2.44
Saturn seen at different times,
as it would have appeared to observers in
the seventeenth century (reproduction of
sketches).

not "proof" but rather, at best, circumstantial evidence against the systems
of Ptolemy and Aristotle and for Copernicus's heliocentric system. They
could lead us to doubting Ptolemy and Aristotle, but not necessarily to re-
jecting their theories entirely. Only the phases of Venus provided a clear
challenge to Ptolemy's theory—but not to all geocentric theories, since
Brahe's geocentric theory could still account for the observed phases.
Apparently Galileo expected that his discoveries with the telescope would
immediately demolish the deep-seated assumptions and beliefs that pre-
vented widespread acceptance of the Copernican theory. But no matter
108
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.45
Photographs of
Venus at various phases with a
constant magnification. 
S
Full
Earth
0
3/4
1/4
1/2
1/2
FIGURE 2.46
Explanation of phases of
Venus as seen from Earth, based on the
heliocentric theory.

what the evidence, people often cannot believe what they are not ready to
believe. The Aristotelians firmly continued to believe that the heliocentric
theory was absolutely false and contrary to direct, naked-eye observation,
common sense, and religious belief. Lest Galileo gain influence among the
general public and threaten cherished, pious beliefs, the religious authori-
ties decided to forbid his teachings on this matter.
2.12
GALILEO CONDEMNED
The political and personal tragedy that struck Galileo is described in many
books. Many of the documents pertaining to this case have been recently
released by the Vatican and are available in English translation. We know
that the period was one of turmoil for the Roman Catholic Church. In the
wake of the Protestant Reformation, the Church was in the midst of its
own reassessment, called the Counter Reformation, to win back some of
its members. In addition, there were many intrigues occurring among var-
ious factions within the Church. These factions saw Galileo's vulnerability
as an opportunity to enhance their own prestige and power within the
Church hierarchy.
For several centuries the Church had supported the Inquisition, a theo-
logical court established to investigate and stamp out heresy by every means.
In 1616, the same year in which the Inquisition placed Copernicus's book
on the Index of Forbidden Books, the Inquisitors, mindful of Galileo's recent
publication of some of his discoveries with the telescope, warned Galileo
to cease teaching the Copernican theory as truth. He could continue to
teach it only as just one of several possible hypotheses or methods for com-
puting the planetary motions, but not as a literally true model of the Uni-
verse. Although a devoutly religious man, Galileo deliberately ruled out
questions of religious faith from scientific discussions. This was a funda-
mental break with the past. But he was ordered "henceforth not to hold,
teach, or defend it in any way whatever, either orally or in writing."
In 1632, having obtained permission of the Church censors, Galileo pub-
lished his Dialogue Concerning Two Chief World Systems. Galileo's enemies in
the Church flew into a rage when they found their views represented in
the book by a fictitious Aristotelian named Simplicio, who in the end was
portrayed as persuaded of the heliocentric theory. Galileo's long-time ene-
mies, incensed by his lack of tact, argued that he had directly violated 
the warning of 1616. These and related motivations marked Galileo for
punishment.
Among the many factors in this complex story it is important to re-
member that Galileo was always religiously faithful, as were most of the
2.12 GALILEO CONDEMNED
109

scientists of that era. In earlier letters Galileo wrote that God's mind con-
tains all the natural laws. Consequently, the occasional glimpses of these
laws that scientists might gain are direct revelations about God, just as true
in their way as those in the Bible. He believed scientific research could be
considered the retracing of God's thoughts as He created nature long ago.
Today, similarly, some view science as one way to contemplate God's cre-
ation, whether they are scientists or not. Few people think of scientific find-
ings about the world as conflicting with religion. In Galileo's time, how-
ever, such ideas were regarded as symptoms of pantheism, the belief that
God is no more (nor less) than the forces and laws of nature. Pantheism
was one of the religious "crimes," or heresies, for which the Dominican
monk Giordano Bruno, who proclaimed the existence of other worlds, had
been burned at the stake in 1600. The Inquisition, alarmed by Galileo's
seeming denial of the Bible as the only literal source of knowledge about
Nature and of God, ordered him to Rome to stand trial for heresy.
Although old and in ill-health, Galileo was confined in Rome, interro-
gated, threatened with torture, forced to make a formal confession for hold-
ing and teaching forbidden ideas, and finally forced to deny the Coperni-
can theory as heresy. In return for his confession and denial, Galileo was
sentenced only to house arrest for the remainder of his life. He never wrote
again on the Copernican theory, but he managed to produce perhaps his
110
2. MOVING THE EARTH
FIGURE 2.47
Title page from Galileo's 
Dialogue on Two Chief World Systems (1632). 

best work, Dialogue Concerning Two New Sciences, in which he presented his
findings on the science of motion and mechanics. In the end, ironically,
this new work—by leading to Newton's work—eventually demolished Aris-
totle's cosmology more thoroughly than could any polemical writings or
dialogues debating the merits of different models for the solar system.
The Inquisition also placed Galileo's Dialogue on Two Chief World Systems
on the Index of Forbidden Books. It remained there, along with Copernicus's
book and one by Kepler, until 1835—a warning to all that demands for
spiritual conformity also required intellectual conformity. The result was
the noticeable decline of science in Italy for nearly two centuries. But sci-
ence cannot be extinguished. Less than 50 years after the condemnation of
Galileo, Newton published his great work, the Principia, an achievement
that would not have been possible without the work of Galileo and Kepler.
In 1979, during the worldwide celebration of the 100th birthday of Al-
bert Einstein, Pope John Paul II announced that the Vatican would reopen
the case against Galileo. In 1984 it released the documents pertaining to
the case, and in 1992 a papal commission acknowledged the Vatican's 
error in condemning Galileo for heresy.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
altitude
law of nature
azimuth
nova
celestial sphere
Renaissance
eastward drift
retrograde motion
empirical laws
Scientific Revolution
epicycle-deferent
solstice
equinox
stellar parallax
geocentric theory
Zodiac
heliocentric theory
FURTHER READING
J.R. Christianson, On Tycho's Island: Tycho Brahe and His Assistants (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2000).
G. Galilei, Galileo on the World Systems—A New Abridged Translation and Guide,
M.A. Finocchiaro, transl. and ed. (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
1997).
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapters 1-5.
FURTHER READING
111

T.S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the Development of
Western Thought (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982).
J.R. Jacob, The Scientific Revolution: Aspirations and Achievements, 1500-1700 (Hu-
manities Press, 1998).
M. Caspar, Kepler, C.D. Hellman and O. Gingerich, transl. (New York: Dover,
1993).
O. Gingerich, The Eye of Heaven: Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler (Woodbury, NY: AIP
Press, 1993).
A. Koestler, The Watershed. In: The Sleepwalkers (New York: Macmillan, 1959), a
biography of Kepler.
D. Sobel, Galileo's Daughter: A Historical Memoir of Science, Faith, and Love (New
York: Walker, 2000).
H. Thurston, Early Astronomy (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1994).
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1.
This chapter concerns the development, debates, and impact regarding an im-
portant new scientific theory. Describe the new theory and the old theory that
it challenged.
2.
What was the Scientific Revolution, and what is the importance of astronomy
and mechanics to it?
2.4 The Geocentric View
1.
Until about A.D. 1700 most people believed that the Earth is stationary at the
center of the Universe. We now know that the Earth is rotating and the stars
are more or less stationary. Why would anyone believe that the Earth is 
stationary?
2.
Looking at a sunrise, or a sunset, is it possible to decide whether the Sun 
is moving and the Earth is stationary or the Earth is moving and the Sun is
stationary?
3.
What is relative motion?
4.
As seen from the Earth, briefly describe the motions of the stars, Sun, Moon,
and planets.
5.
Explain the origin of the seasons in the northern hemisphere in terms of the
geocentric theory. (Refer to Discovery Question 4 for further inquiry on this
topic.)
6.
Explain the origin of the seasons in the northern and southern hemispheres in
terms of the heliocentric theory.
7.
How would we know that the Earth is round if we didn't have satellites and
photographs from the Moon?
8.
Is the sun ever directly overhead at your latitude on the Earth? Explain.
112
2. MOVING THE EARTH

2.5 Copernicus versus Ptolemy
1.
Who was Copernicus, what did he do, and why did he do it?
2.
In what ways was Copernicus's theory a sharp break with the past?
3.
How did Ptolemy account for the observed motion of a planet as seen from
the Earth?
4.
Evaluate Ptolemy's theory, including both its positive contributions as well as
its problems.
5.
What did Copernicus find wrong with Ptolemy's explanation?
6.
How did Copernicus account for the observed motions of the planets?
2.6 Arguments for the Heliocentric System
1.
Give some of the arguments in favor of the heliocentric system.
2.
What reasons did Copernicus have for proposing this theory?
3.
What was the numerical harmony that Copernicus found in the table of rela-
tive radii and periods of the planets?
2.7 Arguments against the Heliocentric System
1.
Why wasn't Copernicus's idea immediately accepted? After all, he was right!
2.
List some of the arguments at that time against his theory.
3.
What was the problem of stellar parallax? How did Copernicus respond? And
how did his opponents respond to his response?
2.8 Carrying Forth the Revolution
1.
At the time of Copernicus's death, how did most astronomers view Coperni-
cus's theory?
2.
Comparing the abilities of the alternative theories to account for observations,
did either theory have an advantage? Explain why or why not.
3.
List some of the work that was done in the century and a half after Coperni-
cus's death, and how it strengthened the case for the new theory.
2.9 New Data
1.
Why would the observations of comets and new stars (novae) beyond the Moon
pose a challenge for Aristotle's system?
2.
What were Brahe's contributions to the debate over a model for the planets?
3.
What compromise did he offer, and what were its advantages for either side
of the debate?
2.10 New Orbits
1.
Who was Kepler? What was he attempting to discover?
2.
What did Kepler believe to be the discovery in Question 1?
3.
How does a law of nature differ from a theory?
4.
State each of Kepler's three laws of planetary motion in your own words.
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
113

5.
Where in its orbit does a planet move the fastest? the slowest? How does this
motion account for the varying lengths of the seasons on Earth?
6.
The radius of the planet Venus is given in the table in Section 2.6. Use 
Kepler's third law to calculate the radius of its orbit, then compare with the
value given in the table. Does this support Kepler's third law?
7.
How did Kepler's work affect Plato's age-old problem?
8.
What are empirical laws, and why are they usually not sufficient to form a 
theory?
9.
How did Kepler attempt to account for his laws?
2.11 New Observations
1.
List and briefly describe Galileo's observations with the telescope.
2.
Did any of Galileo's observations completely disprove the geocentric theory?
3.
What did Galileo observe about the phases of Venus, and what did he claim
they proved? Was he right? Explain.
2.12 Galileo Condemned
1.
Why did the Church authorities decide to try Galileo for heresy?
2.
What was Galileo's position on the relationship between science and religion?
3.
What was the Church's position?
4.
What was the outcome of the case, in the short term and in the long term?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1.
Fundamental new ideas about the world are often hard to accept. Why do
you think this is so? Why don't most people gladly accept new and chal-
lenging ideas if there is evidence for them?
2.
This is supposed to be a physics course, so why is this chapter about 
astronomy?
3.
Why does this chapter have a lot of material on the geocentric model, when
we now know that it's wrong?
4.
Section 2.4 contained a description of the seasons during 1 year as seen from
a position on the northern hemisphere of the Earth. Referring to Figure 2.12,
describe what happens to the seasons during 1 year as seen by an observer:
(a) in the southern hemisphere;
(b) at the north pole;
(c) at the south pole.
5.
What is so important about the Scientific Revolution and Copernicus's 
theory?
6.
The relationship between science and religion has always been a hot issue.
Both deal with nature and our relationship to it, but they have different ap-
proaches. Consider what are your own ideas on this controversial issue, but
114
2. MOVING THE EARTH

feel free to discuss without having to reveal your personal beliefs one way or
the other.
7.
Think of some examples of beliefs and scientific theories. What is the dif-
ference, if any, between a scientific theory and a belief? Can there be some
overlap? How could a scientist like Galileo also be devoutly religious?
8.
In what ways has our place in nature and the Universe become even more
humble than it was in Copernicus's day?
9.
Set up a debate in class over the heliocentric versus the geocentric theories
of the solar system. Give specific arguments for and against each side, and
decide upon a winner. Then introduce a compromise and let each side eval-
uate its acceptability.
10.
Instead of an in-class debate, write a brief dialogue between Copernicus,
Ptolemy, Galileo, and a modern person, and act it out before the class.
11.
Look at the reasons Copernicus gave for his new theory. Do you think they
were enough to convince everyone eventually? If not, what other reasons or
evidence were needed?
12.
Think about or look up some of the other great theories that you know about
in science, and compare some of the features of their acceptance with those
of the heliocentric theory.
13.
Looking back over this chapter, outline the steps in the formation, debate,
and acceptance of a new, fundamental theory in physical science. Use this
outline later to compare with other theories you will encounter in this
course.
14.
Many of the astronomers of that day were also astrologers. Why do you think
this was so? What are some of the fundamental assumptions in astrology and
in astronomy, and how do these two differ from each other? In what ways are
they similar?
15.
Many of the astronomers then were also greatly concerned with revising the
calendar. Look up the history of our modern calendar in an encyclopedia or
other reference work and report on it to the class.
16.
Do you think a second scientific revolution, with the same implications as the
first one, could occur today? Make up an imaginary theory that provides a
sharp break with what we understand today about some aspect of nature or
the Universe. How would political leaders, religious authorities, scientists,
students, the general public, react to this imaginary theory? How does the
situation in the United States today compare with the conditions that helped
or hindered new theories during the Renaissance?
Quantitative
1.
Pluto orbits the Sun with a period of 248.4 yr. What is its average distance
from the Sun?
2.
A satellite is launched into circular orbit around the Sun at a distance of 
3 AU. What is the period of its orbit?
3.
Assuming the Earth is a perfect sphere, what would be the altitude of the Sun
at solar noon on the Summer Solstice at your latitude?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
115

4.
On the day of the Winter Solstice, the Sun's elevation at noon in the north-
ern hemisphere is the lowest it attains throughout the year. At some northern
latitudes the Sun never rises on that day. What is the highest northern latitude
at which the Sun is still visible at noon on the Winter Solstice?
5.
The Moon orbits the Earth at an average distance of 384,403 km with a pe-
riod (as seen from the stars) of 27.3 days. With this information, find the 
period of a satellite launched into a circular orbit around the Earth of radius
10,000 km.
116
2. MOVING THE EARTH

A.
THE THREE LAWS OF MOTION
3.1
Natural Motion
3.2
Forces in Equilibrium
3.3
More about Vectors
3.4
Newton's Second Law of Motion
3.5
Measuring Mass and Force
3.6
More about Weight, and Weightlessness
3.7
Newton's Third Law of Motion
B.
THE THREE LAWS IN ACTION
3.8
Projectile Motion
3.9
The Earth Can Move!
3.10 Galilean Relativity
3.11 Orbiting Satellites
3.12 Circular Motion
A. THE THREE LAWS OF MOTION
3.1 NATURAL MOTION
You saw in the previous chapter that the proposal that the Earth moves
caused all sorts of problems for the Earth-centered view of the Universe—
as well as for theology, philosophy, and just plain common sense. If the
Earth really is moving around the Sun, then what keeps the heavy Earth
on its orbit? The ground beneath our feet must be moving very fast, so
why do heavy objects fall straight down, instead of hitting behind the spot
over which they are released?
You probably know that these and other excellent questions can be an-
swered by referring to the law governing the force of gravity. But under-
117
Understanding
Motion
C
H
A
P
T
E
R 33

standing what gravity is and how it answers these questions requires a fur-
ther understanding of motion and its causes. We could just list the results
for you here in a few paragraphs, but (as usual) we think you will get a
much clearer idea of what these concepts really mean, and what goes into
them, by seeing where they came from and how people managed to pro-
vide the understanding we have today of this complicated thing we so eas-
ily call "motion." This understanding, too, began with Galileo, which he
discussed in his book Two New Sciences, published after his condemnation
for religious heresy. At least two other scientists of that era, Descartes and
Newton, further enhanced his work and put it into more modern form af-
ter his death.
The story begins with what seems to be a very simple concept we have
already encountered, the concept of "natural motion"—how an object
moves "naturally" without outside help. In Aristotle's physics there were
two types of motion: "natural" motion and "violent" motion. Natural mo-
tion was the motion of an object on a vertical line directly to the place
where it "belonged." For example, a stone falls straight down through the
air and further through any water to reach the earth below. On the other
hand, an air bubble trapped under water moves upward through the water
until it reaches the air above. There was no need to explain why these mo-
tions occur—they're just as natural as the movement of an animal making
straight for its "home."
In contrast to natural motion Aristotle also defined "violent" motion.
This was any motion that is not directly to the place where the object "be-
longed." Examples are the lifting of a stone upward from the earth, or the
motion of a cart across a horizontal tabletop, or the flight of an arrow
through the air. This type of motion had to be explained, since it was not
natural for an object to move sideways by itself. Something has to cause or
force the object to perform such motion. This was why he called it "vio-
118
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
Natural motion
Violent motion
FIGURE 3.1
Examples of Aristotle's notions of natural and violent 
motion. 

lent" motion. Therefore, according to Aristotle, to maintain these violent
motions a force had to be applied continuously. As soon as the force ceased,
the violent motion ceased. Again, this seems very reasonable at first sight.
Anyone who has pushed a heavy cart over a rough pavement knows that it
stops moving as soon as you stop pushing. But Galileo showed for the first
time that there is more going on here than we realize. The causes and in-
hibitors to motion are not obvious, and it takes the careful reasoning and
experimentation of modern physics that Galileo and others developed to
sort this out.
As noted earlier, Galileo was one of the first to realize that he should
dispense with less important complications in order to focus on the essen-
tial aspects of any motion. He realized that the role of friction and air re-
sistance could be neglected in his thinking in order that the essential prop-
erties of the motion itself can be studied. You may recall that when he
neglected friction and air resistance for a ball rolling down an inclined
plane, he obtained the idea of uniform acceleration. The uniform acceler-
ation increased as the small angle of inclination increased. From this he in-
ferred that the extreme case of a 90° "incline" would also be uniform ac-
celeration. In that case the ball is no longer rolling down the incline, but
falling freely to the ground. From this he concluded that free fall must also
be an example of uniform acceleration and that all bodies will fall freely at
the same uniform acceleration if air resistance is neglected. As a result,
heavier objects do not fall faster than lighter ones. They all reach the ground 
at the same time when dropped from the same height (neglecting air 
resistance).
Now Galileo decided to look at the other extreme. What happens when
the angle of the incline becomes smaller and smaller, down to zero? As
3.1 NATURAL MOTION
119
FIGURE 3.2

usual, he decided to try a "thought experiment" (which can also be done
as a real experiment). This thought experiment is based on an actual ob-
servation. If a pendulum bob on the end of a string is pulled back and re-
leased from rest, it will swing through an arc and rise to very nearly the
same height. Indeed, as Galileo showed, the pendulum bob will rise almost
to its starting level even if a peg is used to change the path, as shown in
the illustration above. Try it yourself!
From this observation Galileo went on to his thought experiment. He
predicted that a ball released from a height on a ramp would roll up to the
same height on a similar ramp, neglecting all resistances. Consider the fol-
lowing diagram. As the ramp on the right is changed from position A to B
and then to C, the ball must roll farther along the upward incline in each
case in order to reach its original height.
Now let's look at the extreme case, the limit in which the angle of in-
clination of the second ramp is zero, and the path is level, as shown in D.
In this case the ball never reaches its original height. Therefore, Galileo
reasoned, the moving ball on this surface, with no air resistance and no bar-
riers in its way, would continue to roll on and on at uniform speed forever.
(Actually, he thought that if the ball continued on long enough, it would
120
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
FIGURE 3.3
A swinging pendulum bob returns to its initial height, even if
there is an impediment.
D
A
B
C
FIGURE 3.4
Ball rolling up ramps of different inclination return-
ing each time to the height, except in D.

eventually go into a circular orbit around the Earth.
However, without the gravity of the Earth, the ball
would continue in a straight line forever.) What
Galileo discovered is that, within any reasonable large
space—say, a laboratory—it is "natural" for the ball to
continue to roll horizontally in a straight line at uniform
speed until it is forced by a push or other means to change
its motion. Even though it is not moving vertically,
no force is required to keep the ball rolling hori-
zontally, as Aristotle had believed. A force is needed
only to stop it from rolling, or to divert it in another
direction. Contrary to Aristotle's arguments, the mo-
tion of a moving ball at uniform velocity (constant
speed in a straight line) is quite "natural." It needs
no explanation. What must be explained is why it
ever changes that motion. And this is where the ac-
tion of a force comes in. The departure from motion with uniform veloc-
ity, now called "accelerated motion," occurs only when an object is acted
on by a force.
The same holds when objects are at rest. They stay at rest, which can
be thought of as a state where the velocity is zero, until they are "forced"
to move.
Since objects stay in uniform motion or at rest until they are forced to
do otherwise, they behave as if they are "inert," literally unable to change
their state by themselves. It takes a force applied from outside themselves
to get them to change their motion, either to speed up, or to slow down,
or to change direction. When they are at rest, it takes a force to get them
to move; otherwise they "naturally" tend to maintain their state of rest or
motion. This tendency of all material objects to maintain their state of mo-
tion is called inertia. Newton elevated this tendency of material objects into
the first of his three basic laws of nature governing all motion. These laws
are so universal that Newton applied them to all motion everywhere, in-
cluding throughout the entire Universe. And they are part of the founda-
tion of modern physics. So far, no contradiction to these laws has been
found, either on Earth or anywhere else in the Universe—although, as you
will see in Chapter 9, modifications become increasingly necessary for
events occurring at extremely high speeds approaching the speed of light.
Newton's first law of motion is also called the law of inertia. Expressed
in modern terms, it states:
Every object continues in its state of rest or of uniform velocity
(motion at uniform speed in a straight line) unless acted upon by
3.1 NATURAL MOTION
121
For a ball rolling without fric-
tion, there is no detectable dif-
ference between motion in a
straight (horizontal) line in a lab-
oratory on Earth or at a constant
height above the Earth. But on a
larger scale, Galileo held that
eternal rolling would become
motion in a circle around the
Earth. Newton made clear what
is really more important: In the
absence of the Earth's gravita-
tional pull or other external
forces, the ball's undisturbed path
would extend straight out into
space without end.

an unbalanced force (a net force). Conversely, if an object is at rest
or in motion with uniform velocity, all forces that may be acting on
it must cancel so that the net force is zero.
Notice that Newton is not saying that there are no forces acting on an
object at rest or moving with uniform velocity. Rather, he is staying that if
there are any forces they must all cancel out if the object is to be in a state
of rest or uniform velocity.
For Aristotle, an object rolling horizontally on a tabletop was thought
to have a constant force acting on it to keep it moving; otherwise it would
stop as soon as the force is removed. Newton's first law of motion makes
the situation just the reverse. An object moving with uniform velocity or
at rest needs no net force to keep it in that state of motion; instead, any
"unbalanced force" (such as friction, air resistance, or a push or pull) will
change its state of moving with uniform velocity. Remove all forces and
obstacles, and the object will continue on forever. In real life it is very dif-
ficult to come close to a situation where all forces are absent or balanced
out. But a hockey puck moving on flat ice, after it has been pushed, is a
close example of such an object.
122
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
FIGURE 3.5
Pages from the original (Latin) edition of Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Prin-
cipia Mathematica (The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy) presenting the three laws
of motion and the parallelogram rule for the addition of forces (See Secs. 3.3 and 3.4). 

We must now define exactly what is meant by an "unbalanced force." In
fact, what is a force?
3.2 FORCES IN EQUILIBRIUM
The word "force" still has the connotation of violence that Aristotle gave
it. In physics, it refers to a push or a pull. You know without having to think
about it that forces can make things move. Forces can also hold things still.
A cable supporting the main span of the Golden Gate Bridge is under the
influence of mighty forces, yet it remains at rest.
This is not surprising. Think of two children quarreling over a toy. If
each child pulls with equal determination in the opposite direction, the toy
goes nowhere. In this case we say that the forces are "balanced." Or think
of a grand chandelier hanging from a ceiling. The pull down by gravity is
exactly balanced by the pull upward on the chandelier by the cord and chain
on which it hangs. In all such cases we can think of forces in terms of ar-
rows which represent the sizes and directions of the forces in a given situ-
ation. As with velocity, forces have both a magnitude (size) and a direction.
As discussed in Section 1.5, we call any physical quantity that has both a
3.2 FORCES IN EQUILIBRIUM
123
FIGURE 3.6
The Golden Gate Bridge in San
Francisco—one example of an exquisite arrange-
ment of balanced forces on the structure. 

magnitude and a direction a "vector," and represent it in a diagram by an
arrow. These arrows, representing vectors, can be added up graphically to
obtain the resultant, for example, the "net force." (Vectors are discussed
further in the next section.) As you can see from Figure 3.8, the two equally
strong but opposing forces are represented by arrows equal in size but op-
posite in direction. The force pulling to the left is "balanced" exactly by
the force pulling to the right. So these two forces cancel. The "net force"
on the puppet is zero in this case.
Now suppose the child on the left suddenly makes an extra effort and
pulls even harder. At that point the forces of course no longer balance each
other. There is a net force to the left, and the toy starts to go from rest
into motion to the left (Figure 3.8b).
124
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
FIGURE 
3.7
Children 
playing
tug-of-war. Until one side pulls
the other with acceleration, the
net force is zero. 
F
F
FIGURE 3.8a
Diagram of equal forces on a
doll. 
F
2
F
FIGURE 3.8b
Diagram of unequal forces on
a doll. 

Suppose now that a third child eyes the toy and tries to grab it from the
other two. Perhaps the three children pull in the directions shown in Fig-
ure 3.8c. Again there are forces on the toy, but they all balance out, the net
force is zero, so the toy stays at rest. Finally, suppose that the original two
children decide to "join forces" against the intruder and pull together par-
allel to each other. As shown in Figure 3.8d, their two forces add together,
and the net result of all three forces is in their direction. The result is: they
"win" (if the toy is not already torn apart).
The point to keep in mind most of all here is that you can have many
forces all acting on an object at once and in different directions; but the
net force is zero if the forces are balanced, and in that case the object stays
in its original state of motion, either at rest or in uniform velocity. This is
the meaning of Newton's first law of motion.
On the other hand, whenever there is an unbalanced or net force on an
object, such as a toy, a car, or the space shuttle taking off, a change in its
velocity must occur.
This leads to the next step: as you know from Chapter 1, whenever there
is a change in uniform velocity there is, by definition, an acceleration. So,
net forces are related to accelerations. "How" they are related is the sub-
ject of one of the mightiest laws of physics, Newton's second law of mo-
tion. But first, let's look a little closer at vectors.
3.3 MORE ABOUT VECTORS
As just discussed, forces belong in a class of concepts called vector quanti-
ties, or just vectors for short. Some characteristics of vectors are easy to rep-
resent by arrows. It is not obvious that forces should behave like arrows.
But arrows drawn on paper happen to be useful for calculating how forces
3.3 MORE ABOUT VECTORS
125
F
F
FIGURE 3.8c
Diagram of three forces on a
doll (non-parallel). 
F
F
F
FIGURE 3.8d
Diagram of three forces on a
doll (parallel). 

add. (If arrows weren't useful, we simply would look for other symbols that
did work.) In particular, vector quantities have magnitude, which can be rep-
resented by the length of an arrow drawn to scale. They also have direc-
tion, which can be shown by the direction of an arrow. By experiment, we
find that vectors can be added in such a way that the total effect of two or
more vectors can be represented by the addition of the corresponding ar-
rows placed tail to head. The total effect is represented by a new arrow,
from the tail of the first to the head of the last, and is called the vector re-
sultant, or the vector sum.
One example of a vector sum involves the distance traveled in a round
trip over several days. Each leg of the trip undertaken each day may be
represented by a displacement vector, each of which has both a scalar dis-
tance traveled and a direction. Since each leg of the trip begins at the point
where the previous day left off, the displacement during the course of the
trip may be represented by a series of arrows arranged tail to head. The
length of each arrow represents the net distance traveled each day, the di-
rection of the arrow represents the direction of the finishing point from
the starting point. The net vector displacement from the start at the end
of each day can be represented by a vector from the start to the head of
the last vector. This is how vectors are added together to form the vector
resultant.
One surprising result of this definition is that by the end of the round
trip the vector resultant is zero! In other words, while the scalar distance
traveled may have been many kilometers, the net displacement was zero.
In terms of vectors, the traveler has gone nowhere.
Similar results occur in the example of the tug-of-war between two tots
over a toy, where we determined the total effect of equal but opposing vec-
126
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
Same direction, different magnitudes
Same magnitude, different directions
F
F
F
F
F1
F2
Sum of F1 and F2
FIGURE 3.9
Vector sums. 

tor forces. If two forces act in the same direction, the resultant force is found
in much the same way as two displacement vectors.
If two forces act at some angle to each other, the same type of sketch is
still useful. For example, suppose two forces of equal magnitude are ap-
plied to an object at rest but free to move. One force is directed due east
and the other due west. The resultant is found by moving each of the vec-
tors parallel to each other and placing them tail to head. The resultant is
the vector drawn from the tail of the first vector to the head of the last vec-
tor. In this case, this results in a vector of zero length. The object remains
in equilibrium, without any acceleration, even though it is under the stress
of enormous forces.
If one force on the object is directed due east and the other is directed
due north, the object will accelerate in the northeast direction, the direc-
tion of the resultant force (see Figure 3.10.) The magnitude and direction
of the resultant force vector are represented by the length and direction of
the arrow representing the resultant.
The same addition procedure applies to forces of any magnitude and act-
ing at any angle to each other. Suppose one force is directed due east and
a somewhat larger force is directed northeast. The resultant vector sum can
be found as shown in Figure 3.11.
To summarize, a vector quantity has both direction and magnitude. Vec-
tors can be added by constructing a head-to-tail arrangement of vector ar-
rows (graphical method). An equivalent technique, known as the parallel-
3.3 MORE ABOUT VECTORS
127
F2
F1
F2
F1
F2
F1
F1 + F2
FIGURE 3.10
Adding vectors F1 and F2 head to tail to
achieve the resultant F1  F2.
F1 + F2
F2
F1
F2
F1
F2
F1
FIGURE 3.11
Adding non-perpendicular vectors ("head-
to-tail" method).

ogram method, is briefly explained in Figure 3.12. Vectors also have other
properties which you will study if you take further physics courses.
3.4
NEWTON'S SECOND LAW OF MOTION
You saw in Chapter 1 that Galileo made tremendous progress in describ-
ing motion, speed, acceleration, and free fall, but that he refrained from
attempting to uncover the causes of these motions, leaving that to "the 
attention of other minds." One of the foremost "other minds" was Isaac
Newton, who lived from 1642 to 1727. His second law of motion goes far
beyond Galileo in attributing the cause of all changes of motion to the ac-
tion of forces. Once again, it is important to know that Newton's laws of
motion are universal laws of nature. This means that they apply not just to
falling balls and inclined planes and toys pulled by tots, but to all matter
everywhere and always—on Earth, in the solar system, and throughout the
Universe. (However, at very high speeds, close to the speed of light, rela-
tivity theory introduces a modification of the kinematic quantities that en-
ter into these laws.)
As noted earlier, the description of motion, without looking at its causes,
is called kinematics. The study of motion that involves the causes of changes
of motion is called dynamics. Together, kinematics and dynamics form the
science of mechanics, and at the center of this new science are Newton's
three laws of motion.
Newton's second law of motion has to do with force and acceleration.
We know what acceleration is (see Chapter 1) and we know that force has
to do with pushes and pulls generated either by people or by objects, such
as magnets or springs.
Newton's second law provides an answer to the question: What happens
when an unbalanced force acts on an object? Since we think of the force as caus-
ing the resulting motion, this law is the fundamental law of dynamics.
In qualitative terms, the second law of motion says little more than this:
The reason for a deviation from "natural" motion (i.e., motion with a constant
128
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
FIGURE 3.12
You can use equally well a graphical construction called
the "parallelogram method." It looks different from the "head-to-tail"
method, but it is actually equivalent. In the parallelogram construction,
the vectors to be added are represented by arrows joined tail-to-tail in-
stead of head-to-tail, and the resultant is obtained by completing the
diagonal of the parallelogram.

or zero velocity) is that a nonzero net force acts on the object. However, the law
tells us much more: it provides a simple quantitative relationship between
the change in the state of motion—the acceleration—and the net force. As
usual in science, the best way to discern quantitative relationships between
two concepts is to head for the laboratory. We will first consider a situa-
tion in which different forces act on the same object; then we will consider
a situation in which the same force acts on different objects; finally, we will
combine the two results into a general relationship. You might do these ex-
periments yourself. We will describe only briefly the procedures and the
results here.
Different Forces Acting on the Same Object
In our first experiment we accelerated an object with a steady force so that
it accelerated continuously. The object was a cart on wheels but it could
be a dry-ice disk or any other nearly frictionless object on a flat table. The
force was produced by the horizontal pull provided by a string attached
over a pulley to a descending weight. We determined the acceleration (a)
by measuring the distance between the dots made every 0.1 s on a tape
pulled by the cart.
Repetitions of this experiment with different amounts of force (F) on the
same cart produced by different amounts of weight yielded the following
results, in words and symbols:
The force F caused an acceleration of a.
The force 2F caused an acceleration of 2a.
The force 1⁄2F caused an acceleration of 1⁄2 a.
The force 5.2F caused an acceleration of 5.2a.
As you can see, as the force increased or decreased, the acceleration in-
creased or decreased by the exact same amounts. What can you conclude
from these results about the general relationship between the force and the
acceleration? Here is our conclusion:
The acceleration of an object is directly proportional to, and in the
same direction as, the net force acting on the object.
If a stands for the acceleration of the object and Fnet stands for the net force
on it, this statement may be expressed in symbols as follows:
Fnet  a.
3.4 NEWTON'S SECOND LAW OF MOTION
129

Notice that the force and the acceleration are both vector quantities. In
our experiment, the force provided by the horizontal pull of the string and
the acceleration of the cart to which the string is attached were both in the
same direction. It is understood that when vectors are proportional, they
must point in the same direction as well as have proportional magnitudes.
We used the net force in this conclusion because there was still some fric-
tion opposing the force with which we pulled the cart.
To say that two quantities are proportional means that if one quantity is
doubled (or multiplied by any number), the other quantity is also doubled
(or multiplied by the same number). Thus, as our data indicated, if a cer-
tain force produces a certain acceleration, twice the force (on the same ob-
ject) will produce twice as great an acceleration in the same direction.
The Same Force Acting on Different Objects
Once again we tried an experiment, this time to see what happens when
the same force acts on different objects. We can select different objects in
different ways, such as by size, shape, density, or weight. In terms of force
and motion, one of the most important differences among objects is the
amount of matter, or mass, they contain. We can see this when we attempt
to apply the same force to a child's wagon and to a parked car in neutral.
Each contains a different amount of matter, which is called mass. (Mass is
further discussed below.)
In this experiment the different objects are the same cart on wheels but
loaded with objects of different masses. In each case we applied the same
horizontal force to the cart, by using the same system of a string, a pulley,
and a suspended weight. (You can perhaps try this with other setups.) Again
we determined the acceleration (a) by measuring the distance between the
dots made every 0.1 s on a tape pulled by the cart.
Repetitions of this experiment with different total masses m for the cart
and its load yielded the following results, in words:
The mass m experienced an acceleration of a.
The mass 2m experienced an acceleration of 1⁄2 a.
The mass 1⁄3m experienced an acceleration of 3a.
The mass 5.2m experienced an acceleration of (1/5.2)a.
This time you can see that, as the mass changed, the acceleration changed
by exactly the inverse amount. We can conclude from this:
130
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION

The acceleration of an object is inversely proportional to the mass
of the object. The larger the mass of an object, the smaller will be
its acceleration if a given net force is applied to it.
This relationship between acceleration and mass may also be written in
symbols. Let a stand for the acceleration (the magnitude of the acceleration
vector a) and m stand for mass. Then,
a  1/m
as long as the same net force is acting. Notice that an object with twice (or
three times, or whatever) the mass of another object will experience one-
half (or one-third, or one-whatever) the acceleration if subjected to the
same net force.
Notice also that it is the mass of an object that determines how large a
force is required to change its motion. In other words, the mass of an ob-
ject is a measure of its inertia. It is sometimes called inertial mass, to em-
phasize that it measures inertia. Mass is a scalar quantity (it has no direc-
tion), and it does not affect the direction of the acceleration.
The General Relationship Between Force, 
Mass, and Acceleration
We concluded from our two experiments that the acceleration of an object
is proportional to:
(1)
the net force (for constant m); and
(2)
to 1/m, the reciprocal of the mass (for constant Fnet).
It follows from these two proportions that the acceleration is proportional
to the product of the net force and the reciprocal of the mass:
a  Fnet 	
.
Are there any other quantities (other than net force and mass) on which
the acceleration depends? Newton proposed that the answer is no. Only
the net force on the object and the mass of the object being accelerated affect
the acceleration. All experience since then indicates that he was right.
Since there are no other factors to be considered, we can make the pro-
portionality into an equality; that is, we can write
a 
.
Fnet

m
1
m
3.4 NEWTON'S SECOND LAW OF MOTION
131

This relationship can also be written as the famous equation
In both these equations we have again written Fnet to emphasize that it is
the net force that determines the acceleration.
This relationship is probably the most basic equation in mechanics and,
therefore, in physics. Without symbols we can state it as follows:
Newton's second law of motion: The net force acting on an object
is numerically equal to, and in the same direction as, the accelera-
tion of the object multiplied by its mass. In symbols: F  ma.
It does not matter whether the forces that act are magnetic, gravitational,
simple pushes and pulls, or any combination of these; whether the masses
are those of electrons, atoms, stars, or cars; whether the acceleration is large
or small, in this direction or that. The law applies universally. And if you
think about this and other "universal" laws of science, it is remarkable that
there are only two disciplines—physics and mathematics—that have found
laws or statements that apply everywhere in the Universe!
3.5 MEASURING MASS AND FORCE
How should we define the units of mass and force that are used in the 
Newton's laws of motion? The answer depends on the meaning of these
two concepts. As you just saw, the mass of an object is its inertia, its resis-
tance to changes in its motion. A net force, on the other hand, is what
pushes or pulls against the mass to produce an acceleration. If you apply a
force to a small mass, you would produce a larger acceleration than if you
applied the same force to a larger mass. For instance, pushing a new shop-
ping cart over a smooth surface would produce a larger acceleration than
pushing a truck in neutral over the same surface with the same force.
Measuring mass (or inertia) and defining its units are quite different from
measuring force and defining its units. When you think of measuring the
Fnet  ma.
132
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
F
m
a
FIGURE 3.13
Ball accelerated by an applied force.

mass of an object, you might first think of weighing it on a scale—and some
laboratory scales are calibrated to convert the weight of the object into a
measure of its mass. But mass and weight are two different concepts. In the
most basic terms: mass is the inertia of an object; weight is the gravitational
force exerted on the object.
The stretch of a spring can be used as a measure of force, since the
amount of stretch is proportional to the force exerted. (You may have ob-
served this in the laboratory, as suggested in the Student Guide.) If you take
apart a typical household scale—a bathroom scale, for instance—you will
find that it usually just consists of a spring that compresses as you stand on
it. This indicates that it measures your weight, not your inertia or mass,
when you stand on it, since the contraction of the spring inside the scale
exerts on you an upward force that balances the gravitational force you ex-
perience downward. The amount of contraction is also proportional to the
force exerted and the scale gives a reading of the corresponding amount of
force, which is your weight at your location on the Earth. However, if you
stand on your bathroom scale on the Moon, it will show a much smaller
weight, since the gravitational pull on you downward is less on the Moon
than on the Earth. Nevertheless, you will have just the same mass, or 
inertia.
Since the mass of an object is the same for that object everywhere, while
the weight depends on the location, the wise thing to do is to choose the
unit of mass first, and let the unit of force follow later. The simplest way to
define a unit of mass is to choose some convenient object as the universal
standard of mass, and then compare the masses of all other objects with that
one. What is selected to serve as the standard object is arbitrary. In Re-
naissance England the standard used was a grain of barley ("from the mid-
dle of the ear"). The original metric commission, established in France in
1799 in the wake of the French Revolution, proposed the mass of a cubic
centimeter of water as the standard mass. Today, for scientific purposes, 
the standard mass is, by international agreement, a cylinder of platinum-
3.5 MEASURING MASS AND FORCE
133
Spring's force 
on person, 
pushing up
Gravitational 
force pulling 
person down
FIGURE 3.14
Person on spring
scale.

iridium alloy kept at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near
Paris. The mass of this cylinder is defined to be 1 kilogram (kg), or 1000
grams (g). Accurately made copies of this cylinder are used in various stan-
dards laboratories throughout the world to calibrate precision equipment.
Further copies are made from these for distribution. (The mass of 1 cm3 of
water is still exactly 1 g, but only under very specific conditions of temper-
ature and pressure. The mass of 1 liter (l) of water under standard condi-
tions is 1000 g, or 1 kg.)
The international agreements that have established the kilogram as the
unit of mass also established units of length and time. The meter (m) was
originally defined in terms of the circumference of the Earth, but modern
measurement techniques make it more precise to define the meter in terms
of the wavelength of light, generated in a specific way. The second of time
(s) was also originally defined with respect to the Earth (as a certain frac-
tion of the year), but it, too, is now more precisely defined in terms of light
waves emitted by a specific group of atoms. The meter and second together
determine the units of speed (m/s) and acceleration (m/s2). The crash of a
Mars probe due to a mix-up over the use of the metric or American sys-
tem of units in guiding the probe is a good example of why it is so impor-
tant to define and use only one set of units for all measurements.
With the metric units defined so far, we can now go back and calibrate
the spring balances used for measuring force. While in the American sys-
tem of units, the unit of force is the pound or ounce, in the metric system
134
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
FIGURE 3.15
The standard kilogram, kept
at the Bureau des Poids et Mesures.

the unit of force is called, appropriately the "newton" (N), in honor of Isaac
Newton. Again by international agreement, 1 N of force is defined to be
the amount of net force required to accelerate a mass of 1 kg at the uni-
form acceleration of one meter per second every second, or, in symbols, 
1 m/s/s, which may be written 1 m/s2. Because of Newton's second law
(Fnet  ma), we have
Fnet  ma
1 N  1 kg  1 m/s2,
1 N  1 kg m/s2.
If we are working with the smaller metric units of centimeter (cm) and
grams (g), then the unit of force is no longer a newton, since the defini-
tion of the newton involves meters, kilograms, and seconds. For centime-
ters, grams, and seconds another unit of force has been defined. It is called
the "dyne" with the symbol D. In this case,
1 D  1 g cm/s2.
The kilogram (kg), meter (m), and second (s) are the fundamental units
of the "mks" system of measurement. The gram (g), centimeter (cm), and
second (s) are the fundamental units of the "cgs" system of measurement.
Together with units for light and electricity, the mks and cgs units form
the International System of units, known as SI (SI stands for Système In-
ternationale). Other systems of units are possible. But since the ratios be-
tween related units are more convenient to use in a decimal (metric) sys-
tem, all scientific and technical work, and most industrial work, is now done
with SI units in most countries, including the United States.
Example. A 900-kg car accelerates from rest to 50 km/hr in 10 s (50 km/
hr is equal to 13.9 m/s). What is the net force on the car?
We need to find the acceleration first
a  
t
v
  
13
1
.9
0
m
s
/s
  1.39 m/s2.
We can now find the force
F  ma  (900 kg)(1.39 m/s)  1251 kg m/s2  1251 N.
3.5 MEASURING MASS AND FORCE
135

Example. A 5-g ping-pong ball at rest is hit by a paddle, propelling it to
50 cm/s in 0.1 s. What is the force on the ball?
Again we need to find the acceleration first
a  
t
v
  
50
0.
c
1
m
s
/s
  500 cm/s2,
F  ma  (5 g)(500 cm/s2)  2500 g cm/s2  2500 D.
3.6 MORE ABOUT WEIGHT, 
AND WEIGHTLESSNESS
Whenever you observe an object in acceleration, you know there is a force
acting on the object. Forces need not be exerted by contact only (often
called "mechanical forces"). They can also result from gravitational, elec-
tric, magnetic, or other actions originating from objects that are not touch-
ing the object that is being accelerated. Newton's laws of motion hold for
all of these forces.
The force of gravity acts between objects, attracting them to each other,
even if they are not in direct contact. As you know, the gravitational force
exerted by the Earth on an object is called the weight of the object. Your
weight is the downward force that the Earth exerts on your mass, whether
you stand or sit, fly or fall, or merely stand on a scale to "weigh" yourself.
The symbol Fg is often used for gravitational force. The size, or mag-
nitude, of the gravitational pull Fg on a given mass is roughly the same
everywhere on the surface of the Earth. This is because, for objects on the
surface, the magnitude of the force of gravity depends on only the mass of
the object and the distance from the center of the Earth. Since the Earth
is nearly a sphere, the magnitudes of the gravitational force on a given mass
at different places on the Earth's surface are nearly the same. Since the
gravitational force is a vector, it also has a direction. It is always to the cen-
ter of the Earth, which means that it is perpendicular to the level ground
at every point on the Earth's surface. Scientists since Newton's time have
known that an object having a mass of 1.0 kg experiences a gravitational
force of about 9.8 N everywhere on the surface of the Earth. An object of
mass 2 kg would experience a force twice that of a 1-kg object, or about
19.6 N; a 10-kg object would have a force of 98 N, and so on.
However, these weights are not exactly the same everywhere on the sur-
face of the Earth, since the Earth is not a perfect sphere, nor is it homo-
136
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION

geneous. For instance, an object having a mass of 1 kg will experience a
gravitational force of 9.812 N in London, but only 9.796 N in Denver,
Colorado. Geologists make use of minute variations in locating oil and min-
eral deposits.
You can sense the magnitude of the gravitational force on an object, for
example, the weight of a 1-kg ball, by holding it stationary in your hand.
Why doesn't the ball accelerate if there is a gravitational force on it? . . .
Remember what Newton's first law of motion tells us. If you hold the ball
stationary in your hand, your hand is exerting an upward force that exactly
balances the force of gravity downward. It is the upward force that you pro-
vide which equals (numerically) the weight of the ball. Since all forces on
the ball are balanced, it remains stationary in your hand.
Now release the ball. What happens? The gravitational force is no longer
balanced. Rather, it acts as a net force on the 1-kg ball of 9.8 N downward,
so the ball begins to accelerate. What is the rate of acceleration? We can
obtain this from Newton's second law:
Fg  ma,
so
a  F
m
g
  
1
9
.
.
0
8
k
N
g
  9.8 N/kg  9.8 m/s2
downward.
Now try this with a 2.0-kg ball. As given above, there is a larger force
of gravity of 19.6 N downward. What is the acceleration in this case?
a  F
m
g
  
1
2
9
.0
.6
k
N
g
  9.8 N/kg  9.8 m/s2
downward.
3.6 MORE ABOUT WEIGHT, AND WEIGHTLESSNESS
137
F
net force = 0
Fg
FIGURE 3.16
(a) net force on ball being held in gravitational field is zero;
(b) the ball falls with acceleration g if it is not held in the gravitational
field.
a = g = 9.8 m/s2 down
(a)
(b)

Finally, the 10-kg ball:
a  F
m
g
  
1
9
0
8
k
N
g
  9.8 m/s2
downward.
You see the pattern that is emerging. In each case the mass was differ-
ent and the force of gravity was different, but the acceleration was the same.
Now we can understand more clearly the results of Galileo's experiments
on falling objects. You may recall (or see Chapter 1) that he found that, in
the absence of friction, all objects fall at the same location with the same
uniform acceleration. Different masses have different weights, but because
they are about the same distance from the center of the Earth, the ratio of
weight (force of gravity) to mass always gives the same result at the same
location on the surface of the Earth, a uniform acceleration of about 
9.8 m/s2 (give or take a fraction of a percent at different locations around
the Earth). This acceleration is called the acceleration of gravity. It is often
given the symbol g. It is a vector quantity with a magnitude 9.8 m/s2 (or
980 cm/s2 or 32 ft/s2) and a direction downward toward the center of 
the Earth at each place on the surface of the Earth. Free fall is an exam-
ple of uniform acceleration. All objects fall with the same acceleration, 
g  9.8 m/s2 downward, at the same location on the surface of the Earth.
The weight, mass, and acceleration of all objects are related to each other
by Newton's second law: F  ma.
What about weightlessness, such as experienced by astronauts orbiting in the
space shuttle? How does that arise? Gravity constantly pulls us and every ma-
terial object down toward the center of the Earth, but our body hardly
"feels" the gravitational force itself. What you can experience directly is
the acceleration due to gravity as, for instance, when you fall through the air
138
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
a = 9.8 m/s2
1 kg
2 kg
10 kg
a = 9.8 m/s2
a = 9.8 m/s2
FIGURE 3.17
Acceleration is constant for freely falling balls of different
mass.
(a)
(b)
(c)

when you dive into a pool. If you stand on a scale to weigh yourself, the
spring in it compresses, as noted earlier, until it exerts an upward force on
you strong enough to balance the downward force of gravity. The com-
pression of the spring registers on the scale, which indicates your weight
in pounds or in newtons. So, what you actually experience as "weight" when
you stand on a scale, sit in a chair, or walk on a sidewalk is not the force
of gravity but the opposing force of the scale or chair or ground.
Other bodies in the solar system exert the same kind of gravitational
forces on objects on their surfaces. For instance, the Moon exerts a gravi-
tational force on objects on or near it, but that force is much smaller than
the pull of the Earth at its surface. The astronauts who landed on the sur-
face of the Moon felt the effects of the pull of the Moon, which they ex-
perienced as weight, but, since that force was much smaller than on the
surface of the Earth, they felt much "lighter" than on Earth and had a grand
time bouncing around on the surface.
From the discussion so far you can see that true weightlessness can oc-
cur only when there is no net gravitational force pulling on an object—for
example, in space, far from any sun or planet. In that case there would be
no opposing force that you would experience as your weight. In such a
spaceship, when you stand on a scale, it would register zero. But astronauts
orbiting the Earth seem to be weightless, floating in their spaceship. Does
this mean that they are beyond the Earth's pull of gravity and are there-
fore really weightless? The answer is NO. They are still being pulled by
gravity, so they do have weight. But they cannot experience this weight be-
cause, while they orbit the Earth or the Moon, they are in free fall! (We
will come to explain this curious phenomenon in Section 3.11.)
3.6 MORE ABOUT WEIGHT, AND WEIGHTLESSNESS
139
FIGURE 3.18
Astronauts in
"weightless" environment. 

In order to get a start on what happens with the apparent weightlessness
during orbiting, try taking a bathroom scale into an elevator. While stand-
ing on it, notice what happens as the elevator briefly accelerates upward
and downward. If you do so, you will notice that the scale registers more
than your normal weight when accelerating upward, and less when accel-
erating downward.
Now imagine for a moment a ridiculous but instructive thought exper-
iment. Suppose you are weighing yourself on a scale in an elevator or room
on Earth. As you stand on the scale, the floor suddenly gives way. Like 
Alice in Wonderland, you and the scale drop into a deep well in free fall.
At every instant, your increasing speed of fall and the scale's increasing
speed of fall are equal, since all objects fall on Earth with the same accel-
eration. In fact, any objects that fell into the well with you will fall with
you at the same increasing speed as you are experiencing. But to you they
appear to float with or around you. Your feet now touch the scale only
barely (if at all). Before you awake from this nightmare, you look down at
the dial on the scale and see that the scale registers zero because the spring
inside is not being compressed. This does not mean that you have lost your
weight (the force of gravity on you). Gravity still acts on you as before. In
fact, it is the dominant force on you, accelerating you downward. But since
the scale is accelerating with you, you are no longer pushing down on it,
nor is it pushing up on you. You feel weightless, but you still have weight;
you just cannot experience it while you are falling. What you do experi-
ence is an apparent, but not real, weightlessness.
3.7 NEWTON'S THIRD LAW OF MOTION
In his first law, Newton described the behavior of objects when there are
no forces acting on them or when the forces all balance, yielding a net force
of zero. His second law explained how the motion of objects changes when
the net force is not zero. Newton's third law added an original, new, and
surprising insight into forces.
Consider this problem: In a 100-m dash, an athlete goes from rest to
nearly top speed in less than 3 s. We could measure the runner's mass be-
fore the dash, and we could use high-speed photography to obtain the ac-
celeration. With the mass and acceleration known, we could find the net
force acting on the sprinter during the initial acceleration. But where does
this force come from? Obviously it must have something to do with the run-
ner himself. But is it possible for him to exert a force on himself as a whole?
140
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION

Newton's third law of motion, also called the law of action and reaction,
helps to explain just such puzzling situations. In modern language it states:
If one object exerts a force on another object, the second object at
the same time exerts a force on the first object. These two forces,
each acting on one of the two objects, are equal in magnitude and
opposite in direction.
The startling idea in this statement is that forces always act in pairs, one
force acting on one object, the other acting on another object. A single
force acting alone, without another force acting back on something else,
does not exist in nature. For example, consider the sprinter. When the gun
goes off to start the dash, his act of pushing with his feet back against the
starting blocks (call it the "action") involves simultaneously a push by the
starting blocks of an equal amount acting on him in the forward direction
(call it the "reaction"). It is the reaction by the blocks that propels him for-
ward. The action does not "cause" the reaction; the two forces simply co-
exist. If somehow the starting blocks came loose from the ground so that
they cannot push back on his feet, they would just slide away when he tried
to give them a big push, rather than providing the reacting force and the
acceleration he needs to get started on the sprint.
A common mistake is to think that these action and reaction forces can
balance each other to zero, and give equilibrium, as in the first law of mo-
tion. But in fact the two forces do not act on the same object; each acts on
a different object, so they can't balance out. It is like debt and credit. One is
impossible without the other; they are equally large but of opposite sign,
and they happen to two different accounts.
Every day you see many examples of Newton's third law of motion at
work. A car is set in motion by the push of the ground on the tires forward
3.7 NEWTON'S THIRD LAW OF MOTION
141
Reaction
Reaction
Action
Action
FIGURE 3.19
Force diagram on feet of sprinter
and on blocks. 

in reaction to the push of the tires on the ground backward. When fric-
tion is not sufficient, as when trying to start the car moving on ice, the car
just spins its wheels in place because there is no reacting forward push 
of the ground on the tires. A tennis racket hits a tennis ball, accelerating 
the ball forward, even while the tennis ball exerts a force backward on the
racket, causing tennis elbow in some cases, or even broken arm bones. The
Earth exerts a force on an apple and the apple exerts an equally large 
force on the Earth. When the apple falls, pulled down by the gravitational
pull of the Earth (the weight of the apple), the Earth, in turn, is pulled up-
ward by the equal but opposite attraction of the Earth to the apple. Hence,
during the apple's fall the Earth accelerates upward—though by only an
infinitesimal amount. Of course, we don't notice this motion of the Earth
because of the difference in mass between the Earth and the apple, but the
effect is there and in all similar situations. Similarly, after the sprinter has
left the starting block behind and runs forward (owing to the force the
ground exerts on his feet), the Earth moves a little in the opposite direc-
tion because of the force applied to it by his feet. On a small enough planet,
this might become noticeable!
The universal nature of Newton's third law of motion makes it, like the
other two laws of motion, an extremely valuable and useful law in physics.
142
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
Michael Johnson, the American sprinter, set 
a new world record in 1999 of 43.18 s for 
400 m, breaking the previous record by 0.11 s.
(a) What was his average speed for the en-
tire run?
(b) Assuming that he was able to accelerate
to the average speed in 2.5 s, what was
his average acceleration at the start?
(c) Assuming that his mass is about 75 kg,
how large was the force on his legs while
he accelerated? (Ignore air resistance.)
(d) Explain why the force produced by his
legs on the starting block was not the
force that accelerated him during the
first 2.5 s.
■NOW YOU TRY IT
FIGURE 3.20
Michael Johnson just off the blocks. 

B. THE THREE LAWS IN ACTION
3.8 PROJECTILE MOTION
You have already seen various types of motion, and you have seen that forces
account for changes in motion. Now let's look at some common motions that
have major significance for physics, and for our understanding of events
around us. The first type is projectile motion: the flight of an arrow shot
from a bow, a baseball batted into the outfield, a golf ball hit horizontally
from a platform, or an elementary particle shot out into an evacuated tube
of an "accelerator." Once again, Galileo was the first person to comprehend
fully what is happening here, and to use the results in making some very im-
portant conclusions about the heliocentric theory of the solar system.
Returning once again to Galileo's inclined plane (and again neglecting
friction and air resistance), you may recall that he obtained two very im-
portant results. First, by extrapolation to a 90° angle for the incline, he
showed that free fall near the Earth's surface is an example of uniform ac-
celeration, with the acceleration of gravity for all freely falling objects. Sec-
ond, at the other extreme, for zero-angle inclination for a second inclined
3.8 PROJECTILE MOTION
143
Force on racket
due to ball.
(b)
(a)
Force on ball due
to racket.
FIGURE 3.21
Tennis racquet: (a) Force on
ball and (b) reaction force on racquet.
(a)
(b)

plane, he concluded that once in motion a ball will maintain its uniform ve-
locity forever, until something gets in the way or alters its course. Now he
considered what happens when something does alter a ball's course—namely,
what happens when the ball rolls so far in the laboratory that it eventually
falls off the table? Galileo realized that a ball rolling with uniform velocity
on a flat tabletop will maintain its uniform velocity (constant speed and di-
rection) in the horizontal direction even after it leaves the edge of the table,
since there is no net force in the horizontal direction to change its hori-
zontal motion. However, once the ball leaves the tabletop the unbalanced
force of gravity also sets it into free fall in the vertical direction. Therefore
the ball has two motions simultaneously after it leaves the tabletop:
(1)
uniform velocity in the horizontal direction;
(2)
uniform acceleration downward, in the vertical direction.
These two motions are completely independent of each other. What hap-
pens to one of them has no effect on the other. As the ball flies off the
table, the two motions are "compounded" together to form the curved mo-
tion of a projectile, or any other object flying through space. The motion
of a projectile is the result of two independent motions, put together to
form the observed "trajectory" of the object. That is what we now would
call our new understanding of "natural" motion.
A real experiment using a stroboscopic camera will help clarify this idea
better. In the famous photograph in Figure 3.22, a ball is fired horizon-
tally. At the same moment a second ball is allowed to fall freely down to
the same floor. Although the motion of the objects may be too rapid to fol-
low with the eye, if you tried it your ears will tell you that they do in fact
144
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
FIGURE 3.22
The two balls in this stro-
boscopic photograph were released si-
multaneously. The one on the left was
simply dropped from a rest position; the
one on the right was given an initial ve-
locity in the horizontal direction. 

impact the floor at the same time. This could happen only if they both fell
with the exact same vertical motion, even though they had different hori-
zontal motions. To see if this is indeed the case, with equally spaced hori-
zontal lines were introduced into Figure 3.22 to aid the examination of the
two motions. Look first at the ball on the left, the one that was released
without any horizontal motion. You can see that it accelerates downward
because it moves a greater distance downward between successive flashes
of the strobe's light in equal time intervals. Now compare the vertical po-
sitions of the other ball, the one that was fired horizontally, with the ver-
tical positions of the first ball falling freely. The horizontal lines show that
the distances of fall are almost exactly the same for corresponding time in-
tervals (air resistance has a tiny effect). Neglecting the effect of air resis-
tance, the two balls are undergoing the same acceleration in the vertical di-
rection. This experiment supports the idea that the vertical motion is the
same whether or not the ball has a horizontal motion. The horizontal mo-
tion does not affect the vertical motion—something we recall that the Aris-
totelians did not believe possible.
But does the vertical motion affect the horizontal motion? To answer this ques-
tion, measure the horizontal distance of the projected ball between each
image. You will find that the horizontal distances are practically equal. Since
the time intervals between producing each image are equal, you can con-
clude that the horizontal velocity is constant during the curved descent.
Therefore, the vertical motion does not affect the horizontal motion. Together,
the vertical and horizontal motions make up the path of the projectile that
we see. What is this path? Obviously, it's some kind of a curve, as shown
in the photograph. On examination it turns out that the actual path, or tra-
jectory, is what is known as a parabola. (See the Student Guide for a deri-
vation showing that it is indeed a parabola.)
You can see that the trajectory of a projectile is a parabola more clearly
for a ball thrown into the air. Here you can see both halves of the parabola.
The second half, the downward side, is equivalent to the motion of the ball
3.8 PROJECTILE MOTION
145
vx
vy
vx
FIGURE 3.23
Schematic of ball on par-
abolic path. 

projected straight out horizontally. On the upward side of the trajectory,
the ball has uniform velocity in the horizontal direction and uniform ac-
celeration downward due to gravity, as before, but it also has a vertical ve-
locity, straight up. Gravity works against the vertical velocity, slowing it
down until the vertical velocity finally reaches zero at the top of the arc.
(Note: The vertical velocity reaches zero, but not the gravitational accelera-
tion, which stays constant throughout.) At the top of the arc, the ball still
has the same horizontal velocity as at the start, since gravity cannot affect
motion in the horizontal direction. So the ball continues after reaching the
top and begins the downward side of the arc. The vertical velocity now
starts accelerating at the acceleration of gravity; the projectile reaches
greater and greater speeds until it reaches the initial level with about the
same vertical speed and horizontal velocity with which it started (assuming
air resistance plays only a minor role).
3.9 THE EARTH CAN MOVE!
As the previous section indicates, understanding the motion of a projectile
is not easy to grasp by simple observation. After much thought and study,
Galileo concluded that projectile motion is a single motion compounded
of two independent motions: uniform velocity in the horizontal direction
and changing velocity in the vertical direction owing to the effect of the
uniform acceleration of gravity. Once he understood this, Galileo was able
to answer at last one of the major objections against the moving-Earth hy-
pothesis, raised at that time and given at the beginning of this chapter. If
the Earth really is rotating on its axis once a day, then the surface of the
Earth must be moving very rapidly (about 1000 mi/hr at the equator). If
that's the case, some argued, then a stone dropped from a high tower would
146
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
e
h
f
i
d
c
b
a
o
g
l
n
FIGURE 3.24
Drawing of a parabolic trajectory
from Galileo's Two New Sciences.

not land directly at the tower's base. During the time the stone is falling,
the tower would move forward many meters. The stone would be left 
behind while it is falling and so would land far away from the base of the
tower. But this is not what happens. Except for very slight variations, the
stone always lands directly below the point of release. Therefore, many of
Galileo's critics argued that the tower and the Earth could not possibly be
in motion.
Galileo answered this objection showing that the tower experiment can
be understood as an example of projectile motion. While the stone lies or
is held at the top of the tower, it has the same horizontal velocity as the
tower. During the time the stone falls after it is released, Galileo said, the
stone continues to have the same horizontal velocity, and it gains vertical
3.9 THE EARTH CAN MOVE!
147
FIGURE 3.25
Stroboscopic photograph of a
ball thrown into the air. 
vx
vx
vy
vy
vx
FIGURE 3.26
Components of velocity of a ball
in flight.

speed as it falls freely under the force of gravity. But during the brief time
of the stone's fall, the stone and the tower and the ground under them all
continue to move forward with the same uniform horizontal velocity as be-
fore; the falling stone behaves like any other projectile. The horizontal and
vertical components of its motion are independent of each other. Since the
tower and the stone continue to have the same horizontal velocity through-
out, the stone will not be left behind as it falls. Therefore, no matter what
the speed of the Earth, the stone will always land at the base of the tower.
So the fact that falling stones are not left behind can not be used to argue
that the Earth is standing still. The Earth can be in motion.
Similarly, Galileo said, a stone dropped from the crow's nest at the top
of a ship's mast lands at the foot of the mast, whether the ship is standing
still or moving with constant velocity in calm water. This was actually tested
by experiment in 1642, and many observations today support this view. For
example, if you drop or toss a book in a car or bus or train that is moving
with constant velocity (no bumps in the road!), you see the book move just
as it would if the vehicle were standing still. Similarly, a person walking at
constant speed and tossing a ball into the air and catching it, will see the
ball move straight up and straight down, as if he were standing still. Try it!
148
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
Moving
Earth
Stationary
Earth
FIGURE 3.27
Galileo's critics' view of how a ball
would drop to Earth.

3.10 GALILEAN RELATIVITY
The observations in the previous section all indicated that objects in a sys-
tem, such as the Earth, or a ship, or a car, that is moving at constant ve-
locity, will move within that system exactly in the same way as if they were
in a system that is at rest. Here is how Galileo himself expressed it in a
beautiful thought experiment recounted in 1632 in his Dialogue on Two Chief
World Systems:
Shut yourself up with some friend in the main cabin below decks
on some large ship, and have with you some flies, butterflies, and
other small flying animals. Have a large bowl of water with some
fish in it; hang up a bottle that empties drop by drop into a wide
vessel beneath it. With the ship standing still, observe carefully how
the little animals fly with equal speed to all sides of the cabin. The
fish swim indifferently in all directions; the drops fall into the ves-
sel beneath; and, in throwing something to your friend, you need
throw it no more strongly in one direction than another, the dis-
3.10 GALILEAN RELATIVITY
149
Moving
Earth
Stationary
Earth
FIGURE 3.28
Galileo argued that while falling,
the ball would continue its initial horizontal mo-
tion so that it would fall to the base of the tower.
Therefore, an observer on Earth could not tell
whether the Earth moved by watching the path of
the ball.

tances being equal; jumping with your feet together, you pass equal
spaces in every direction. When you have observed all these things
carefully (though there is no doubt that when the ship is standing
still everything must happen this way), have the ship proceed with
any speed you like, so long as the motion is uniform and not fluc-
tuating this way and that. You will discover not the least change in
all the effects named, nor could you tell from any of them whether
you were moving or standing still.
We can perform the same experiment today with butterflies or baseballs
in a boat, or in a car or train or plane. Today, such a "system" is usually
called a reference frame, since it is the frame of reference for our observa-
tions. The fact that the motions of baseballs and butterflies stay the same,
regardless of whether or not the reference frame is moving at constant ve-
locity, indicates that Newton's laws of motion are the same—in fact, that all
mechanics (science of motion) is the same—for all reference frames at rest
or moving with uniform velocity relative to each other. This conclusion has
been called the Galilean relativity principle. It can be stated as follows:
The laws of mechanics are exactly the same for every observer in
every reference frame that is at rest or is moving with uniform 
velocity.
Since objects move in a reference frame that is at rest or in uniform 
velocity—such as a boat, or the Earth's surface for reasonably short periods—
as they were in a frame at rest, there is no way to find out the speed of one's
own reference frame from any mechanical experiment done within that frame.
Nor can one pick out any one reference frame as the "true" frame, the one
that is, say, absolutely at rest. Thus, there can be no such thing as the "ab-
solute" velocity of an object. All measured velocities are relative.
Three centuries later, Albert Einstein expanded upon the Galilean rela-
tivity principle in formulating his theory of relativity, as you will see in
Chapter 9.
3.11 ORBITING SATELLITES
To recapitulate: After obtaining his new concept of "natural motion" Galileo
investigated what happens when a rolling ball moving with uniform veloc-
ity reaches the end of the plane on which it is rolling. He observed that it
flies off the table and goes into projectile motion. He discovered that this
motion is really a compound of independent motions: uniform velocity in
150
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION

the horizontal direction and free fall (with uniform acceleration of gravity)
in the vertical direction.
Newton took Galileo's ideas one step further. He considered what hap-
pens when a projectile is launched horizontally from a high tower or a
mountain on the Earth. Three factors determine where the object strikes
the Earth. These are the height of the mountain, the acceleration due to
the force of gravity, and the horizontal speed of the projectile. Keeping the
first two constant (by starting from the top of the same high mountain), as
the horizontal launch speed of the projectile is increased, it will strike the
Earth at points farther and farther from the base of the mountain. This is
shown in the diagram, taken directly from Newton's Principia. Eventually,
if it is fast enough at launch, the projectile goes so far that the curvature
of the Earth comes into play. Since gravity always pulls objects toward the
center of the Earth, the trajectory of the projectile is no longer a parabola
because gravity pulls it from slightly different directions as it moves over
the curve of the Earth.
If the launch speed is increased even more, the projectile will strike the
Earth at points farther and farther around the Earth. Finally, at a certain
speed the projectile would not fall fast enough in order to strike the Earth
before it returns to its original launch location. At that point, if it is not
slowed by air resistance, the projectile would just keep going around and
around the Earth, never actually reaching the Earth even though it "keeps
falling" toward the Earth. In other words, it would go into orbit: always
falling toward the Earth in free fall but moving too fast in the orbit's di-
rection to hit the curved Earth. The amount of fall of the projectile away
from its original horizontal motion is roughly matched by the curvature of
the Earth's surface. Therefore, the projectile stays in orbit at roughly a con-
stant distance above the surface. (Actually, as Kepler's first law tells us, the
orbits may be ellipses, of which the circle is a special case.)
3.11 ORBITING SATELLITES
151
FIGURE 3.29
". . . the greater the velocity . . . with
which [a stone] is projected, the farther it goes be-
fore it falls to the Earth. We may therefore suppose
the velocity to be so increased that it would describe
an arc of 1, 2, 5, 10, 100, 1000 miles before it arrived
at the Earth, till at last, exceeding the limits of the
Earth, it should pass into space without touching
it."—Newton, Principia.

The "projectile" could be a research satellite, launched into orbit by a
rocket, instead of a ball projected from a high mountain. Putting Newton's
third law of motion to work, the rocket, with the satellite fastened to it,
lifts off from the launch pad. During its motion upward it is made to tilt
in the horizontal direction, moving faster and faster and further from the
Earth, until it reaches orbital velocity at the desired height above the sur-
face of the Earth. At that point the main engines shut down and are jetti-
soned, and the satellite is in orbit.
A common question about the motion of a satellite in orbit is, "What is
holding it up"? The answer is of course that it is not being held up. In fact,
the tons of metal and electronics are constantly falling toward the Earth,
pulled down by gravity. The only difference from direct fall downward 
is that the satellite also has such a tremendous orbital speed, as much as 
18,000 mi/hr (or 29,000 km/hr). This prevents it from ever reaching the
curved Earth as it falls downward because the curvature of the satellite's
trajectory is about the same as the Earth's curvature. The satellite will stay
in orbit as long as it maintains sufficient speed. This can change of course
if, following Newton's second law, there acts on it an unbalanced force, say 
152
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
FIGURE 3.30
Space Shuttle blast-off.

in the horizontal direction. (One already exists in the vertical direction—
gravity.) Such a horizontal force can arise from air resistance, or if the pi-
lot in a space shuttle turns on the forward thrusters to slow the shuttle
down and begin the long spiral inward for a landing.
Special Satellites
Three special types of satellites are: communications satellites, weather
satellites, and global positioning satellites. Communications satellites are
placed into orbits for which the horizontal speed exactly matches the ro-
tational speed of the Earth—this is called a "geosynchronous orbit." Hence
the satellite stays over the same location on the Earth, appearing to hang
stationary in the sky. This is very useful for television transmission and
wireless reception because ground-based satellite dishes can then be aimed
at a fixed point in the sky to send and receive signals.
Some weather satellites are placed in polar orbits, in which they orbit
the Earth in the north-south direction. As the Earth rotates west to east,
the entire Earth passes under the orbit of the satellite. The satellite's cam-
eras can then be turned on at the appropriate time to record events on any
desired portion of the Earth.
3.11 ORBITING SATELLITES
153
FIGURE 3.31
An early manned space capsule in orbit. 

In the Global Positioning System 24 satellites are in orbit around the
Earth. A signal is emitted by a satellite and is picked up by a receiver on
Earth. From the timing of the sending and receiving of the signal, three of
the satellites are used to "triangulate" the location. The fourth satellite cor-
rects for timing errors.
154
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
FIGURE 3.32
Path of satellite in polar orbit.
FIGURE 3.33
Space Shuttle with Solar Max satellite (in background) to be launched. 

The Space Shuttle
Some might think an orbiting space vehicle stays in orbit because it is far
beyond the pull of gravity. After all, they argue, the astronauts and any
equipment not fastened down can float around as if "weightless," which
"proves" there is no gravity on them and the space shuttle itself. But, as
you saw earlier, in orbital motions gravity continues to act. When a space
shuttle is about 500 km above the surface of the Earth (whose radius is
about 6370 km), the Earth's gravitational force there is still about 90% of
its value at the Earth's surface. In fact, if there were no gravity acting on
the shuttle, there would be no net force on it, in which case Newton's first
law of motion would come into play. According to the first law of motion,
the shuttle would fly off into outer space on a straight line at uniform ve-
locity and never go into orbit. As you will see below (Section 3.12), we need
a net force owing to gravity to keep any object in orbit; without it there
would be no orbit!
So, how can the astronauts feel weightless inside the space shuttle even though
the force of gravity is acting on them? The answer is that they are in "free
fall," when everything behaves as if it were weightless. For instance, if you
3.11 ORBITING SATELLITES
155
FIGURE 3.34
Astronaut during space
walk. 

were in free fall and released a bunch of keys taken from your pocket, they
would stay with you, falling alongside you, as if gravity had been "turned
off."
In order to answer the further objections that people after Copernicus
raised against the idea that the Earth is in motion, we have to look a little
closer at circular motion.
3.12 CIRCULAR MOTION
The simplest kind of circular motion is uniform circular motion. This is mo-
tion in a circle at constant speed. If you are in a test car that goes around
a perfectly circular track so that at every instant the speedometer reading
is, say, 60 mi/hr, you are in uniform circular motion. This is not the case
if the track is of any shape other than circular, or if your speed changes at
any point.
How can you find out if an object in circular motion is moving at con-
stant speed? You can apply the same test used earlier to decide whether or
not an object traveling in a straight line does so with constant average speed:
measure the distances traveled along the circumference in given time in-
tervals and determine if the ratios d/t are equal. For circular motion, it
is often convenient to use one complete circumference of the circle as the
distance traveled. If we know the radius r, this distance C is given by the
formula: C  2r. Here  is the Greek letter "pi." It represents the value,
sufficient for all our calculations, of approximately 3.14. (More precisely,
pi represents the value 3.141592653. . . .) The time required for an object
to complete one revolution around the circle is the period (T) of the mo-
156
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
FIGURE 3.35 Bobsled rounding curve. 

tion. The number of revolutions completed by an object in a unit of time
is called the frequency ( f ) of the motion. If the unit of time is chosen to be
one period, then one revolution is completed in one period. So, the fre-
quency of revolution is just 1/period, or f  1/T.
(There is another measure of speed used in circular motion, called an-
gular speed. Instead of distance traveled per time interval, which is called
linear speed, angular speed refers to the angle of the circular segment tra-
versed per time interval. An analogue music record turns at a uniform an-
gular speed, but a modern-day CD turns at a constantly changing rate so
that the data, which are arranged along a tight spiral, pass over a laser beam
at constant linear speed. In this text we will use only linear speed in uni-
form circular motion.)
Using the radius of the circle and the frequency of revolution, we can
obtain the average linear speed of an object in uniform circular motion as
follows:
average speed 
,
vav  2
T
r

or, dropping the "av," if we can assume that there is no change of speed
during the elapsed time, we have
v  2
T
r
.
This expression is essentially the definition of the speed of an object in uni-
form circular motion.
What about the velocity, which is speed with direction? To find out the di-
rection of the velocity of a circulating object, carefully whirl a small object
on the end of a string. Being careful not to hit anyone, release the object
while it is whirling on the string. In what direction does it move? You will
notice that it does not move straight outward from the circle, as one might
intuitively believe, nor does it keep spiraling for a while as it moves out-
ward. Instead, upon release it immediately moves in a straight line along a
tangent to the circle at the point where you released it. Try this at differ-
ent points on the circle. You will notice that the object always flies away
on a tangent at that point. We conclude from this that the velocity vector is tan-
gent to the circle at every point on the circle.
distance traveled on circumference

elapsed time
3.12 CIRCULAR MOTION
157

This is a very important conclusion. Since the tangent to a circle is dif-
ferent for every point on the circle, this conclusion means: the direction of
the velocity is different at each point on the circle, even though the speed is the
same over the entire circle. Since the velocity is constantly changing in 
direction—even though not in magnitude (speed)—there is a uniform ac-
celeration. But it is different from the accelerations we have encountered
so far. It is an acceleration that changes only the direction but not the speed
of the moving object.
Where there is an acceleration there is a net force. What is the direction
of the vector representing the net force? Remember that a vector can be rep-
resented by an arrow in the direction of the vector. The magnitude of the
vector is represented by its length. Since the magnitude of the velocity vec-
tor, or the speed, is not changing in uniform circular motion, the lengths
of the arrows in the above diagram are all equal. But their directions are
all different. Since the force does not help or hinder the speed, it must be
perpendicular to the velocity vectors. Since a tangent to a circle is always
perpendicular to the radius at that point, the force must lie along the ra-
dius, either straight in or straight out.
Now let's look at what happens when arrow A, representing the veloc-
158
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
A
B
ac
ac
FIGURE 3.37
Force and acceleration vectors on a uni-
formly circulating object, at two points on its path.
v
v
v
FIGURE 3.36
Velocity vectors for uniform circu-
lar motion at three points.

ity vector of a ball in uniform circular motion at point A, turns into arrow
B at point B. If there is no net force, Newton's first law tells us that the
ball will fly off on a straight line in the direction of arrow A. But there is
a net force, which pulls the ball off the straight-line course, changing the
velocity at A, represented by arrow A, into a velocity at B in a new direc-
tion, represented by the direction of arrow B. To force the ball off course
and around the curve, you can almost feel how you must pull it inward, not
outward. This force must be an inward force along the radius and point-
ing toward the center. Since it is a pull toward the center, it is often called
the centripetal force, literally "moving, or directed, toward the center."
The centripetal force acting on a mass causes an acceleration toward the
center, the centripetal acceleration. These are both vectors and they both
point inward toward the center of the circle along the radius at each point
on the circle. The magnitude of each is related to the speed of the object
and the radius of the circle. You can almost feel that the faster a ball whirls
on a string, the harder you must pull on it to keep it in circular motion.
As shown in the Student Guide, the magnitude of the centripetal accelera-
tion, symbol ac, is given by
ac  v
r
2
.
The magnitude of the centripetal force F is given by Fc  mac, or
Fc  
m
r
v2
.
From this you can see that the force and acceleration increase rapidly as
you increase speed, while they go down more slowly as you increase the
radius of the circle.
3.12 CIRCULAR MOTION
159
v
v
ac
ac
ac
v
FIGURE 3.38
Velocity and acceleration vectors at three
points on the path of a uniformly circulating object.

Some Examples
We have learned now that without a centripetal force there cannot be a
circular motion. Unless acted upon by a net, unbalanced force, all objects
move in a straight line at constant speed. To make objects change their di-
rection and move in a circle at uniform speed, something must provide a
force toward the center of the circle. A stone whirling on a string requires
a pull inward on the string. As soon as the inward pull ceases or the string
breaks, the ball ceases to be in circular motion.
Another example involves cars traveling at high speed on a curved high-
way. Why are these highways usually banked on the curves? The reason is
to use part of the weight of the car itself to help provide the centripetal
force. The faster the expected speeds of the cars, the steeper the bank 
(according to the square of the speeds). Even with a bank, there must be
enough friction between the tires and the road to provide additional cen-
tripetal force to enable the cars to perform the circular turn. If the friction
is lost on a rainy or icy day, the road might not supply enough centripetal
friction force to enable the cars to make the turn. The cars will skid off on
a straight line, with possibly disastrous results. This is why speed limits are
(or should be) reduced in inclement weather.
An example of nearly uniform circular motion around the Earth was the
flight of the space shuttle Endeavor in January 1996. Let's find out how fast
it was going and what its centripetal acceleration was. To calculate these
using the formulas above, we need to know the radius and period of its or-
bit. According to information supplied by NASA's site on the World Wide
Web (http://spacelink.nasa.gov), the average altitude of the Endeavor shut-
tle above the Earth's surface was 288 mi. This is equivalent to 463.4 km.
But this is not the radius of its orbit! The orbit is centered on the center
of the Earth, which we can assume to be a sphere of radius 6370 km. So
the radius of the orbit was
R  6370 km  463 km  6833 km.
160
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
Fc
F
Hand
Reaction
FIGURE 3.39
The centripetal force Fc on the object is equal
in magnitude and opposite in direction to the reaction force
felt by the hand.

NASA's Web site also reports that Endeavor made 142 orbits of the Earth in
approximately 8 days and 22 hr, or 214 hr total. So the period for one orbit is
T 
 1.51 hr  3600 s/hr
 5425 s.
We are now ready to obtain the speed of the shuttle in its orbit
v  
2
T
R
  2  
6
5
8
4
3
2
3
5
k
s
m
  7.91 km/s.
This is equivalent to a horizontal speed of 17,798 mi/hr. Some projectile!
However, at any speed slower than this, the shuttle would not be able to
214 hr

142 orbits
3.12 CIRCULAR MOTION
161
FIGURE 3.40
Space Shuttle in
orbit around the Earth. 

stay in this orbit, but would spiral down to a lower orbit. If it still decreased
in speed, it could not stay in orbit at all and would have to land—which is
exactly what it does intentionally when it returns to Earth.
With the speed and the radius of the shuttle in its orbit, we are now
ready to obtain the centripetal acceleration
ac  v
R
2
  
(7
6
.9
8
1
33
km
km
/s)2

 0.0092 km/s2  9.2 m/s2.
What is the origin of the force that gives rise to this acceleration? You
already know that it must be due to the Earth's gravitational attraction. Ev-
idently the centripetal acceleration on the shuttle Endeavor was just the ac-
celeration of gravity at that height, 9.2 m/s2. This is in fact the uniform 
acceleration at that height of a freely falling object. However, it is about
13.6% less than the gravitational acceleration at the surface of the Earth,
which is 9.8 m/s2. It appears, then, that the gravitational force does extend
into outer space and that it accounts for the centripetal force acting on or-
biting objects, but it appears to decrease with distance.
Is it possible that the same situation occurs for other orbiting objects,
such as the Moon around the Earth, the moons of Jupiter observed by
Galileo orbiting Jupiter, and perhaps even for the Earth and other planets
orbiting the Sun? Is there a centripetal force holding the Earth and the
other planets in orbits around the Sun, or is the Earth really physically dif-
ferent from all the other planets, as people believed for centuries? If the
former case, what is the exact nature of this centripetal force? For answers
to these and other fundamental questions we turn, in the next chapter, to
the work of Isaac Newton.
162
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION
RE = 6370 km
463 km
Orbiting
space shuttle
FIGURE 3.41
Diagram of Space Shuttle in
orbit.

SUMMARY
Newton's Three Laws of Motion
1.
The law of inertia:
Every object continues in its state of rest or of uniform velocity (motion at
uniform speed in a straight line) unless acted upon by an unbalanced force (a
net force). Conversely, if an object is at rest or in motion with uniform veloc-
ity, all forces that may be acting on it must cancel so that the net force is zero.
2.
The force law:
The net force acting on an object is numerically equal to, and in the same di-
rection as, the acceleration of the object multiplied by its mass. In symbols:
F  ma.
3.
The law of action and reaction:
If one object exerts a force on another object, the second object at the same
time exerts a force on the first object. These two forces, each acting on one
of the two objects, are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
centrifugal force
net force
centripetal force
projectile motion
force
reference frame
force, unbalanced
uniform circular motion
Galilean relativity principle
violent motion
inertia
weight
mass
weightlessnes
natural motion
FURTHER READING
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapters 8-10.
R.S. Westfall, The Construction of Modern Science: Mechanisms and Mechanics (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
T.S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the Development of
Western Thought (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982).
FURTHER READING
163

STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1.
Look at every equation, graph, table, law, and definition in this chapter and be
sure that you understand their meaning to the extent that you are able to ex-
plain each of them in your own words to another person.
2.
List all the different types of motion discussed in this chapter. Then attempt
to see how Newton's laws of motion apply to each one.
A. THE THREE LAWS OF MOTION
3.1 Natural Motion and Newton's First Law
1.
What were the so-called natural motion and violent motion? Why did they
seem reasonable?
2.
How is the old idea of natural motion contradicted by the observation that two
objects of different mass fall at the same rate when dropped from the same
height?
3.
What did Galileo discover about a ball moving on a tabletop without friction?
4.
Express the law of inertia in your own words.
5.
A roller-blader coasts for a distance along a flat stretch of a street. How would
Aristotle and Galileo each account for his motion?
3.2 Forces in Equilibrium
1.
What are balanced forces?
2.
Give some examples of unbalanced forces.
3.
Sketch the examples in Question 2 and represent the forces by vectors.
4.
What are two possible states of motion for objects on which balanced forces
act?
3.3 More about Vectors
1.
Draw arrows to represent two or more forces acting on an object. Then de-
scribe how you would find the net vector force acting on the object.
2.
A swimmer tries to swim across a fast-moving stream flowing west to east at
4 mi/hr. The swimmer sets out to cross the stream by swimming 3 mi/hr due
north. What is his resultant velocity?
3.4 Newton's Second Law of Motion
1.
What is a universal law?
2.
How do we know that Newton's laws of motion are universal laws?
3.
Describe an experiment that explored the relationship between force and ac-
celeration. What was the conclusion?
4.
Describe an experiment that explored the relationship between mass and 
acceleration. What was the conclusion?
164
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION

5.
State Newton's second law of motion in your own words.
6.
A net force of 10 N gives an object a constant acceleration of 4 m/s2. What is
the mass of the object?
7.
Does Newton's second law hold only when frictional forces are absent? 
Explain.
8.
An unbalanced force can cause acceleration, yet you can push hard on a bro-
ken shopping cart on a rough pavement and it still moves only at constant ve-
locity. Explain.
9.
What does it mean to say that mass is a scalar quantity?
3.5 Measuring Mass and Force
1.
What is weight, and how is it different from mass?
2.
How are the kilogram, meter, and second defined?
3.
What exactly is inertial mass?
4.
What is a "newton"?
5.
What are the cgs and mks systems of units? Are they both metric systems?
3.6 More about Weight, and Weightlessness
1.
You are standing on a platform on Earth that is part of a "weighing scale."
(a) Using the metric conversion (to kilograms), how much do you weigh?
(b) What is your mass?
(c) In a sketch, draw the forces on you and on the scale.
(d) If the net force on you is zero, why does the scale register your "weight"?
(e) The ground suddenly gives way and you fall freely into a deep well. Be-
fore you panic, you look down at the scale. What is it reading as your
weight?
(f) What is your mass as you fall in free fall?
2.
An astronaut walking on the Moon, which has one-sixth the gravitational pull
of the Earth, has a certain amount of weight and mass. Are they the same or
different from his weight and mass on the Earth, and if different, by how
much?
3.
If an object is accelerating, what can we say about the forces acting on it?
4.
Name some common types of forces.
5.
Different masses on Earth have different weights, yet they have the same ac-
celeration in free fall. How can this be?
6.
How do Newton's second law and the force of gravity account for the fact that
two objects of different mass hit the ground together when dropped from the
same height? (Neglect air resistance.)
7.
Why does a skydiver in free fall feel weightless? Is he/she really weightless?
Explain.
8.
An astronaut is orbiting on the International Space Station, where he feels
weightless. At that altitude, the acceleration due to gravity is 13% less than its
value on the surface of the Earth. Which of the following is/are true?
(a) The astronaut's weight is zero.
(b) The astronaut's mass is zero.
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
165

(c) The astronaut's weight is 13% less than its value on Earth.
(d) The astronaut's mass is 13% less than its value on Earth.
3.7 Newton's Third Law of Motion
1.
State Newton's third law of motion in your own words.
2.
Give some examples of the third law in operation.
3.
Why don't action and reaction "cancel out"?
B. THE THREE LAWS IN ACTION
3.8 Projectile Motion
1.
A golfer tees off on a fairway, hitting the green some distance away.
(a) What is the shape of the trajectory of the ball?
(b) How would Galileo account for the motion of the ball? Would Aristotle
agree?
2.
What are the two motions, acting at the same time, that make up projectile
motion?
3.
Does the vertical motion affect the horizontal motion, and vice versa? How do
you know?
3.9 The Earth Can Move!
1.
What was the main argument against the moving Earth in this section of 
the text?
2.
How did Galileo use the concept of projectile motion to demolish that argument?
3.10 Galilean Relativity
1.
What conclusion can be drawn from Galileo's examples of moving objects in
systems at rest or in uniform motion?
2.
State the Galilean relativity principle in your own words.
3.
How does the principle support the argument that the Earth can be in motion?
3.11 Orbiting Satellites
1.
Explain how a projectile can become an orbiting satellite.
2.
The Space Shuttle weighs hundreds of tons, yet it can orbit the Earth with-
out falling down. How does it stay in orbit if nothing is "holding it up"?
3.
Jumbo jets also weigh many tons. What can you say about the forces on them
as they are flying at cruising altitude at a constant velocity? What "keeps 
them up"?
4.
Name two types of specialty satellites and describe their orbits.
166
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION

5.
Why do astronauts in the orbiting Space Shuttle feel weightless? Are they re-
ally weightless?
3.12 Circular Motion
1.
An object is moving around a circle with constant speed. Is the object accel-
erating, even though the speed is constant? Explain.
2.
If an object moving in uniform circular motion is accelerating, then there must
be a force on it. Describe the nature of this force, and draw arrows to repre-
sent the force vector at different points around a circle depicting the object's
motion.
3.
What is centripetal acceleration?
4.
In which of these cases is an object accelerating?
(a) Moving with constant speed in a straight line.
(b) Moving with constant speed in a circle.
(c) Moving on the trajectory of a projectile.
5.
Classify each of the following as either vectors or scalars:
(a) 4 s;
(b) 3 m/s eastward;
(c) 600 g;
(d) centripetal acceleration;
(e) 5 N to the right;
(f) 5 N.
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1.
During the course of 1 day, observe some of the different motions that you
see around you and make a list of them. Examples might be a car accelerat-
ing, a bus turning a corner, a rotating fan, falling rain, a basketball arcing to-
ward a basket, even the Sun rising and setting. Now attempt to answer the
following:
(a) What type of motion is each of the motions that you observed?
(b) If some of these involve combinations of two or more motions, can you
break them down into simpler motions?
(c) Using Newton's laws of motion, try to account for each of these motions.
2.
Why do you think that Galileo and Newton found the study of motion to be
so difficult? Do you find it difficult?
3.
List some examples of action-reaction forces.
4.
List some examples of uniform circular motion and describe the centripetal
force involved in each case.
5.
How would you use a "balance scale" and a set of known masses to measure
the mass of an unknown object? How does this make use of Newton's laws
of motion?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
167

6.
If you know the period and speed of a satellite, you can easily find the ac-
celeration of gravity at the height of the satellite. How would you do this?
7.
A person is sitting in a car at rest. In an unfortunate accident, the car is hit
from behind. Which way is the person inside thrown, backward or forward?
Explain.
8.
Have someone drive you for a short distance in a car that includes a number
of stops, starts, turning corners and curves, and bumps. Carefully observe and
write down all the forces you feel. Then try to explain each one from the ma-
terial in this chapter. Which of these forces are fictitious forces and which
are real forces?
9.
While you are sitting in the back of a car on the right side, the car makes a
sudden turn to the left. You feel a push on you from the right side of the car.
Why?
10.
Try the experiment described in Section 3.6. Take a bathroom scale into an
elevator and record the reading on the scale as the elevator accelerates up-
ward and downward. Compare the result with the reading when the elevator
is at rest. What would the scale read if the acceleration downward increased
to the acceleration of gravity, g? What would the scale read if the accelera-
tion upward increased by the same amount?
Quantitative Questions
1.
Consider a system consisting of a 1-kg ball and the Earth. The ball is dropped
from a short distance above the Earth and falls freely to the Earth (whose mass
is 6.0  1024 kg).
(a) Make a vector diagram illustrating the important forces acting on each
member of the system during the ball's descent.
(b) Calculate the acceleration upward of the Earth while the ball accelerates
downward.
(c) Make a vector diagram as in (a), but showing the situation when the ball
has come to rest after hitting the ground.
2.
A projectile is launched horizontally with a speed of 8 m/s from the edge of a
precipice.
(a) How much time will the projectile take to hit the ground 80 m below?
(b) How does this time change if the horizontal speed is doubled?
(c) What is the vertical speed of the projectile when it hits the ground?
(d) What is the horizontal speed of the projectile when it hits the ground?
3.
What is the period of the minute hand of an ordinary clock? If the hand is 
3.0 cm long, what is the speed of the tip of the minute hand?
4.
Go to the NASA site on the World Wide Web (http://spacelink.nasa.gov) and
find data on the orbit of a satellite or space shuttle. From the data given, ob-
tain the speed, period, velocity, and centripetal acceleration of the orbiting 
object.
5.
Do the same as in Question 4 for the International Space Station.
6.
What are the velocity and centripetal acceleration of a person standing on the
equator of the Earth, owing to the rotation of the Earth?
168
3. UNDERSTANDING MOTION

7.
What are the velocity and the centripetal acceleration of the Earth as it 
orbits the Sun each year? What is the centripetal force on the Earth (mass
6.0  1024 kg)?
8.
A satellite with a mass of 500 kg completes a circle around the Earth every
380 min in an orbit 18,000 km from the center of the Earth. What are the
magnitude and direction of the force vector holding the satellite in orbit? What
produces this force?
9.
How fast would you have to throw a baseball in order to put it into orbit at
the surface of the Earth, assuming that there are no mountains and buildings
in the way?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
169

This page intentionally left blank 

4.1
Newton and Seventeenth-Century Science
4.2
Isaac Newton
4.3
Newton's Principia
4.4
The Inverse-Square Law
4.5
The Law of Universal Gravitation
4.6
Newton's Synthesis
4.7
Newton and Hypotheses
4.8
The Magnitude of the Gravitational Force
4.9
The Value of G, and Some Consequences
4.10 Further Successes
4.11 The Nature of Newton's Work
4.1 NEWTON AND 
SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY SCIENCE
Forty-five years passed between the death of Galileo in 1642 and the pub-
lication in 1687 of Newton's greatest work, the Philosophiae Naturalis Prin-
cipia Mathematica, or the Principia (Principles) for short. In those years, ma-
jor changes occurred in the social organization of scientific studies. The
new philosophy of experimental science, applied with enthusiasm and imag-
ination, produced a wealth of new results. Scholars began to work together
and to organize scientific societies in Italy, France, and England. One of
the most famous, the Royal Society of London for Improving Natural
Knowledge, was founded in 1662. Through these societies, scientific ex-
perimenters exchanged information, debated new ideas, argued against op-
ponents of the new experimental activities, and published technical papers.
Each society sought public support for its work and published studies in
widely read scientific journals. Through the societies, scientific activities
became well defined, strong, and international.
171
Newton's
Unified Theory
C
H
A
P
T
E
R 44

This development was part of the general cultural, political, and eco-
nomic change occurring throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies (1500s and 1600s). Artisans and people of wealth and leisure became
involved in scientific studies. Some sought to improve technological meth-
ods and products. Others found the study of nature through experiment a
new and exciting hobby. However, the availability of money and time, the
growing interest in science, and the creation of organizations are not
enough to explain the growing success of scientific studies. This rapid
growth also depended upon able scientists, well-formulated problems, and
good experimental and mathematical tools.
Many well-formulated problems appeared in the writings of Galileo and
Kepler. Their studies showed how useful mathematics could be when com-
bined with experimental observation. Furthermore, their works raised ex-
citing new questions. For example, what forces act on the planets and cause
the paths that are actually observed? Why do objects fall as they do near
the Earth's surface?
Good experimental and mathematical tools were also becoming avail-
able in that era. As scientists applied mathematics to physics, studies in each
field stimulated development in the others. Similarly, the instrument maker
and the scientist aided each other. Another factor of great importance was
172
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY
FIGURE 4.1 Isaac Newton (1642-1727). 

the rapid buildup of scientific knowledge itself. From the time of Galileo,
scientists had reported repeatable experiments in books and journals. The-
ories could now be tested, modified, and applied. Each new study built
upon those done previously.
Newton, who lived during this bustling new scientific age, is the central
person in this chapter. However, in science as in any other field, many 
workers made useful contributions. The structure of science depends not
only upon recognized geniuses, but also upon many lesser-known scien-
tists. As Ernest Rutherford, one of the founders of twentieth-century nu-
clear physics, once said (updating his language slightly):
It is not in the nature of things for any one person to make a sud-
den violent discovery; science goes step by step, and every person
depends upon the work of his or her predecessors. . . . Scientists
are not dependent on the ideas of a single person, but on the com-
bined wisdom of thousands. . . . 
In order to tell the story properly, we should trace each scientist's debt
to others who worked previously and in the same age, and we should trace
each scientist's influence upon future scientists. Within the space available,
we can only briefly hint at these relationships.
4.2 ISAAC NEWTON
Isaac Newton was born on Christmas Day, 1642, according to the Julian
calendar—4 January 1643, according to the Gregorian calendar now in
use—in the small English village of Woolsthorpe in Lincolnshire, north of
Cambridge. His father had died before his birth, and Isaac, initially a weak
infant, then a quiet farm boy, became very dependent upon his mother. He
never married. Like young Galileo, Newton loved to build mechanical
gadgets and seemed to have a liking for mathematics. With financial 
help from an uncle, he went to Trinity College of Cambridge University
in 1661, where he enrolled in the study of mathematics and was a success-
ful student.
In 1665, the Black Plague swept through England. The officials closed
the college, and Newton went home to Woolsthorpe. Drawing upon what
he had learned and his own independent work, there he made spectacular
discoveries. In mathematics, he developed the binomial theorem and dif-
ferential calculus. In optics, he worked out a theory of colors. In mechan-
ics, he had already formulated a clear concept of the first two laws of mo-
4.2 ISAAC NEWTON
173

tion and the law of gravitational attraction. He also discovered the equa-
tion for centripetal acceleration. However, Newton did not announce this
equation until many years after Christiaan Huygens' equivalent statement.
This period at Woolsthorpe must have been the time of the famous,
though still disputed, fall of the apple. (An ancient apple tree, said to be a
descendant of the one from Newton's time, is still on the grounds of the
Woolsthorpe home.) One version of the apple story appears in a biogra-
phy of Newton, written by his friend William Stukeley. In it we read that
on a particular occasion Stukeley was having tea with Newton. They were
sitting under some apple trees in a garden, and (wrote Stukeley) Newton
said that
174
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY
FIGURE 4.2
Newton's drawing of his telescope, made while he was still a student. 

he was just in the same situation, as when formerly, the notion of
gravitation came into his mind. It was occasion'd by the fall of an
apple, as he sat in a contemplative mood. Why should that apple
always descend perpendicularly to the ground, thought he to him-
self. Why should it not go sideways or upwards, but constantly to
the Earth's centre?
The main emphasis in this story probably should be placed on the "con-
templative mood" and not on the apple. Newton himself later wrote that
he had begun at that time to think of the force on the apple as a force that
extends out to the Moon, and that this same type of force might also act
between the planets and the Sun. "All this was in the two plague years of
1665 and 1666," he later wrote, "for in those days [at age 21 or 22] I was
in the prime of my age for invention, and minded mathematics and phi-
losophy more than at any time since." You have seen this pattern before:
A great puzzle (here, that of the forces acting on planets) begins to be solved
when a clear-thinking person contemplates a familiar event (here the 
fall of an object on Earth). Where others had seen no relationship, 
Newton did.
Soon after he returned to Cambridge, Newton succeeded his former
teacher as professor of mathematics. Newton taught at the university and
contributed papers to the Royal Society. At first his contributions were
mainly on optics. His Theory of Light and Colors, published in 1672, fired a
long and bitter controversy with other scientists who disagreed with his
work. Newton, a private and complex man, resolved never to publish again.
In 1684, Newton's devoted friend Edmund Halley, a noted astronomer
who later discovered the comet named after him, came to ask Newton's ad-
vice. Halley was involved in a discussion with Christopher Wren and Robert
Hooke about the force needed to cause a body to move along an ellipse in
accord with Kepler's laws. This was one of the most debated and interest-
ing scientific problems of the time. Halley was pleasantly surprised to learn
that Newton had already solved this problem "and much other matter,"
Halley wrote. Halley persuaded his friend to publish these important stud-
ies. To encourage Newton, Halley took on responsibility for all the costs
of publication. Less than 2 years later, Newton had the Principia ready 
for the printer. Publication of the Principia in 1687 quickly established 
Newton as one of the greatest thinkers in history.
Several years afterward, Newton apparently suffered a nervous break-
down. He recovered, but from then until his death 35 years later, Newton
made no major scientific discoveries. He rounded out his earlier studies on
heat, optics, chemistry, and electricity, and turned increasingly to theolog-
4.2 ISAAC NEWTON
175

ical studies and politics. During those years, he received many honors. In
1699 Newton was appointed Master of the Mint, partly because of his great
knowledge of the chemistry of metals. In this position, he helped to reestab-
lish the value of British coins, in which lead and copper had been intro-
duced in place of silver and gold. In 1689 and 1701 Newton represented
Cambridge University in Parliament. Queen Anne knighted Newton in
1705. He was president of the Royal Society from 1703 until his death in
1727. Newton is buried in Westminster Abbey.
4.3 NEWTON'S PRINCIPIA
Newton's Principia, written in scholarly Latin, contained long geometrical
arguments, and is very difficult to read, even today in English translation.
Happily, as was the case later with the relativity and quantum theories, 
several gifted writers wrote excellent nontechnical summaries in the ver-
nacular languages that allowed a wide circle of educated readers to learn of
Newton's arguments and conclusions. The French philosopher Voltaire
published one of the most popular of these books in 1736.
The Principia begins with the definitions of mass, momentum, inertia,
and force. Next come the three laws of motion and the principles of addi-
tion for forces and velocities. In a later edition of the Principia Newton also
included a remarkable passage on "Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy." The
four rules, or assumptions, reflect Newton's profound faith in the unifor-
mity of all nature. Newton intended the rules to guide scientists in mak-
ing hypotheses. He also wanted to make clear to the reader his own philo-
sophical assumptions. These rules had their roots in ancient Greece and
are still useful today. The first has been called a principle of parsimony
(simplicity or economy), the second and third, principles of unity. The
fourth rule expresses a faith needed to use the process of logic.
In a brief form, and using some modern language, Newton's four rules
of reasoning are:
1.
"Nature does nothing . . . in vain, and more is in vain when less will serve."
In short, nature is simple. Therefore, scientists ought not to intro-
duce more hypotheses than are needed to explain observed facts. This
fundamental faith of all scientists has a long history, going back to
Aristotle, Medieval thought, and Galileo. An example: if a falling ap-
ple and the orbiting Moon can be explained by the hypothesis of one
force, there is no need for two separate forces, one celestial and 
one terrestrial.
176
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

2.
"Therefore to the same natural effects we must, as far as possible, assign the
same causes." For instance, we can assume, at least initially, that the force
attracting the Moon to the Earth is the same type of force attracting
the Earth and planets to the Sun.
3.
Properties common to all bodies within reach of experiments are assumed (un-
til proved otherwise) to apply to all bodies in general. For example, all phys-
ical objects known to experimenters had always been found to have
mass. So, by this rule, Newton proposed—until proved otherwise by
new information—that every physical object be considered to have mass,
even those objects beyond our reach in the celestial region.
4.
In "experimental philosophy" scientists should accept hypotheses or general-
izations based on experimental evidence as being "accurately or very nearly
true, notwithstanding any contrary hypotheses that may be imagined." That
is, scientists should accept such experimentally based hypotheses until
4.3 NEWTON'S PRINCIPIA
177
FIGURE 4.3
Title page of Newton's
Principia Mathematica. The Royal Soci-
ety sponsored the book, and the title
page therefore includes the name of the
Society's president, Samuel Pepys (fa-
mous for his diary describing life dur-
ing the seventeenth century). 

they have additional evidence by which the hypotheses may be made
more accurate or revised.
The Principia is an extraordinary document. Its three main sections con-
tain a wealth of mathematical and physical discoveries. Overshadowing
everything else is the theory of universal gravitation, with the geometrical
proofs and arguments leading to it. We shall now restate many of the steps
Newton used in his proofs in modern terms in order to make them more
accessible.
The central idea of universal gravitation is breathtaking in its generality
but can be simply stated: Every object in the Universe attracts every other ob-
ject. Moreover, the amount of attraction in every instance depends in a sim-
ple way on the masses of the objects and the distance between them. (We
shall patiently develop the steps taken toward finding the equation in Sec-
tion 4.8, which, in a few symbols, expresses that grand law.)
Newton's great synthesis was boldly to combine terrestrial laws of force
and motion with astronomical laws of motion. Gravitation is a universal
force. It applies to the Earth and apples, to the Sun and planets, and to all
other bodies (such as comets) moving in the solar system. Celestial and ter-
restrial physics were united in one grand system dominated by the law of
universal gravitation. The general astonishment and awe were reflected in
the famous words of the English poet Alexander Pope:
Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in night:
God said, Let Newton be! and all was light.
Readers of Newton's work must have been excited and perhaps puzzled
by the new approach and assumptions. For 2000 years, from the time of
the ancient Greeks until well after Copernicus, people believed that the
world is separated into two distinct realms, the celestial and the terrestrial.
They had used the ideas of natural place and natural motion to explain the
general position and movements of the planets. From the time of the
Greeks, scholars had widely believed that the planets' orbits were their "nat-
ural motion." Therefore, their orbital motion required no explanation; it
was natural. However, to Newton the natural motion of a body was con-
tinuing to go at a uniform rate along a straight line, in the absence of forces.
Motion in a curve showed that a net force was continuously accelerating
the planets away from their natural straight-line motion, causing them to
move in an orbit. The force acting on the planets was entirely natural and
acted between all bodies in heaven and on Earth. Furthermore, it was the
same force that caused bodies on the Earth to fall. What a reversal of the
old assumptions about what was "natural"!
178
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

4.4 THE INVERSE-SQUARE LAW
Newton believed that the influence of the Sun forced the natural straight-
line path of a planet into a curve. He demonstrated that Kepler's law of ar-
eas could be true if, and only if, forces exerted on the planets are always
directed toward a single point. Such a force is termed a central force. New-
ton also showed that the single point is the location of the Sun. Planets
obey the law of areas no matter what magnitude the force has, as long as
the force is always directed to the same point. Newton still had to show
that a central gravitational force would cause the exact relationship ob-
served between the orbital radii and the periods of the planets, as given by
Kepler's third law. How great was the gravitational force and how did it
differ for different planets?
The combination of Kepler's three laws of planetary motion with New-
ton's three laws of motion in general provides a fine example of the power
of logical reasoning. Compare these different sets of laws (you may want
to review Section 2.10 and Chapter 3):
Newton's Laws of Motion
1.
Every object continues in its state of rest or of uniform velocity (mo-
tion at uniform speed in a straight line) unless acted upon by an un-
balanced force (a net force). Conversely, if an object is at rest or in mo-
tion with uniform velocity, all forces that may be acting on it must
cancel so that the net force is zero.
2.
The net force acting on an object is numerically equal to, and in the
same direction as, the acceleration of the object multiplied by its mass.
In symbols: Fnet  ma.
3.
If one object exerts a force on another object, the second object at the
same time exerts a force on the first object. These two forces, each act-
ing on one of the two objects, are equal in magnitude and opposite in
direction.
Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
1.
The planets orbit the Sun on ellipses, with the Sun at one focus and
nothing at the other focus.
2.
An imaginary line from the Sun to the moving planet sweeps out equal
areas in equal amounts of time.
3.
The squares of the periods of the planets are proportional to the cubes
of their average distances from the Sun, for all of the planets.
4.4 THE INVERSE-SQUARE LAW
179

Now we will see how these different laws can be put to more general
use. According to Newton's first law, a change in motion, either in direc-
tion or in magnitude (speed), requires the action of a net force. According
to Kepler, the planets move in orbits that are ellipses, that is, curved or-
bits. Therefore, a net force must be acting to change their motion. Notice
that this conclusion alone does not yet specify the type or direction of the
net force.
Combining Newton's second law with the first two laws of Kepler 
clarifies the direction of the force. According to Newton's second law, the
net force is exerted in the direction of the observed acceleration. What is
the direction of the force acting on the planets? Newton's geometrical anal-
ysis indicated that a body moving under a central force will, when viewed
from the center of the force, move according to Kepler's law of areas. 
Kepler's law of areas invokes the distance of the planets from the Sun.
Therefore, Newton could conclude that the Sun at one focus of each el-
lipse was the source of the central force acting on each of the correspond-
ing planets.
Newton then found that motion in an elliptical path would occur only
when the central force was an inverse-square force
F 
.
Thus, only an inverse-square force exerted by the Sun would result in the
observed elliptical orbits described by Kepler. Newton then proved the ar-
gument by showing that such an inverse-square law would in fact result in
Kepler's third law, the law of periods, T2  kR3av.
From this analysis, Newton concluded that one general law of universal
gravitation applied to all bodies moving in the solar system. This is the
central argument of Newton's great synthesis.
Early in his thinking, Newton considered the motions of the six then-
known planets in terms of their centripetal acceleration toward the Sun.
By Newton's proof, mentioned above, this acceleration decreases inversely
as the square of the planets' average distances from the Sun. For the spe-
1
R2
180
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY
F ∝1
2
R
Planet
R
S
FIGURE 4.4
Planet orbiting Sun, which exerts a
force F on the planet that is inversely proportional
to the square of the distance to the Sun's center.
The ellipse is greatly exaggerated here.

cial case of an ellipse that is just a circle, the proof is very simple and short.
The expression for centripetal acceleration ac of a body moving uniformly
in a circular path may be found in terms of the radius R and the period T:
ac 
,
v 
,
so
ac 
	

.
Kepler's law of periods stated a definite relationship between the orbital
period of every planet and its average distance from the Sun, i.e.,
T2 is proportional to R3,
or
 constant.
Using the symbol k for constant
T2  kR3av.
For circular orbits, Rav is just R. Substituting kR3 for T2 in the centripetal
force equation gives
ac 

.
Since 42/k is also a constant, we have
ac 
.
As you can see from the derivation, this conclusion follows necessarily from
Kepler's law of periods and the definition of acceleration. If Newton's sec-
1
R2
42

kR2
42R

kR3
T2

R3
42R

T2
1
R
42 R2

T2
2R

T
v2

R
4.4 THE INVERSE-SQUARE LAW
181

ond law, Fnet  a, holds for planets as well as for bodies on Earth, then there
must be a centripetal force Fc acting on a planet. Furthermore, this force
must decrease in proportion to the square of the distance of the planet from
the Sun
Fc 
.
Newton showed that the same result holds for all ellipses. Indeed, this
proportionality holds for any object moving in an orbit around a center
from which the force on the body is applied (even in Bohr's model for hy-
drogen, in which an electron is thought to orbit around the nucleus). The
center of force (in this case the Sun) acts upon any such object by a cen-
tripetal force that varies inversely with the square of the distance from the
center of force.
Newton had still more evidence from telescopic observations of Jupiter's
satellites and Saturn's satellites. The satellites of each planet obeyed 
Kepler's law of areas around the planet as a center. For Jupiter's satellites,
Kepler's law of periods, T2/R3  constant, held. But the value of the con-
stant was different from that for the planets around the Sun. The law held
also for Saturn's satellites, but with still a different constant. The reason is
that Jupiter's satellites were acted on by a central force directed toward
Jupiter and decreasing with the square of the distance from Jupiter. The
same held true for Saturn's satellites and Saturn. These observed interac-
tions of astronomical bodies supported Newton's proposed central attrac-
tive force obeying the 1/R2 rule.
4.5 THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION
Subject to further evidence, you can now accept the idea that a central force
is holding the planets in their orbits. Furthermore, the strength of this cen-
tral force changes inversely with the square of the distance from the Sun.
This strongly suggests that the Sun is the origin of the force, but it does
not necessarily require this conclusion. Newton's results so far describe the
force in mathematical terms, but they do not provide any mechanism for
its transmission.
The French philosopher Descartes (1596-1650) had proposed that all
space was filled with a thin, invisible fluid. This ethereal fluid carried the
planets around the Sun in a huge whirlpool-like motion. This interesting
idea was widely accepted at the time. However, Newton proved by a pre-
1
R2
182
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

cise argument that this mechanism could not explain the details of plane-
tary motion summarized in Kepler's laws.
Kepler had made a different suggestion some years earlier. He proposed
that a magnetic force from the Sun kept the planets moving. Kepler was
the first to regard the Sun as the controlling mechanical agent behind plan-
etary motion. But Kepler's magnetic model was inadequate. The problem
remained: Was the Sun actually the source of the force? If so, on what
properties of the Sun or planets did the amount of the force depend?
As you read in Section 4.2, Newton had begun to think about planetary
force while living at home during the Black Plague. There an idea came to
him (perhaps when he saw an apple fall). Newton's idea was that the force
between the Sun and the planets was the same as the force that caused ob-
jects near the Earth's surface to fall. He first tested this idea on the Earth's
attraction for the Moon. It was an ingenious argument. The data available
to him fixed the distance between the center of the Earth and the center
of the Moon at nearly 60 times the radius of the Earth. Newton believed
that the attractive force varies as 1/R2. Therefore, the gravitational accel-
4.5 THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION
183
FIGURE 4.5 Drawing by Descartes (1596-
1650) illustrating his theory of a space
filled with whirlpools of matter that drive
the planets along their orbits.

eration the Earth exerts on the Moon should be only 1/(60)2  1/3600 of
that exerted upon objects at the Earth's surface. Observations of falling bod-
ies had long established gravitational acceleration at the Earth's surface as
about 9.80 m/s/s, that is, 9.8 m/s2. Therefore, the Moon should fall at 1/3600
of that acceleration value:
9.80 m/s2  (1/3600)  2.72  103 m/s2.
It was also common knowledge that the orbital period of the Moon is
very nearly 27.33 days. The centripetal acceleration ac of a body moving
uniformly with period T in a circle of radius r is ac  42R/T2, as indicated
earlier. When you insert the observed values for the quantities R and T (in
meters and seconds) for the case of the Moon orbiting the Earth and do
the arithmetic, you find that the centripetal acceleration of the Moon, based
upon observed quantities, should be
ac  2.74  103 m/s2.
This is in very good agreement with the value of 2.72  103 m/s2 pre-
dicted above. From the values available to Newton, which were close to
these, he concluded that he had, in his words,
compared the force requisite to keep the moon in her orbit with
the force of gravity at the surface of the earth, and found them to
answer pretty nearly.
Therefore, the force by which the moon is retained in its orbit
becomes, at the very surface of the earth, equal to the force of 
gravity which we observe in heavy bodies there. And, therefore, 
(by rules of reasoning 1 and 2) the force by which the moon is re-
tained in its orbit is that very same force which we commonly call
gravity. . . .
184
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY
R
Apple
Earth
FIGURE 4.6
An apple on
Earth's surface.

This was really a triumph. The same gravity that brings apples down
from trees also keeps the Moon in its orbit, i.e., making it constantly fall
away from a straight-line motion into space, just enough to make it move
around the Earth. This assertion is an aspect of what is known as the law
of universal gravitation: Every object in the Universe attracts every other object
with a gravitational force. If this is so, there must be gravitational forces not
only between a rock and the Earth, but also between the Earth and the
Moon, between Jupiter and its satellites, and between the Sun and each of
the planets. And by Newton's third law, we should expect the Moon to ex-
ert an equal (but oppositely directed) gravitational force on the Earth, and
the planets on the Sun. Indeed that is so, and we shall study this in the next
section in detail. But for now, note that because the Earth is so much more
massive than the Moon, the "wobble" of the Earth caused by the pull of
the Moon is tiny. Similarly, our Sun, enormously more massive than the
planets of our solar system, is acted on by them, but this action produces
only very small motions of the Sun. This effect has led to a remarkable
finding: other stars than our Sun have been observed to exhibit a small
wobbling motion that is attributed to the presence of one or more (not di-
rectly observable) planets orbiting these stars, thus revealing that other
planetary systems exist throughout our Universe.
Newton did not stop at saying that a gravita-
tional force exists between the Earth and Moon, the
planets and the Sun. He further claimed that the
force is exactly the right magnitude and direction to
explain completely the motion of every planet. No
other mechanism (whirlpools of invisible fluids or
magnetic forces) is needed. Gravitation, and gravi-
tation alone, underlies the dynamics of the heavens.
4.6 NEWTON'S SYNTHESIS
The concept of gravitation is now so commonplace that you might be in
danger of passing it by without really appreciating what Newton was claim-
ing. First, he proposed a truly universal physical law. Following his rules
of reasoning, Newton extended to the whole Universe what he found true
for its observable parts. He excluded no object in the Universe from the
effect of gravity.
The idea that terrestrial laws and forces are the same as those that reg-
ulate the entire Universe had stunning impact. Less than a century before,
it would have been dangerous even to suggest such a thing. Kepler and
4.6 NEWTON'S SYNTHESIS
185
Recently indications have been
found that some galaxies experi-
ence a repulsion, not predomi-
nantly a gravitational attraction,
from one another. Hence the ex-
pansion of the universe is pro-
ceeding at an accelerating rate!

Galileo had laid the foundation for combining the physics of the heavens
and Earth. Newton carried this work to its conclusion. Today, Newton's
extension of the mechanics of terrestrial objects to the motion of celestial
bodies is called the Newtonian synthesis.
Newton's claim that a planet's orbit is determined by the gravitational
attraction between it and the Sun had another effect. It moved science away
from geometrical explanations and toward physical ones. Most philosophers
and scientists before Newton were occupied mainly with the question
"What are the motions?" Newton asked, instead, "What force explains the
motions?" In both the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems, the planets
moved about points in space rather than about objects. The planets moved
as they did because of their "nature" or geometrical shape, not because
forces acted on them. Newton, on the other hand, spoke not of points, but
of things, of objects, of physical bodies. For example, unless the gravita-
tional attraction to the Sun deflected them continuously from straight-line
paths, the planets would fly out into the darkness of deep space. Thus, it
was the physical Sun that was important, not the point at which the Sun
happened to be located.
Newton's synthesis centered on the idea of gravitational force. By call-
ing it a force of gravity, Newton knew that he was not explaining why it
existed. When you hold a stone above the surface of the Earth and release
it, it accelerates to the ground. The laws of motion tell you that there must
be a force acting on the stone to accelerate it. You know the direction of the
force. You can find the magnitude of the force by multiplying the mass of the
stone by the acceleration. You know that this force is weight, or gravitational
attraction to the Earth. But why such an interaction between bodies exists at
all remains a puzzle. It is still an important problem in physics today.
4.7 NEWTON AND HYPOTHESES
Newton's claim that there is a mutual force (gravitational interaction) be-
tween a planet and the Sun raised a new question: How can a planet and
the Sun act upon each other at enormous distances without any visible con-
nections between them? On Earth you can exert a force on an object by
pushing it or pulling it. You are not surprised to see a cloud or a balloon
drifting across the sky, even though nothing seems to be touching it. Air is
invisible, but you know that it is actually a material substance that you can
feel when it moves. Objects falling to the Earth, and pieces of iron being
attracted to a magnet are harder to explain, but at least the distances in-
volved are small. However, the Earth is over 144 million kilometers, and
186
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

Saturn more than 1 billion kilometers, from the Sun. How could there pos-
sibly be any physical contact between such distant objects? How can we ac-
count for such "action at a distance"?
In Newton's time and for a long time afterward, scholars advanced sug-
gestions for solving this problem. Most solutions involved imagining space
to be filled with some invisible substance, called the "ether," which trans-
mitted force. Newton himself privately guessed that such an ether was in-
volved. But he could find no way to test this belief. Therefore, at least in
public, he refused to speculate on possible mechanisms. In a famous passage
that he added in the second edition of the Principia (1713), Newton declared:
Hitherto I have not been able to discover the cause of those prop-
erties of gravity from phenomena, and I frame no hypotheses; for
whatever is not deduced from the phenomena is to be called an hy-
pothesis; and hypotheses, whether metaphysical or physical, whether
of occult qualities or mechanical, have no place in experimental phi-
losophy. . . . And to us it is enough that gravity does really exist, and
acts according to the laws which we have explained, and abundantly
serves to account for all the motions of the celestial bodies, and of
our sea.
Newton is quoted at length here because one particular phrase is often
taken out of context and misinterpreted. The original Latin reads: hypotheses
non fingo. This is translated above as "I frame no hypotheses." The sense
is, "I do not make untestable, possibly false, hypotheses." Newton in fact
made many hypotheses in his publications that led to testable results. Also,
his letters to friends contain many speculations which he did not publish.
So his stern denial of "framing" hypotheses must be properly interpreted.
The fact is that there are two main kinds of hypotheses or assumptions.
The most common hypothesis is a proposal of some hidden mechanism to
explain observations. For example, you observe the moving hands of a
watch. You might propose or imagine some arrangement of gears and
springs that causes the motion. This would be a hypothesis that is directly or
indirectly testable, at least in principle, by reference to phenomena. The hypoth-
esis about the watch, for example, can be tested by opening the watch or
by making an X ray film of it. In this context, consider the invisible fluid
that supposedly transmitted gravitational force, the so-called "ether." New-
ton and others thought that certain direct tests might establish the pres-
ence of this substance. Many experimenters tried to "catch" the ether. A
common approach involved pumping the air from a bottle. Then tests were
made to see if any wind, pressure, or friction due to the ether remained to
affect objects in the bottle. Nothing of this sort worked (nor has it since).
4.7 NEWTON AND HYPOTHESES
187

So Newton wisely avoided making public any hypothesis for which he could
not also propose a test.
A quite different type of assumption is often made in published scien-
tific work. It involves a hypothesis which everyone knows is not directly
testable, but which still is necessary just to get started on one's work. An ex-
ample is such a statement as "nature is simple," or any other of Newton's
four rules of reasoning. Acceptance of either the heliocentric system or the
geocentric system is another example. In choosing the heliocentric system,
Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo made the hypothesis that the Sun is at the
center of the Universe. They knew that this hypothesis was not directly
testable and that either system seemed to explain the observed behavior of
the celestial objects equally well. Yet they adopted the point of view that
seemed to them simpler, more convincing, and more "pleasing to the mind."
It was this kind of initial hypothesis that Newton used without apology in
his published work, and it turned out to be right to do so since it did lead
to testable results in the end.
Every scientist's work involves both kinds of hypothesis. One popular
image of the scientist is of a person who uses only deliberate, logical, ob-
jective thoughts, and immediately tests them by definitive experiments. But,
in fact, the working scientist feels quite free to entertain any guess, imag-
inative speculation, or hunch, provable or not, that might be helpful in the
early stages of research. (Sometimes these hunches are dignified by the
phrase "working hypotheses." Without them there would be little progress!)
As Einstein once said, the initial ideas and concepts used in starting re-
search may be considered "free conventions. They appear to be a priori
only insofar as thinking without the positing of categories and of concepts
in general would be as impossible as is breathing in a vacuum." However,
most scientists today do not like to publish something that is still only an
unproven hunch. It has to prove its usefulness to be accepted in the final
theory.
4.8 THE MAGNITUDE OF THE 
GRAVITATIONAL FORCE
The general statement that gravitational forces exist universally must now
be turned into a quantitative law, as indeed Newton did. An expression is
needed for both the magnitude and the direction of the forces any two ob-
jects exert on each other. It was not enough for Newton to assert that a
mutual gravitational attraction exists between the Sun and Jupiter. To be
convincing, he had to specify what quantitative factors determine the mag-
188
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

nitudes of those mutual forces. He had to show how they could be mea-
sured, either directly or indirectly.
The first problem was defining precisely the distance R. Should it, for
example, be taken as the distance between the surface of the Earth and the
surface of the Moon? For many astronomical problems, the sizes of the in-
teracting bodies are extremely small compared to the distances between
them. In such cases, the distance between the surfaces is practically the
same as the distance between the centers. (For the Earth and the Moon,
the distance between centers is only about 2% greater than the distance
between surfaces.) Yet, some historians believe Newton's uncertainty about
a proper answer to this problem led him to drop the study for many years.
Eventually, Newton solved the problem. His calculation showed that the
gravitational force exerted by a spherical body is the same as if all its mass
were concentrated at its center. The gravitational force exerted on a spher-
ical body by another body is the same as would be exerted on it if all its
mass were concentrated at its center. Therefore, the distance R in the law of
gravitation is the distance between centers.
This was a very important discovery. The gravitational attraction be-
tween spherical bodies can be considered as though their masses were con-
centrated at single points. Thus, in thought, the objects can be replaced by
mass points.
Newton's third law states that action equals reaction. If this is univer-
sally true, the amount of force the Sun exerts on a planet must exactly equal
the amount of force the planet exerts on the Sun. For such a very large
mass and such a relatively small mass, this may seem contrary to common
sense. But the equality is easy to prove. First, assume only that Newton's
third law holds between small pieces of matter. For example, a 1-kg piece
of Jupiter pulls on a 1-kg piece of the Sun as much as it is pulled by it. Now
consider the total attraction between Jupiter and the Sun, whose mass is
about 1000 times greater than Jupiter's. You can consider the Sun as a globe
containing about 1000 Jupiters. Define one unit of force as the force that
two Jupiter-sized masses exert on each other when separated by the dis-
tance of Jupiter from the Sun. Then Jupiter pulls on the Sun (a globe of
1000 Jupiters) with a total force of 1000 units. Each of the 1000 parts of
4.8 THE MAGNITUDE OF THE GRAVITATIONAL FORCE
189
R
M1
Fgrav
Fgrav
M2
FIGURE 4.7
Mutual gravitational
forces.

the Sun also pulls on the planet Jupiter with 1 unit. Therefore, the total
pull of the Sun on Jupiter is also 1000 units. Each part of the massive Sun
not only pulls on the planet, but is also pulled upon by the planet. The more
mass there is to attract, the more there is to be attracted. But note: Although
the mutual attractive forces on the two bodies are equal in magnitude, the
resulting accelerations of these are not. Jupiter pulls on the Sun as hard as
the Sun pulls on Jupiter, but the Sun responds to the pull with only 1/1000
of the acceleration, because its inertia is 1000 times Jupiter's.
We saw earlier why bodies of different mass fall with the same acceler-
ation near the earth's surface. The greater the inertia of a body, the more
strongly it is acted upon by gravity; that is, near the Earth's surface, the
gravitational force on a body is directly proportional to its mass. Like New-
ton, extend this earthly effect to all gravitation. You then can assume that
the gravitational force exerted on a planet by the Sun is proportional to the
mass of the planet. Similarly, the gravitational force exerted on the Sun by
the planet is proportional to the mass of the Sun. You have just seen that
the forces the sun and planet exert on each other are equal in magnitude
(though opposite in direction). It follows that the magnitude of the gravi-
tational force is proportional to the mass of the Sun and to the mass of the
planet; that is, the gravitational attraction between two bodies is propor-
tional to the product of their masses. That is, if the mass of either body is
tripled, the force each experiences is tripled. If the masses of both bodies
are tripled, the force is increased by a factor of 9. Using the symbol Fgrav
for the magnitude of the forces
Fgrav  mplanet mSun.
The conclusion is that the amount of attraction between the Sun and a
planet is proportional to the product of their masses. Earlier you saw that
the gravitational attraction also depends on the square of the distance be-
tween the centers of the bodies.
Fgrav 
.
1
R2
190
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY
R
Mplanet
Msun
Fgrav
Fgrav
S
FIGURE 4.8
Gravitational attraction be-
tween a planet and the Sun.

Combining these two proportionalities gives one force law, which now in-
cludes both mass and distance
Fgrav 
.
Such a proportionality can be written as an equation by introducing a
constant. (The constant allows for the units of measurement used.) Using
G as a symbol of the proportionality constant, the law of planetary forces
can be written as an equation
Fgrav 
Gmpla
R
ne
2
t mSun
.
This equation asserts that the force between the Sun and any planet de-
pends only upon three factors. These factors are the masses of the Sun and
planet and the distance between them. The equation seems unbelievably
simple when you remember how complex the observed planetary motions
seemed. Yet every one of Kepler's empirical laws of planetary motion agrees
with this relation. In fact, we can derive Kepler's empirical laws from this
force law and Newton's second law of motion. More important still, details
of planetary motion not obtainable with Kepler's laws alone can be calcu-
lated using this force law.
Newton's proposal that this simple equation describes completely the
forces between the Sun and planets was not the final step. He saw nothing
to restrict this mutual force to the Sun and planets, or to the Earth and ap-
ples. Rather, again in line with his rules of reasoning, Newton insisted that
an identical relation should apply universally to all matter everywhere
throughout the Universe. This relation would hold true for any two bodies
separated by a distance that is large compared to their dimensions. It would
apply equally to two atoms or two stars. In short, Newton proposed a gen-
eral law of universal gravitation
Here m1 and m2 are the masses of the two bodies and R is the distance be-
tween their centers. The numerical constant G is called the constant of uni-
versal gravitation. Newton assumed it to be the same for all gravitational
interactions, whether between two grains of sand, two members of a solar
Fgrav  
G 	
R
m
2
1m2

mplanet mSun

R2
4.8 THE MAGNITUDE OF THE GRAVITATIONAL FORCE
191

system, or two stars in different parts of the sky. As you will see, the very
great successes made possible by this simple relationship have borne out
Newton's assumption. In fact, scientists have come to assume that this equa-
tion applies everywhere and at all times, past, present, and future.
Even before we consider more supporting evidence, the sweeping majesty
of Newton's law of universal gravitation should command your wonder and
admiration. It also leads to the question of how such a bold universal law
can be proved. There is no complete proof, of course, for that would mean
examining every interaction between all bodies everywhere in the Universe!
But the greater the variety of individual tests made, the greater will be our
belief in the validity of the law.
4.9
THE VALUE OF G, AND 
SOME CONSEQUENCES
The masses of small solid objects on the surface of the Earth can be found
easily enough from their weights. Measuring the distance between solid ob-
jects of spherical shape presents no problem. But how can one measure the
tiny mutual gravitational force between relatively small objects in a labo-
ratory? (Remember that each object is also experiencing separately a huge
gravitational force toward the tremendously massive Earth.) In addition,
how can we find the actual value of G?
This serious technical problem was eventually solved by the English sci-
entist, Henry Cavendish (1731-1810). For measuring gravitational forces,
he employed a torsion balance. In this device, the gravitational attraction
between two pairs of lead spheres, one pair fixed in the laboratory, the other
suspended from a wire on a rod holding up that pair (see the illustration).
The force producing a twist of the wire could be calibrated by applying
first to the suspended pair of lead spheres small known forces. A typical ex-
periment might test the attraction between one of the fixed spheres of, say,
100 kg and one of the suspended spheres of, say, 1 kg, at a center-to-
center distance of 0.1 m. The resulting force would be found to be about
one-millionth of a newton (0.000001 N)! These data, inserted into the force
law of universal gravitation, allow one to calculate a value for G; it comes
out to be about 1010 (N m2/kg2). The experiment to find the value of G
has been steadily improved ever since, and the accepted value of G is now
G  0.00000000006673 N m2/kg2.
This can be written more concisely in scientific notation:
G  6.673  1011 N m2/kg2.
192
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

FIGURE 4.9
(a) Schematic diagram of the device used by Cavendish for determining the
value of the gravitational constant G. Large lead balls of masses M1 and M2 were brought
close to small lead balls of masses m1 and m2. The mutual gravitational attraction between
M1 and m1 and between M2 and m2 caused the vertical wire to be twisted by a measurable
amount. (b) Diagram of Cavendish's apparatus for determining the value of G. To prevent
disturbance from air currents, Cavendish enclosed the apparatus in a sealed case and ob-
served the deflection of the balance rod from outside with telescopes. 
(b)
(a)
193

Using this result in the formula giving the law of universal gravitation al-
lows one to calculate the force in newtons (N), if the distance R between
the centers of the attracting objects is measured in meters (m) and the
masses of the objects are measured in kilograms (kg).
G is obviously a very small number. The measurement of G confirms that
the gravitational force between everyday objects is indeed very small. Let's
see how small. Suppose you have two 1-kg masses separated by a distance
of 1 m between their centers. How large is the gravitational attraction be-
tween them? To find out, simply substitute into the equation for Fgrav:
Fgrav  
Gm
R
1
2
m2

 (6.67  1011 N m2/kg2)(1 kg 	 1 kg/1 m2)
 6.67  1011 N
or
Fgrav  0.0000000000667 N.
Obviously this is an extremely small force. Could you ever measure a force
to this accuracy in your laboratory? For comparison, it turns out that an
average apple (mass of about 0.1 kg) weighs (has the gravitational force on
it of) about 1 N—which is only right!
The Acceleration of Gravity g
You know from the previous chapter that all objects on Earth fall at the
same rate of acceleration, regardless of their mass. Since this rate of accel-
eration is nearly the same everywhere on Earth, it is given a special sym-
bol, g. Using Newton's law of gravitation, and the value of G, how can we
explain that g is nearly constant over the entire Earth's surface? Consider
an apple of mass m. From the previous chapter, the gravitational force on
the apple at the Earth's surface is
Fgrav  m 	 a  m 	 g.
We found in this chapter that the gravitational force is given also by 
Newton's equation
Fgrav  G 	
.
MEarth m

R2
Earth
194
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

Therefore, these two expressions must be equal to each other
G 	
 m 	 g.
Canceling the mass of the apple (m) on both sides of the last equation, we
find that g is related to the mass and radius of the Earth
G 	
 g.
This equation helps to explain why the acceleration of gravity g is nearly
the same for all objects on the Earth, regardless of their own mass: The
value of g is determined by the universal constant G, the mass of the Earth
MEarth, which is the same in each case, and the radius of the Earth, REarth,
also near enough the same in each case.
To be sure, g is not exactly the same everywhere on the Earth's surface,
because the distance to the center of the Earth and its local mass density
are slightly different at different places on the surface of the Earth. The
Earth is not a perfect, homogeneous sphere. Nevertheless, to one decimal
place, the result for g is near enough the same everywhere on the Earth.
(For example, at the top of Mount Everest the value of g is 9.7647 m/s2,
while in Toronto, Canada, it is 9.8049 m/s2.) This means that the gravita-
tional force on objects near the Earth's surface, also known as the weight,
is different for each mass; but the acceleration (g) will be about the same
for all.
Of course, the acceleration due to gravity will be different from the ac-
celeration on Earth if the attracting object is not the Earth. For instance,
on the surface of the Moon, which has a smaller radius and a smaller mass
than the Earth's, the acceleration due to gravity is only 1.6 m/s2. Thus, an
astronaut having a mass of 70 kg, would weigh 690 N on the surface of the
Earth, but only 110 N on the Moon.
The law of gravitation may also be used to "weigh the Earth," i.e., to
find its mass. This amazing calculation may be found in the Student Guide.
Revisiting the Space Shuttle
In the previous chapter (Section 3.12) we looked at the flight of the space
shuttle Endeavor as it orbited the Earth in January 1996. Data available on
the NASA Web site indicated that the shuttle flew in a nearly circular or-
bit of 288 miles average altitude above the Earth's surface with a period of
MEarth

R2
Earth
MEarth m

R2
Earth
4.9 THE VALUE OF G, AND SOME CONSEQUENCES
195

196
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY
The English physicist George Cayley
worked out the essentials of aerodynamic
theory in 1799. However, it would take
another one hundred years before aviation
technology would be ready for the flight
of a heavier-than-air machine that seemed
to defy gravitation (which it did not). For
the next century those studying aerody-
namics focused on finding the working ra-
tio between the weight of the craft and the
power required to make it fly. Wilbur and
Orville Wright, two bicycle manufactur-
ers from Dayton, Ohio, were the first to
solve this problem successfully. On De-
cember 17, 1903, Orville Wright became
the first man ever to fly an airplane, using
a 12-horsepower engine to fly a biplane
with a 40-ft 4-in wingspan.
After World War I commercial airlines
began to be formed in order to harness the
increasing number of aviation inventions.
In contrast to European government sub-
sidies, the 1920s American government
had no coherent national policy concern-
ing the production of aircraft or the op-
eration of airlines. As a result many pri-
vate American airline companies were
created during the 1920s but very few of
them lasted more than a couple of years
before going out of business. The most
successful American airline during this pe-
riod was Pan American Airlines, whose
founder Juan Trippe concentrated on
routes to Latin America.
Two central problems still remained to
be overcome, however, if air flight was go-
ing to challenge the supremacy of rail
travel, particularly in America. These
problems were safe high-altitude flying
and safe night flying. In 1930, the airplane
manufacturer Boeing responded to this
need by designing and producing the
Monomail, which was an all-metal plane
with retractable landing equipment. This
evolved into the 247 model in 1933, which
could cruise at 155 mi/hr carrying ten pas-
sengers, twice as fast as its competitors.
Airline operators and military users of
these planes, however, wanted still bigger
and faster craft. American manufacturers
had begun tinkering with various ways to
improve the piston engines: in particular,
they had been experimenting with tur-
bochargers during the previous decade.
In a turbocharger, exhaust gases from
the piston engine drive the turbine. The
turbine drives a supercharger, which acts
as an air compressor, delivering additional
air to run the engine.
The aim of the turbocharger was to
maintain power at high altitudes, by com-
pressing the air that goes into the piston
engine. The compressor would be driven
by a turbine placed in the hot engine ex-
■AVIATION TECHNOLOGY
FIGURE 4.10
Orville Wright (in prone posi-
tion) piloting Flyer, December 17, 1903. 

5425 seconds for each orbit. From these data we calculated that the shut-
tle exhibited a centripetal acceleration of
ac  9.2 m/s2
which is about 13.6% less than the gravitational acceleration g at the sur-
face of the Earth. We surmised that the centripetal acceleration on the shut-
tle was provided by the force of gravity at that altitude. From this we con-
cluded that the gravitational force appears to decrease with distance from
the Earth.
Now we can affirm this conclusion on the basis of the law of universal
gravitation. Earlier in this section we found that the acceleration of grav-
ity at the distance R from the center of a massive object M is
ag  
G
R
M
2.
This holds if the point where the calculation is measured is outside of the
object. If the centripetal acceleration experienced by the shuttle Endeavor
does indeed arise from the force of gravity at the shuttle's altitude, then the
calculated centripetal acceleration, ac  9.2 m/s2, should be close to the ac-
4.9 THE VALUE OF G, AND SOME CONSEQUENCES
197
haust whose gases carried so much power
that this system was extremely effective,
and cost free. However, regardless of this
simplicity and the cost effectiveness of this
design, the turbocharger did not attract
investors within the aviation industry,
largely because the temperatures within
the turbine were too high for the steel that
was used in its construction.
The next major improvement in air-
craft engines was the turbojet; which was
developed in Germany by Max Hahn and
Hans von Ohain and in Britain by Frank
Whittle. The main benefit of the turbojet
was that its light weight offered a favor-
able weight to power ratio. The American
company Boeing became one of the first
successfully to design and manufacture a
passenger plane powered by a turbojet.
They introduced their 707 model onto the
market in 1958, and it was so economical
that it was soon followed by the Boeing
727 that could carry 100 passengers, and
therefore rivaled the biggest piston planes
on the market. When the Boeing 747,
known as the "jumbo jet," came onto the
market in 1970, it could carry 500 pas-
sengers, and still have room for cargo,
freight, and mail.
Further Reading
T.A. Heppenheimer, Turbulent Skies: The
History of Commercial Aviation (New
York: Wiley, 1998).

celeration of gravity calculated from the law of gravitation. So we may ask
which is correct:
ac  ag
or
9.2 m/s2  
G
R
M
2 ?
In order to answer these questions, we need to substitute the values for G,
M, and R in the second equation and see if the result is 9.2 m/s2. We have
now found the value for G and for M, which is the mass of the Earth, 
M  6.0  1024 kg (to one decimal place). The radius R of the shuttle's 
orbit, which is assumed to be circular, must be measured from the center 
of the Earth (not from the surface). We found in Section 3.12 that 
R  6833 km  6.8  106 m (to one decimal place). Substituting, we have

G
R
M
2 

 
N
m
m
2 k
2
g
k
2
g

 8.8 m/s2.
The calculated result of 8.8 m/s2 is within about 4.3% of the expected ac-
celeration of 9.2 m/s2. Since we have assumed that the orbit of the shuttle
was a perfect circle, which it was not, we can be fairly certain that our re-
sult is within the limits of accuracy of this assumption. Therefore our con-
clusion that the centripetal acceleration on the shuttle is just the force of
gravity at that altitude is supported. However, we would have to repeat this
calculation again for the flights of other satellites, and perhaps even test it
for a satellite in an orbit that is as nearly circular as possible. This is how
conclusions based upon experimental evidence are often obtained.
4.10 FURTHER SUCCESSES
Newton did not stop with the fairly direct demonstrations described so far,
accessible to him at that time. In the Principia, he showed that his law of
universal gravitation could explain other complicated gravitational inter-
(6.8  1011)(6.0  1024)

(46.2  1012)
(6.8  1011 N m2/kg2)(6.0  1024 kg)

(6.8  106 m)2
198
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

actions. Among these were the tides of the sea and the peculiar drift of
comets across the sky.
The Tides
Knowledge of the tides had been vital to navigators, traders, and explorers
through the ages, including of course especially Newton's fellow country-
men, the British traders and explorers. But the cause of the tides had re-
mained a mystery despite the studies of such scientists as Galileo. By ap-
plying the law of universal gravitation, Newton was able to explain the main
features of the ocean tides. He found them to result from the attraction of
the Moon and the Sun upon the waters of the Earth. Because the Moon is
so much nearer to the Earth, its attractive force on the oceans is greater
than the Sun's force on the oceans. Each day, as the Earth rotates, two high
tides normally occur. Also, twice each month, at full Moon and at new
Moon, the Moon, Sun, and Earth are in line with each other. At these times
the tidal changes are greater than average.
Two questions about tidal phenomena demand special attention. First,
why do high tides occur on both sides of the Earth, including the side away
from the Moon? Second, why does high tide occur at a given location some
hours after the Moon is highest in the sky?
Newton knew that the gravitational attractions of the Moon and Sun act
not only on the ocean but also on the whole solid Earth. These forces ac-
celerate both the fluid water on the Earth's surface and the Earth itself.
Newton realized that the tides result from the difference in acceleration of
the Earth and its waters. The Moon's distance from the Earth's center is
about 60 Earth radii. On the side of the Earth nearer the Moon, the dis-
tance of the water from the Moon is only 59 radii. On the side of the Earth
away from the Moon, the water is 61 Earth radii from the Moon. (See Fig-
ure 4.11.) On the side nearer the Moon, the force on the water toward the
4.10 FURTHER SUCCESSES
199
59R
60R
61R
1/592
1/602
1/612
Moon
FIGURE 4.11
Relative amounts of tidal
forces (note that the Earth-Moon dis-
tance indicated in the figure is greatly
reduced owing to space limitations).

Moon is slightly greater than the force on the Earth as a whole, because
the distance R is slightly smaller. The net effect is that the water is pulled
away from the Earth. On the side of the Earth away from the Moon, the
pull on the water toward the Moon is less than that of the Earth as a whole
since its distance to the Moon is slightly greater. The net result is that 
the Earth is pulled away from the water there. A point on the ocean shore
on the Earth therefore experiences two high tides each day. In between,
there are low tides because the water is depleted at those points on the
globe between the high tides.
Perhaps you have watched the tides change at the seashore or examined
tide tables. If so, you know that high tide occurs some hours after the Moon
is highest in the sky. To understand this, even qualitatively, you must re-
member that relative to the size of the Earth the oceans are not very deep.
The ocean waters moving in from more distant parts of the oceans in re-
sponse to the Moon's attraction are slowed by friction with the ocean floors,
especially in shallow water. Thus, the time of high tide is delayed. In any
particular place, the amount of delay and the height of the tides depend
greatly upon how easily the waters can flow. No general theory can account
for all the particular details of the tides. Most local predictions in the tide
tables are based, in part, on empirical rules using the tidal patterns recorded
in the past.
Since there are tides in the seas, you may wonder if the atmosphere and
the Earth itself undergo tides. They do. The Earth is not completely rigid,
but bends somewhat, like steel. The high tide in the Earth's crust is about
30 cm high. The atmospheric tides are generally masked by other weather
changes. However, at altitudes of about 160 km, satellites have recorded
considerable rises and falls in the thin atmosphere.
Comets
From earliest history through the Middle Ages, people have interpreted
comets as omens of disaster. Halley and Newton showed them to be only
shiny, cloudy masses moving around the Sun according to Kepler's laws,
just as planets do. They found that most comets are visible only when closer
to the Sun than the distance of Jupiter. Today we know that they are com-
posed of frozen water and gases, as well as dirt—a "dirty snowball."
Several very bright comets have orbits that take them well inside the or-
bit of Mercury. Such comets pass within a few million kilometers of the
Sun. Many orbits have eccentricities near 1.0; these comets have periods
of thousands or even millions of years. Some other faint comets have pe-
riods of only 5-10 years. Occasionally comets collide with planets, as hap-
pened when the Schoemaker-Levy comet smashed into Jupiter in 1994. An
200
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

observation satellite studying Jupiter at that time, appropriately named
Galileo, recorded the spectacular effects on the outer gases of Jupiter, pro-
viding much valuable information on Jupiter's atmosphere.
Unlike the planets, all of whose orbits lie nearly in a single plane, the
planes of comet orbits tilt at all angles. Yet, like all members of the solar
system, they obey all the laws of dynamics, including Kepler's laws and the
law of universal gravitation.
Edmund Halley (1656-1742) applied Newton's concepts of celestial mo-
tion to the motion of bright comets. Among the comets he studied were
those that had been observed in 1531, 1607, and 1682. Halley found the
orbits for these comets to be very nearly the same. He suspected that all
these observations were really of one and the same comet, moving in a
closed orbit with a period of about 75 years. He predicted that the comet
would return to where people on Earth could see it in about 1757—which
it did, although Halley did not live to see it. It was a spectacular verifica-
tion of Newton's law of gravitation. Halley's comet appeared again in 1833,
1909, and in 1985-86. It is due to return to the vicinity of the Sun in 2061.
With the period of Halley's bright comet known, its dates of appearance
could be tracked back in history. Ancient Indian, Chinese, and Japanese
documents record all of the expected appearances since 240 B.C. except one.
Almost no European records of this great comet exist. This is a sad com-
ment upon the level of culture in Europe during the so-called Dark Ages.
One of the few European records is on part of the famous Bayeux tapes-
try, embroidered with 72 scenes of the Norman Conquest of England in
1066. One scene shows the comet overhead while King Harold of England
and his court cower below, taking the appearance to presage a disaster. But
4.10 FURTHER SUCCESSES
201
Comet's orbit
Mars' orbit
Earth's orbit
Mercury's orbit
Venus' orbit
FIGURE 4.12
Schematic diagram of the orbit of a comet in the
ecliptic plane. Comet orbits are tilted at all angles.

with Newtonian science explaining the paths of comets, they came to be
seen as regular members of the solar system, instead of unpredictable, fear-
ful events.
Beyond the Solar System
You have seen how Newton's laws explain motions and other physical events
on the Earth and in the solar system. Now consider a new and even broader
question: Do Newton's laws also apply at greater distances, for example,
among the stars?
Over the years following publication of the Principia, several sets of ob-
servations provided an answer to this important question. One observer was
William Herschel, a British musician turned amateur astronomer. In the
late 1700s, with the help of his sister Caroline, Herschel made a remark-
able series of observations. Using homemade, high-quality telescopes, Her-
schel hoped to measure the parallax of stars owing to the Earth's motion
around the Sun. Occasionally he noticed that one star seemed quite close
to another. Of course, this might mean only that two stars happened to lie
in the same line of sight. But Herschel suspected that some of these pairs
were actually double stars held together by their mutual gravitational 
attractions.
He continued to observe the directions and distances of one star with re-
spect to the other in such pairs. In some cases, one star moved during a few
years through a small arc of a curved path around the other. Other as-
tronomers gathered more information about these so-called double stars, far
removed from the Sun and planets. Eventually, it was clear that they do
move around each other according to Kepler's laws. Therefore, their mo-
tions also agree with Newton's law of universal gravitation. Using the same
equation as that used above for the planets, see Student Guide, astronomers
have calculated the masses of these stars. They range from about 0.1 to 50
times the Sun's mass.
Here we stop briefly to note again that the essence of science is that it is
not dogmatic, i.e., newly found facts can modify and improve a theory. The-
202
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY
FIGURE 4.13
The motion over many years of one of two
components of a binary star system. Each dot indicates
the average of observations made over an entire year.

ories become increasingly acceptable as they are found useful over a wider
and wider range of problems. No theory has stood this test better than New-
ton's theory of universal gravitation as applied to the planetary system. It took
nearly a century for physicists and astronomers to comprehend, verify, and
extend Newton's work on planetary motion. As late as the end of the nine-
teenth century, most of what had been accomplished in mechanics since 
Newton's day was but a development or application of his work.
As indicated earlier in reference to Kepler's laws of planetary motion
(Section 2.10), a scientific theory differs from a law of nature, since a theory
encompasses data and assumptions and hypotheses that can be altered and
improved or abandoned as new experimental data and new ideas become
available. A scientific theory is therefore quite different from the common
usage of the word "theory," as, for instance, in such an everyday statement
as "That's just a theory, which is merely your opinion." On the other hand,
a scientific law is a statement about nature. It can be accepted or rejected,
and sometimes expanded, but it does not contain hypotheses or assump-
tions. Examples are Kepler's laws, Newton's laws of motion, and Newton's
law of universal gravitation: Every object in the Universe attracts every other
object with a gravitational force given by Fgrav  GM1M2/R2. Newton's theory
of gravitation encompasses his law of universal gravitation, but it also en-
compasses Newton's synthesis of celestial and terrestrial phenomena, as ex-
pressed, for instance, in his Rules of Reasoning: Not only is there one uni-
versal law of gravitation, but it is an expression of the circumstance that
there is one universal physics that applies to all physical processes occur-
ring on the Earth and throughout the entire Universe. As we have seen in
this chapter, Newton's synthesis and his law of universal gravitation have
4.10 FURTHER SUCCESSES
203
FIGURE 4.14 Globular cluster M80. Glob-
ular clusters like this one contain tens of
thousands of stars held together by gravi-
tational attraction.

been confirmed many times in many different comparisons with experi-
mental evidence.
4.11
THE NATURE OF NEWTON'S WORK
Today, Newton and his system of mechanics are honored for many reasons.
The Principia formed the basis for the development of much of our physics
and technology. Also, the success of Newton's approach has made it a model
for all the physical sciences.
Throughout Newton's work, you will find his basic belief that celestial
phenomena can be explained by applying quantitative, earthly laws. New-
ton felt that his laws had real physical meaning, that they were not just
mathematical conveniences behind which unknowable laws lay hidden. The
natural physical laws governing the universe are accessible through human
reason and observation, and they can be expressed in simple mathematical
forms of the laws.
Newton combined the skills and approaches of both the experimenter
and the theoretician. He invented research equipment, such as the first re-
flecting telescope. He performed skillful experiments, especially in optics.
Yet he also applied his great mathematical and logical powers to the cre-
ation of specific, testable predictions.
Like all scientists, Newton also had another weapon: the useful concepts
developed by earlier scientists and those of his own time. Galileo and
Descartes had contributed the first steps leading to a proper idea of iner-
tia, which became Newton's first law of motion. Kepler's planetary laws
were central in Newton's consideration of planetary motions. Huygens,
Hooke, and others clarified the concepts of force and acceleration, ideas
that had been evolving for centuries.
In addition to his own experiments, Newton selected and used data from
a large number of sources. Tycho Brahe was only one of several astronomers
whose observations of the motion of the Moon he used. When Newton
could not complete his own measurements, he knew whom he could ask
or where to look.
Last, recall how completely and how fruitfully he used and expanded his
own specific contributions. A good example is his theory of universal grav-
itation. In developing it, Newton used his laws of motion and his various
mathematical inventions again and again. Yet Newton was modest about
his achievements. He once said that if he had seen further than others "it
was by standing upon the shoulders of Giants."
But, today, scientists recognize that Newton's mechanics, while im-
204
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

mensely useful still, holds true only within a well-defined region of science.
For example, the forces within each galaxy appear to be Newtonian. But
this may not be true for forces acting between one galaxy and another or
across the entire universe. In addition to gravitation between galaxies, there
appears to be an effect so far little understood but first suspected by Albert
Einstein and given the name "dark energy," that seems to overcome that
attraction and indeed to accelerate the galaxies away from one another.
At the other end of the scale are atoms and subatomic particles. During
the past century, non-Newtonian concepts had to be developed to explain
the observed motions of these particles, as will be discussed in Chapter 14.
Even within the solar system, there are several small differences between
the predictions based on Newtonian gravitation and the observations. The
most famous involves the angular motion of the axis of Mercury's orbit
around the Sun. This motion is greater than the value predicted from New-
ton's laws by about one part in 800 per century. What causes this differ-
ence? For a while, it was thought that gravitational force might not vary
inversely exactly with the square of the distance. One of the greatest tri-
umphs of Einstein's theory of general relativity over 200 years later involved
an explanation of this effect, without throwing doubt on the accuracy of
Newton's equation for the gravitational force for the cases to which they
had been generally applied.
Einstein's success suggests that any perceived difficulties with Newton-
ian gravitation should not be hastily assigned to an imperfection in the the-
ory as a whole. The law of gravitation applies with unquestionable accu-
racy to all other planetary motions. But when applied to extreme situations,
such as the behavior of a massive object like the planet Mercury moving
rapidly in the near vicinity of the Sun, some facets of the theory make it
too limited. Many studies have shown that there is no way to modify the
details of Newtonian mechanics to explain certain observations in such ex-
treme cases. Instead, these observations can be accounted for only by con-
structing new theories, such as relativity theory and quantum mechanics, based
on some very different assumptions. The predictions from these theories,
when applied to ordinary, nonextreme situations, are almost identical to
those from Newton's laws for familiar phenomena. But they are accurate
also in some extreme cases where the Newtonian predictions alone begin
to show inaccuracies. Thus, Newtonian science is linked at one end with
relativity theory, which is important for bodies with very great mass or mov-
ing at very high speeds. At the other end, Newtonian science approaches
quantum mechanics, which is important for particles of extremely small mass
and size, for example, atoms, molecules, and nuclear particles. However,
for a vast range of problems between these extremes, Newtonian theory
gives accurate results and is far simpler to use. Moreover, it is in Newton-
4.11 THE NATURE OF NEWTON'S WORK
205

ian mechanics that relativity theory and quantum mechanics historically
have their roots. (For more on Newton's impact see the Student Guide dis-
cussion for Chapter 4, "Impact and Reaction.")
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
action at a distance
law of universal gravitation
ether
Newton's synthesis
gravitation
FURTHER READING
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapters 12-14, is especially helpful on the struc-
ture and method in physical science, as is Chapter 11 on Newton's law of uni-
versal gravitation.
D.H. Levy, More Things in Heaven and Earth: Poets and Astronomers Read the Night
Sky (Wolfville, Nova Scotia: Wombat Press, 1997).
I.B. Cohen, Science and the Founding Fathers (New York: Norton, 1995.)
I. Newton, The Principia: Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, a new trans-
lation by I.B. Cohen and A. Whitman, assisted by J. Budenz (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1999).
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1.
Write a brief outline of this chapter, including the main ideas contained in each
section.
2.
State in your own words Newton's law of universal gravitation.
3.
What is Newton's equation for the magnitude of the gravitational force? Care-
fully define every symbol in this equation.
4.1 Newton and Seventeenth-Century Science
List some characteristics of society during Newton's lifetime that fostered scien-
tific progress.
4.3 Newton's Principia
1.
Explain Newton's concept of the "whole burden of philosophy," that is, the job
of the scientist.
206
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

2.
In your own words, state Newton's four rules of reasoning and give an exam-
ple of each.
3.
What do these rules have to do with the theory of universal gravitation?
4.
State, in your own words, the central idea of universal gravitation.
5.
How did Newton differ from Aristotle, who believed that the rules of motion
on Earth are different from the rules of motion in the heavens?
4.4 The Inverse-Square Law
1.
What can be proved from Kepler's law that the planets sweep out equal areas
with respect to the Sun in equal times?
2.
With what relationship can Kepler's third law, T2/R3av  constant, be combined
to prove that the gravitational attraction varies as 1/R2?
3.
What simplifying assumption was made in the derivation given in this section?
4.
Did Newton limit his own derivation by the same assumption?
5.
How did Newton reach the conclusion that one general law of universal grav-
itation must apply to all bodies moving in the solar system?
6.
If two objects are moved twice as far away from one another, by how much is
the gravitational force between them decreased? If they are moved three times
as far? By how much is the gravitational force increased if the objects are moved
together to one-fourth their original separation?
7.
While two objects are held at a fixed distance from each other, what happens
to the gravitational force if one of the two masses is doubled; if it is tripled;
and if both masses are halved?
4.5 The Law of Universal Gravitation
1.
What idea came to Newton while he was thinking about falling objects and
the Moon's acceleration?
2.
Kepler, too, believed that the Sun exerted forces on the planets. How did his
view differ from Newton's?
3.
What quantitative comparison did Newton make after (supposedly) seeing the
apple fall? What was the result?
4.
The Moon is 60 times farther from the center of the Earth than objects at the
Earth's surface. How much less is the gravitational attraction of the Earth act-
ing on the Moon than on objects at its surface? Express this value as a frac-
tion of 9.8 m/s2.
5.
The central idea of this and the next chapter is the "Newtonian synthesis."
What is a synthesis? What did Newton synthesize?
4.6 Newton's Synthesis
1.
What was the nature of Newton's synthesis?
4.7 Newton and Hypotheses
1.
If Newton could not test the gravitational attraction of every body in the Uni-
verse, how could he dare to formulate a "universal" law of gravitation?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
207

2.
What is meant by "action at a distance"?
3.
What was the popular type of explanation for "action at a distance"? Why did
Newton not use this type of explanation?
4.
What are two main types of hypotheses used in science?
5.
Newton's claim to "frame no hypotheses" seems to refer to hypotheses that
cannot be tested. Which of the following claims are not directly testable?
(a) Plants need sunlight to grow, even on other planets.
(b) This bandage is guaranteed to be free from germs unless the package is
opened.
(c) Virtual particles exist for a time that is too short for them to affect 
anything.
(d) Life exists in the distant galaxies.
(e) The Earth really does not move, since you would feel the motion if it did.
(f) Universal gravitation holds between every pair of objects in the Universe.
4.8 The Magnitude of the Gravitational Force
1.
How did Newton define the value of R in the force equation?
2.
Two large balls of equal size and mass are touching each other. The radius of
each is 1 m. In finding their mutual gravitational attraction, what is the value
of R that goes into Newton's equation?
3.
Two objects attract each other by gravitation. If the mass of each object is dou-
bled, how does the force between them change?
4.
Two people attract each other by gravitation. If the distance between them is
doubled, but their masses stay the same, how does the force between them
change?
5.
Finally, if both masses and the distance between two people are doubled, how
does the gravitational force between them change?
6.
Can a theory ever be absolutely confirmed or proved? If not, does this throw
doubt on the usefulness of a theory? Explain.
7.
According to Newton's law of action and reaction, the Earth should experi-
ence a force and accelerate toward a falling stone.
(a) How does the force on the Earth compare with the force on the stone?
(b) How does the Earth's acceleration compare with the stone's acceleration?
4.9 The Value of G, and Some Consequences
1.
Which of the quantities in the equation Fgrav  Gm1m2/R2 did Cavendish 
measure?
2.
Knowing a value for G, what other information can be used to find the accel-
eration of gravity, g?
3.
The mass of the Sun is about 1000 times the mass of Jupiter. How does the
Sun's acceleration, owing to Jupiter's attraction, compare with Jupiter's accel-
eration owing to the Sun's attraction?
4.
Two young persons you know are standing about 1 ft apart. Stating what as-
sumption you make (e.g., about their respective masses, etc.), calculate the ap-
proximate value of the attraction between them.
208
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

5.
What is the difference between a theory and a law in science? Explain with
some examples.
4.10 Further Successes
1.
How does the Moon cause the water level to rise on both sides of the Earth?
2.
Explain why at a point on the ocean shore two high tides and two low tides
are observed each day.
3.
In which of the following does the Moon produce tides?
(a) the seas;
(b) the atmosphere;
(c) the solid Earth.
4.
Why is the calculation of the Moon's motion so difficult?
5.
How are the orbits of comets different from the orbits of the planets?
6.
Do these differences affect the validity of Newton's law of universal gravita-
tion as applied to comets?
4.11 The Nature of Newton's Work
1.
How did the orbit of Mercury challenge Newton's theory?
2.
The theories of relativity and quantum mechanics contradict Newtonian
physics in some situations. Does this mean that Newtonian physics must now
be rejected? If not, why not?
3.
In what ways are relativity theory and quantum mechanics "linked" to New-
tonian physics?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1.
Write a brief outline of the steps Newton took in arriving at the law of uni-
versal gravitation. Include the data, assumptions, empirical laws, and hy-
potheses he used in constructing his theory.
2.
Think of one of the theories you have encountered so far in this book. How
did the proposer of the theory obtain it? What were the reasons for its ac-
ceptance and/or rejection?
3.
An apple is attracted to the Earth by the force of gravitation. What is the re-
action force to this action? What happens to the Earth as a result? Do we see
this reaction? Why or why not?
4.
How would you answer the following question: What keeps the Moon up?
5.
Since Newton can be regarded as the "culmination of the Scientific Revolu-
tion," how would you answer the following:
(a) What happened to Plato's problem? Was it solved?
(b) Why do we believe today in the heliocentric theory? What is the evidence
for it?
(c) Is there any fundamental difference between the timeless heavens and the
constantly changing Earth?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
209

6.
Is Newton's work only of historical interest, or is it still useful today? Explain.
7.
What are some of the major consequences of Newton's work on scientists'
views of the world?
8.
What is the relationship, if any, between physics and our culture and society?
9.
Set up a discussion or debate between a person living in the Aristotelian world
view before Newton and a person living in the Newtonian world view.
Quantitative
1.
Using the value for the Sun's mass msun  1.98  1030 kg and the mass of the
Earth from the text, find the gravitational attraction of the Sun on the Earth.
2.
How could you find the attractive force of the Sun on the Earth if you did not
know the mass of the Sun?
3.
Using the values for the mass and radius of the Earth in the text, find the ac-
celeration of gravity at the Earth's surface in meters per seconds squared. As-
sume that the Earth is a homogeneous sphere.
4.
One of Jupiter's moons, Europa, has an ocean on its surface whose surface is
frozen. Some scientists speculate that some form of life may exist below the
surface. Find from tables the radius and period of Europa's orbit around Jupiter.
From this information, find the mass of Jupiter. How does the mass of Jupiter,
the largest planet, compare with the mass of Earth?
5.
How high could an astronaut throw a ball on the Moon, if he can throw it to
the height of 30 m on Earth?
6.
(a) The gravitational force from Earth extends all the way to the Moon and
beyond. How far out into space does it extend? Does the gravitational force
ever decline to zero?
(b) Black holes are thought to contain mass that is concentrated into a space
approaching a radius of 0. What would happen to the gravitational force
if the distance R between the centers of two masses were 0? Can this ever
occur?
(c) Draw a graph of the gravitational force as a function of R; place F on the
y-axis and R on the x-axis. Let Gm1m2 remain constant.
210
4. NEWTON'S UNIFIED THEORY

5.1
Conservation of Mass
5.2
Collisions
5.3
Conservation of Momentum
5.4
Momentum and Newton's Laws of Motion
5.5
Isolated Systems
5.6
Elastic Collisions
5.7
Leibniz and the Conservation Law
5.8
Work
5.9
Work and Kinetic Energy
5.10 Potential Energy
5.11 Conservation of Mechanical Energy
5.12 Forces that Do No Work
5.1 CONSERVATION OF MASS
Newton's success in mechanics altered profoundly the way in which scien-
tists viewed the Universe. The motions of the Sun and planets could now
be considered as purely mechanical, that is, governed by the laws of me-
chanics, much like a machine. As for any machine, whether a clock or the
solar system, the motions of the parts were completely determined once
the system had been put together.
This model of the solar system is called the Newtonian world machine. As
is true of any model, certain things are left out. The mathematical equa-
tions that govern the motions of the model cover only the main properties
of the real solar system. The masses, positions, and velocities of the parts
211
Conserving
Matter and
Motion
C
H
A
P
T
E
R 55

of the system, and the gravitational forces among them, are well described.
But the Newtonian model neglects the internal structure and chemical com-
position of the planets, as well as heat, light, and electric and magnetic
forces. Nevertheless, it serves splendidly to deal with observed motions in
mechanics, and to this day is in constant use, in physics, engineering, sports,
etc. Moreover, Newton's approach to science and many of his concepts be-
came useful later in the study of those aspects he had to leave aside.
The idea of a world machine does not trace back only to Newton's work.
In his Principia Philosophiae (1644), René Descartes, the most influential
French philosopher of the seventeenth century, had written:
I do not recognize any difference between the machines that arti-
sans make and the different bodies that nature alone composes, un-
less it be that the effects of the machines depend only upon the ad-
justment of certain tubes or springs, or other instruments, that,
having necessarily some proportion with the hands of those who
make them, are always so large that their shapes and motions can
be seen, while the tubes and springs that cause the effects of natu-
ral bodies are ordinarily too small to be perceived by our senses.
212
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
FIGURE 5.1
Newtonian physics inspired
a mechanistic view of the universe as a
self-contained "clock" designed by God
to run on its own according to dis-
cernible principles and without any fur-
ther need for Divine intervention (ex-
cept, Newton thought, for occasional
"fine tuning").

Robert Boyle (1627-1691), a British scientist, is known particularly for
his studies of the properties of air. Boyle, a pious man, expressed the "mech-
anistic" viewpoint even in his religious writings. He argued that a God who
could design a universe that ran by itself, as an ideal machine would, was
more wonderful than a God who simply created several different kinds of
matter and gave each a natural tendency to behave as it does. Boyle also
thought it was insulting to God to believe that the world machine would
be so badly designed as to require any further divine adjustment once it
had been created. He suggested that an engineer's skill in designing "an
elaborate engine" is more deserving of praise if the engine never needs su-
pervision or repair. Therefore, if the "engine" of the Universe is to keep
running unattended, the amounts of matter and motion in the Universe
must remain constant over time. Today we would say that they must be
conserved.
The idea that despite ever-present, obvious change all around us the to-
tal amount of material in the Universe does not change is really very old.
It may be found, for instance, among the ancient atomists (see Prologue).
5.1 CONSERVATION OF MASS
213
FIGURE 5.2
The Ancient of Days
by William Blake (1757-1827), an
English poet and artist who had lit-
tle sympathy with the Newtonian
style of "Natural Philosophy." 

And just 24 years before Newton's birth, the English philosopher Francis
Bacon included the following among his basic principles of modern science
in Novum Organum 1620):
There is nothing more true in nature than the twin propositions
that "nothing is produced from nothing" and "nothing is reduced
to nothing" . . . the sum total of matter remains unchanged, with-
out increase or diminution.
This view agrees with everyday observation to some extent. While the form
in which matter exists may change, in much of our ordinary experience
matter appears somehow indestructible. For example, you may see a large
boulder crushed to pebbles and not feel that the amount of matter in the
Universe has diminished or increased. But what if an object is burned to
ashes or dissolved in acid? Does the amount of matter remain unchanged
even in such chemical reactions? What of large-scale changes such as the
forming of rain clouds or seasonal variations?
In order to test whether the total quantity of matter actually remains
constant, you must know how to measure that quantity. Clearly, it cannot
be measured simply by its volume. For example, you might put water in a
container, mark the water level, and then freeze the water. If you try this,
you will find that the volume of the ice is greater than the volume of the
water you started with. This is true even if you carefully seal the container
214
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
FIGURE 5.3
In some open-air chemical reactions, the
mass of objects seems to decrease, while in others it
seems to increase

so that no water can possibly come in from the outside. Similarly, suppose
you compress some gas in a closed container. The volume of the gas de-
creases even though no gas escapes from the container.
Following Newton, we regard the mass of an object as the proper mea-
sure of the amount of matter it contains. In all the examples in previous
chapters, we assumed that the mass of a given object does not change. How-
ever, a burnt match has a smaller mass than an unburnt one; an iron nail
increases in mass as it rusts. Scientists had long assumed that something
escapes from the match into the atmosphere and that something is added
from the surroundings to the iron of the nail. Therefore, nothing is really
"lost" or "created" in these changes. Not until the end of the eighteenth
century was sound experimental evidence for this assumption provided. The
French chemist Antoine Lavoisier produced this evidence.
Lavoisier (1743-1794), who is often called the "father of modern chem-
istry," closely examined chemical reactions that he caused to occur in closed
flasks (a "closed system"). He carefully weighed the flasks and their con-
tents before and after each reaction. For example, he burned iron in a closed
flask. He found that the mass of the iron oxide produced equaled the sum
of the masses of the iron and oxygen used in the reaction. With experi-
mental evidence like this at hand, he could announce with confidence in
Traité Elémentaire de Chimie (1789):
We may lay it down as an incontestable axiom that in all the oper-
ations of art and nature, nothing is created; an equal quantity of
matter exists both before and after the experiment . . . and nothing
takes place beyond changes and modifications in the combinations
of these elements. Upon this principle, the whole art of perform-
ing chemical experiments depends.
5.1 CONSERVATION OF MASS
215
FIGURE 5.4
Conservation of mass was first
demonstrated in experiments on chemical re-
actions in closed flasks.

THE FATHER OF MODERN CHEMISTRY
Antoine Laurent Lavoisier showed the de-
cisive importance of quantitative meas-
urements, confirmed the principle of con-
servation of mass in chemical reactions,
and helped develop the present system of
nomenclature for the chemical elements.
He also showed that organic processes
such as digestion and respiration are sim-
ilar to burning.
To earn money for his scientific re-
search, Lavoisier invested in a private
company which collected taxes for the
French government. Because the tax col-
lectors were allowed to keep any extra tax
which they could collect from the public
they became one of the most hated groups
in France. Lavoisier was not directly en-
gaged in tax collecting, but he had mar-
ried the daughter of an important execu-
tive of the company, and his association
with the company was one of the reasons
why Lavoisier was guillotined during the
French Revolution.
Also shown in the elegant portrait by
J.L. David is Madame Lavoisier. She as-
sisted her husband by taking data, trans-
lating scientific works from English into
French, and making illustrations. About
10 years after her husband's execution, she
married another scientist, Count Rum-
ford, who is remembered for his experi-
ments which cast doubt on the caloric the-
ory of heat.
FIGURE 5.6
Title page from Lavoisier's Traite. 
FIGURE 5.5
The Lavoisiers. 
216
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION

Lavoisier knew that if he put some material in a well-sealed bottle and
measured its mass, he could return at any later time and find the same mass.
It would not matter what had happened to the material inside the bottle.
It might change from solid to liquid or liquid to gas, change color or con-
sistency, or even undergo violent chemical reactions. At least one thing
would remain unchanged: the total mass of all the different materials in the
bottle.
In the years after Lavoisier's pioneering work, a vast number of similar
experiments were performed with ever-increasing accuracy. The result was
always the same. As far as scientists now can measure with sensitive bal-
ances (having a precision of better than 0.000001%), mass is conserved, that
is, remains constant, in chemical reactions.
To sum up, despite changes in location, shape, chemical composition,
and so forth, the mass of any closed system remains constant. This is the state-
ment of the law of conservation of mass. This law is basic to both physics and
chemistry.
5.2
COLLISIONS
Looking at moving things in the world around us easily leads to the con-
clusion that everything set in motion eventually stops. Every actual ma-
chine, left to itself, eventually runs down. It appears that the amount of
motion in the Universe must be decreasing. This suggests that the Uni-
verse, too, must be running down, though, as noted earlier, many philoso-
phers of the seventeenth century could not accept such an idea. Some def-
inition of "motion" was needed that would permit one to make the
statement that "the quantity of motion in the Universe is constant."
Is there a constant "quantity of motion" that keeps the world machine
going? To suggest an answer to this question, you can do some simple lab-
oratory experiments (Figure 5.7). Use a pair of carts with equal mass and
nearly frictionless wheels; even better are two dry-ice disks or two air-track
gliders. In a first experiment, a lump of putty is attached so that the carts
will stick together when they collide. The carts are each given a push so
that they approach each other with equal speeds and collide head-on. As
you will see when you do the experiment, both carts stop in the collision;
their motion ceases. But is there anything related to their motions that does
not change?
The answer is yes. If you add the velocity vA of one cart to the velocity
vB of the other cart, you find that the vector sum does not change. The vec-
tor sum of the velocities of these oppositely moving equally massive carts is
zero before the collision. It is also zero for the carts at rest after the collision.
5.2 COLLISIONS
217

Does this finding hold for all collisions? In other words, is there a "law
of conservation of velocity"? The example above was a very special cir-
cumstance. Carts with equal masses approach each other with equal speeds.
But suppose the mass of one of the carts is twice the mass of the other cart.
We let the carts approach each other with equal speeds and collide, as be-
fore. This time the carts do not come to rest. There is some motion re-
maining. Both objects move together in the direction of the initial veloc-
ity of the more massive object. So the vector sum of the velocities is not
conserved in all collisions. (See Figure 5.7.)
Another example of a collision will confirm this conclusion. This time
let the first cart have twice the mass of the second, but only half the ve-
locity. When the carts collide head-on and stick together, they stop. The
vector sum of the velocities is equal to zero after the collision. But it was
not equal to zero before the collision. Again, there is no conservation of ve-
locity; the total "quantity of motion" is not always the same before and af-
ter a collision.
The problem was solved by Newton. He saw that the mass played a role
in such collisions. He redefined the "quantity of motion" of a body as the
product of its mass and its velocity, mv. This being a vector, it includes
the idea of the direction of motion as well as the speed. For example, in all
218
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
After: VA + VB ≠ 0
′
′
′
′
mA
mB
VA
VB
After: VA + VB = 0
′
′
′
′
mA
mB
VA
VB
= 0
= 0
Before: VA + VB = 0
mA
mB
VA
VB
Before: VA + VB ≠ 0
mA
mB
VA
VB
FIGURE 5.7
Collision of two carts (see text).

three collisions we have mentioned above, the motion of the carts before
and after collision is described by the equation
mAvA  mBvB  mAvA  mBvB
Here mA and mB (which remain constant) represent the respective masses
of the two carts, vA and vB represent their velocities before the collision,
and vA and vB represent their velocities after the collision. Earlier, we rep-
resented initial and final velocities by vi and vf. Here they are represented
by v and v because we now need to add subscripts, such as A and B.
In words, the above equation states:
The vector sum of the quantities mass  velocity before the collision is
equal to the vector sum of the quantities mass  velocity after the colli-
sion. The vector sum of these quantities is constant, or conserved, in all
these collisions. 
The above equation is very important and useful, leading directly to a
powerful law, and of course is useful in allowing us to predict, at least qual-
itatively, the motions after collisions of the two colliding carts in the above
examples.
5.3 CONSERVATION OF MOMENTUM
The product of mass and velocity often plays an important role in me-
chanics. It therefore has been given a special name. Instead of being called
"quantity of motion," as in Newton's time, it is now called momentum. The
total momentum of a system of objects (e.g., the two carts) is the vector
sum of the momenta of all objects in the system. Consider each of the col-
lisions examined. The momentum of the system as a whole, that is, the vec-
tor sum of the individual parts, is the same before and after collision. Thus,
the results of the experiments can be summarized briefly: The momentum
of the system is conserved.
This rule (or law, or principle) follows from observations of special cases,
such as that of collisions between two carts that stuck together after col-
liding. But in fact, this law of conservation of momentum (often abbreviated
LCM) turns out to be a completely general, universal law. The momen-
after
collision
before
collision


5.3 CONSERVATION OF MOMENTUM
219

tum of any system is conserved if one condition is met: that no net force is
acting on the system—or, to put it in other words, that the system of ob-
jects can be considered closed to any effect from outside the system.
To see just what this condition means, let's examine the forces acting on
one of the carts in the earlier experiment. Each cart, on a level track, ex-
periences three main forces. There is, of course, a downward pull Fgrav
exerted by the Earth, and an equally large upward push Ftable exerted by
the table. (See Figure 5.8.) During the collision, there is also on each a
push Ffrom other cart exerted by the other cart. The first two forces evidently
cancel, since the cart is not accelerating up or down while on the tabletop.
Thus, the net force on each cart is just the force exerted on it by the other
cart as they collide. (We assume that frictional forces exerted by the table
and the air are small enough to neglect. That was the reason for using dry-
ice disks, air-track gliders, or carts with "frictionless" wheels. This as-
sumption makes it easier to discuss the law of conservation of momentum.
Later, you will see that the law holds whether friction exists or not.)
The two carts form a system of bodies, each cart being a part of the sys-
tem. The force exerted by one cart on the other cart is a force exerted by
one part of the system on another part. It is not a force on the system as a
whole. The outside forces acting on the carts (by the Earth and by the
table) exactly cancel. Thus, there is no net outside force. The system is "iso-
lated." If this condition is met, the total momentum of all parts making up
the system stays constant, it is "conserved." This is the law of conservation
of momentum for systems of bodies that are moving with linear velocity v.
The Universality of Momentum Conservation
So far, you have considered only cases in which two bodies collide directly
and stick together. The remarkable thing about the law of conservation of
momentum is how universally it applies. For example:
1.
It holds true no matter what kind of forces the bodies exert on each
other. They may be gravitational forces, electric or magnetic forces,
220
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
Ftable
Fgrav
Fother cart
FIGURE 5.8
Forces on one of the
carts during collision. 

tension in strings, compression in springs, attraction or repulsion. The
sum of the (mass  velocity) before is equal to the sum of the (mass 
velocity) of all parts after any interaction.
2.
The LCM also holds true even when there are friction forces present.
If a moving object is slowed or stopped by frictional forces, for exam-
ple, a book sliding to a stop on a tabletop, then the Earth, to which
the table is attached, will take up the initial momentum of the book.
In general, the object producing friction becomes part of the system
of bodies to which the LCM applies.
3.
It does not matter whether the bodies stick together or scrape against
each other or bounce apart. They do not even have to touch. When
two strong magnets repel or when a positively charged alpha particle
is repelled by a nucleus (which is also positive), conservation of mo-
mentum still holds in each of those systems.
4.
The law is not restricted to systems of only two
objects; there can be any number of objects in
the system. In those cases, the basic conserva-
tion equation is made more general simply by
adding a term for each object to both sides of
the equation.
5.
The size of the system is not important. The law
applies to a galaxy as well as to atoms.
6.
The angle of the collision does not matter. All of the examples so far
have involved collisions between two bodies moving along the same
straight line. They were "one-dimensional collisions." If two bodies
make a glancing collision rather than a head-on collision, each will
move off at an angle to the line of approach. The law of conservation
of momentum applies to such "two-dimensional collisions" also. (Re-
member that momentum is a vector quantity.) The law of conservation
of momentum also applies in three dimensions. The vector sum of the
momenta is still the same before and after the collision.
In the Student Guide for this chapter you will find a worked-out exam-
ple of a collision between a spaceship and a meteorite in outer space that
will help you become familiar with the law of conservation of momentum.
On p. 225, the sidebar, "A Collision in Two Dimensions," shows an anal-
ysis of a two-dimensional collision. There are also short VHS or DVD
videos of colliding bodies and exploding objects. These include collisions
and explosions in two and three dimensions. The more of them you ana-
lyze, the more convinced you will be that the law of conservation of mo-
mentum applies to any isolated system.
5.3 CONSERVATION OF MOMENTUM
221
In general symbols, for n ob-
jects, this law may be written: 
	
n
i1
(mivi)before  	
n
i1
(mivi)after, 
where 	
i represents the sum of
the quantities in parentheses.

These worked-out examples display a characteristic feature of physics:
again and again, physics problems are solved by applying the expression of
a general law to a specific situation. Both the beginning student and the vet-
eran research physicist find it helpful, but also awesome, that one can do
this. It seems strange that a few general laws enable one to solve an almost
infinite number of specific individual problems. As Einstein expressed it in
a letter to a friend:
Even though the axioms of a theory are posed by human beings,
the success of such an enterprise assumes a high degree of order in
the objective world which one is not at all authorized to expect a
priori. This is the wonder which is supported more and more with
the development of our knowledge.*
Everyday life seems so very different. There you usually cannot calcu-
late answers from general laws. Rather, you have to make quick decisions,
some based on rational analysis, others based on "intuition." But the use
of general laws to solve scientific problems becomes, with practice, quite
natural also.
222
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
FIGURE 5.9
Stroboscopic photo-
graphs of two balls colliding. A
ball enters from left top at a higher
speed than the one from the right
top. They collide near the center
of the picture and then separate at
different speeds.
* A. Einstein to M. Solvine, letter of March 30, 1952.

5.4
MOMENTUM AND NEWTON'S 
LAWS OF MOTION
Earlier in this chapter we developed the concept of momentum and the law
of conservation of momentum by considering experiments with colliding
carts. The law was an "empirical" law; that is, it was discovered (perhaps "in-
vented" or "induced" are better terms) as a generalization from experiment.
We can show, however, that the law of conservation of momentum also
follows directly from Newton's laws of motion. It takes only a little alge-
bra; that is, we can deduce the law from an established theory! Conversely,
it is also possible to derive Newton's laws from the conservation law. Which
of these is the fundamental law and which the conclusion drawn from it is
therefore a bit arbitrary. Newton's laws used to be considered the funda-
mental ones, but since about 1900 the conservation law has been assumed
to be the fundamental one.
Newton's second law expresses a relation between the net force Fnet act-
ing on a body, the mass m of the body, and its acceleration a. We wrote
this as Fnet  ma. We can also write this law in terms of change of momen-
tum of the body. Recalling that acceleration is the rate-of-change of veloc-
ity, a  v/t, we can write
Fnet  ma 
,
or
Fnet t  m v.
If the mass of the body is constant, the change in its momentum, (mv),
is the same as its mass times its change in velocity, m(v), since only the
velocity changes. Then we can write
Fnet t  (mv).
That is, the product of the net force on a body and the time interval during which
this force acts equals the change in momentum of the body. (The quantity F t
is called the "impulse.")
This statement of Newton's second law is more nearly how Newton ex-
pressed it in his Principia. Together with Newton's third law, it enables us
to derive the law of conservation of momentum for the cases we have stud-
ied. The details of the derivation are given in the Student Guide, "Deriving
Conservation of Momentum from Newton's Laws." Thus, Newton's laws
v

t
5.4 MOMENTUM AND NEWTON'S LAWS OF MOTION
223

224
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
A COLLISION IN TWO DIMENSIONS
The stroboscopic photograph shows a col-
lision between two wooden disks on a fric-
tionless horizontal table photographed
from straight above the table. The disks
are riding on tiny plastic spheres which
make their motion nearly frictionless.
Body B (marked ) is at rest before the
collision. After the collision it moves to 
the left, and Body A (marked ) moves to
the right. The mass of Body B is known
to be twice the mass of Body A: mB  2mA.
We will analyze the photograph to see
whether momentum was conserved. (Note:
The size reduction factor of the photo-
graph and the [constant] stroboscopic flash
rate are not given here. But as long as all
velocities for this test are measured in the
same units, it does not matter here what
those units are.)
In this analysis, we will measure in cen-
timeters the distance the disks moved on
the photograph. We will use the time be-
tween flashes as the unit of time. Before
the collision, Body A (coming from the
lower part of the photograph) traveled
36.7 mm in the time between flashes: vA 
36.7 speed-units. Similarly, we find that
vA  17.2 speed-units, and vB  11.0
speed units.
The total momentum before the colli-
sion is just mAvA. It is represented by an
arrow 36.7 momentum-units long, drawn
at right.
The vector diagram shows the mo-
menta mAvA and mBvB after the collision;
mAvA is represented by an arrow 17.2 mo-
mentum-units long. Since mB  2mA, the
mBvB arrow is 22.0 momentum-units long.
The dotted line represents the vector
sum of mAvA and mBvB, that is, the total
momentum after the collision. Measure-
0
5
Momentum Scale
(Arbitrary units)
′
mAVA = 17.2
′
mBVB = 22.0
mAVA = 36.7
mAVA + mBVB
10
15
20
′
′
FIGURE 5.11
Momentum diagram of the two-
dimensional collision pictured in Fig. 5.10.
FIGURE 5.10

and the law of conservation of momentum are not separate, independent
laws of nature.
In all the examples considered so far and in the derivation above, we
have considered each piece of the system to have a constant mass. But the
definition of momentum permits a change of momentum to arise from a
change of mass as well as from a change of velocity. In many cases, the mass
of the object involved is in fact changing. For example, as a rocket spews
out exhaust gases, its mass is decreasing; conversely, the mass of a train of
coal cars increases as it rolls past a hopper that drops coal into the cars.
The LCM remains valid for cases such as these, where the masses of the
objects involved are not constant, as long as no net forces act on the sys-
tem as a whole, and the momenta of all parts (including, say, that of the
rocket's exhaust, are included).
One great advantage of being able to use the LCM is that it is a law of
the kind that simply says "before  after." Thus, it applies in cases where
you do not have enough information to use Newton's laws of motion dur-
ing the whole interval between "before" and "after." For example, suppose
a cannon that is free to move fires a shell horizontally. Although it was ini-
tially at rest, the cannon is forced to move while firing the shell; it recoils.
The expanding gases in the cannon barrel push the cannon backward just
as hard as they push the shell forward. You would need a continuous record
of the magnitude of the force in order to apply Newton's second law sep-
arately to the cannon and to the shell to find their respective accelerations
during their movement away from each other. A much simpler way is to
use the LCM to calculate the recoil. The momentum of the system (can-
non plus shell) is zero initially. Therefore, by the LCM, the momentum
will also be zero after the shell is fired. If you know the masses of the shell
and the cannon, and the speed of the emerging shell after firing, you can
calculate the speed of the recoil (or the speed of the shell, if you measure
the cannon's recoil speed). Moreover, if both speeds can be measured after
5.4 MOMENTUM AND NEWTON'S LAWS OF MOTION
225
ment shows it to be 34.0 momentum-units
long. Thus, our measured values of the to-
tal momentum before and after the colli-
sion differ by 2.7 momentum-units. This
is a difference of about 7%. We can also
verify that the direction of the total is the
same before and after the collision to
within a small uncertainty.
Have we now demonstrated that mo-
mentum was conserved in the collision? Is
the 7% difference likely to be due entirely
to measurement inaccuracies? Or is there
reason to expect that the total momentum
of the two disks after the collision is re-
ally a bit less than before the collision?

the separation, then the ratio of the masses of the two objects involved can
be calculated.
5.5
ISOLATED SYSTEMS
There are important similarities between the conservation law of mass and
that of momentum. Both laws are tested by observing systems that may be
considered to be isolated from the rest of the Universe. When testing or
using the law of conservation of mass, an isolated system such as a sealed
flask is used. Matter can neither enter nor leave this system. When testing
or using the law of conservation of momentum, another kind of isolated sys-
tem, one which experiences no net force from outside the system, is used.
Consider, for example, two frictionless carts colliding on a smooth hor-
izontal table, or two hockey pucks colliding on smooth ice. The very low
friction experienced by the pucks allows us to think away the ice on which
they move, and to consider just the pucks to form a very nearly closed or
isolated system. The table under the carts and the ice under the pucks do
not have to be included since their individual effects on each of the objects
cancel. That is, each puck experiences a downward gravitational force ex-
erted by the Earth, while the ice on the Earth exerts an equally strong up-
ward push.
Even in this artificial example, the system is not entirely isolated. There
is always a little friction with the outside world. The layer of gas under the
puck and air currents, for example, provide some friction. All outside forces
are not completely balanced, and so the two carts or pucks do not form a
truly isolated system. Whenever this is unacceptable, one can expand or
extend the system so that it includes the bodies that are responsible for the
external forces. The result is a new system on which the unbalanced forces
are small enough to ignore.
For example, picture two automobiles skidding toward a collision on an
icy road. The frictional forces exerted by the road on each car may be sev-
eral hundred newtons. These forces are very small compared to the im-
mense force (thousands of newtons) exerted by each car on the other when
they collide. Thus, for many purposes, the action of the road can be ig-
nored. For such purposes, the two skidding cars before, during, and after the
collision are nearly enough an isolated system. However, if friction with the
road (or the table on which the carts move) is too great to ignore, the law
of conservation of momentum still holds, if we apply it to a larger system—
one which includes the road or table. In the case of the skidding cars or
the carts, the road or table is attached to the Earth. So the entire Earth
would have to be included in a "closed system."
226
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION

5.5 ISOLATED SYSTEMS
227
DERIVING CONSERVATION OF MOMENTUM 
FROM NEWTON'S LAWS
Suppose two bodies with masses mA and
mB exert forces on each other (by gravita-
tion or by magnetism, etc.). FAB is the
force exerted on body A by body B, and
FBA is the force exerted on body B by body
A. No other unbalanced force acts on ei-
ther body; they form an isolated system.
By Newton's third law, the forces FAB and
FBA are at every instant equal in magni-
tude and opposite in direction. Each body
acts on the other for exactly the same time
t. Newton's second law, applied to each
of the bodies, says
FAB t  (mAvA)
and
FBA t  (mBvB).
By Newton's third law,
FAB  FBA
so that
FAB t  FBA t.
Therefore,
(mAvA)  (mBvB).
Suppose that the masses mA and mB are
constant. Let vA and vB stand for the ve-
locities of the two bodies at some instant,
and let vA and vB stand for their velocities
at some later instant. Then we can write
the last equation as
mAvA  mAvA  (mBvB  mBvB).
and
mAvA  mAvA  mBvB  mBvB
A little rearrangement of terms leads to
mAvA  mBvB  mAvA  mBvB.
You will recognize this as our original 
expression of the law of conservation of
momentum.
Here we are dealing with a system con-
sisting of two bodies. This method works
equally well for a system consisting of any
number of bodies.
FAB
FBA
mA
mB
FIGURE 5.12
Collision between two rocks. 

5.6
ELASTIC COLLISIONS
In 1666, members of the recently formed Royal Society of London wit-
nessed a demonstration. Two hardwood balls of equal size were suspended
at the ends of two strings, forming two pendula. One ball was released from
rest at a certain height. It swung down and struck the other, which had
been hanging at rest.
After impact, the first ball stopped at the point of impact while the sec-
ond ball swung from this point, as far as one could easily observe, to the
same height as that from which the first ball had been released. When 
the second ball returned and struck the first, it was now the second ball
which stopped at the point of impact as the first swung up to almost the
same height from which it had started. This motion repeated itself for sev-
eral swings. (You can repeat it with a widely available desk toy.)
This demonstration aroused great interest among members of the Royal
Society. In the next few years, it also caused heated and often confusing ar-
guments. Why did the balls rise each time to nearly the same height after
each collision? Why was the motion "transferred" from one ball to the
228
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
FIGURE 5.13
Demonstration with two pendula (similar to the demon-
stration witnessed by Royal Society members in 1666)

other when they collided? Why did the first ball not bounce back from the
point of collision, or continue moving forward after the second ball moved
away from the collision point?
The LCM explains what is observed, but it would also allow quite differ-
ent results for different cases. The law says only that the momentum of ball
A just before it strikes the resting ball B is equal to the total momentum of
A and B just after collision. It does not say how A and
B share the momentum. The actual result is just one
of infinitely many different outcomes that would all
agree with conservation of momentum. For example,
suppose (though it has never been observed to hap-
pen) that ball A bounced back with ten times its initial speed. Momentum
would still be conserved if ball B went on its way at 11 times A's initial speed.
In 1668, three men reported to the Royal Society on the whole matter
of impact. The three were the mathematician John Wallis, the architect
and scientist Christopher Wren, and the physicist Christian Huygens. Wal-
lis and Wren offered partial answers for some of the features of collisions;
Huygens analyzed the problem in complete detail.
Huygens explained that in such collisions another conservation law, in ad-
dition to the law of conservation of momentum, also holds. Not only is the
vector sum of the values of (mass  velocity) conserved, but so is the or-
dinary arithmetic sum—as we would now express it—of the values of 1⁄2mv2
for the colliding spheres! In modern algebraic form, the relationship he dis-
covered can be expressed as
1⁄2mAvA
2  1⁄2mBvB
2  1⁄2mAvA2  1⁄2mBv2
B .
The quantity 1⁄2mv2—a scalar, not a vector—has come to be called kinetic
energy, from the Greek word kinetos, meaning "moving." (The origin of the
1⁄2, which does not really affect the rule here, is shown in the Student Guide
discussion for this chapter, "Doing Work on a Sled.") The equation stated
above, then, is the mathematical expression of the conservation of kinetic en-
ergy. This relationship holds for the collision of two "perfectly hard" ob-
jects similar to those observed at the Royal Society meeting. There, ball A
stopped and ball B went on at A's initial speed. This is the only result that
agrees with both conservation of momentum and conservation of kinetic en-
ergy, as you can demonstrate yourself.
But is the conservation of kinetic energy as general as the law of con-
servation of momentum? Is the total kinetic energy present conserved in
any interaction occurring in any isolated system?
It is easy to see that it is not, that it holds only in special cases such as
that observed at the Royal Society test (or on making billiard ball colli-
5.6 ELASTIC COLLISIONS
229
In general symbols, 
	
i
(1⁄2mi vi
2)  0.

sions). Consider the first example of Section 5.2. Two carts of equal mass
(and with putty between the bumping surfaces) approach each other with
equal speeds. They meet, stick together, and stop. The kinetic energy of
the system after the collision is 0, since the speeds of both carts are zero.
Before the collision the kinetic energy of the system was 1⁄2mAvA
2  1⁄2mBvB
2.
Both 1⁄2mAvA
2 and 1⁄2mBvB
2 are always positive numbers. Their sum cannot
equal zero (unless both vA and vB are zero, in which case there would be
no collision and not much of a problem). The kinetic energy of the system
is not conserved in this collision in which the bodies stick together, while
momentum is conserved. In fact, no collision in which the bodies stick to-
gether will show conservation of kinetic energy. It applies only to the col-
lision of "perfectly hard" bodies that bounce back from each other.
The law of conservation of kinetic energy, then, is not as general as the
law of conservation of momentum. If two bodies collide, the kinetic energy
may or may not be conserved, depending on the type of collision. It is con-
served if the colliding bodies do not crumple or smash or dent or stick to-
gether or heat up or change physically in some other way. Bodies that re-
bound without any such change are called perfectly elastic, whether they are
billiard balls or subatomic particles. Collisions between them are called per-
fectly elastic collisions. In perfectly elastic collisions, both momentum and ki-
netic energy are conserved.
230
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
FIGURE 5.14
Christian Huygens (1629-1695)
was a Dutch physicist and inventor. He devised
an improved telescope with which he discovered
a satellite of Saturn and saw Saturn's rings clearly.
Huygens was the first to obtain the expression 
for centripetal acceleration (v 2/R); he worked 
out a wave theory of light; and he invented a 
pendulum-controlled clock. Huygens' reputation
would undoubtedly have been greater had he 
not been overshadowed by his contemporary,
Newton. 

But most collisions are not perfectly elastic, and kinetic energy is not
conserved. Thus, the sum of the 1⁄2mv2 values after the collision is less than
that before the collision. Depending on how much kinetic energy is "lost,"
such collisions might be called "partially elastic" or "perfectly inelastic."
The loss of kinetic energy is greatest in perfectly inelastic collisions, when
the colliding bodies remain together.
Collisions between steel ball bearings, glass marbles, hardwood balls, bil-
liard balls, or some rubber balls (silicone rubber) are almost perfectly elas-
tic, if the colliding bodies are not damaged in the collision. The total ki-
netic energy after the collision might be as much as, say, 96% of this value
before the collision. Examples of perfectly elastic collisions are found only
in collisions between atoms or subatomic particles. But all is not lost—we
shall see how to deal with inelastic collisions also.
5.7
LEIBNIZ AND THE CONSERVATION LAW
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716) extended conservation ideas to
phenomena other than collisions. For example, when a stone is thrown
straight upward, its kinetic energy decreases as it rises, even without any
5.7 LEIBNIZ AND THE CONSERVATION LAW
231
FIGURE 15.15
Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz (1646-1716), a contempo-
rary of Newton, was a German
philosopher and diplomat and advi-
sor to Louis XIV of France and Pe-
ter the Great of Russia. Indepen-
dently of Newton, Leibniz invented
the method of mathematical analysis
called calculus. A long public dispute
resulted between the two great men
concerning the priority of ideas. 

collision. At the top of the trajectory, kinetic energy is zero for an instant.
Then it reappears and increases as the stone falls. Leibniz wondered
whether something applied or given to a stone at the start is somehow stored
as the stone rises, instead of being lost. His idea would mean that kinetic
energy is just one part of a more general and really conserved quantity.
It was a hint that was soon followed up, with excellent results—once
more an illustration of how science advances by successive innovators im-
proving on partial truths.
232
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
WHAT IS CONSERVED? THE DEBATE BETWEEN
DESCARTES AND LEIBNIZ
René Descartes believed that the total
quantity of motion in the Universe did 
not change. He wrote in his Principles of
Philosophy:
It is wholly rational to assume that God,
since in the creation of matter He im-
parted different motions to its parts, and
preserves all matter in the same way and
conditions in which He created it, so He
similarly preserves in it the same quan-
tity of motion.
Descartes proposed to define the quan-
tity of motion of an object as the product
of its mass and its speed. As you saw in Sec-
tion 5.3, this product is a conserved quan-
tity only if there are no outside forces.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was aware
of the error in Descartes' ideas on motion.
In a letter in 1680 he wrote:
M. Descartes' physics has a great defect;
it is that his rules of motion or laws of
nature, which are to serve as the basis,
are for the most part false. This is dem-
onstrated. And his great principle, that
the quantity of motion is conserved in
the world, is an error.
FIGURE 5.16
René Descartes (1596-1650) was
the most important French scientist of the sev-
enteenth century. In addition to his early con-
tribution to the idea of momentum conserva-
tion, he is remembered by scientists as the
inventor of coordinate systems and the graph-
ical representation of algebraic equations.
Descartes' system of philosophy, which used the
deductive structure of geometry as its model, 
is still influential. 

5.8 WORK
In everyday language, pitching, catching, and running on the baseball field
are "playing," while using a computer, harvesting in a field, or tending to
an assembly line are "working." However, in the language of physics, "work"
has been given a rather special definition, one that involves physical con-
cepts of force and displacement instead of the subjective ones of reward or
accomplishment. It is more closely related to the simple sense of effort or
labor. The work done on an object is defined as the product of the force ex-
erted on the object times the displacement of the object along the direction of the
force. (You will see in Chapter 6 one origin of this definition in connection
with the steam engine.)
When you move the hand and arm to throw a baseball, you exert a large
force on it while it moves forward for about 1 m. In doing so, you (i.e.,
your muscles) do a large amount of work, according to the above defini-
tion. By contrast, in writing or in turning the pages of a book you exert
only a small force over a short distance. This does not require much work,
as the term "work" is understood in physics.
Suppose you have to lift boxes from the floor straight upward to a table
5.8 WORK
233
FIGURE 5.17
Major League base-
ball pitcher Mike Hampton. 

at waist height. Here the language of common usage and that of physics
both agree that you are doing work. If you lift two identical boxes at once,
you do twice as much work as you do if you lift one box. If the table were
twice as high above the floor, you would do twice as much work to lift a
box to it. The work you do depends on both the magnitude of the force you
must exert on the box and the distance through which the box moves in the
direction of the force. Note that the work you do on a box does not de-
pend on how long it takes to do your job.
We can now define the work W done on an object by a force F more
precisely as the product of the magnitude F of the force and the distance
d that the object moves in the direction of F while the force is being exerted;
in symbols,
W  Fd
Note that work is a scalar quantity; it has only a magnitude but not a di-
rection. As an example, while you are lifting a box weighing 100 N upward
through 0.8 m you are applying a force of 100 N to the box. The work you
234
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
FIGURE 5.18

have done on the box to move it through the dis-
tance is 100 N  0.8 m  80 N 	 m.
From the definition of work, it follows that no
work is done if there is no displacement. No matter
how hard you push on a wall, no work is done if the
wall does not move. Also, by our definition, no work
is done if the only motion is perpendicular to the di-
rection of the force. For example, suppose you are carrying a book bag.
You must pull up against the downward pull of gravity to keep the bag at
a constant height. But as long as you are standing still you do no work on
the bag. Even if you walk along with it steadily in a horizontal line, the
only work you do is in moving it forward against the small resisting force
of the air.
5.9 WORK AND KINETIC ENERGY
Work is a useful concept in itself. The concept is most useful in under-
standing the concept of energy. There are a great many forms of energy, in
addition to kinetic energy discussed in Section 5.6. A few of them will be
discussed in this and succeeding chapters. We will define them, in the sense
of describing how they can be measured and how they can be expressed al-
gebraically. We will also discuss how energy changes from one form to an-
other. The general concept of energy is difficult to define. But to define
some particular forms of energy is easy enough. The concept of work helps
greatly in making such definitions.
The chief importance of the concept of work is that work represents an amount
of energy transformed from one form to another. For example, when you throw
a ball you do work on it. While doing so, you transform chemical energy,
which your body obtains from food and oxygen, into energy of motion of
the ball. When you lift a stone (doing work on it), you transform chemi-
cal energy into what is called gravitational potential energy (discussed in
the next section). If you release the stone, the Earth pulls it downward (does
work on it); gravitational potential energy is transformed into kinetic en-
ergy. When the stone strikes the ground, it compresses the ground below
it (does work on it), and its kinetic energy is transformed into heat and into
work done to deform the ground on which it lands. In each case, the work
is a measure of how much energy is transferred.
The form of energy called kinetic energy is the simplest to deal with.
We can use the definition of work, W  Fd, together with Newton's laws
of motion, to get an expression of this form of energy. Imagine that you
5.9 WORK AND KINETIC ENERGY
235
More generally, the definition of
mechanical work is W  Fd cos ,
where  is the angle between the
vectors F and d. So, if   90°,
cos   0, and W  0; if   0°,
cos   1, and W  Fd.

exert a constant net force F on an object of mass m. This force accelerates
the object over a distance d in the same direction as F from rest to a speed
v. Using Newton's second law of motion, we can show that
Fd  1⁄2mv2.
(The details of this derivation are given in the Student Guide, "Doing Work
on a Sled.")
Fd is the expression for the work done on the object by whatever agency
exerted the force F. The work done on the object equals the amount of en-
ergy transformed from some form into the energy of motion, the kinetic
energy, of the object. The symbol KE is often used to represent kinetic en-
ergy. By definition, then
KE  1⁄2mv2.
The expression 1⁄2mv2 relates directly to the concept of work and so pro-
vides a useful expression for the energy of motion.
The equation Fd  1⁄2mv2 was obtained by considering the case of an ob-
ject initially at rest. In other words, the object had an initial kinetic energy
of zero. The relation can be extended to hold also for an object already in
motion when the net force is applied (e.g., a bat hitting a moving ball). In
that case, the work done on the object still equals the change in its kinetic
energy from its initial to its final value
Fd  (KE).
The quantity (KE) is, by definition, equal to (1⁄2mv2)final  (1⁄2mv2)initial.
Work is defined as the product of a force and a distance. Therefore, its
units in the mks system are newtons  meters or newton-meters: A newton-
meter is given a special name. It is also called a joule (symbol J) in honor
of James Prescott Joule, the nineteenth-century physicist famous for his ex-
periments showing that heat is a form of energy (Chapter 6). The joule is
the unit of work or of energy, when force is measured in newtons and dis-
tance in meters. When force is measured in dynes and distance in centi-
meters, the unit of work or energy is dynes  centimers. A dyne-centimeter
is also given a special name: erg.
5.10 POTENTIAL ENERGY
As you saw in the previous section, doing work on an object can increase
its kinetic energy. Work also can be done on an object without increasing
its kinetic energy. For example, while you lifted that box up to the table in
236
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION

Section 5.8 at a small, constant speed, kinetic energy remains constant. But
you were doing work on the box. By doing work you are using your body's
store of chemical energy. Into what form of energy is it being transformed?
The answer, as Leibniz suggested, is that there is "energy" somehow as-
sociated with height above the Earth. This energy is now called gravita-
tional potential energy. Lifting a box or a book higher and higher increases
the gravitational potential energy associated with the lifted object. You can
see clear evidence of this effect when, say, you pick up a book from the
floor, lift it to a certain height, and then let it drop. The gravitational po-
tential energy is transformed rapidly into the kinetic energy of a fall. In
general terms, suppose a force F is used to displace an object upward a dis-
tance d, without changing its KE. Then, the increase in gravitational po-
tential energy, symbolized by (PE)grav, is
(PE)grav  Fapplied 	 d
 Fgrav 	 d.
Potential energy can be thought of as stored energy. As the book falls, its
gravitational potential energy decreases while its kinetic energy increases
correspondingly. When the book reaches its original level, all of the grav-
itational potential energy stored during the lift will have been transformed
into kinetic energy.
Many useful applications follow from this idea of potential or stored en-
ergy. For example, a steam hammer used by construction crews is driven
upward by high-pressure steam (thus gaining potential energy). When the
steam supply stops, the hammer drops, the gravitational potential energy
is converted into kinetic energy. Another example is the use of energy from
electric power plants during low-demand periods to pump water into a high
reservoir. When there is a large demand for electricity later, the water is
5.10 POTENTIAL ENERGY
237
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 5.19
Object (a book) at rest, falling, and coming to rest again.

allowed to run down and drive the electric generators, recouping the stored
energy for use.
There are forms of potential energy other than gravitational. For exam-
ple, if you stretch a rubber band or a spring, you increase its elastic poten-
tial energy. When you release the rubber band, it can deliver the stored en-
ergy to a projectile in the form of kinetic energy. Nearly all of the work
done in blowing up an elastic balloon is also stored as potential energy.
Other forms of potential energy are associated with other kinds of forces.
In an atom, the negatively charged electrons are attracted by the positively
charged nucleus. If an externally applied force pulls an electron away from
the nucleus, the electric potential energy increases. If, then, the electron is
freed of the applied forces and moves back toward the nucleus, the poten-
tial energy decreases as the electron's kinetic energy increases. Or, if two
magnets are pushed together with north poles facing, the magnetic potential
energy increases. When released, the magnets will move apart, gaining ki-
netic energy as they lose potential energy.
Where is the potential energy located in all these cases? It is easy to
think at first that it "belongs" to the body that has been moved. But with-
out the presence of the other object (the Earth, the nucleus, the other mag-
net) neither would work be needed for steady motion, nor would there be
238
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
S
N
N
S
FIGURE 5.20
Two forms of potential energy (in
an extended spring and in a pair of magnets).
FIGURE 5.21
Chemical energy (ultimately
from the Sun) is stored in rice and converted
into work by the farmer who cultivates the
crop. 

any increase in potential energy. Rather, action on the object would in-
crease only the kinetic energy of the object on which work was done. We
must conclude that the potential energy belongs not to one body, but to the
whole system of interacting bodies involved! This is evident in the fact that
the potential energy gained is available to any one or to all of these inter-
acting bodies. For example, either of the two magnets would gain all the
kinetic energy just by releasing it and holding the other in place. Or sup-
pose you could fix the book somehow to a hook in space that would hold
it fixed there. The Earth would then "fall" up toward the book, being at-
tracted to it. Eventually the Earth would gain just as much kinetic energy
at the expense of stored potential energy as the book would if it were free
to fall to the Earth.
The increase in gravitational potential energy "belongs" to the Earth-
book system, not the book alone. The work is done by an "outside" agent
(you), increasing the total energy of the Earth-book
system. When the book falls, it is responding to
forces exerted by one part of the system on another.
The total energy of the system does not change; it is
converted from PE to KE. This is discussed in more
detail in the next section.
5.11 CONSERVATION OF MECHANICAL ENERGY
In Section 5.9, you learned that the amount of work done on an object is
equal to the amount of energy transformed from one form to another. For
example, the chemical energy of muscles is transformed into the kinetic en-
ergy of a thrown ball. The work you have done while throwing the ball is
equal to the energy you have given up from your store of chemical energy.
This statement in the first sentence implies that the amount of energy in-
volved during an interaction does not change; only its form changes. This
is particularly obvious in motions where no "outside" force is applied to a
mechanical system.
While a stone falls freely, for example, the gravitational potential energy
of the stone-Earth system is continually transformed into kinetic energy.
Neglecting air friction, the decrease in gravitational potential energy is, for
any portion of the path, equal to the increase in kinetic energy. Consider a
stone thrown upward, which we will call the positive direction. Between
any two points in its path, the increase in gravitational potential energy
equals the decrease in kinetic energy. Consider a stone rising upward after
being thrown in the upward direction. After it leaves your hand, the only
5.11 CONSERVATION OF MECHANICAL ENERGY
239
In fact, during the fall of the
book, as initially postulated, the
Earth would be moving a little
toward the falling book. Why
don't we observe this?

force applied is Fgrav (neglect external forces such as friction). The gravita-
tional force is pointing downward in the negative direction. The work done
by this force (with d positive for upward displacements) is
Fgrav d  (PE)grav
 KE.
In words, these equations state that the work done by gravity as the stone
rises against it results in an increase in potential energy but a decrease in
kinetic energy—the stone slows down. This relationship can be rewritten as
(KE)  (PE)grav  0,
or, still more concisely, as
(KE  PEgrav)  0.
If (KE  PEgrav) represents the total mechanical energy of the system (con-
sisting here of the stone and the Earth), then the change in the system's to-
tal mechanical energy is zero, provided there is no outside work added to the
system (e.g., a strong wind acting on the stone). In other words, when outside
work is zero, the total mechanical energy of a system, (KE  PEgrav), re-
mains constant; it is conserved.
A similar statement can be made for a vibrating guitar string. While the
string is being pulled away from its unstretched position, the string-guitar
system gains elastic potential energy. When the
string is released, the elastic potential energy de-
creases while the kinetic energy of the string in-
creases. The string coasts through its unstretched
position and becomes stretched in the other direc-
tion. Its kinetic energy then decreases as the elastic
potential energy increases. As it vibrates, there is a
repeated transformation of elastic potential energy
into kinetic energy and back again. The string loses some mechanical en-
ergy; for example, sound waves radiate away. Otherwise, the decrease in
elastic potential energy over any part of the string's motion would be ac-
companied by an equal increase in kinetic energy, and vice versa:
(PE)elastic  (KE),
240
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
The equations in this section are
valid only if friction is negligi-
ble. We shall extend the range
later to include friction, which
can cause the conversion of me-
chanical energy into heat energy.

or
(PE)elastic  (KE).
In such an ideal case, the total mechanical energy (KE  PEelastic) remains
constant; it is conserved.
Galileo's experiment with the pendulum (Section 3.1) can also be de-
scribed in these terms. The gravitational potential energy is determined by
the height to which the pendulum was originally pulled. That potential en-
ergy is converted to kinetic energy at the bottom of the swing and back to
potential energy at the other side. Since the pendulum retains its initial en-
ergy, it will stop temporarily (KE  0, PE  max) only when it returns to
its initial height.
Adding Work
You have seen that the potential energy of a system can be transformed
into the kinetic energy of some part of the system, and vice versa. Suppose
that an amount of work W is done on part of the system by some external
force. Then the energy of the system is increased by an amount equal to
W. Consider, for example, a suitcase-Earth system. You must do work on
the suitcase to pull it away from the Earth up to the second floor. This
work increases the total mechanical energy of the Earth-suitcase system. If
5.11 CONSERVATION OF MECHANICAL ENERGY
241
FIGURE 5.22

you yourself are included in the system, then your internal chemical en-
ergy decreases in proportion to the work you do. Therefore, the total
energy of the lifter  suitcase  Earth system does not change, though of
course the energy is redistributed among the parts of the system.
Relationship to Newton's Laws of Motion
The law of conservation of energy can be derived from Newton's laws of
motion (although Newton himself did not do this). Therefore, it tells noth-
ing that could not, in principle, be computed directly from Newton's laws
of motion. However, there are situations where there is simply not enough
information about the forces involved to apply Newton's laws, or where it
would be inconvenient to try to measure them. It is in these cases that 
the law of conservation of mechanical energy demonstrates its maximum
usefulness.
A perfectly elastic collision is a good example of a situation where we
often cannot simply apply Newton's laws of motion. For such collisions,
we cannot easily measure the force that one object exerts on the other. We
do know that during the actual collision among perfectly elastic bodies, the
objects distort one another. The distortions are produced against elastic
forces. Thus, some of the combined kinetic energy of the objects is trans-
formed into elastic potential energy as they distort one another. Then elas-
tic potential energy is transformed back into kinetic energy as the objects
separate. In an ideal case, both the objects and their surroundings are ex-
actly the same after colliding as they were before.
However, the law of conservation of mechanical energy involves only the
total energy of the objects before and after the collision. It does not try to
give the kinetic energy of each object separately. So it is incomplete knowl-
edge, but useful nevertheless. You may recall that the law of conservation
of momentum also supplies incomplete but useful knowledge. It can be
used to find the total momentum of elastic objects in collision, but not the
individual momentum vectors. In Section 5.6 you saw how conservation of
momentum and conservation of mechanical energy together limit the pos-
sible outcomes of perfectly elastic collisions. (As often in physics, two or
242
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
Work = PE
Energy = 0
Start
PE
PE
KE
FIGURE 5.23
Work, kinetic,
and potential energy in a swing-
ing pendulum.

more laws together show the limits of what science can say about phe-
nomena.) For two colliding objects, these two restrictions are enough to
give an exact solution for the two velocities after collision. For more com-
plicated systems, conservation of energy remains important. Scientists usu-
ally are not interested in the detailed motion of every part of a complex
system. They are not likely to care, for example, about the motion of every
molecule in a rocket exhaust. Rather, they may want to know only about
the exhaust's overall thrust and temperature. These can be found from the
overall conservation laws.
5.12 FORCES THAT DO NO WORK
In Section 5.8, the work done on an object was defined as the product of
the magnitude of the force F applied to the object and the magnitude of the
distance d in the direction of F through which the object moves while 
the force is being applied. In all the examples so far, the object moved in
the same direction as that of the force vector.
Usually, the direction of motion and the direction of the force are not
the same. Let us revisit the example we briefly mentioned before (end of
Section 5.8). Suppose you carry a book bag at constant speed horizontally,
so that its kinetic energy does not change. Since there is no change in the
book bag's energy, you are doing no work on it (by the definition of work).
You do apply a force on the book bag, and the bag does move through a
distance. But here the applied force and the distance the bag moves are at
right angles. You exert a vertical force on the bag upward to balance its
weight. But it moves horizontally, with you. Here, an applied force F is ex-
5.12 FORCES THAT DO NO WORK
243
FIGURE 5.24
During its contact
with a golf club, a golf ball is dis-
torted. As the ball moves away from
the club, and while the ball recov-
ers its normal spherical shape, its
elastic potential energy is trans-
formed into (additional) kinetic en-
ergy. 

erted on an object while the object moves at right angles to the direction
of the force. Therefore, F has no component in the direction of d and so
the force does no work. This statement agrees entirely with the idea of work
in physics as energy being transformed from one form to another. Since the book
bag's speed is constant, its kinetic energy is constant. Since its distance from
the Earth is constant, its gravitational potential energy is constant. There-
fore, there is no transfer of mechanical energy. (Nevertheless, your arm
does tire as you carry the book bag horizontally. The reason for this is that
muscles are not rigid. They are constantly relaxing and tightening up again.
This requires chemical energy, even though no work is done on the bag.)
A similar reasoning, but not so obvious, applies to a satellite in a circu-
lar orbit. The speed and the distance from the Earth are both constant.
Therefore, the kinetic energy and the gravitational potential energy are
both constant, and there is no energy transformation. For a circular orbit,
the centripetal force vector is perpendicular to the tangential direction of
motion at any instant. No work is being done on the satellite. But to put
an artificial satellite into a circular orbit to start with requires work. Once
it is in orbit, however, the KE and PE stay constant, and no further work
is done on the satellite.
However, if the satellite's orbit is eccentric, the force vector is generally
not perpendicular to the direction of motion. In such cases, energy is con-
tinually transformed between kinetic and gravitational potential forms. The
total energy of the system (satellite and Earth) remains of course constant.
Situations where the net force is exactly perpendicular to the motion are
as rare as situations where the force and motion are in exactly the same di-
rection. What about the more usual case, involving some angle between
the force and the motion?
244
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION
FIGURE 5.25
A balanced rock (Mo-
jave Desert): potential energy wait-
ing to be converted. 

In general, the work done on an object depends on how far the body
moves in the direction of the force. As stated before, the equation W  Fd
properly defines work only if d is the distance the body moves in the di-
rection of the force. The gravitational force is directed down. So only the
distance down determines the amount of work done by Fgrav. Change in
gravitational potential energy depends only on change in height, at least
near the Earth's surface. For example, consider raising a suitcase from the
first floor to the second floor of a building. The same increase in PEgrav of
the suitcase-Earth system occurs regardless of the path by which the suit-
case is raised. Also, each path requires the same amount of work.
More generally, change in PEgrav depends only on change of position.
The details of the path followed in making the change make no difference
at all. The same is true for changes in elastic potential energy, electric po-
tential energy, etc. The changes depend only on the initial and final posi-
tions, and not on the path taken between these positions.
An interesting conclusion follows from the fact that change in PEgrav de-
pends only on change in height. For example, consider a child on a slide.
Starting from the top position, the gravitational potential energy decreases
as his/her altitude decreases. If frictional forces are vanishingly small, all
the work the Earth's pull does on him/her goes into transforming PEgrav
into KE. Therefore, the increases in KE depend only on the decreases in
altitude. In other words, the child's speed when he/she reaches the ground
will be the same (absent friction) whether he/she slides down or jumps off
the top.
A similar principle holds for satellites in orbit and for electrons in TV
tubes. In the absence of losses to parts outside the system, the change in
kinetic energy depends only on the initial and final positions, and not on
5.12 FORCES THAT DO NO WORK
245
FIGURE 5.26
The change in kinetic energy de-
pends only on the initial and final positions, and
not on the path taken between them.

the path taken between them. This principle gives great simplicity to the
use of physical laws, as you will see when you study gravitational and elec-
tric fields in Chapter 10.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
conservation law
law of conservation of 
elastic collision
momentum (LCM)
isolated system
mechanical energy
joule
momentum
kinetic energy
Newtonian world machine
law of conservation of kinetic energy
potential energy
law of conservation of mass
system
law of conservation of mechanical energy
work
FURTHER READING
F.L. Holmes, Lavoisier and the Chemistry of Life (Madison: University of Wiscon-
sin Press, 1989).
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapters 15-18.
R.S. Westfall, The Construction of Modern Science: Mechanisms and Mechanics (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
5.1 Conservation of Mass
1.
Why did scientists look for conservation laws?
2.
True or false: Mass is conserved in a closed system only if there is no chemi-
cal reaction in the system.
3.
If 50 cm3 of alcohol is mixed with 50 cm3 of water, the mixture amounts to
only 98 cm3. An instrument pack weighs much less on the Moon than on Earth.
Are these examples of contradictions to the law of conservation of mass?
4.
Which one of the following statements is true?
(a) Lavoisier was the first person to believe that the amount of material in the
Universe does not change.
(b) Mass is measurably increased when heat enters a system.
(c) A closed system was used to establish the law of conservation of mass 
experimentally.
246
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION

5.
Five grams (5 g) of a red fluid at 12°C having a volume of 4 ml are mixed in
a closed bottle with 10 g of a blue fluid at 5°C having a volume of 8 ml. On
the basis of this information only, what can you be sure of about the resulting
mixture?
5.2 Collisions
1.
Descartes defined the quantity of motion of an object as the product of its mass
and its speed. Is his quantity of motion conserved as he believed it was? If not,
how would you modify his definition so the quantity of motion would be con-
served?
2.
Two carts collide head-on and stick together. In which of the following cases
will the carts be at rest immediately after the collision?
Cart A
Cart B
Mass
Speed before
Mass
Speed before
(kg)
(m/s)
(kg)
(m/s)
(a)
2
3
2
3
(b)
2
2
3
3
(c)
2
3
3
2
(d)
2
3
1
6
5.3 Conservation of Momentum
1.
State the law of conservation of momentum in terms of
(a) a change in the total momentum of a system;
(b) the total initial momentum and final momentum;
(c) the individual parts of a system.
2.
Under what condition is the law of conservation of momentum valid?
3.
Which of the following has the least momentum? Which has the greatest 
momentum?
(a) a pitched baseball;
(b) a jet plane in flight;
(c) a jet plane taxiing toward the terminal.
4.
A girl on ice skates is at rest on a horizontal sheet of smooth ice. As a result
of catching a rubber ball moving horizontally toward her, she moves at 2 cm/s.
Give a rough estimate of what her speed would have been:
(a) if the rubber ball were thrown twice as fast;
(b) if the rubber ball had twice the mass;
(c) if the girl had twice the mass;
(d) if the rubber ball were not caught by the girl, but bounced off and went
straight back with no change of speed.
5.
A boy and a girl are on ice skates at rest near each other. The boy throws a
ball to the girl in a straight line. Does he move? If so, in what way and why?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
247

After she catches the ball, she throws it back to him in a high arc. Does she
move? If so, in what way and why?
5.4 Momentum and Newton's Laws of Motion
1.
Since the law of conservation of momentum can be derived from Newton's
laws, what good is it?
2.
Explain why a cannon shooting a cannon ball must experience a recoil.
3.
What force is required to change the momentum of an object by 50 kg m/s in
15 s?
5.5 Isolated Systems
1.
Define what is meant by a "closed" or "isolated" system for the purpose of the
law of conservation of mass; for the purpose of the law of conservation of mo-
mentum.
2.
Explain whether or not each of the following can be considered an isolated
system:
(a) a baseball thrown horizontally, after it leaves the thrower's hand;
(b) a space shuttle orbiting the Earth;
(c) the Earth and the Moon.
3.
Three balls in a closed system have the following masses and velocities:
ball A: 4 kg, 8 m/s left;
ball B: 10 kg, 3 m/s up;
ball C: 8 kg, 4 m/s right.
Using the principles of mass and momentum conservation, what can you dis-
cover about the final condition of the system after the balls have come to rest
in the system? What cannot be discovered?
5.6 Elastic Collisions
1.
Which phrases correctly complete the statement? Kinetic energy is conserved:
(a) in all collisions;
(b) whenever momentum is conserved;
(c) in some collisions;
(d) when the colliding objects are not too hard.
2.
Under what condition does the law of conservation of kinetic energy hold?
3.
Explain why the conservation laws of kinetic energy and momentum are both
sometimes needed to describe the outcome of a collision of two bodies.
4.
Is the law of conservation of kinetic energy as general as the law of conserva-
tion of momentum? Explain.
5.
Kinetic energy is never negative because:
(a) scalar quantities are always positive;
(b) it is impossible to draw vectors with negative length;
(c) speed is always greater than zero;
(d) kinetic energy is proportional to the square of the speed.
248
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION

5.7 Leibniz and the Conservation Law
1.
How would Leibniz have explained the apparent disappearance of the quan-
tity 1⁄2mv2 in the following situations?
(a) during the upward motion of a thrown object;
(b) when the object strikes the ground.
2.
Give an example of a situation in which momentum is conserved but kinetic
energy is not conserved.
5.8 Work
1.
If a force of magnitude F is exerted on an object while the object moves a dis-
tance d in the direction of the force, the work done on the object is:
(a) F;
(b) Fd;
(c) F/d;
(d) 1⁄2Fd2.
2.
Give two examples of situations in which a force is exerted on an object but
no work is done.
5.9 Work and Kinetic Energy
1.
The kinetic energy of a body of mass m moving at a speed v is given by the
expression:
(a) 1⁄2mv;
(b) 1⁄2mv2;
(c) mv2;
(d) 2mv2;
(e) m2v2.
2.
What is the general relationship between work and energy?
3.
You lift a book from the floor and put it on a shelf.
(a) What happens to the work that you put into lifting the book?
(b) Can the work ever be turned into kinetic energy? Explain how.
5.10 Potential Energy
1.
Name some forms of potential energy. Describe a situation for each of these
in which the potential energy would be greater than zero.
2.
A stone of mass m falls a vertical distance d, pulled by its weight Fgrav  mg,
where g is the acceleration of gravity. The decrease in gravitational potential
energy during the fall is:
(a) md;
(b) mg;
(c) mgd;
(d) 1⁄2md2;
(e) d.
3.
When you compress a coil spring, you do work on it. The elastic potential 
energy:
(a) disappears;
(b) breaks the spring;
(c) increases;
(d) decreases.
4.
Two electrically charged objects repel one another. To increase the electric po-
tential energy, you must:
(a) make the objects move faster;
(b) move one object in a circle around the other object;
(c) attach a rubber band to the objects;
(d) pull the objects farther apart;
(e) push the objects closer together.
5.
A pendulum bob is swinging back and forth. Where is the kinetic energy of
the bob the greatest? Where is it the least?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
249

5.11 Conservation of Mechanical Energy
1.
As a stone falls frictionlessly:
(a) its kinetic energy is conserved;
(b) its gravitational potential energy is conserved;
(c) its kinetic energy changes into gravitational potential energy;
(d) no work is done on the stone;
(e) there is no change in the total energy.
2.
In which position is the elastic potential energy of a vibrating guitar string
greatest? In which position is its kinetic energy greatest?
3.
If a guitarist gives the same amount of elastic potential energy to a bass string
and to a treble string, which one will gain more speed when released? (The
mass of 1 m of bass string is greater than that of 1 m of treble string.)
4.
Describe the changes in kinetic energy and potential for the system of the two
colliding pendula observed at the Royal Society, as described in Section 5.6.
5.12 Forces That Do No Work
1.
How much work is done on a satellite during each revolution if its mass is m,
its period is T, its speed is v, and its orbit is a circle of radius R?
2.
Two skiers were together at the top of a hill above a ski jump. While one skier
skied down the slope and went off the jump, the other had a change of mind
and rode the ski lift back down. Compare their changes in gravitational po-
tential energy.
3.
A third skier went directly down a straight slope next to the ski jump. How
would this skier's speed at the bottom compare with that of the skier who went
off the jump?
4.
No work is done (select one):
(a) on a heavy box when it is pushed at constant speed along a rough hori-
zontal floor;
(b) on a nail when it is hammered into a board;
(c) when there is no component of force parallel to the direction of motion;
(d) when there is no component of force perpendicular to the direction of 
motion.
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1.
In the examples in this chapter we carefully neglected the effects of friction
and air resistance. How would friction and air resistance affect the mechani-
cal energy of a pendulum or a flying baseball? How would they affect the con-
servation of momentum?
2.
A child is swinging on a swing. She asks you to push her higher.
(a) Using the concepts in this chapter, explain why pushing her makes her go
higher.
(b) What is the best part of the swing to exert a push? Why?
250
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION

3.
Using the laws of conservation of momentum and energy, explain why cyclists
should wear helmets and football players should wear padding.
4.
Discuss the conversion between kinetic and potential forms of energy in the
system of a planet orbiting the Sun.
5.
Furniture movers are paid for their work in moving furniture. In which of the
following cases is work, as defined in physics, not done by them or the truck
on the furniture?
(a) A piano is carried downstairs.
(b) The piano is lifted onto a truck.
(c) The truck accelerates to 50 mi/hr in 30 s.
(d) The truck hits an ice patch and skids at constant speed for 2 s.
(e) The truck hits an obstacle and comes to rest.
6.
(a) Why can ocean liners or airplanes not turn corners sharply?
(b) In the light of your knowledge of the relationship between momentum and
force, comment on reports about so-called unidentified flying objects
(UFOs) turning sharp corners in full flight.
7.
The philosopher John Locke (1632-1704) proposed a science of human na-
ture that was strongly influenced by Newton's physics. In Locke's atomistic
view, elementary ideas ("atoms") are produced by elementary sensory experi-
ences and then drift, collide, and interact in the mind. Thus, the formation of
ideas was only a special case of the universal interactions of particles.
Does such an approach to the subject of human nature seem reasonable to
you? What argument for and against this sort of theory can you think of?
Quantitative
1.
A person who lifts a 10-N book a distance d of 0.8 m straight up does 8 J of
work. How much work would the person do if the book is lifted up 1.6 m?
2.
The kinetic energy of a ball on a tabletop increases from 10 J to 20 J. How
much work is done on it?
3.
One joule (1 J) of work is put into lifting a pendulum bob from the zero-
energy position. After it is let go, the kinetic energy at one point was found to
be 0.25 J. What is the potential energy at that point?
4.
A freight car of mass 105 kg travels at 2.0 m/s and collides with a motionless
freight car of mass 1.5  105 kg on a horizontal track. The two cars lock and
roll together after impact.
(a) Using the law of conservation of momentum, find the velocity of the two
cars after collision.
(b) Using the result from (a), find the total kinetic energy of the two cars af-
ter the collision, and compare it with the total kinetic energy before the
collision. Is this an example of an elastic collision?
(c) Which quantities are conserved in this collision, and which are not?
5.
A 1-kg billiard ball moving on a pool table at 0.8 m/s collides head-on with
the cushion along the side of the table. The collision can here be regarded as
perfectly elastic. What is the momentum of the ball:
(a) before impact?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
251

(b) after impact?
(c) What is the change in momentum of the ball?
(d) Is the momentum of the ball conserved?
(e) Is the kinetic energy of the ball conserved?
(f) If the duration of the collision is 0.01 s, what average force does the cush-
ion experience?
6.
A system consists of three elastic bodies with masses of 4 g, 6 g, and 8 g. They
are squeezed together at rest at a single point and then released. They fly away
from each other under the influence of the elastic forces, which are assumed
equal for each. The 4-g body is moving with a velocity of 20 cm/s north, and
the 6-g body is moving at 3 cm/s east. What is the velocity of the 8-g body?
7.
Calculate the kinetic energy of a car and driver traveling at 100 km/hr (about
60 mi/hr). The mass of the car and driver is about 1000 kg. How did they ob-
tain this kinetic energy? Where does it go when the driver puts on the brakes
and comes to a stop? Where does it go if the car collides with another?
252
5. CONSERVING MATTER AND MOTION

6.1 Heat as a Form of Energy
6.2 The Steam Engine and the Industrial Revolution
6.3 Power and Efficiency of Engines
6.4 Carnot and the Beginnings of Thermodynamics
6.5 Arriving at a General Conservation Law
6.6 The Two Laws of Thermodynamics
6.7 Faith in the Laws of Thermodynamics
6.1 HEAT AS A FORM OF ENERGY
Consider a book sent sliding across a tabletop. If the surface is rough, it
will exert a fairly large frictional force on the book, and the book will soon
come to a stop as its kinetic energy rapidly disappears. No corresponding
increase in potential energy will occur, since there is no change in height.
It appears that, in this example, mechanical energy is not conserved.
However, close examination of the book and the tabletop would show
that they are slightly warmer than before. The disappearance of kinetic en-
ergy of the book is accompanied by the appearance of heat. This suggests,
though by no means proves, that the kinetic energy of the book was trans-
formed into heat. If so, heat must be one form of energy. This section deals
with how the idea of heat as a form of energy gained acceptance. You will
see how theory was aided by practical knowledge of the relationship be-
tween heat and work.
Until about the middle of the nineteenth century, heat was generally
thought to be some kind of fluid, called caloric fluid. No heat is lost or
gained overall when hot and cold bodies are mixed; for example, mixing
equal amounts of boiling water (100°C) and nearly freezing water (0°C)
produces water at just about 50°C. One could therefore conclude that the
253
The Dynamics 
of Heat
C
H
A
P
T
E
R 66

caloric fluid is conserved in that kind of experiment. Some substances, like
wood or coal, seemed to have locked up the caloric fluid, which is then re-
leased during combustion.
Although the idea that the heat content of a substance is represented by
a quantity of conserved fluid was an apparently useful one, it does not ad-
equately explain some phenomena involving heat. Friction, for example,
was known to produce heat (e.g., just rub your hands together rapidly). But
it was difficult to understand how the conservation of caloric fluid applied
to friction.
In the late eighteenth century, while boring cannon for the Elector of
Bavaria, Benjamin Thompson (Count Rumford) observed that a great deal
of heat was generated. Some of the cannon shavings—provided by the work
done on the metal by a drill—were hot enough to glow. Rumford made
some careful measurements by immersing the cannon in water and mea-
suring the rate at which the temperature rose. His results showed that so
much heat evolved that the cannon would have melted had it not been
cooled. From many such experiments, Rumford concluded that heat is not
254
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
FIGURE 6.1
Benjamin Thompson
was born in Woburn, Massachusetts,
in 1753. After several years as a shop-
keeper's apprentice, he married a rich
widow and moved to Concord (then
called Rumford). During the Revo-
lution, Thompson was a Tory; he left
with the British army for England
when Boston was taken by the rebels.
In 1783, Thompson left England and
ultimately settled in Bavaria, where
he designed fortifications and built
munitions and served as an adminis-
trator. The King of Bavaria was suf-
ficiently impressed to make him a
Count in 1790, and Thompson took
the name Rumford. In 1799, he re-
turned to England and continued 
to work on scientific experiments.
Rumford was one of the founders of
the Royal Institution. In 1804 he
married Lavoisier's widow; the mar-
riage was an unhappy one, and they
soon separated. Rumford died in
France in 1814, leaving his estate to
institutions in the United States. 

a conserved fluid but is generated when work is done, and it continues to
appear without limit as long as work is done. His estimate of the ratio of
heat produced to work performed was within an order of magnitude
("power of ten") of the presently accepted value.
Rumford's experiments and similar work by Humphry Davy at the Royal
Institution in London did not convince many scientists at the time. The
reason may have been that Rumford could give no clear suggestion of just
what heat is, at least not in terms that were compatible with the accepted
models for matter at that time.
Nearly a half-century later, James Prescott Joule repeated on a smaller
scale some of Rumford's experiments. Starting in the 1840s and continu-
ing for many years, Joule refined and elaborated his apparatus and his tech-
niques. In all cases, the more careful he was, the more exact was the pro-
portionality of the quantity of heat, as measured by a change in temperature,
and the amount of work done. Here, Joule, like others, made the assump-
tion that the quantity of heat produced, say, in water, symbolized by Q
(Q is the usual symbol for heat), is equal to the mass of the water times the
change of its temperature, T:
Q  m T.
Today, we know that the amount of heat corresponding to a given tem-
perature change is different for different substances being heated. In order
to take this into account, the constant c, called the specific heat, is introduced
into the above equation. In the metric system of units, the specific heat c
is the amount of heat, measured in the units of calories, required to raise
1 g of the substance by 1°C under standard conditions (i.e., at prescribed
temperature and pressure) and without any loss of heat to the surround-
ings. So the relationship between heat and temperature may be written
Q  m c T.
In order to define a calorie of heat, the specific heat of water under stan-
dard conditions is defined as c  1 cal/g°C. In other words, 1 cal is defined
as the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 g of water by
1°C under standard conditions. So, in these units, and with water as the
material being heated, we have
Q  m T.
For one of his early experiments on the relationship between heat and
work, Joule constructed a simple electric generator, which was driven by a
falling weight. The electric current that was generated heated a wire. The
6.1 HEAT AS A FORM OF ENERGY
255

wire was immersed in a container of water, which it heated. From the dis-
tance that the weight descended Joule calculated the work done (the de-
crease in gravitational potential energy). The product of the mass of the
water and its temperature rise allowed him to calculate the amount of heat
produced. In another experiment, Joule compressed gas in a bottle im-
mersed in water, measuring the amount of work done to compress the gas.
He then measured the amount of heat given to the water as the gas grew
hotter on compression.
Joule's most famous experiments involved an apparatus in which slowly
descending weights turned a paddle wheel in a container of water. Owing
to the friction between the wheel and the liquid, the wheel performed work
on the liquid, raising its temperature.
All these experiments, some repeated many times with improved appa-
ratus, led Joule to announce two very important, quantitative results in
1849. As expressed in modern terms and units, they are as follows:
•
The quantity of heat produced by the friction of bodies, whether solid
or liquid, is always proportional to the quantity of energy expended.
•
The quantity of heat (in calories) capable of increasing the temperature
of 1 kg of water by 1°C requires for its evolution the change of me-
256
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
FIGURE 6.2
James Prescott Joule
(1818-1889). Joule was the son of
a wealthy Manchester brewer. His
arduous experiments were initially
motivated by the desire to develop
more efficient engines for the fam-
ily brewery. 

chanical energy represented by the fall of a weight of 4180 N through
the distance of 1 m.
Joule's first statement in the above quote is the evidence that heat is a
form of energy, contrary to the caloric theory that heat is a fluid. The sec-
ond statement gives the numerical magnitude of the ratio he had found of
mechanical energy to the equivalent heat energy. The ratio of the me-
chanical energy, E, to the equivalent amount of heat energy, Q, is gener-
ally called the mechanical equivalent of heat. Its value, by the most recent
measurements, is 4.18  103 joules/Calorie in the mks system of units,
where Calorie (with a capital C) is 1000 calories (often abbreviated "kcal").
In the cgs system of units, the mechanical equivalent of heat is 4.18 
105 erg/calorie. (See the insert for review.)
By the time Joule performed his famous experiments, the idea that heat
is a form of energy was slowly gaining acceptance. Joule's experiments
served as a strong argument in favor of that idea.
6.1 HEAT AS A FORM OF ENERGY
257
UNITS
A reminder: In the metric system used to-
day in most countries, quantities are mea-
sured using either grams, centimeters, and
seconds (cgs units) or kilograms, meters,
and seconds (mks units). (See the discus-
sion in the Student Guide.) You saw in
Chapter 5 that mechanical energy in mks
units is expressed as joules (J) and in cgs
units as ergs:
1 J  1 kg m2/s2  1 N 	 m (newton-meter),
1 erg  1 g cm2/s2  1 D 	 cm (dyne-centimeter).
As indicated on page 255, heat energy in
cgs units is expressed as calories (abbrevi-
ated as cal), while in mks units heat en-
ergy is expressed in kilocalories (1000
calories), which is often written either as
kcal or with an uppercase initial C, Calo-
rie. (The Calorie, abbreviated as Cal, is
also the measure used to express the en-
ergy content in food.) These units are
summarized in the table below, along with
the modern values for the mechanical
equivalent of heat.
Units
Mechanical energy
Heat energy
J  W/Q
mks
joule (J)
Calorie, kcal
4.18  103 J/Cal
cgs
erg
calorie
4.18  107 erg/cal
English
foot-pound (ft-lb)
Btu
1.29  103 ft-lb/Btu

6.2 THE STEAM ENGINE AND 
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
The development of the modern science of heat was closely tied to the de-
velopment of the modern technology of engines designed to perform use-
ful work. For millennia until about two centuries ago, most work was done
by people or by animals. Wind and water also provided mechanical work,
but these were generally unreliable as sources of energy. For one thing,
they were not always available when and where they were needed.
In the eighteenth century, miners began to dig deeper and deeper in
search of a greater coal supply. Water tended to seep in and flood these
deeper mines. The need arose for an economical method of pumping wa-
ter out of these mines. The steam engine was developed initially to meet
this very practical need.
The steam engine is a device for converting the heat energy of heat-
producing fuel into mechanical work. For example, the chemical energy of
wood, coal, or oil, or the nuclear energy of uranium, can be converted into
heat. The heat energy in turn is used to boil water to form steam, and the
energy in the steam is then turned into mechanical energy. This mechan-
ical energy can be used directly to perform work, as in a steam locomotive,
used to pump water, or to transport loads, or is transformed into electrical
energy. In typical industrial societies today, most of the energy used in fac-
258
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
FIGURE 6.3
Camel driving a
water wheel.

tories and in homes comes from electrical energy. Falling water is used to
generate electricity in some areas, but steam-powered generators still gen-
erate most of the electrical energy used in the United States today. (This
is further discussed in Chapter 11.) There are other devices that convert
fuel to heat energy for the production of mechanical energy, such as in-
ternal combustion engines used in cars and trucks, for example. But the
steam engine remains a good model for the basic operation of the whole
family of so-called heat engines, and the chain of processes from heat input
to work output and heat exhaust is a good model of the basic cycle involved
in all heat engines.
Since ancient times, people knew that heat can be used to produce steam,
which can then do mechanical work. One example was the "aeolipile," in-
6.2 THE STEAM ENGINE AND THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
259
FIGURE 
6.4
Woodcut 
from
Georgius Agricola's De Re Metal-
lica (1556), a book on mining
techniques in the sixteenth cen-
tury. 

vented by Heron of Alexandria about A.D. 100. (See Figure 6.6.) It worked
on the principle of the rotating lawn sprinkler, except that the driving force
was steam instead of water pressure. Heron's aeolipile was a toy, meant to
entertain rather than to do any useful work. Perhaps the most "useful" ap-
plication of steam in the ancient world was another of Heron's inventions.
This steam-driven device astonished worshipers in a temple by causing a
door to open when a fire was built on the altar.
Not until late in the eighteenth century, however, did inventors develop
commercially successful steam engines. Thomas Savery (1650-1715), an
English military engineer, invented the first such engine. It could pump
water out of a mine by alternately filling a tank with high-pressure steam,
driving the water up and out of the tank, and then condensing the steam,
drawing more water into the tank.
Unfortunately, inherent in the Savery engine's use of high-pressure steam
was a serious risk of boiler or cylinder explosions. Thomas Newcomen
(1663-1729), another English engineer, remedied this defect. Newcomen
invented an engine that used steam at lower pressure (see Figure 6.7). His
engine was superior in other ways also. For example, it could raise loads
other than water. Instead of using the steam to force water into and out of
260
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
FIGURE 6.5
Old windmill and new wind turbine. 
(a)
(b)

a cylinder, Newcomen used the steam to force a piston forward and air
pressure to force it back. The motion of the piston could then be used to
drive a pump or other engine. It is the back-and-forth force provided by
the motion of the piston in a steam engine that is one origin of the defi-
nition of mechanical work, W, as force  distance, W  Fd.
The Newcomen engine was widely used in Britain and other European
countries throughout the eighteenth century. By modern standards, it was
not a very good engine. It burned a large amount of coal but did only a
6.2 THE STEAM ENGINE AND THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
261
FIGURE 6.6
A model of Heron's aeolipile. Steam
produced in the boiler escapes through the nozzles
on the sphere, causing the sphere to rotate.
FIGURE 6.7
Model of the Newcomen engine,
which inspired Watt to conceive of the separa-
tion of condenser and piston.

small amount of work at a slow, jerky rate. But the great demand for ma-
chines to pump water from mines produced a good market, even for that
uneconomical engine.
The work of a Scotsman, James Watt, led to a greatly improved steam
engine and one that had profound economic consequences. Watt's father
was a carpenter with a successful business selling equipment to shipown-
ers. James Watt was in poor health much of his life and gained most of 
his early education at home. In his father's attic workshop, he developed
considerable skill in using tools. He wanted to become an instrument 
maker and went to London to learn the trade. Upon his return to Scot-
land in 1757, he obtained a position as instrument maker at the University
of Glasgow.
In the winter of 1763-1764, Watt was asked to repair a model of New-
comen's engine that was used for demonstration lectures at the university.
In acquainting himself with the model, Watt was impressed by how much
steam was required to run the engine. He undertook a series of experiments
on the behavior of steam and found that a major problem was the tem-
perature of the cylinder walls. Newcomen's engine wasted most of its heat
in warming the walls of its cylinder, since the walls were cooled on each
cycle as cold water was injected to condense the steam, forcing the piston
back under air pressure.
Early in 1765, Watt remedied this wasteful defect by devising a modi-
fied type of steam engine. (See Figure 6.8.) In retrospect, it sounds like a
simple idea. After pushing the piston up, the steam was admitted to a sep-
arate container, called the condenser, where the steam condensed at a low
temperature. With this system, the cylinder containing the piston could be
kept hot all the time, and the condenser could be kept cool all the time.
The use of the separate condenser allowed huge fuel savings. Watt's en-
gine could do twice as much work as Newcomen's with the same amount
of fuel. Watt also added many other refinements, such as automatically con-
trolled valves that were opened and closed by the reciprocating action of
the piston itself, as well as a governor that controlled the amount of steam
reaching the engine, to maintain a constant speed for the engine (see Fig-
ure 6.9). The latter idea of using part of the output of the process to reg-
ulate the process itself, is called feedback. It is an essential part of the de-
sign of many modern mechanical and electronic systems.
Like Thomas Edison later, or successful computer technologists in our
day, Watt and his associates were good businessmen as well as good engi-
neers. They made a fortune manufacturing and selling the improved steam
engines. Watt's inventions stimulated the development of engines that could
do many other jobs. Steam drove machines in factories, railway locomotives,
262
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT

steamboats, and even early steam cars. Watt's engine gave an enormous stim-
ulus to the growth of industry in Europe and America. It thereby helped
transform the economic and social structure of industrial civilization.
The widespread development of engines and machines revolutionized
the mass production of consumer goods, construction, and transportation.
The average standard of living in Western Europe and the United States
6.2 THE STEAM ENGINE AND THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
263
Piston
Cylinder
Condenser
Cooling
water
Load
flywheel
Condensed
steam
Boiler
Valve
A
Valve
B
FIGURE 6.8
Schematic diagram of Watt's steam engine. With valve A open
and valve B closed, steam under pressure enters the cylinder and pushes the
piston upward. When the piston nears the top of the cylinder, valve A is
closed to shut off the steam supply. Then valve B is opened, so that steam
leaves the cylinder and enters the condenser. The condenser is kept cool by
water flowing over it, so the steam condenses. As steam leaves the cylinder,
the pressure there decreases. Atmospheric pressure (helped by the inertia of
the flywheel) pushes the piston down. When the piston reaches the bottom
of the cylinder, valve B is closed, and valve A is opened, starting the cycle
again. Valves A and B are connected to the piston directly, so that the mo-
tion of the piston itself operates them.

rose sharply. It is difficult for most people in the industrially "developed"
countries to imagine what life was like before this "Industrial Revolution."
But not all the effects of industrialization have been beneficial. The 
nineteenth-century factory system provided an opportunity for some
greedy and cruel employers to treat workers almost like slaves. With no
labor laws or even child protection laws, those employers made huge prof-
its while keeping employees and their families on the edge of starvation.
264
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
Connected
to flywheel
Throttle
Pivot
Cam
Steam
to engine
FIGURE 6.9
Watt's "governor." If the engine speeds up for some rea-
son, the heavy balls swing out to rotate in larger circles. They are
pivoted at the top, so the sleeve below is pulled up. The cam that fits
against the sleeve is therefore also pulled up; this forces the throttle
to move down and close a bit. The reduction in steam reaching the
engine thus slows it down again. The opposite happens when the en-
gine starts to slow down. The net result is that the engine tends to
operate at nearly a stable level.
FIGURE 6.10
Steam-powered locomotive. 

This situation, which was especially serious in England early in the nine-
teenth century, led to demands for reform. New laws eventually eliminated
the worst excesses.
More and more people left the farms, either voluntarily or forced by
poverty and new land laws, to work in factories. Conflict grew intense be-
tween the working class, made up of employees, and the middle class, made
up of employers and professionals. At the same time, some artists and in-
tellectuals, many of the Romantic movement, began to attack the new ten-
dencies of their society. They saw this society becoming increasingly dom-
6.2 THE STEAM ENGINE AND THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
265
FIGURE 6.11
The Charlotte Dun-
das, the first practical steamboat,
built by William Symington, an
engineer who had patented his
own improved steam engine. It
was tried out on the Forth and
Clyde Canal in 1801. 
FIGURE 6.12
Engraving of an early steam-powered factory. Matthew Boulton (Watt's busi-
ness partner) proclaimed to Boswell (biographer of Samuel Johnson): "I sell here, sir, what
all the world desires to have: POWER!"

266
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
There are three distinct operations in the
harvesting of grain. Reaping, which is cut-
ting the stem from the ground, threshing
which is separating the grain from the ker-
nel, and winnowing which cleans the grain
from the chaff.
Hand-reaping methods, using first sickles
and then scythes for millennia, were only re-
placed by new methods employing mechan-
ical machinery in the first half of the nine-
teenth century. In the 1830s Hiriam Moore,
a farmer in Michigan, began to design a ma-
chine known as a combine that would use
horsepower to cut, thresh, and clean.
The next important breakthrough came
from George Berry, a wheat farmer in the
Sacramento Valley. Although he had been
impressed by the reduction in labor costs re-
sulting from the introduction of the combine,
Berry had seen many of his horses die in the
intense heat of July and August harvesting.
Berry decided to use the steam-traction en-
gines that had begun to appear on some farms
to power his own combine. The combine was
moved forward by a 26-horsepower steam-
traction engine, while a smaller, stationary 
6-horsepower steam-traction engine pow-
ered the cutter, thresher, and separator.
The steam-traction engines were used not
only to power combines, but also for plow-
ing, planting, and cultivation as well. How-
ever, a different engine was used for each dif-
ferent job, and few farmers could justify this
kind of expenditure on machinery. In 1921,
Alexander Legge, general manager of Inter-
national Harvester Company, authorized his
company to begin developing an all-purpose
engine. The new tractor became known as
the Farmall, and it was the first engine that
truly achieved George Berry's vision of re-
placing horses in farming.
Further Reading
C. Canine, Dream Reaper (Chicago, Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1997).
■AGRICULTURAL STEAM TECHNOLOGY
FIGURE 6.13
Nineteenth-century French steam
cultivator
FIGURE 6.14
The Farmall: "It would be tall and
maneuverable enough to cultivate row crops, yet
it would still have the power to plow, pull imple-
ments, and deliver belt power to threshers,
grinders, and crop elevators." 

inated by commerce, machinery, and an emphasis on material goods. In
some cases, they confused research science itself with its technical applica-
tions (as is still done today). Sometimes they accused scientists of explain-
ing away all the awesome mysteries of nature. These artists denounced both
science and technology, while often refusing to learn anything about them.
A poem by William Blake contains the questions:
And did the Countenance Divine
Shine forth upon our clouded hills?
And was Jerusalem builded here
Among these dark Satanic mills?
Elsewhere, Blake advised his readers "To cast off Bacon, Locke, and New-
ton." John Keats was complaining about science when he included in a
poem the line:
Do not all charms fly
At the mere touch of cold philosophy?
These attitudes are part of an old tradition, going back to the ancient
Greek opponents of Democritus' atomism. As noted in Chapter 4, many
of the Romantic writers and artists attacked Galilean and Newtonian physics
for supposedly distorting moral values. The same type of accusation can
still be heard today.
6.3
POWER AND EFFICIENCY OF ENGINES
The usefulness of an engine for many tasks is given by the rate at which it
can deliver energy. The rate at which an engine delivers energy is called
its power. By definition, the power (P) is the amount of energy (E) deliv-
ered per unit of time (t):
P 
.
As with energy, there are many common units of power with definitions
rooted in tradition. Before the steam engine, the standard source of power
was the workhorse. Watt, in order to rate his engines in a unit people could
understand, measured the power output of a horse. He found that a strong
horse, working steadily, could lift an object of 75-kg mass, which weighed
E
t
6.3 POWER AND EFFICIENCY OF ENGINES
267

about 750 N, at a speed of about 1 m/s (of course, Watt used the units of
pounds and feet). The "horsepower" unit is still used today, but its value is
now given by definition, not by experiment.
In metric units, the unit of power is appropriately named the watt, sym-
bol W, which is not to be confused with the symbol W for "work." (You
can usually tell from the context which unit is intended.) One watt is de-
fined as one joule of energy per second, or in symbols, 1 W  1 J/s. Thus,
Watt's horse had a power rating of about 750 W. This means that in this
case one horsepower was about 750 W. It is a curious case of the persist-
ence of ancient habits that the unit "horsepower" is still used today, for ex-
ample, for rating car engines and electric motors.
A further example: A light bulb rated at 100 W is using energy at the
rate of 100 J/s. To find the total energy the bulb uses in a specific case, we
need to specify the time interval during which it is on. Once the time is
specified, and if the power usage is known, the energy can be found (from
P  E/t) by multiplying the time and the power. In a typical case, the en-
ergy E used by a 100-W bulb during a period of, say, 10 hr is
E  P 	 t  (100 W) (10 hr)
 1000 W 	 hr  1 kWhr,
1 kWhr  (1000 J/s)(1 hr)(3600 s/hr)
 3.6  106 J.
The answer is over three million joules! Since the amount of energy con-
sumed is so large, the commercial energy used by a typical home is billed
in units of kilowatt-hours (kW-hr). Look at the monthly bill for your home's
use of electricity and see how much electric energy is used, and what it
costs effectively per kW-hr. (Then perhaps consider how to cut down on
the home's use of electricity.)
Efficiency
Section 6.1 showed that the amount of mechanical energy corresponding
to a unit of heat energy is known as the "mechanical equivalent of heat."
Joule's finding a value for the mechanical equivalent of heat made it possi-
ble to describe engines in a new way. The concept of efficiency can be ap-
plied to an engine or to any device that transforms energy from one form
to another, such as from heat energy into mechanical energy. Efficiency is
268
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT

defined as the ratio of the useful output energy to the amount of input energy. If
Ein is input energy and Eout is the useful output, then efficiency (eff), can
be defined in symbols
eff 
.
Efficiency may also be expressed as a percentage
eff (%) 
  100.
Since energy cannot be lost, the greatest possible efficiency of any engine
would be 100%, which would occur when all of the input energy appears
as useful output. Obviously, efficiency must be considered as seriously as
power output in designing engines. Fuel is, after all, a part of the cost of
running an engine, and the more efficient an engine is, the cheaper it is
to run.
Watt's engine was more efficient than Newcomen's, which in turn was
more efficient than Savery's. Is there any limit to improvements in effi-
ciency? The upper limit, 100%, is of course imposed by the law of energy
conservation. That is, no engine can put out more mechanical energy than
the energy put into it. But even before that law had been formulated, a
young French engineer, Sadi Carnot, established that there is in practice a
much lower limit. The reasons for this limit are just as fundamental as the
law of energy conservation.
6.4 CARNOT AND THE BEGINNINGS 
OF THERMODYNAMICS
Carnot was one of a group of French engineers who had set out to study
the scientific principles underlying the operation of the steam engine with
the goal of achieving maximum power output at maximum efficiency. As a
result of their studies, Carnot and others helped to establish the physics of
heat, which is known as thermodynamics.
Carnot started with the experimentally obtained fact that heat does not
by itself flow from a cold body to a hot one. It then follows that if, in a
given situation, heat is made to flow from cold to hot, some other change
useful Eout

Ein
useful Eout

Ein
6.4 CARNOT AND THE BEGINNINGS OF THERMODYNAMICS
269

must take place elsewhere. Some work must be done. Using an elegant 
argument, which is summarized in the materials for this chapter in the
Student Guide, Carnot showed that no engine can be more efficient than
an ideal, reversible engine, and that all such engines have the same effi-
ciency. A reversible engine is one in which the cycle from input energy to output
work and exhausted energy, then back to input energy, can be run in reverse
without any loss or gain of heat or other forms of energy. For example, a re-
frigerator or an air conditioner is also a "heat engine," but its cycle oper-
ates in reverse fashion to a steam engine or automobile engine. It takes in
work (in the form of electrical or mechanical power) to pump heat from
a cold body (from inside the cold compartment or room) to a hotter one
(the outside room or outside air). Naturally, because of friction and other
outside effects, a truly reversible engine cannot be realized in practice, but
it can be approached.
Since all reversible engines have the same efficiency, one has only to
choose a simple version of a reversible engine and calculate its efficiency
for one cycle to find an upper limit to the efficiency of any engine. Such a
270
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
FIGURE 6.15
Sadi Carnot (1796-
1832). Son of one of Napoleon's
most trusted generals, Sadi Carnot
was one of the new generation of
expert administrators who hoped
to produce a new enlightened or-
der in Europe. He died of cholera
in Paris at the age of 36. 

simple engine is depicted schematically in the diagram below. During one
cycle of operation, the engine, represented by the small rectangle, takes in
heat energy Q1 from the hot body, produces useful work W, and exhausts
some wasted heat energy Q2 to the cold body. The cycle may then be re-
peated many times.
6.4 CARNOT AND THE BEGINNINGS OF THERMODYNAMICS
271
Carnot calculated the efficiency of this schematic engine cycle and found
that the ratios of heat and work in such a reversible engine depend only on
the temperature of the hot substance from which the engine obtains its heat
and on the temperature of the cold substance that extracts the waste heat
from the engine. The temperatures used in this case are called absolute, or
Kelvin, temperatures (named for Lord Kelvin who first introduced this scale).
On the absolute scale, temperature measurements are equal to temperatures
(t) on the Celsius scale (°C) plus 273. (Following current standard practice,
no degree sign, °, is used for degrees Kelvin; the symbol used is K.)
T (absolute, in K)  t (Celsius, in °C)  273.
Thus, on the Kelvin scale, water freezes at 273 K, while "absolute zero,"
T  0 K, is
t  273°C.
hot body, temperature T1
engine
cold body, temperature T2
heat out, Q2  Q1  W
work, W
heat in, Q1
efficiency  
w
h
o
e
r
a
k
t
o
in
ut
  Q
W
1


1  
T
T
2
1


The expression found by Carnot for the efficiency of reversible engines,
in modern terms, is
efficiency 


1 

Notice that unless T2, the temperature of the cold
body that receives the exhaust from the engine, is 
0 K—an unattainably low temperature—no engine
can have an efficiency of 1 (or 100%). This means
that every engine must exhaust some "waste" heat to the
outside before returning to get more energy from the hot body.
In steam engines, the "hot body" is the steam fresh from the boiler, and
the waste heat is extracted at the condenser. The cycle starts with the pis-
ton in the cylinder at rest. Steam is let into the cylinder at high tempera-
ture and pressure. The steam expands against the piston, performing work
on the piston and ultimately on the outside surroundings. As the space oc-
cupied by the steam increases, the steam cools down. The steam cools fur-
ther as it is let into the condenser, where it condenses into water. Air pres-
sure then works on the piston, pushing it back into the cylinder, until it
returns to where it started, thus completing one cycle.
As you see, the engine could not operate without a condenser to remove
the heat from the steam after it had caused the piston to move forward, thus
enabling the cylinder to be filled once again with steam. In an internal com-
bustion engine (a car engine, for example), the "hot body" is the gasoline va-
por inside the cylinder just as it explodes, and the cold substance is the ex-
haust. Any engine that derives its mechanical energy from heat must also be
cooled to remove the "waste" heat at a lower temperature. If there is any fric-
tion or other inefficiency in the engine, it will add further heat to the waste
and reduce the efficiency to below the theoretical limit of an ideal engine.
However, despite the inefficiencies of all real engines, it is important to
know that none of the total energy is destroyed. Rather than being de-
stroyed, the part of the energy that is extracted at the exhaust is unavail-
able for doing work. For instance, the exhausted heat cannot be recycled
as input energy to run the engine to produce more useful work and thus
increase the efficiency of the engine, by reducing the amount of waste en-
ergy because the input reservoir of heat is at a higher temperature than the
output, and heat does not flow of its own accord from cold to hot.
The generalization of Carnot's finding is now known as one expression
of the second law of thermodynamics. It is equivalent to Carnot's earlier ob-
servation that heat does not by itself flow from a cold body to a hot one. The need
for air conditioners and refrigerators makes this abundantly clear.
T2

T1
W

Q1
work out

heat in
272
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
Although Carnot did not write
the formula this way, we are
making use of the fact that heat
and energy are equivalent.

The second law of thermodynamics, of which more will be said in Sec-
tion 6.6, is recognized as one of the most powerful laws of physics. Even
in simple situations it can help explain natural phenomena and the funda-
mental limits of technology.
Some Examples of Carnot's Result
If you burn oil to heat your home, the furnace requires some inefficiency
to burn cleanly, so some heat is lost out the chimney. But recent advances
in boiler technology have resulted in boilers with rated efficiencies as high
as 0.86, or 86%.
If you install "flameless electric heat," which uses electric heating ele-
ments placed along the floor where it meets the wall, the electric power
company still has to burn oil, coal, or natural gas in a boiler, use the steam
to generate electricity, and deliver the electricity to your home. Because
metals melt above a certain temperature and because the cooling water
never gets below freezing, Carnot's finding makes it impossible to make the
efficiency of electrical generation greater than about 60%. Since the power
company's boiler also loses some of its energy out the chimney, and since
the electricity loses some of its energy on the way from the power plant,
only about one-quarter to one-third of the energy originally in the fuel ac-
tually makes it to your home. Obviously, electric heating wastes a lot of ir-
replaceable fossil fuel.
Because of the limits placed by Carnot's finding
on heat engines, it is sometimes important not only
to give the actual efficiency of a heat engine but also
to specify how close it comes to the maximum pos-
sible. The more carefully you look at a process, the
more information is seen to be important. Home-
heating apparatus and many large electrical heat-
engine devices, such as refrigerators and air condi-
tioners, now come with an "energy guide" sticker indicating the efficiency
of the apparatus and the potential annual savings in electricity costs. Some
states may even reward consumers with a rebate for making an energy-
efficient purchase.
6.5 ARRIVING AT A GENERAL 
CONSERVATION LAW
The law of conservation of mechanical energy was presented in Section 5.11.
This law applies only to "closed systems," i.e., to situations where no work
is done on or by the system, and where no mechanical energy is transformed
6.5 ARRIVING AT A GENERAL CONSERVATION LAW
273
For steam engines the coldest
temperature feasible for T2 is
about 280 K. (Why?) The
hottest possible temperature for
T1 is about 780 K. So the maxi-
mum efficiency is 0.64.

into heat energy or vice versa. Early in the nineteenth century, develop-
ments in science, engineering, and philosophy suggested new ideas about
energy. It appeared that all forms of energy (including heat) could be trans-
formed into one another with no loss. Therefore, it appeared that the total
amount of energy in nature, that is, the Universe, must remain constant.
In 1800 Italian scientist Alessandro Volta invented the electric battery,
demonstrating that chemical reactions could produce electricity. It was soon
found that electric currents could produce heat and light, as in passing
through a thin wire. In 1820, Hans Christian Oersted, a Danish physicist,
discovered that an electric current produces magnetic effects. In 1831,
Michael Faraday, the English scientist, discovered electromagnetic induc-
tion. When a magnet moves near a coil or a wire, an electric current is pro-
duced in the coil or wire. To some thinkers, these discoveries (discussed
further in Chapter 11) suggested that all of the phenomena of nature were
somehow united. Perhaps all natural events result from the same basic
"force." This idea, though vague and imprecise, eventually bore fruit in the
form of the law of conservation of energy, one of the most important laws in
all of science:
Natural events may involve a transformation of energy from one
form to another; but the total quantity of energy does not change
during the transformation.
The invention and use of steam engines helped in
establishing the law of conservation of energy (of-
ten abbreviated LCE) by showing how to measure
energy changes. For example, Joule used the work
done by descending weights driving a paddle wheel
in a tank of water as a measure of the amount of
gravitational potential energy transformed into heat
energy in the water by its friction with the paddles.
In 1843, Joule stated that in such experiments,
whenever a certain amount of mechanical energy
seemed to disappear, a definite amount of heat al-
ways appeared. To him, this was an indication of the conservation of what
we now call energy. Joule said that he was
. . . satisfied that the grand agents of nature are by the Creator's
fiat indestructible; and that, wherever mechanical [energy] is ex-
pended, an exact equivalent of heat is always obtained.
Joule was basically a practical man who had little time to speculate about
a deeper philosophical meaning of his findings. But others, though using
274
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
Joule began his long series of ex-
periments by investigating the
"duty" of electric motors. In this
case, duty was measured by the
work the motor could do when a
certain amount of zinc was used
up in the battery that ran the
motor. Joule's interest was to see
whether motors could be made
economically competitive with
steam engines.

speculative arguments, were also concluding that the total amount of en-
ergy in the Universe is constant. Before going into the detailed uses of the
LCE (as we shall in the next section), it will be interesting to look briefly
at an example of the interaction of science and other cultural trends of 
the time.
Nature Philosophy
A year before Joule's remark, Julius Robert Mayer, a German physician,
had also proposed a general law of conservation of energy. Mayer had done
no quantitative experiments; but he had observed body processes involving
heat and respiration. He had also used other scientists' published data on
the thermal properties of air to calculate the mechanical equivalent of heat,
obtaining about the same value that Joule had.
Mayer had been influenced by the German philosophical school now
known as Naturphilosophie or "Nature Philosophy." This school, related to
the Romantic movement, flourished during the late eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries. According to Nature Philosophy, the various phe-
nomena and forces of nature—such as gravity, electricity, and magnetism—
are not really separate from one another but are all manifestations of some
unifying "basic" natural force. This philosophy therefore encouraged ex-
periments searching for that underlying force and for connections between
different kinds of forces observed in nature.
6.5 ARRIVING AT A GENERAL CONSERVATION LAW
275
FIGURE 6.16 Friedrich von Schelling
(1775-1854), one of the founders of
German Naturphilosophie. 

The most influential thinkers of the school of Nature Philosophers were
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling.
Neither of these men is known today as a scientist, although Goethe did
write extensively on geology and botany, and did develop a theory of col-
ors that differed from Newton's. Goethe is generally considered Germany's
greatest poet and dramatist, while Schelling was a philosopher. Both men
had great influence on the generation of European scientists educated in
the first decades of the nineteenth century.
The Nature Philosophers were closely associated with the Romantic
movement in literature, art, and music. As noted Section 6.2 and in Chap-
ter 4, the Romantics protested against the idea of the Universe as a great ma-
chine, the "Newtonian world machine." This idea seemed to them morally
empty and artistically worthless. They refused to believe that the richness of
natural phenomena, including human intellect, emotions, and hopes, could
be understood as the result of the motions of particles—an opinion which in
fact almost no scientists then did, or now do, hold or defend.
The Nature Philosophers claimed that nature could be understood as it
really is only by direct observation, or "experience." No complicated, "ar-
tificial" apparatus must be used, only the senses, feelings, and intuitions.
For Goethe the goal of his philosophy was "that I may detect the inmost
force which binds the world, and guides its course."
Although its emphasis on the unity of nature led followers of Nature
Philosophy to some very useful insights—such as the general concept of
the conservation of energy—its romantic and antiscientific bias made it less
and less influential. Scientists who had previously been influenced by it, in-
cluding Mayer, now strongly opposed it. In fact, some hard-headed scien-
tists at first doubted the law of conservation of energy simply because of
their distrust of Nature Philosophy. For example, William Barton Rogers,
founder of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, wrote in 1858:
To me it seems as if many of those who are discussing this ques-
tion of the conservation of force [we would now call it energy] are
plunging into the fog of mysticism.
However, the law was so quickly and successfully put to use in physics that
its philosophical origins were soon forgotten. Yet, this episode is a reminder
of a familiar lesson: In the ordinary day-to-day work of physical scientists,
experiment and mathematical theory are the usual guides. But in making a
truly major advance in science, philosophical speculation may also play an
important role.
Mayer and Joule were only two of at least a dozen people who, between
1832 and 1854, proposed in some form the idea that energy is conserved.
276
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT

Some expressed the idea vaguely; others expressed it quite clearly. Some
arrived at the belief mainly through philosophy; others from a practical
concern with engines and machines or from laboratory investigations; still
others from a combination of factors. Many, including Mayer and Joule,
worked quite independently of one another. The idea of energy conserva-
tion was somehow "in the air," leading to essentially simultaneous, sepa-
rate discoveries.
The initial wide acceptance of the LCE owed much to the long-range
influence of a paper published in 1847, 2 years before Joule published the
results of his most precise experiments. The author, a young German physi-
cian and physicist named Hermann von Helmholtz, entitled his work "On
the Conservation of Force." Helmholtz (using "force" in the modern sense
of "energy"), boldly asserted the idea that others were only vaguely ex-
pressing, namely, "that it is impossible to create a lasting motive force out
of nothing." He restated this theme even more clearly many years later in
one of his popular lectures:
We arrive at the conclusion that Nature as a whole possesses a store
of force [energy] which cannot in any way be either increased or
diminished, and that, therefore, the quantity of force in Nature is
6.5 ARRIVING AT A GENERAL CONSERVATION LAW
277
FIGURE 6.17 Hermann von Helm-
holtz (1821-1894). 

just as eternal and unalterable as the quantity of matter. Expressed
in this form, I have named the general law "The Principle of the
Conservation of Force."
Any machine or engine that does work (provides energy) can do so only
by drawing from some source of energy. The machine cannot supply more
energy than it obtains from the source. When the source runs out, the ma-
chine will stop working. Machines and engines can only transform energy;
they cannot create it or destroy it.
6.6 THE TWO LAWS OF THERMODYNAMICS
Two laws summarize many of the ideas in this chapter. Both of these laws
are called laws of thermodynamics. They may be stated in completely anal-
ogous fashion as statements of impossibility.
The First Law
The first law of thermodynamics is a general statement of the conservation
of energy in thermal processes. It is based on Joule's finding that heat and
energy are equivalent. It would be pleasingly simple to call heat "internal"
energy associated with temperature. We could then add heat to the poten-
tial and kinetic energies of a system, and call this sum the total energy that
is conserved. In fact, this solution works well for a great variety of phe-
nomena, including the experiments of Joule. Difficulties arise with the idea
of the heat "content" of a system. For example, when a solid is heated to
its melting point, further heat input causes melting but without increasing
the temperature. Simply regarding heat energy measured by a rise in tem-
perature as a part of a system's total energy will not give a complete gen-
eral law.
278
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT
∆E = 0
Special case of an
isolated system:
∆E = W + ∆Q
∆Q
W
In general:
FIGURE 6.18
Diagram of a thermody-
namic system.

Instead of "heat," we can use the idea of an internal energy—energy in
the system that may take forms not directly related to temperature. We can
then use the word "heat" to refer only to a transfer of energy between a
system and its surroundings. (In a similar way, the term work is not used to
describe something contained in the system. Rather, it describes the trans-
fer of energy from one system to another.)
Even these definitions do not permit a simple statement such as "Heat
input to a system increases its internal energy, and work done on a system
increases its mechanical energy." Heat input to a system can have effects
other than increasing internal energy. In a steam engine, for example, heat
input increases the mechanical energy of the piston. Similarly, work done
on a system can have effects other than increasing mechanical energy. In
rubbing your hands together on a cold day, for example, the work you do
increases the internal energy of the skin of your hands. In short, a general
conservation law of energy must include both work and heat transfer. Fur-
ther, it must deal with change in the total energy of a system, not with a
"mechanical" part and an "internal" part.
In an isolated system, that is, a system that does not exchange energy
with its surroundings, the total energy must remain constant. If the system
exchanges energy with its surroundings, it can do so in only one of two
ways: Work can be done on or by the system, or heat can be passed to or
from the system. In the latter case, the change in energy of the system must
equal the net energy gained or lost by the surroundings. More precisely,
let W stand for the work done on or by the system (such as the cylinder in
a steam engine). If the work is done by the system, W will be positive; if
the work is done on the system, W will be negative. Similarly, let Q rep-
resent the net heat transfer to or from the system. If the net heat transfer
is to the system, Q will be positive; if the net transfer is from the system,
Q will be negative.
With these definitions, the first law of thermodynamics states that the change
in the total energy of the system, E, is given by the sum of the work done on or
by the system and the net heat transfer to or from the system, or in symbols
E  W  Q.
This general expression includes as special cases the preliminary versions
of the energy-conservation law given earlier in the chapter. If there is no
heat transfer at all, then Q  0, and so E  W. In this case, the change
in energy of a system equals the work done on or by it. On the other hand,
if work is done neither on nor by a system, then W  0, and E  Q.
Here the change in energy of a system is equal to the net heat transfer.
6.6 THE TWO LAWS OF THERMODYNAMICS
279

The equation above is enormously useful. But we still need a descrip-
tion of that part of the total energy of a system called "heat" (or better,
"internal" energy). So far, we have seen only that an increase in internal
energy is sometimes associated with an increase in temperature. We also
mentioned the long-held suspicion that internal energy involves the mo-
tion of the "small parts" of bodies. We will take up this problem in detail
in the next chapter.
The Second Law
The second law of thermodynamics is a general statement of the limits of
the heat engine and is based on Carnot's work. We indicated in Section 6.4
that a reversible engine is the most efficient engine. Any other engine is
not as efficient. In order to formulate that idea generally and precisely, a
new concept, entropy, must be introduced.
The change in entropy of a system, S, is defined as the net heat, Q,
gained or lost by the system, divided by the temperature (in Kelvin) of the
system, T:
S 
.
This equation defines only changes of entropy, S, rather than the absolute
value of entropy. But this is similar to what we encountered in defining po-
tential energy. In both cases what interests us is only the change. Once a
standard state for the system for which S  0 is chosen, the total entropy
for any state of the system can be determined.
We introduced the concept of an ideal, reversible engine in Section 6.4.
Such an engine, working in a cycle between hot and cold bodies (as any
heat engine does), must have the same entropy at the end of a cycle as it
does at the start. This is because, at the end of the cycle, T is back to its
initial value, and as much heat and work energy as has been given up in
one part of the cycle as has been gained in the rest of the cycle; so Q on
the whole during the entire cycle is zero. Since the change of entropy is
defined as S  Q/T, the change in entropy during one cycle is also zero,
S  0.
What about an engine that is not reversible and thus less than ideal, such
as an actual steam engine? You know it must be less efficient than a per-
fectly reversible engine, which would have 100% efficiency. So, for such an
engine, the heat transfers must be greater than those for an ideal engine.
Q

T
280
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT

At the end of each work cycle, Q within the engine will not be zero but
positive, and S, correspondingly, will have a positive value. In short,
though the total energy inside and outside the engine will, by the first law,
be unchanged, the entropy of the system will have increased. Note that this
will happen again and again as this or any other engine of this sort repeats
its work cycle. So the result is that the entropy of the universe will con-
stantly increase while the less-than-ideal engine is running.
We can summarize our results for the change in entropy of the universe
resulting from the operation of simple heat engines as follows:
Suniverse  0
(reversible processes),
Suniverse 
 0
(any other process).
Although proven here only for these simple heat engines, these results are
general ones. In fact, these apply to all thermal processes. For simplicity,
these two expressions may be joined together by using the greater than or
equal to sign,  or more simply :
Suniverse  0,
where the  sign refers to reversible processes; the > sign refers to any
other process. The last expression is, in fact, a mathematical formulation ex-
pressing the second law of thermodynamics.
Rudolf Clausius, who first formulated the second law in the form given
here, paraphrased the two laws of thermodynamics in 1850, as follows:
"The energy of the Universe remains constant, but its entropy seeks to reach a
maximum."
6.6 THE TWO LAWS OF THERMODYNAMICS
281
THE "THIRD" LAW
Some physicists include a third law among
the laws of thermodynamics. The third
law states that no system can be cooled to
absolute zero.
If we include the third law, a light-
hearted synopsis of the three laws is:
1. you cannot win; you can only break
even;
2. you can break even only at absolute
zero;
3. you cannot reach absolute zero.

6.7 FAITH IN THE LAWS OF THERMODYNAMICS
For over a century, the law of conservation of energy has stood as one of
the most fundamental laws of science. You will encounter it again and again
in this course, in studying electricity and magnetism, the structure of the
atom, and nuclear physics. Throughout the other sciences, from chemistry
to biology, and throughout engineering studies, the same law applies. In-
deed, no other law so clearly brings together the various scientific fields,
giving all natural scientists and engineers a common set of concepts.
The law of conservation of energy has been immensely successful. It is
so firmly believed that it seems almost impossible that any new discovery
could disprove it. However, in some experiments, energy does seem to ap-
pear or disappear in a system, without being accounted for by changes in
known forms of energy. For instance, as heat is added to a melting ice cube,
the temperature of the ice cube does not increase. In such cases, physicists
preferred to assume that the added heat takes the form of a kind of energy
not yet investigated, rather than to consider seriously the possibility that
energy is not conserved. The German philosopher Leibniz once proposed
that energy could be dissipated among "the small parts" of bodies. He ad-
vanced this idea specifically in order to maintain the principle of conser-
vation of energy in inelastic collisions and frictional processes. Leibniz's
faith in energy conservation was justified. Other evidence showed that "in-
ternal energy," stored by the motion of submicroscopic particles in the ma-
terial being experimented on, changed by just the right amount to explain
observed changes in external energy, such as the case of a melting ice cube.
Another similar example is the "invention" of the neutrino by the physi-
cist Wolfgang Pauli in 1930. Experiments had suggested that energy dis-
appeared in certain nuclear reactions. Pauli proposed that a previously un-
suspected and then undetectable subatomic particle, which Enrico Fermi
named the "neutrino," was produced in these reactions. He proposed that
the neutrino carried off some of the energy. Physicists accepted the neu-
trino theory for more than 20 years even though neutrinos by themselves
could not be shown to exist. Finally, in 1956, neutrinos were indeed de-
tected, in experiments using the radiation from a nuclear reactor. (The ex-
periment could not have been done in 1930, since no nuclear reactor ex-
isted until over a decade later.) Again, faith in the law of conservation of
energy turned out to be justified.
The theme of "conservation" is so powerful in science that scientists be-
lieve it will always be justified. Any apparent exceptions to the law will
sooner or later be understood in a way which does not require us to give
282
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT

up the law. At most, these exceptions may lead us to discover new forms
of matter or energy, making the law even more general and powerful.
The French mathematician and philosopher Henri Poincaré expressed
this idea in 1903 in his book Science and Hypothesis:
. . . the principle of conservation of energy signifies simply that
there is something which remains constant. Indeed, no matter what
new notions future experiences will give us of the world, we are
sure in advance that there will be something which will remain con-
stant, and which we shall be able to call energy.
Today, it is agreed that the discoveries of various conservation laws with
cosmic reach we have discussed (and others to be mentioned later) were
among the most important achievements of science. These laws are pow-
erful and valuable tools of analysis. All of them basically affirm that, what-
ever happens within a system of interacting bodies, certain measurable
quantities will remain constant as long as the system remains isolated.
The list of known conservation laws has grown in recent years. The area
of fundamental (or "elementary") particles has yielded much of this new
knowledge. Some of the newer laws are imperfectly and incompletely un-
derstood. Others are on uncertain ground and are still being argued. Be-
low is a list of conservation laws to date. This list is not complete or eter-
nal, but it does include the conservation laws that make up the working
tool-kit of physicists today.
Conservation Laws
1.
Linear momentum.
2.
Angular momentum (including spin).
3.
Energy (including mass).
4.
Electric charge.
5.
Electron-family number.
6.
Muon-family number.
7.
Baryon-family number.
8.
Strangeness number.
9.
Isotopic spin.
Number 3 is a generalized form of the first law of thermodynamics; the in-
clusion of mass will be explained in the chapter on relativity theory. Num-
bers 4-9 result from work in nuclear physics, high-energy physics, or ele-
mentary or fundamental particle physics.
6.7 FAITH IN THE LAWS OF THERMODYNAMICS
283

The Status of the Second Law
The second law of thermodynamics has a status rather different from the
conservation laws. It, too, is extremely successful and powerful. It, too, has
continued to stand as one of the fundamental laws of science. Unlike the
conservation laws or Newton's laws of motion, the second law of thermo-
dynamics is less concerned with giving precisely measurable results than
with saying that certain processes or phenomena are impossible. For ex-
ample, it is impossible to make the entropy of the Universe (or of an iso-
lated system) decrease; it is impossible to make heat flow from a cold body
to a hot one without doing work on something; it is impossible to invent
a heat engine with efficiency greater than 100%. In other words, the pro-
cesses involving heat happen in one direction only: The entropy increases;
heat flows from hot objects to cold ones. Thus, the second law is connected
in some fundamental way with the notion that time proceeds in one di-
rection only. To word it differently, when a movie taken of real events is
run backward, what you see cannot, in detail, be found to occur in the real
world. For example, while two liquids can quickly mix together by them-
selves; they cannot spontaneously un-mix themselves. These ideas will be
examined in more detail in the next chapter.
The second law states that during reversible processes—such as those
involving ideal, frictionless heat engines—the entropy of the Universe will
remain constant. However, all other processes, all of which would not be
reversible—that is, they are irreversible—the entropy of the Universe would
increase. In no case will the net entropy of the Universe decrease. For ex-
ample, as the second law requires, heat will not flow by itself from cold
bodies to hot bodies, because that would involve a decrease in entropy. A
ball lying on the floor will not somehow gather energy from its surround-
ings and suddenly leap up. An egg will not unscramble itself. An ocean liner
cannot be powered by an engine that takes heat from the ocean water and
ejects ice cubes. All these and many other events could occur without vio-
lating any principles of Newtonian mechanics, including the law of con-
servation of energy. But they do not happen; they are "forbidden" by the
second law of thermodynamics. (They are "forbidden" in the sense that
such things do not happen in nature.)
All familiar processes are to some degree irreversible, and thus contrib-
ute to an increase in the entropy of the Universe. As this happens, the use-
fulness of the heat available for work in engines will decline. Lord Kelvin
predicted that eventually all bodies in the Universe would reach the same
temperature by exchanging heat with one another. When this happened, it
would be impossible to produce any useful work from heat, since work can
only be done by means of heat engines when heat flows from a hot body
284
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT

to a colder body. Finally, the Sun and other stars would cool, all life on
Earth would cease, and the Universe would be dead.
This idea of a "heat-death" of the Universe, based on predictions from
thermodynamics, aroused some popular interest at the end of the nineteenth
century. The idea later appeared in several books, such as H.G. Wells' The
Time Machine, and in Isaac Asimov's short story "The Last Question."
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
absolute temperature scale
feedback
absolute zero
governor
caloric fluid
heat-death of the Universe
calorie
law of conservation of energy (LCE)
Calorie
mechanical equivalent of heat
Carnot's finding
Nature Philosophy (Naturphilosophie)
condenser
power
cycle
reversible engine
cylinder
specific heat
efficiency
thermodynamics, first law
entropy
thermodynamics, second law
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
285
FIGURE 6.19
An illustration of
the "heat death" of the universe,
from Camille Flammarion's 1893
book: La Fin du Monde (The End
of the World).

SOME IMPORTANT EQUATIONS
Q  mc T,
eff 
,
P 
,
E  W  Q,
Suniverse  0,
S 
.
DEFINITIONS OF IMPORTANT UNITS
1 W  1 J/s,
T (K)  t (°C)  273.
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
6.1 Heat as a Form of Energy
1.
When a book slides to a stop on the horizontal rough surface of a table:
(a) the kinetic energy of the book is transformed into potential energy;
(b) heat is transformed into mechanical energy;
(c) the kinetic energy of the book is transformed into heat energy;
(d) the momentum of the book is conserved.
2.
The kilocalorie is:
(a) a unit of temperature;
(b) a unit of energy;
(c) 1 kg of water at 1°C.
3.
In Joule's paddle-wheel experiment, was all the change of gravitational poten-
tial energy used to heat the water?
4.
How are heat and temperature related to each other?
5.
How are heat and mechanical energy related to each other?
Q

T
E
t
useful Eout

Ein
286
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT

6.2 The Steam Engine and the Industrial Revolution
1.
Describe in your own words, possibly with a drawing, the operation of Watt's
steam engine.
2.
The purpose of the separate condenser in Watt's steam engine is to:
(a) save the water so it can be used again;
(b) save fuel by not having to reheat the cylinder after cooling;
(c) keep the steam pressure as low as possible;
(d) make the engine more compact.
3.
The history of the steam engine suggests that the social and economic effects
of technology are:
(a) always beneficial to everyone;
(b) mostly undesirable;
(c) unimportant one way or another;
(d) none of the above.
6.3 Power and Efficiency of Engines
1.
A strong horse, working steadily, is able to lift a 75-kg mass at a speed of 
1 m/s. What is the power output of the horse in watts?
2.
During a certain period, a home consumes 1 kW-hr of energy. How many
joules is this? How long could this amount of energy light a 100-W light bulb?
3.
The efficiency of a heat engine is the ratio of:
(a) the work output to the heat input;
(b) the work output to the heat output;
(c) the heat output to the heat input.
4.
What would be the efficiency, in percent, of a steam engine that took in the
equivalent of 3000 J of heat and produced 1200 J of work?
6.4 Carnot and the Beginnings of Thermodynamics
1.
What does Carnot's finding say about the efficiency of heat engines?
2.
A heat engine is most efficient when it works between objects that have:
(a) a large temperature difference;
(b) a small temperature difference;
(c) a large size.
3.
In what way is a refrigerator or an air conditioner also a heat engine?
4.
How are the Kelvin and Celsius temperature scales related to each other? What
would be the temperatures of freezing water, boiling water, and absolute zero
on these two scales?
6.5 Arriving at a General Conservation Law
1.
The significance of German Nature Philosophy in the history of science was
that it:
(a) was the most extreme form of the mechanistic viewpoint;
(b) was a reaction against excessive speculation;
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
287

(c) stimulated speculation about the unity of natural phenomena;
(d) delayed progress in science by opposing Newtonian mechanics.
2.
Discoveries in electricity and magnetism early in the nineteenth century con-
tributed to the discovery of the law of conservation of energy because:
(a) they attracted attention to the transformation of energy from one form to
another;
(b) they made it possible to produce more energy at less cost;
(c) they revealed what happened to the energy that was apparently lost in
steam engines;
(d) they made it possible to transmit energy over long distances.
3.
The development of steam engines helped the discovery of the law of conser-
vation of energy because:
(a) steam engines produced a large amount of energy;
(b) the caloric theory could not explain how steam engines worked;
(c) the precise idea of work was developed to rate steam engines;
(d) the internal energy of a steam engine was always found to be conserved.
6.6 The Two Laws of Thermodynamics
1.
Define the meaning of the symbols E, Q, W, and S for a system.
2.
State the first law of thermodynamics in your own words.
3.
What is the difference between the first law and the law for energy conservation?
4.
The value of Q can be positive, negative, or zero. Using an example, such as
the steam engine cylinder, explain what is happening in each case and exactly
why Q is positive, negative, or zero.
5.
Give an example of an imaginable situation that would violate the law regard-
ing entropy increase.
6.
The first law of thermodynamics is:
(a) true only for steam engines;
(b) true only when there is no friction;
(c) a completely general statement of conservation of energy;
(d) the only way to express conservation of energy.
7.
What two ways are there for changing the total energy of a system?
8.
The second law of thermodynamics says that the entropy of the Universe:
(a) cannot increase;
(b) cannot decrease;
(c) must increase;
(d) must decrease.
9.
The presumed "heat-death of the Universe" refers to a state in which:
(a) all mechanical energy has been transformed into heat energy;
(b) all heat energy has been transformed into other forms of energy;
(c) the temperature of the Universe decreases to absolute zero;
(d) the supply of coal and oil has been used up.
288
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT

6.7 Faith in the Laws of Thermodynamics
1.
Give some examples of situations in which energy seems not to be conserved.
2.
How was the law of energy conservation confirmed in the situations in 1?
3.
How does the status of the second law of thermodynamics differ from that of
the conservation laws?
4.
How might the second law of thermodynamics be connected with the forward
motion of time?
5.
What is meant by the "heat-death" of the universe?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1.
The introduction of steam technology transformed the economic and social
lives of people in the industrial world. In what ways has the introduction of
computer technology changed our economic and social lives?
2.
Give some examples of the first and second laws of thermodynamics in ac-
tual cases.
3.
Give an example of a hypothetical situation in which the first law of ther-
modynamics would not be violated but the second law is.
4.
Give an example of a hypothetical situation in which the second law of ther-
modynamics would not be violated but the first law is.
5.
What is the difference between work and power?
6.
Suppose the temperatures of the "hot" and "cold" bodies in a heat engine
were the same. What would be the efficiency of a heat engine that attempted
to operate between these two bodies? What would be the work output?
7.
The introduction of the steam engine had both positive and negative effects,
although all of these effects were not predicted at the time.
(a) List several actual effects on society, both beneficial and undesirable ones,
of the steam engine and of the gasoline internal combustion engine.
(b) List several predicted effects of nuclear power and of solar power by its in-
ventors and the general public at the time of its invention. List both ben-
eficial and undesirable ones.
8.
Explain why all ideal reversible engines have the same efficiency and why this
efficiency is the maximum possible for an engine. What is an ideal engine?
What is a reversible engine?
9.
Assuming that no real engine can be perfectly reversible, why does the for-
mula for the maximum efficiency of an engine imply that absolute zero can
never be reached in practice?
10.
Any of the terms in the equation E  W  Q can have negative values.
(a) What would be true of a system for which:
(1) E is negative?
(2) Q is negative?
(3) W is negative?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
289

(b) Which terms would be negative for the following systems?
(1) a person digging a ditch;
(2) a car battery while starting a car;
(3) an electric light bulb just after it is turned on;
(4) an electric light bulb an hour after it is turned on;
(5) a running refrigerator;
(6) an exploding firecracker.
11.
In each of the following, trace the chain of energy transformations from the
Sun to the energy in its final form.
(a) A pot of water is boiled on an electric stove.
(b) An automobile accelerates from rest on a level road, climbs a hill at con-
stant speed, and comes to a stop at a traffic light.
(c)
A windmill pumps water out of a flooded field.
12.
Why is it that despite centuries of attempts no perpetual motion machine has
been constructed? Is it likely that one will be in the future?
13.
Why can a block of ice at 0°C and water at 0°C coexist in an insulated bucket
without changes either way in the amount of ice?
14.
Why can an ocean liner not run all its engines simply by drawing heat from
the ocean, thereby making the ocean a bit colder?
15.
Since there is a tendency for heat to flow from hot to cold, will the Universe
eventually reach absolute zero?
Quantitative
1.
You walk up a flight of stairs to the second floor, which is 10 m above the first
floor, in 15 s. At the same time, a friend runs up the stairs in 5 s. Both of you
weigh 80 N. Find the amount of work and the amount of power that each of
you exerts in getting up the stairs.
2.
A skier of 70-kg mass experiences a pull on a ski lift from an engine trans-
mitting 140 W to the cable. Neglecting friction, how high can the engine pull
the skier in 500 s?
3.
One hundred joules (100 J) of heat is put into two engines. Engine A can lift
5 N a distance of 10 m in 10 s. Engine B pulls with a force of 2 N for 5 s a
distance of 20 m. Calculate the efficiency and power of each engine.
4.
While traveling in Switzerland on his honeymoon, James Prescott Joule at-
tempted to measure the difference in temperature of the water at the top and
at the bottom of a waterfall. Assuming that the amount of heat produced in
the water when it is stopped at the bottom is equal to the decrease in its grav-
itational potential energy, calculate roughly the temperature difference you
would expect to observe between the top and bottom of Niagara Falls, which
is 50 m in height. Does it matter how much water goes down the waterfall?
5.
If you place a hot body and a cold one in thermal contact, heat will flow from
the first to the second spontaneously. Suppose an amount of heat Q flows from
a body at temperature T1 to a body at T2. What is the entropy change of the
universe?
290
6. THE DYNAMICS OF HEAT

6.
An ice cube (10 g) at 0°C melts in a glass of water (100 g) at a temperature
just above 0°C. Melting the ice requires 3.4  106 J of energy (which comes
from cooling the water). Neglecting temperature changes, what is the entropy
change of the ice? of the water? of the universe?
7.
In Section 6.3 you saw that a 100-W light bulb burning for 10 hr consumes 
1 kWhr of energy. The production of 1 kWhr of electricity to run the light
bulb requires the burning of about 0.8 lb of coal in an electric generating plant.
(a) If the average citizen consumes energy at the rate of 1.5 kJ/s, how many
pounds of coal do you consume per year? during an expected life span of
75 yr?
(b) The United States population is about 280 million. For their energy needs,
how many pounds of coal would they consume in 1 day?
8.
On average, a person emits as much heat from his/her body as a 100-watt bulb.
How come?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
291

This page intentionally left blank 

A. THE KINETIC THEORY
7.1
An Ideal Gas
7.2
A Model for the Gaseous State
7.3
The Speeds of Molecules
7.4
The Sizes of Molecules
B. APPLYING THE KINETIC THEORY
7.5
Kinetic-Theory Explanation of the Ideal Gas Law
7.6
Kinetic-Theory Explanation of the Second Law
7.7
Maxwell's Demon and the Statistical View of the Second Law
7.8
Two Challenges
A. THE KINETIC THEORY
7.1 AN IDEAL GAS
During the 1840s, many scientists recognized that heat is not a substance
but a form of energy that can be converted into other forms. James Prescott
Joule and Rudolf Clausius went a step further. Heat can produce mechan-
ical energy, and mechanical energy can produce heat; therefore, they rea-
soned, the "heat energy" of a substance is simply the kinetic energy of 
its atoms and molecules. This idea, which forms the basis of the kinetic-
molecular theory of heat, is largely correct.
However, the idea of atoms and molecules was not completely accepted
in the nineteenth century. (Molecules, as you know, are the smallest pieces
of a substance. They may themselves be composed of atoms of simpler sub-
stances.) If such small bits of matter really existed, they would be too small
to observe even under the most powerful microscopes. Since scientists could
293
Heat—A Matter
of Motion
C
H
A
P
T
E
R 77

not observe molecules, they could not confirm directly the hypothesis that
heat is molecular kinetic energy. So they resorted to the indirect way of
checking the plausibility of the hypothesis, which is always useful: They
derived from this hypothesis predictions about the behavior of measurably
large samples of matter, and then tested these predictions by experiment.
For reasons that will be explained, it is easiest to test such hypotheses
by observing the properties of gases. The resulting development of the ki-
netic theory of gases in the nineteenth century led to one of the last ma-
jor triumphs of Newtonian mechanics. This chapter deals mainly with the
kinetic theory as applied to gases. We start with the observed properties of
a simple gas; then, in the following sections, we will attempt to account for
these properties and to understand origins of the laws of thermodynamics
on the basis of the kinetic theory.
One of the most easily measured characteristics of a confined gas is its
pressure. Experience with balloons and tires makes the idea of air pressure
seem obvious. But there are important subtleties. One involves the pres-
sure exerted by the air around us.
Galileo, in his book on mechanics, Two New Sciences (1638), noted that
a lift-type pump cannot raise water more than the equivalent of 10 m. This
fact was well known, and such pumps were widely used to obtain drinking
water from wells and to remove water from mines. Already you have seen
one important consequence of this limited ability of pumps to lift water out
of deep mines: the initial stimulus for the development of steam engines.
But why only 10 m? Why did the lift pumps work at all?
Air Pressure
These puzzles were solved as a result of experiments by Torricelli (a stu-
dent of Galileo), as well as by Guericke, Pascal, and Boyle. By 1660, it was
fairly clear that the operation of a "lift" pump depends on the pressure of
the air. By removing some air above the water in the pump, it merely re-
duces the pressure at the top of the water in the pipe. It is the pressure ex-
erted by the atmosphere on the pool of water below which forces water up
the pipe. A good pump can reduce the pressure at the top of the pipe to
nearly zero. Then the atmospheric pressure can force water up above the
pool. But atmospheric pressure at sea level is not great enough to support
a column of water any higher than 10 m. Mercury is almost 14 times as
dense as water. Thus, ordinary pressure on a pool of mercury can support
a column only one-fourteenth as high, or about 0.76 m (76 cm). This is a
convenient height of an instrument for measuring atmospheric pressure.
Therefore, much of the seventeenth-century research on air pressure was
294
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION

done with a column of mercury, a mercury barometer. Torricelli designed
the first of these barometers.
The height of the mercury column that can be supported by air pres-
sure does not depend on the diameter of the tube; that is, it depends not
on the total amount of mercury, but only on its height. This may seem
strange at first. To understand it, you must consider the difference between
pressure and force. Pressure is defined as the magnitude of the force acting per-
pendicularly on a surface divided by the area of that surface:
P 
(in units of N/m2).
Thus, a large force may produce only a small pressure if it is spread over
a large area. For example, you can walk on snow without sinking in it if
you wear snowshoes. On the other hand, a small force can produce a very
large pressure if it is concentrated on a small area. Women's spike-heel
shoes have dented many a wooden floor or carpet. The pressure exerted
by a spike heel can be greater than that under an elephant's foot!
In short, the pressure measurement is not affected by the cross-sectional
area of the barometer tube or by the total weight of the column it sup-
ports, because pressure is the ratio of the two. Twice the weight owing to
twice the size of the tube still provides the same value for the ratio that de-
fines pressure.
The Relationship Between Pressure and Volume
In 1661, two English scientists, Richard Towneley and Henry Power, 
discovered an important basic relation. They found that—e.g., in a thin
balloon—the pressure exerted by a gas is inversely proportional to the volume oc-
cupied by that gas. Doubling the pressure (by letting in more gas) will dou-
F⊥

A
7.1 AN IDEAL GAS
295
0.76 m
0.0 m
FIGURE 7.1
Torricelli's barometer is a glass tube standing in a
pool of mercury. The topmost part of the tube is empty of air.
The air pressure on the pool supports the weight of the column
of mercury in the tube up to a height of about 0.76 m. The unit
of pressure in the metric system is N/m3, which has been given
the name "pascal" (symbol: Pa).

ble the volume of the balloon. Using P for pressure and V for volume, this
relationship is
P 
or
P 
or
PV  a,
where a is some constant. For example, if the volume of a given quantity of
air in a balloon is halved (say, by compressing it), the pressure exerted by
the gas inside doubles. On the other hand, if you double the volume of the
a

V
1

V
296
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
FIGURE 7.2
Because the force acts on a very small surface, the pressure under
a thin, high heel is greater than under an elephant's foot (which acts on a larger
surface). 

closed container with a certain amount of air inside, the pressure inside is
halved. Robert Boyle confirmed this relation by extensive experiments. It is
an empirical rule, now generally known as Boyle's law. However, the law
holds true exactly only under special conditions, as given below.
The Effect of Temperature on 
Gas Pressure and Volume
Boyle recognized that if the temperature of a gas changes during an ex-
periment, the relation P  a/V no longer applies. For example, the pres-
sure exerted by a gas in a closed container of fixed size increases if the gas
is heated, even though its volume remains constant. However, if the tem-
perature of a gas is held constant, then Boyle's law does apply. Thus we
modify the rule as follows:
P 
if T is constant.
(a)
Many scientists throughout the eighteenth century also investigated how,
say in a thin balloon, gases expand when heat is supplied, even though the
pressure remains the same. Eventually, evidence for a surprisingly simple
general law appeared. The French chemist Joseph-Louis Gay-Lussac
(1778-1850) found that all the gases he studied (air, oxygen, hydrogen, car-
bon dioxide, etc.) changed their volume in the same way. If the pressure re-
mained constant, then the change in volume was proportional to the change in
temperature. This may be expressed in symbols:
V  T,
if P is constant.
(b)
On the other hand, if the volume was kept constant (say, in using a rigid con-
tainer), the change in pressure of the gas inside was proportional to the change in
temperature:
P  T
if V is constant.
(c)
The experimental data obtained by Boyle, Gay-Lussac, and many other
scientists are expressed in the three proportionalities, (a), (b), and (c). These
relate the three main characteristics of a fixed amount of a gas—the pres-
sure, volume, and temperature, each measured from zero—when any one
variable is held constant. Introducing a new constant, k, these three pro-
a

V
7.1 AN IDEAL GAS
297

portionalities may be joined together into a single, general equation known
as the ideal gas law.
This equation is one of the most important discoveries about gases, but in
use one must be careful about the units! The proportionality constant k
depends on the kind of gas; T, the temperature of the gas, has to be given
on the absolute, or Kelvin, scale, where, as defined earlier,
T (K)  t (°C)  273.15.
(T is temperature in the same units as used for the definition of entropy
given earlier in Chapter 6: S  Q/T.) The pressure P is always the total
pressure (in units of N/m2, which is given the name Pascal, abbreviation
Pa), including the so-called ambient pressure of the atmosphere. Thus a car
tire blown up to 32 lb/in2 above atmospheric pressure has an actual gas
pressure inside of 32 lb/in2  15 lb/in2  47 lb/in2, or in mks units 2.2 
105 Pa  1.0  105 Pa  3.2  105 Pa.
The equation relating P, V, and T is called the ideal gas law because it
is not completely accurate for real gases at very low pressures. It also does
not apply when pressure is so high, or temperature so low, that the gas
PV  kT
298
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
°Celsius
Absolute
(Kelvin)
lead melts
water boils
water freezes
carbon dioxide
freezes (dry ice)
oxygen
nitrogen
liquify
absolute zero
327
600
100
373
0
273
-78
195
-183
90
-196
77
-273
0
  
FIGURE 7.3
Comparison of the Celsius and Ab-
solute temperature scales.

nearly changes to a liquid. Thus, it is not a law of physics in the same sense
as the majestic law of conservation of energy, which is valid under all cir-
cumstances. Rather, it simply gives an experimentally based and useful but
approximate summary of the observed properties of real gases.
Consider what would happen if we tried to lower the temperature of the
gas to absolute zero; that is, T  0 K (or, in Celsius, t  273.15°C). In
this extreme case, the entire factor involving temperature would be zero.
According to the ideal gas law, the PV term must also fall to zero at this
temperature. At constant pressure, the volume would shrink to zero. In fact,
all real gases become liquid before that temperature is reached. Both ex-
periment and thermodynamic theory indicate that it is impossible actually
to cool anything—gas, liquid, or solid—down to exactly this temperature.
However, a series of cooling operations can produce temperatures closely
approaching this limit.
In view of the unique meaning of the lowest temperature for a gas obey-
ing the ideal gas law, Lord Kelvin (William Thomson) proposed the ab-
solute temperature scale and put its zero at 273.15°C. This is why the ab-
solute scale is sometimes called the Kelvin scale, and why temperatures on
this scale are measured in kelvins.
7.1 AN IDEAL GAS
299
FIGURE 7.4
Lord Kelvin (William
Thomson) (1824-1907). 

The ideal gas law, PV  kT, summarizes experimental facts about gases.
The kinetic theory of gases offers a theoretical explanation for these facts.
To prepare for that, we need to develop a kinetic model of a gas.
7.2 A MODEL FOR THE GASEOUS STATE
What are the differences between a gas and a liquid or solid? You know by
observation that, if not compressed, liquids and solids have definite vol-
ume. Even if their shapes change, they still take up the same amount of
space. A gas, on the other hand, will spontaneously
expand to fill any container (such as a room). If not
confined, it will leak out and spread in all directions.
Gases have low densities compared to those of liq-
uids and solids, typically about 1000 times smaller.
Therefore gas molecules are usually relatively far
apart from one another. In the model of a gas we
are constructing here, we can reasonably assume that the forces between
molecules act only over very short distances. In other words, gas molecules
are considered to be moving freely most of the time. In liquids, the mole-
cules are closer together; forces act among them continually, and keep them
from flying apart. In solids, the molecules are usually even closer together,
and the forces between them keep them in a definite orderly arrangement.
Our initial model of a gas is thus very simple, following Newton's ad-
vice to start with the simplest hypotheses. We will assume that the mole-
cules behave like extremely small balls or marbles; they are tiny spheres or
clumps of spheres that exert no force at all on each other except when they
happen to make contact. Moreover, all the collisions of these spheres are
assumed to be perfectly elastic. Thus, the total kinetic energy of two spheres
is the same before and after they collide.
Note that the word "model" is used in two different senses in science.
Earlier we mentioned the model of Newcomen's engine which James Watt
was given to repair. That was a working model. It actually did function, al-
though it was much smaller than the original engine, and contained some
parts made of different materials. Now we are discussing a theoretical model
of a gas. This model exists only in the imagination. Like the points, lines,
triangles, and spheres studied in geometry, this theoretical model can be
discussed mathematically. The results of such a discussion is intended to
understand the real world although, of course, the model will eventually
have to be tested to see if it approximates reality.
300
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
Gases can be confined without a
container. A star, for example, is
a mass of gas confined by gravi-
tational force. Another example
is the Earth's atmosphere.

Our theoretical model represents the gas as consisting of a large number
of very small particles in rapid, disordered motion. "A large number" means
something like a billion billion (1018) or more particles in a sample as small
as a bubble in a soft drink. "Very small" means a diameter about a hundred-
millionth of a centimeter (108 cm). "Rapid motion" means an average speed
at normal temperatures of a few hundred meters per second.
What is meant by "disordered" motion? Nineteenth-century kinetic the-
orists assumed that each individual molecule moved in a definite way, de-
termined by Newton's laws of motion. Of course, in
practice it is impossible to follow billions upon bil-
lions of particles at the same time. They move in all
directions, and each particle changes its direction
and speed during collisions with other particles or
with the wall of the container. Therefore, we can-
not make a definite prediction of the motion of any one individual particle.
Instead, we must be content with describing the average behavior of large
collections of particles. From moment to moment, each individual mole-
cule behaves according to the laws of motion. But it is easier to describe
the average behavior, and to assume complete ignorance about any individ-
ual motions.
To see why this is so, consider the results of flipping a large number of
coins all at once. If you assume the coins behave randomly, you can confi-
dently predict that flipping a million coins will give approximately 50%
heads and 50% tails. The same principle applies to gas molecules bounc-
ing around in a container. You can safely assume, for example, that about
as many are moving in one direction as in another. Furthermore, at a given
moment the same number of molecules is equally likely to be found in any
7.2 A MODEL FOR THE GASEOUS STATE
301
The word "gas" was originally
derived from the Greek word
chaos; it was first used by the
Belgian chemist Jan Baptista van
Helmont (1580-1644).
Solid
Liquid
Gas
FIGURE 7.5
A very simplified "model" of the three states of matter: (a) solid, (b) liq-
uid, and (c) gas.
(a)
(b)
(c)

one cubic centimeter of space inside the container as in any other. "Disor-
dered," then, means that velocities and positions are distributed randomly.
Each molecule is just as likely to be moving to the right as to the left (or
in any other direction). It is just as likely to be near the center as near the
edge (or any other position).
7.3 THE SPEEDS OF MOLECULES
The basic idea of the kinetic theory of matter is that heat energy is related to the
kinetic energy of moving molecules. As we shall see, this is right. This idea had
been frequently suggested in the past. However, many difficulties stood in
the way of its general acceptance. Some of these difficulties are well worth
mentioning. They show that not all good ideas in science (any more than
outside science) are immediately successful.
In 1738, the Swiss mathematician Daniel Bernoulli showed how a ki-
netic model could explain a well-known property of gases. This property
is described by a variant of Boyle's law: As long as the temperature does
not change, the pressure of a gas is proportional to its density.
P  D
if T is constant.
Here density D is defined as the amount of mass (m) per unit volume (V )
of the gas, D  m/V.
302
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
FIGURE 7.6 Daniel Bernoulli (1700-1782). 

Bernoulli assumed that the pressure of a gas is simply a result of the im-
pacts of individual molecules striking the wall of the container. If the den-
sity of the gas were twice as great, there would be twice as many molecules
per cubic centimeter. Thus, Bernoulli said, there would be twice as many
molecules striking the wall per second and hence twice the pressure.
Bernoulli's proposal seems to have been the first step toward the modern
kinetic theory of gases. Yet it was generally ignored by other scientists in
the eighteenth century. One reason for this was that Newton had proposed
a different theory in his Principia (1687). Newton showed that Boyle's law
could be explained by a model in which particles at rest exert forces that re-
pel neighboring particles. Newton did not claim that he had proved that
gases really are composed of such fixed, mutually repelling particles. But
most scientists, impressed by Newton's discoveries, simply assumed that his
treatment of gas pressure was also right. (It was not.)
The kinetic theory of gases was proposed again in 1820 by English physi-
cist John Herapath. Herapath, on his own, rediscovered Bernoulli's find-
ings on the relations between pressure and density, or volume, of a gas and
the speeds of the particles. Herapath's work was also ignored by most other
scientists.
James Prescott Joule, however, did see the value of Herapath's work. In
1848, he read a paper to the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Soci-
ety in which he tried to revive the kinetic theory. This paper, too, was ig-
nored by other scientists. For one thing, physicists do not generally look
in the publications of a "literary and philosophical society" for scientifically
important papers. However, evidence for the equivalence of heat and me-
chanical energy continued to mount. Several other physicists independently
worked out the consequences of the hypothesis that the heat energy in a
gas is explained and given by the kinetic energy of its molecules. Rudolf
Clausius in Germany published a paper in 1856 on "The Nature of the
Motion We Call Heat." This paper established the basic principles of ki-
netic theory essentially in the form accepted today. Soon afterward, James
Clerk Maxwell in Britain and Ludwig Boltzmann in Austria set forth the
full mathematical details of the theory.
Maxwell's Velocity Distribution
It did not seem likely that at a given moment all molecules in a gas would
have the same speed. In 1859, Maxwell applied the mathematics of proba-
bility to this problem. He suggested that the speeds of molecules in a gas
are distributed over all possible values. Most molecules have speeds not
very far from the average speed. Some have much lower speeds and some
much higher speeds.
7.3 THE SPEEDS OF MOLECULES
303

A simple example helps to understand Maxwell's distribution of molec-
ular speeds. Suppose a person shoots arrows at a practice target. Some ar-
rows will probably hit the bull's-eye. Others will miss by smaller or larger
amounts, as shown in (a) in the sketch above. The number of arrows scat-
tered at various distances from the center are counted. A graph of the re-
sults is shown in (b). This graph shows the distribution of the holes made
by arrow hits for one set of shots. If you plot the distribution of hits for a
very large number of shots, you will get a distribution like the one in (c).
For still larger numbers of arrow shots the spread between the holes you
see in (c) will become smaller, ultimately too small to be noticed. By anal-
ogy, the number of molecules in a gas being very large indeed, a graph
showing the distribution of molecular speeds is smooth at any scale that can
be drawn.
The actual shape of the curve shown in (c) was determined by many
things about the bow, the arrows, the person, and so on. Other processes
give rise to other shapes of curves. The speeds of the molecules in a gas
are determined by the collisions they have with each other. Maxwell used
304
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
Number of holes
Distance from center
(b)
(a)
Number of holes
Distance from center
(c)
FIGURE 7.7
Target practice experiment: (a) scatter of holes in target; (b) graph showing
number of holes in each ring from the bull's-eye; (c) graph showing that the distribution
becomes smooth for a very large number of shots and for very narrow rings.
0° C
900° C
1
Relative number of molecules
2
3
km/sec
V
2100° C
FIGURE 7.8
Maxwell's distribution
of speeds in gases at different tem-
peratures.

a clever mathematical argument to deduce what the distribution of molec-
ular speeds should be.
Maxwell's proposed distribution for molecular speeds in a gas is shown
in the diagram in graphical form for three different temperatures. For a
gas at any given temperature, the "tail" of each curve is much longer on
the right (high speeds) than on the left (low speeds). As the temperature
increases, the peak of the curve shifts to higher speeds, and the speed dis-
tribution becomes more broadly spread out.
All this had to be tested, to see if the theoretical model is of real use, or
not. The best test was a direct one, by experiments in the 1920s. Otto Stern
in Germany devised an ingenious method for measuring the speeds in a
beam of molecules. Stern and others found that molecular speeds are in-
deed distributed according to Maxwell's theory. This gave a most direct
proof of the kinetic-molecular model of a gas. (See next page.)
7.4 THE SIZES OF MOLECULES
On the way to that proof, there were reasonably skeptical questions to wres-
tle with. Was it reasonable to suppose that gases consist of molecules mov-
ing at speeds up to several hundred meters per second at room tempera-
ture? If that model were correct, gases should mix with each other very
rapidly. But anyone who has studied chemistry knows that they do not.
Suppose someone opens a bottle of perfume or a container containing am-
monia gas in a corner of the classroom. Several minutes may pass before
the odor is noticed at the other end. But according to Maxwell's speed dis-
tribution, each of the gas molecules should have crossed the room hun-
dreds of times by then. Therefore, something must be wrong with the 
kinetic-theory model.
Rudolf Clausius recognized this as a valid objection to his own version
of the kinetic theory. His 1856 paper had assumed that the particles are so
small that they can be treated like mathematical points. If this were true,
particles would almost never collide with one another. However, the ob-
served slowness of diffusion and mixing convinced Clausius to change his
model. He thought it likely that the molecules of a gas are not vanishingly
small, but of a finite size. Particles of finite size moving very rapidly would
often collide with one another. An individual molecule might have an in-
stantaneous speed of several hundred meters per second, but it changes its
direction of motion every time it collides with another molecule. The more
often it collides with other molecules, the less likely it is to move very far
in any one direction. How often collisions occur depends on their size and
7.4 THE SIZES OF MOLECULES
305

DIRECT MEASUREMENT OF MOLECULAR SPEEDS
A narrow beam of molecules is formed by let-
ting molecules of a hot gas pass through a se-
ries of slits. In order to keep the beam from
spreading out, collisions with randomly mov-
ing molecules must be avoided. Therefore, the
source of gas and the slits are housed in a
highly evacuated chamber. The molecules are
then allowed to pass through a slit in the side
of a cylindrical drum that can be spun very
rapidly. The general scheme is shown in the
drawing above.
As the drum rotates, the slit moves out of
the beam of molecules. No more molecules
can enter until the drum has rotated through
a whole revolution. Meanwhile, the molecules
in the drum continue moving to the right,
some moving quickly and some moving
slowly.
Fastened to the inside of the drum is a sen-
sitive film that acts as a detector. Any mole-
cule striking the film leaves a mark. The faster
molecules strike the film first, before the drum
306
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
High speed
molecules
Darkening of film
(proportional to
number of molecules)
Distance along film
(proportional to 1/speed)
Low speed
molecules
Drum
Screens to
define beam
Oven
to vacuum pumps
FIGURE 7.9 Schematic presentation of Otto Stern's
experiment on the distribution of the speeds of gas
molecules.

on how crowded the molecules are. For most purposes, you can think of
molecules as being relatively far apart and of very small size. But they are
just large enough and crowded enough to get in one another's way. Real-
izing this, Clausius was able to modify his model to explain why gases mix
so slowly, a process known as diffusion.
Clausius now was faced with a problem that plagues every theoretical
physicist. If a simple model is modified to explain better the observed prop-
erties, it becomes more complicated. Some plausible adjustment or ap-
proximation may be necessary in order to make any predictions from the
model. If the predictions disagree with experimental data, is this because
of a flaw in the model or a calculation error introduced by the approxima-
7.4 THE SIZES OF MOLECULES
307
has rotated very far. The slower molecules
hit the film later, after the drum has ro-
tated farther. In general, molecules of dif-
ferent speeds strike different parts of the
film.
The darkness of the film at any point
is proportional to the number of mole-
cules that hit it there. Measurement of the
darkening of the film shows the relative
distribution of molecular speeds. The
speckled strip represents the unrolled film,
showing the impact position of molecules
over many revolutions of the drum. The
heavy band indicates where the beam
struck the film before the drum started ro-
tating. (It also marks the place to which
infinitely fast molecules would get once
the drum was rotating.)
A comparison of some experimental re-
sults with those predicted from theory is
shown in the graph. The dots show the
experimental results, and the solid line
represents the predictions from the kinetic
theory.
FIGURE 7.10
The larger the molecules, the more likely they are to collide with each other,
thus delaying the progress of a molecule through the gas.

tions? The development of a theory often involves a compromise between
adequate explanation of the data and mathematical convenience.
Nonetheless, it soon became clear that the new model was a great im-
provement over the old one. It turned out that certain other properties of
gases also depend on the size of the molecules. By combining data on sev-
eral such properties, it was possible to work backward and find fairly reli-
able values for molecular sizes. Here, only the result of these calculations
is reported. Typically, the diameter of gas molecules came out to be of the
order of 1010 to 109 m. This is not far from the modern values—an amaz-
ingly good result. After all, no one previously had known whether a mol-
ecule was many times smaller or bigger than that. In fact, as Lord Kelvin
remarked:
The idea of an atom has been so constantly associated with in-
credible assumptions of infinite strength, absolute rigidity, mystical
actions at a distance and indivisibility, that chemists and many other
reasonable naturalists of modern times, losing all patience with it,
have dismissed it to the realms of metaphysics, and made it smaller
than "anything we can conceive."
Kelvin showed that other methods could also be used to estimate the
size of atoms and molecules. None of these methods gave results as reli-
able as did the kinetic theory. But it was encouraging that they all led to
the same order of magnitude (power of ten).
One early attempt to obtain the order of magnitude of the size of a mol-
ecule was made by Benjamin Franklin. Dropping a spoonful of oil on a
pond, he was able to estimate the width of a single molecule by assuming
that the oil formed a slick one molecule thick, then comparing the origi-
nal volume of the oil to the area covered by the oil on the pond. A similar
experiment is provided in the Student Guide, "Avogadro's Number and the
Size and Mass of a Molecule."
B. APPLYING THE KINETIC THEORY
7.5 KINETIC-THEORY EXPLANATION OF THE
IDEAL GAS LAW
As we now know, according to the kinetic theory, the pressure of a gas re-
sults from the continual impacts of gas particles against the container wall.
This explains why pressure is inversely proportional to the volume and di-
308
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION

rectly proportional to density: the smaller the vol-
ume or the greater the density, the greater the num-
ber of particles colliding with the wall.
But pressure also depends on the speed of the in-
dividual particles (hence, on the kinetic energy,
1⁄2mv2 of them). This speed determines the force ex-
erted on the wall during each impact and the frequency of the impacts. If
the collisions with the wall are perfectly elastic, the law of conservation of
momentum will describe the results of the impact. (The detailed reason-
ing for this procedure is worked out in the Student Guide.) An atom bounc-
ing off a wall undergoes a change of momentum. As you know from Sec-
tion 5.4, whenever there is a change of momentum, there must be a force
exerted on the object, an atom in this case. At the same time, there must
be a reaction force on the wall that repelled the atom, which contributes
to what we observe as pressure. This is a beautifully simple application of
Newtonian mechanics.
Applying Newtonian mechanics to the kinetic-molecular model of gases,
the result of the actual calculation (in three dimensions of motion) leads to
the conclusion that pressure P is related to the average of the squared speed
of the atoms (v2)av by the expression
P 
,
where V is the volume of the gas, and m is the mass of an individual gas
atom. The steps in the derivation are quite straightforward (see the deri-
vation in the Student Guide) and a beautiful case of applying Newton's laws
in a region Newton himself never did.
1⁄3m(v2)av

V
7.5 KINETIC-THEORY EXPLANATION OF THE IDEAL GAS LAW
309
If the pressure were kept con-
stant, then according to the ideal
gas law, the volume of a sample
of gas would shrink to zero at
273°C.
FIGURE 7.11
Model of gas particle in a con-
tainer with a moveable wall.

We now have two expressions for the pressure of a gas. One summarizes
the experimental facts, PV  kT. The other is derived by Newton's laws
from a theoretical model, PV  1⁄3m(v2)av. The theoretical expression will
agree with the experimental expression only if kT  1⁄3m(v2)av. This would
mean that the temperature of a gas is proportional to (v2)av. The mass m
of each molecule is a constant, so the temperature T is also proportional
to m(v2)av. But this allows us also to write T  1⁄2m(v2)av, which immedi-
ately tells us that according to the kinetic theory the temperature of a gas is
proportional to the average kinetic energy of its molecules! We already had some
idea that raising the temperature of a material somehow affected the mo-
tion of its "small parts." We were aware that the higher the temperature
of a gas, the more rapidly its molecules are moving. But the conclusion
T  1⁄2m(v2)av is a precise quantitative relationship derived from the kinetic
model and empirical laws. At last we know for certain, for a gas, that heat
is not some fluid (caloric) or other substance. It is just the kinetic energy of
the particles (atoms) making up the material (or, as we shall see later, radi-
ant energy).
310
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
FIGURE 7.12
Balloon for carrying
weather forecasting apparatus.

Kinetic-Theory Explanation of the
Temperature-Volume Relationship
The kinetic theory makes possible other quantitative predictions. We know
by experience (e.g., by inflating a bicycle tire quickly) that when a gas is
compressed or condensed rapidly, its temperature changes. The general gas
law (PV  kT) applies. Can our model explain this result?
In the model used in the previous subsection, atoms or molecules were
bouncing back and forth between the walls of a box. Every collision with
the wall was perfectly elastic, so the particles rebounded with no loss in
speed (or kinetic energy). Suppose the outside force that holds one wall in
place is suddenly increased. What will happen to the wall? The wall moves
inward, compressing the gas. As it compresses the gas, it does work on the
particles, increasing their kinetic energy. As kinetic energy goes up, the
temperature of the gas should rise—which is just what happens when a gas
is compressed quickly.
If the outside force on the wall is decreased instead of increased, just the
opposite happens. Again, what we learned earlier in mechanics comes in
handy. As long as the wall was stationary, the particles did no work on it,
and the wall did no work on the particles. Now if the wall is free to move
outward, in the same direction as the force exerted on it by the particles as
they smash into the wall, the picture changes. Since the particles, by their
collisions, exert a force on the wall and the wall moves in the direction of
the force, the particles must be doing work on the
wall. The energy needed to do this work must come
from somewhere. The only available source of en-
ergy here is part or all of the kinetic energy (1⁄2mv2)
of the particles. In fact, it can be shown that mole-
cules colliding perfectly elastically with a receding
wall rebound with slightly less speed. Therefore, the
kinetic energy of the particles must decrease. The
7.5 KINETIC-THEORY EXPLANATION OF THE IDEAL GAS LAW
311
d
F
FIGURE 7.13
Particles in a cylinder being compressed.
This phenomenon can be dem-
onstrated by means of the ex-
pansion cloud chamber, or cool-
ing of CO2 fire extinguisher
while in use. In the last case, the
"wall" is the air mass being
pushed away.

relationship T  1⁄2m(v2)av implies that the temperature of the gas will drop.
This is exactly what happens when a container holding a gas expands!
Brownian Motion
Many different kinds of experimental evidence support these conclusions
and therefore support the kinetic-theory model of a gas. Perhaps the most
sophisticated evidence is the motion of very small particles seen through a
microscope, when they are suspended in a gas or liquid. The gas or liquid
molecules themselves are too small to be seen directly, but their effects on
a larger particle (e.g., a particle of smoke) can be observed through the mi-
croscope. At any instant, swarms of molecules moving at very different
speeds are striking the larger particle from all sides. So many molecules are
taking part that their total effect nearly cancels. Any remaining effect
changes in magnitude and direction from moment to moment. Therefore,
the impact of the invisible molecules makes the visible particles appear 
to "dance" or jitter randomly in the view field of the microscope. The hot-
ter the gas or liquid, the more lively the motion, as the relationship
T  1⁄2m(v2)av predicts.
This observation is known as Brownian motion. It was named after the
English botanist, Robert Brown, who in 1827 observed the phenomenon
312
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
FIGURE 7.14
Track of a particle in
Brownian motion. Successive posi-
tions, recorded every 20 seconds,
are connected by straight lines.
The actual paths between recorded
positions would be as erratic as the
overall path.

while looking at a suspension of the microscopic grains of plant pollen. The
same kind of motion of suspended particles ("thermal motion") also exists
in liquids and solids, although there the particles are far more constrained
than in gases.
The origin of Brownian motion remained a mystery for many years, un-
til in 1905 Albert Einstein, using the kinetic theory, predicted that such
motion should occur. Comparison between his detailed predictions and the
observations of Brownian motion helped to convince most of the remain-
ing sceptics at the time about the reality of atoms. This phenomenon, which
is simple to set up and fascinating to watch, gives striking evidence that the
smallest parts of all matter in the Universe are indeed in a perpetual state
of lively, random motion.
7.6 KINETIC-THEORY EXPLANATION OF 
THE SECOND LAW
The kinetic-theory model can explain the behavior of a gas when it is com-
pressed or expanded, warmed or cooled. In the late nineteenth century, the
model was refined to take into account many effects we have not discussed.
There proved to be limits beyond which the model breaks down. For ex-
ample, radiated heat comes from the Sun through the vacuum of space, or
from an electric grill. This is not explainable in terms of the thermal mo-
tion of particles; rather, that thermal radiation is a form of electromagnetic
waves. But in most cases the model worked splendidly, explaining the phe-
nomenon of heat in terms of the ordinary motions of submicroscopic par-
ticles. It fulfilled much of the hope Newton had expressed in the Principia
and in the Opticks that all phenomena of nature could be explained in terms
of the motion of the small parts of matter (atoms).
As we noted earlier, a basic philosophical theme of the Newtonian cos-
mology is the idea that the world is like a machine whose parts never wear
out and which never runs down. This idea inspired the search for conser-
vation laws applying to matter and motion. So far in this text, you have seen
that this search has been successful. We can measure "matter" by mass, and
"motion" by momentum or by kinetic energy. By 1850, the law of conser-
vation of mass had been firmly established in chemistry. In physics, the laws
of conservation of momentum and of energy had been equally well estab-
lished.
Yet these successful conservation laws could not banish the suspicion that
somehow the world is running down, the parts of the machine are wearing
out. Energy may be conserved in burning fuel, but it loses its usefulness as
7.6 KINETIC-THEORY EXPLANATION OF THE SECOND LAW
313

the heat goes off into the atmosphere. The coal
burned in a steam engine can never be recovered
once it is burned. Mass may be conserved in scram-
bling an egg, but the organized structure of the egg
is lost forever. In these transformations, something
is conserved, but something is also lost. Some 
processes are irreversible; that is, they will not run
backward. There is no way to unscramble an egg,
although such a change would not violate mass con-
servation. There is no way to draw smoke and hot
fumes back into a blackened stick, forming a new,
unburned match. There is no way to run a steam en-
gine backward and obtain all of the heat originally
obtained from the burning of the fuel.
Section 6.4 discussed one type of irreversible
process, that involving heat engines, which is gov-
erned by the second law of thermodynamics. As we saw,
that law can be stated in several equivalent ways:
•
Heat will not by itself flow from a cold body to a hot one.
•
It is impossible to convert fully a given amount of heat into work.
•
The entropy of an isolated system, and therefore of the Universe, tends
to increase.
The processes of scrambling an egg, of mixing smoke and air, or of wear-
ing down a piece of machinery do not, at first sight, seem to obey the same
laws as do heat engines. However, these processes are also governed by the
second law. Heat, as you have seen, is represented by the disordered motions
314
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
FIGURE 7.15
Waterfall.
Our life runs down in sending
up the clock.
The brook runs down in sending
up our life.
The sun runs down in sending
up the brook.
And there is something sending
up the sun.
It is this backward motion toward
the source,
Against the stream, that most we
see ourselves in
The tribute of the current to the
source.
It is from this in nature we are
from.
It is most us.
Excerpt from 
"West-Running Brook,"
(by Robert Frost).

of atoms and molecules. Converting ordered mechanical work into heat—
say, the push of a piston straight into a cylinder full of gas—thus leads to
an increase in disordered motion in the heated material. In fact, entropy
can be defined mathematically as a measure of the disorder of a system
(though it is not necessary to go into the mathematics here). In sum, irre-
versible processes are processes for which entropy increases, and the in-
crease in entropy is a measure of the increase in the disorder of the atoms,
molecules, and any other components making up the system.
7.7 MAXWELL'S DEMON AND THE STATISTICAL
VIEW OF THE SECOND LAW
The Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann, thinking about "irreversible"
phenomena, detected a loophole in the rather pessimistic picture of a Uni-
verse running down as entropy increased. He concluded that the tendency
toward dissipation of energy is not an absolute law of physics that holds in
every situation. Rather, when it concerns the behavior of many particles, it
is only a statistical law.
Think of a balloon filled with air containing billions upon billions of
molecules. Boltzmann agreed that, of all conceivable arrangements of the
gas molecules at a given instant, their motion would nearly always be com-
pletely "disordered," as we have noted (see the meaning of "disorder" in
Section 7.2). Yet, it is conceivable that at some moment most of the mol-
ecules happen, by chance, to be moving in the same direction. In any ran-
7.7 MAXWELL'S DEMON AND THE STATISTICAL VIEW OF THE SECOND LAW
315
FIGURE 7.16
Stroboscopic pho-
tograph of a bouncing ball. 

dom arrangement fluctuations from complete disor-
der are bound to occur. But the greater the fluctu-
ation toward order, the less likely it is to occur. For
collections of particles as large as 1023, the chance
of a fluctuation large enough to be measurable is
vanishingly small, but not zero. By the same argument, it is conceivable that
a cold kettle of water will heat up on its own after being struck by only the
most energetic molecules that happen to be in the surrounding air. It is
also conceivable that for a brief moment air molecules will "gang up" and
strike only one side of a rock, pushing it uphill. Such events, while con-
ceivable, are utterly improbable.
For small collections of particles, however, it is a different story. Just as
it is quite probable that the average height of the people on a particular
bus will be considerably greater or less than the national average, it is prob-
able in the same way that more molecules will hit one side of a microscopic
particle than the other side. That is just what causes the observable, Brown-
ian motion of microscopic particles in a gas or liquid. Fluctuations, virtu-
ally undetectable for any large collection of molecules familiar in the every-
day world, are an important aspect of the world of very small particles.
One outcome of these considerations is that the second law of thermo-
316
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
FIGURE 7.17
Ludwig Boltzmann
(1844-1906). 
Consider also a pool table. The
ordered motion of a cue ball
moving into a stack of resting
ones soon gets "randomized."

dynamics is different in character from all the other
fundamental laws of physics presented so far. The
difference is that it deals with probabilities, not cer-
tainties. For example, it says it is highly probable that
when ice is dropped into hot water, the ordered struc-
ture of the cube will break apart and the cube will
melt, forming water. But this law does not rule out
the extremely unlikely possibility that the slowest
molecules of hot water will join together for an in-
stant to form an ice cube. Such an event has never
been observed, and probably never will be, but it is
possible in principle. The second law is thus a sta-
tistical law, giving the statistical outcome of a huge
number of individual events (collisions of molecules).
Testing the limits of conceivable consequences of the second law,
Maxwell proposed an interesting "thought experiment." Suppose a con-
tainer of gas is divided by a thin membrane into two parts, the gas in one
part being hotter than in the other. "Now conceive of a finite being,"
Maxwell suggested, "who knows the paths and velocities of all the mole-
cules but who can do no work except open and close a hole in the di-
aphragm." This "finite being," now referred to as "Maxwell's demon," can
make the hot gas hotter and the cold gas cooler, just by letting fast mole-
cules move in only one direction through the hole (and slow molecules in
the other), as is shown in the diagram.
Of course, there exists no such fanciful demon (even in machine form)
that can observe and keep track of all the molecules in a gas—hence no
such procedure for violating the second law can be realized in practice. If
somehow such a "demon" could be made to exist, one might find that the
demon's own entropy is affected by its actions. For example, its entropy
might increase enough to compensate for the decrease in entropy of the
gas. This is what happens in other systems where local order is created,
such as in a tray of water freezing into ice cubes in a freezer; the entropy
must increase somewhere else in the universe, such as in the room outside
the freezer, where waste heat from the freezer engine is exhausted.
Some biologists have suggested that certain large molecules, such as en-
zymes, may function as "Maxwell's demons." Large molecules may influ-
ence the motions of smaller molecules to build up the ordered structures
of living systems. This result is different from that of lifeless objects and is
in apparent violation of the second law of thermodynamics. This sugges-
tion, however, shows a misunderstanding of the law. The second law does
not say that the order can never increase in any system. It makes that claim
only for closed or isolated systems. Any "open" system, one that can exchange
7.7 MAXWELL'S DEMON AND THE STATISTICAL VIEW OF THE SECOND LAW
317
To illustrate Boltzmann's argu-
ment, consider a pack of cards
when it is shuffled. Most possi-
ble arrangements of the cards af-
ter shuffling are fairly disor-
dered. If you start with an
ordered arrangement, for exam-
ple, the cards sorted by suit and
rank, then shuffling would al-
most certainly lead to a more
disordered arrangement. (Never-
theless, it does occasionally hap-
pen that a player is dealt 13
spades, even if no one has
stacked the deck.)

energy with its surroundings, can increase its own order without violating
the second law, for the entropy of the surroundings will increase.
The flow of energy through a system that is not closed may tend to in-
crease the order in the system. The existence of highly organized struc-
tures that have life may be a result of supplying energy to them, as from
the Sun. But the organizing phenomenon resulting in life does have its cost
318
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
A
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Initially the average KE of molecules
is equal in A and B.
B
Only fast molecules are allowed to go
from B to A.
Only slow molecules are allowed to
go from A to B.
As this continues, the average KE
in A increases and the average KE
in B decreases.
FIGURE 7.18
How Maxwell's "demon" could
use a small, massless door to increase the or-
der of a system and make heat flow from a cold
gas to a hot gas.

in terms of the effect on the rest of the total system. This point is expressed
vividly in the following passage from a UNESCO document on environ-
mental pollution:
Some scientists used to feel that the occurrence, reproduction, and
growth of order in living systems presented an exception to the sec-
ond law. This is no longer believed to be so. True, the living sys-
tem may increase in order, but only by diffusing energy to the sur-
roundings and by converting complicated molecules (carbohydrates,
fats) called food into simple molecules (CO2, H2O). For example,
to maintain a healthy human being at constant weight for one year
requires the degradation of about 500 kilograms (one-half ton) of
food, and the diffusion into the surroundings (from the human and
the food) of about 500,000 kilocalories (two million kilojoules) of
energy. The "order" in the human may stay constant or even in-
crease, but the order in the surroundings decreases much, much
more.
7.8 TWO CHALLENGES
Late in the nineteenth century, a small but influential group of scientists
began to question the basic philosophical assumptions of Newtonian me-
chanics. They even questioned the very idea of atoms. The Austrian physi-
cist Ernst Mach argued that scientific theories should not depend on as-
suming the existence of things (such as atoms) which could not be directly
observed.
Critics of kinetic theory pointed to two apparent contradictions between
kinetic theory and the second law of thermodynamics. These contradic-
7.8 TWO CHALLENGES
319
FIGURE 7.19
A living system appears
to contradict the second law of ther-
modynamics by bringing order out of
disorder. 

tions are known as the reversibility paradox and the recurrence paradox. Both
paradoxes were based on possible exceptions to the second law; both were
thought to cast doubt on the kinetic theory.
The Reversibility Paradox
Lord Kelvin and Josef Loschmidt, both of whom supported atomic theory,
discovered the reversibility paradox during the 1870s. It was not regarded
as a serious objection to the kinetic theory until the 1890s. The paradox is
based on the simple fact that Newton's laws of motion are reversible in
time. For example, if you watch a video of a bouncing ball, it is easy to tell
whether the video tape is being run forward or backward: You know that
the collisions of the ball with the floor are inelastic and that the ball rises
less high after each bounce. (See Figure 7.16.) If, however, the ball made
perfectly elastic bounces, it would rise to the same height after each bounce.
Then you could not tell whether the tape was being run forward or back-
ward. In the kinetic theory, molecules are assumed to make perfectly elas-
tic collisions. Imagine that you could make a video recording of gas mol-
ecules colliding elastically according to this assumption. (See Figure 7.20.)
When showing this video, there would be no way to tell whether it was be-
ing run forward or backward. Either way would show valid sequences of
collisions. But here is the paradox: Consider videos of interactions involv-
320
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
FIGURE 7.20
Two balls colliding elastically. Since no kinetic energy is lost, the process is
reversible. The reversibility paradox: Can a model based on reversible events explain a
world in which so many events are irreversible?

ing large objects, containing many molecules. You can immediately tell the
difference between forward (true) and backward (impossible) time direc-
tion. For example, a smashed light bulb does not reassemble itself in real
life, although a video run backward can make it appear to do so.
The kinetic theory is based on laws of motion that assume the motions
are reversible for each individual molecular interaction. How, then, can it
explain the existence of irreversible processes on a large scale, involving many
molecular collisions? The existence of such processes seems to indicate that
time flows in a definite direction, that is, from past to future. This contra-
dicts the possibility, implied in Newton's laws of motion, that, when it comes
to observing physical phenomena, it does not matter whether we think of
time as flowing forward or backward. As Kelvin expressed the paradox:
If . . . the motion of every particle of matter in the Universe were
precisely reversed at any instant, the course of nature would be sim-
ply reversed for ever after. The bursting bubble of foam at the foot
of a waterfall would reunite and descend into the water; the ther-
mal motions would reconcentrate their energy, and throw the mass
up the fall in drops reforming into a close column of ascending wa-
ter. Heat which had been generated by the friction of solids and
dissipated by conduction, and radiation with absorption, would
come again to the place of contact, and throw the moving body
back against the force to which it had previously yielded. . . . But
the real phenomena of life infinitely transcend human science; and
speculation regarding consequences of their imagined reversal is 
utterly unprofitable.
Kelvin himself, and later Boltzmann, used statistical probability to ex-
plain why we do not observe such large-scale reversals. There are almost
7.8 TWO CHALLENGES
321
FIGURE 7.21
Example of an irre-
versible process.

infinitely many possible disordered arrangements of water molecules at the
bottom of a waterfall. Only an extremely small number of these arrange-
ments would lead to the process described by Kelvin. Reversals of this kind 
are possible in principle, but for all practical purposes they are out of the
question.
The Recurrence Paradox
Another small possibility allowed in kinetic theory leads to a situation that
seems unavoidably to contradict the second law. The recurrence paradox re-
vived an idea that appeared frequently in ancient philosophies and is pre-
sent also in Hindu philosophy to this day: the myth of the "eternal return."
According to this myth, the long-range history of the world is cyclic. All
historical events eventually repeat themselves, perhaps many times. Given
enough time, even the matter that people were made of will eventually re-
assemble by chance. Then people who have died may be born again and
go through the same life. The German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche
was convinced of the truth of this idea.
The recurrence paradox begins with the fact that the number of mole-
cules in the world is finite, hence there is only a finite number of possible
arrangements of molecules. Therefore, if time continues infinitely, the same
combination of molecules is bound to come up again. At some instant, all
322
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
FIGURE 7.22
A bonfire—another ex-
ample of an irreversible process. 

the molecules in the Universe would reassemble ex-
actly the same arrangement they had at some pre-
vious time. All events following this point would
then be exactly the same as the events that followed
it before. That is, if any single instant in the history
of the Universe is ever exactly repeated, then the en-
tire history of the Universe will be repeated from
that instant on. As a little thought shows, it would
then be repeated over and over again to infinity.
Thus, energy would not endlessly become dissipated
as required by the second law. Nietzsche claimed
that this view of the eternal return disproved the
"heat-death" theory.
At about the same time, in 1889, the French mathematician Henri Poin-
caré published a theorem on the possibility of recurrence in mechanical
systems. According to Poincaré, even though the Universe might undergo
a heat death, it would ultimately come alive again:
A bounded world, governed only by the laws of mechanics, will al-
ways pass through a state very close to its initial state. On the other
hand, according to accepted experimental laws (if one attributes ab-
solute validity to them, and if one is willing to press their conse-
quences to the extreme), the Universe tends toward a certain final
state, from which it will never depart. In this final state, from which
will be a kind of death, all bodies will be at rest at the same tem-
perature.
. . . the kinetic theories can extricate themselves from this con-
tradiction. The world, according to them, tends at first toward a
state where it remains for a long time without apparent change; and
this is consistent with experience; but it does not remain that way
forever; . . . it merely stays there for an enormously long time, a
time which is longer the more numerous are the molecules. This
state will not be the final death of the Universe, but a sort of slum-
ber, from which it will awake after millions of centuries.
According to this theory, to see heat pass from a cold body to a warm
one, it will not be necessary to have the acute vision, the intelligence, and
the dexterity of Maxwell's demon; it will suffice to have a little patience.
Poincaré was willing to accept the possibility of a violation of the sec-
ond law after a very long time has passed. Others refused to admit even
this possibility.
7.8 TWO CHALLENGES
323
The World's great age begins
anew,
The golden years return.
The earth cloth like a snake 
renew
His winter weeds outworn . . . 
Another Athens shall arise
And to remoter time
Bequeath, like sunset to the
skies,
The splendour of its prime . . . 
[Percy Bysshe Shelley, 
"Hellas" (1822)]

The outcome of the dispute between the defenders and the critics of the
kinetic theory was that both sides were partly right and partly wrong. Mach
and his followers were correct in believing that Newton's laws of mechan-
ics cannot fully describe molecular and atomic processes. We will come
back to this subject when we discuss quantum mechanics in Chapter 15.
For example, it is only approximately valid to describe gases in terms of
collections of frantic little balls. But Boltzmann was right in defending the
usefulness of the molecular model. The kinetic theory is very nearly cor-
rect except for those properties of matter that involve the structure of mol-
ecules themselves.
The new success of the kinetic theory in Einstein's account of Brown-
ian motion, along with discoveries in radioactivity and atomic physics, per-
suaded almost all the critics that atoms and molecules do, in fact, exist. But
the problems of irreversibility and of whether the laws of physics must dis-
tinguish between past and future survived. In a new form, these issues still
interest physicists today.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
Boyle's law
kinetic-molecular theory of heat
Brownian motion
Maxwell's "demon"
density
model
diffusion
open system
entropy
pressure
ideal gas
recurrence paradox
ideal gas law
reversiblity paradox 
irreversible processes
reversibile processes
324
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
FIGURE 7.23
The ruins of the pyra-
mid of Zosher (a step pyramid in Sag-
gara, Egypt) testify to the continual
encroachment of disorder. 

IMPORTANT EQUATIONS
P 
,
D 
,
PV  kT.
FURTHER READING
G. Holton, and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2000), Chapters 18-22.
H.C. von Baeyer, Maxwell's Demon: Why Warmth Disperses and Time Passes (New
York: Random House, 1998). Softcover: Warmth Disperses and Time Passes: 
A History of Heat (New York: Modern Library, 1999).
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
A. THE KINETIC THEORY
7.1 An Ideal Gas
1.
Early forms of the kinetic-molecular theory were based on the assumption that
heat energy is (select one of the following):
(a) a liquid;
(b) a gas;
(c) the kinetic energy of molecules;
(d) made of molecules.
2.
The relationship between the volume and the pressure of a gas expressed by
Boyle's law, P  a/V, holds true
(a) for any gas under any conditions;
(b) for some gases under any conditions;
(c) only if the temperature is kept constant;
(d) only if the volume is constant.
3.
How is it possible for the pressure on the floor under a spiked heel to be greater
than the pressure under an elephant's foot?
4.
State the "ideal gas law" in your own words.
5.
What is "ideal" about the ideal gas law?
m

V
F⊥

A
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
325

6.
The text states that the three proportionalities among P, V, and T can be com-
bined into one equation, the ideal gas law. Confirm that by holding one of the
variables constant, the equation does indeed yield each of the three proportions.
7.
Explain why the ideal gas law is not a law of physics in the same sense as the
law of conservation of energy.
8.
Assuming the ideal gas law holds to the lowest temperatures, what happens to
a gas at absolute zero?
7.2 A Model for the Gaseous State
1.
What is meant by a "model of a gas"?
2.
What kind of a model is a test model of a bridge made of balsa wood? a com-
puter program that simulates the forces acting on a bridge? What are the dif-
ferences between "theoretical" and "working" models? How are theoretical
models tested?
3.
What are some of the assumptions in the kinetic theory of gases?
4.
Read the following description of a model of a gas and give a suitable numer-
ical estimation for each underlined phrase: "a large number of small particles
in rapid, disordered motion."
5.
In the kinetic theory, particles are thought to exert significant forces on one
another:
(a) only when they are far apart;
(b) only when they are close together;
(c) all the time;
(d) never.
6.
Why was the kinetic theory first applied to gases rather than to liquids or
solids?
7.
Why do we have to use statistics in studying gases? Why can't we just follow
the motion of each atom?
7.3 The Speeds of Molecules
1.
In the kinetic theory of gases, it is assumed that the pressure of a gas on the
walls of the container is due to:
(a) gas molecules colliding with one another;
(b) gas molecules colliding against the walls of the container;
(c) repelling forces exerted by molecules on one another.
2.
The idea of speed distribution for gas molecules means that:
(a) each molecule always has the same speed;
(b) there is a wide range of speeds of gas molecules;
(c) molecules are moving fastest near the center of the container of the gas.
3.
What happens to the speed distribution as the temperature increases? As the
temperature reaches absolute zero?
4.
The average speed of a molecule in a gas at 900°C is about 1 km/s. Is it pos-
sible that there are molecules in the gas at speeds of 10 km/s? With zero speed?
326
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION

7.4 The Sizes of Molecules
1.
What was the objection raised against Clausius' kinetic theory for a gas?
2.
In his revised kinetic-theory model Clausius assumed that the particles have a
finite size, instead of being mathematical points, because:
(a) obviously everything must have some size;
(b) it was necessary to assume a finite size in order to calculate the speed of
molecules;
(c) the size of a molecule was already well known before Clausius' time;
(d) a finite size of molecules could account for the slowness of diffusion.
B. APPLYING THE KINETIC THEORY
7.5 Kinetic-Theory Explanation of the Ideal Gas Law
1.
Using the kinetic theory of gases, explain in your own words each of the three
empirical relationships between P, V, and T for an ideal gas.
2.
Does your response to Question 1 prove that the kinetic theory of gases is
valid? Explain.
3.
Using the concept of work and the kinetic theory of gases, explain why the
temperature of a gas and the kinetic energy of its molecules both increase if a
piston is suddenly pushed into the container holding the gas.
4.
What are the limits under which the ideal gas law describes the behavior of
real gases?
7.6 Kinetic-Theory Explanation of the Second Law
1.
Which of the following statements agrees with the second law of thermo-
dynamics?
(a) Heat does not naturally flow from cold bodies to hot bodies.
(b) Energy tends to transform itself into less useful forms.
(c) No engine can transform all its heat input into mechanical energy.
(d) Most processes in nature are reversible.
2.
If the water in a pot placed on a hot stove suddenly froze, Newton's laws would
not have been violated. Why would this event violate the second law of 
thermodynamics? If an extremely small volume of the total water in the pot
cooled for a moment, would this violate the second law?
3.
What is a reversible process?
7.7 Maxwell's Demon and the Statistical View of the Second Law
1.
In each of the following pairs, which situation is more ordered?
(a) an unbroken egg; a scrambled egg;
(b) a glass of ice and warm water; a glass of water at uniform temperature;
(c) a falling ball; a ball that has hit a tabletop, bounced, and come to rest.
2.
What is Maxwell's "demon" and what is it supposed to do?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
327

3.
True or false?
(a) Maxwell's demon was able to get around the second law of thermo-
dynamics.
(b) Scientists have made a Maxwell's demon.
(c) Maxwell believed that his demon actually existed.
4.
How did Boltzmann account for the entropy version of the second law?
5.
How does the kinetic theory account for the fact that heat does not flow by
itself from cold objects to hot objects?
6.
Is it ever possible for a scrambled egg to unscramble itself? Why don't we ob-
serve this happening occasionally?
7.
A growing plant takes in nutrients from the soil to create the increasingly com-
plete structure of its stem, roots, leaves, flowers, etc. Order seems to be emerg-
ing by itself out of disorder. Is this a violation of the second law of thermo-
dynamics? Explain.
7.8 Two Challenges
1.
What is the "reversibility paradox" and how did Boltzmann resolve it?
2.
What is the "recurrence paradox" and how was it finally resolved?
3.
The kinetic energy of a falling stone is transformed into heat when the stone
strikes the ground. Obviously, this is an irreversible process; you never see the
heat transform into kinetic energy of the stone, so that the stone rises off the
ground. Scientists believe that the process is irreversible because:
(a) Newton's laws of motion prohibit the reversed process;
(b) the probability of such a sudden ordering of molecular motion is extremely
small;
(c) the reversed process would not conserve energy;
(d) the reversed process would violate the second law of thermodynamics.
4.
What is Brownian motion? How did it provide convincing evidence for the
existence of atoms and molecules?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1. Using the kinetic theory, explain why when exposed to room temperature, hot
water near boiling cools down faster than cold water, initially near freezing,
warms up?
2. An ice cube is dropped into an insulated cup of hot water. Describe what hap-
pens and why, based on the laws of thermodynamics.
3. Explain the results in Question 2 using the kinetic theory, including the fact
that this process does not reverse itself.
4. Using material in this chapter, how would you answer this question: "How
do we know that atoms really do exist?"
5. The idea of randomness can be used in predicting the results of flipping a large
number of coins. Give some other examples where randomness is useful.
328
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION

6. A drop in barometric pressure is often a signal that cold, wet weather is on
the way. A rise in air pressure indicates warm, dry weather. Why do you think
this is so?
7. At sea level, water boils at 100°C, while at higher elevations it boils at slightly
lower temperature. Using the kinetic theory, how would you explain this?
8. Why is the melting of an ice cube considered to be an irreversible process,
even though it could easily be refrozen?
9. Explain why you feel cold on getting out of a shower, even if the room is not
cold.
10. Consider these aspects of the curves showing Maxwell's distribution of mo-
lecular speeds:
(a) all show a peak;
(b) the peaks move toward higher speed at higher temperatures.
Explain these characteristics on the basis of the kinetic model.
11. State the ideal gas law. What three proportionalities are contained in this law?
What are the limitations of this law?
12. Starting from the definition of density, D  m/V (where m is the mass of a
sample and V is its volume), write an expression relating pressure P, temper-
ature T, and density D of a gas.
13. Distinguish between two uses of the word "model" in science.
14. What would you expect to happen to the temperature of a gas that was re-
leased from a container into empty space (i.e., with nothing to push back)?
15. List some of the directly observable properties of gases.
16. What aspects of the behavior of gases can the kinetic-molecular theory be
used to explain successfully?
17. When a gas in an enclosure is compressed by pushing in a piston, its tem-
perature increases. Explain this fact in two ways:
(a) by using the first law of thermodynamics;
(b) by using the kinetic theory of gases.
18. Since all the evidence is that molecular motions are random, you might ex-
pect that any given arrangement of molecules will recur if you just wait long
enough. Explain how a paradox arises when this prediction is compared with
the second law of thermodynamics, viewed as an absolute law of nature.
19. (a) Explain what is meant by the statement that Newton's laws of motion are
time-reversible.
(b) Describe how a paradox arises when the time-reversibility of Newton's
laws of motion is compared with the second law of thermodynamics.
20. Where did Newtonian mechanics run into difficulties in explaining the be-
havior of molecules?
21. What are some advantages and disadvantages of theoretical models?
Quantitative
1.
Benjamin Franklin observed in 1773 that a teaspoonful of oil would spread out
to form a film of about 22,000 ft2 on a pond near London. This helped to give
him an estimate of the upper limit of the size of a molecule. Suppose that 
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
329

330
7. HEAT—A MATTER OF MOTION
1 cm3 of oil forms a continuous layer one molecule thick that just covers an
area on water of 1000 m2.
(a) How thick is the layer?
(b) What is the size of a single molecule of the oil (considered to be a cube
for simplicity)? (See the Laboratory Exploration "Avogadro's Number and
the Size and Mass of a Molecule," in the Student Guide.)
2.
How high could water be raised with a lift pump on the Moon?
3.
(a) The pressure of a gas in a container is 100 N/m2. If the temperature is 
doubled while the volume is made to shrink to one-third, what is the new
pressure?
(b) The temperature of a gas is 100°C. If the pressure is doubled and the vol-
ume is also doubled, what is the new temperature?

A. WAVES
8.1
What Is a Wave?
8.2
The Properties of Waves
8.3
Wave Propagation
8.4
Periodic Waves
8.5
When Waves Meet
8.6
A Two-Source Interference Pattern
8.7
Standing Waves
8.8
Wave Fronts and Diffraction
8.9
Reflection
8.10 Refraction
8.11 Sound Waves
B. LIGHT
8.12 What Is Light?
8.13 Propagation of Light
8.14 Reflection and Refraction
8.15 Interference and Diffraction
8.16 What Is Color?
8.17 Why Is the Sky Blue?
8.18 Polarization
8.19 The Ether
A. WAVES
8.1 WHAT IS A WAVE?
The world is continually criss-crossed by waves of all sorts. Water waves,
whether giant rollers in the middle of the ocean or gently formed rain rip-
ples on a still pond, are sources of wonder or pleasure. If the Earth's crust
shifts, violent waves in the solid Earth cause tremors thousands of kilome-
331
Wave Motion
C
H
A
P
T
E
R 88

ters away. A musician plucks a guitar string, and sound waves pulse against
the ears. Wave disturbances may come in a concentrated bundle, like the
shock front from an airplane flying at supersonic speeds. Or the distur-
bances may come in succession like the train of waves sent out from a
steadily vibrating source, such as a bell or a string.
All of these examples are mechanical waves, in which bodies or particles
physically move back and forth. There are also wave disturbances in elec-
tric and magnetic fields. Such waves are responsible for what we experi-
ence as X rays, visible light, or radio waves. In all cases involving waves,
however, the effects produced depend on the flow of energy, not matter, as
the wave moves forward. Waves are cases of energy transfer without mat-
ter transfer.
So far in this text, you have considered motion in terms of individual
particles or other objects. In this chapter, you will study the cooperative
motion of collections of particles in "continuous media," oscillating back
and forth as the mechanical waves pass by. You will see how closely related
are the ideas of particles and waves used to describe events in nature. Then
we shall deal with the properties of light and other electromagnetic waves.
8.2 THE PROPERTIES OF WAVES
To introduce some necessary terms to discuss the fascinating world of waves,
suppose that two people are holding opposite ends of a taut rope. Suddenly
one person snaps the rope up and down quickly once. That "disturbs" the
rope and puts a hump in it which travels along the rope toward the other
person. The traveling hump is one kind of a wave, called a pulse.
Originally, the rope was motionless. The height above ground of each
point on the rope depended only upon its position along the rope and did
332
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.1
Waves crashing on the
shore.

not change in time. But when one person snaps the rope, a rapid change
is created in the height of one end. This disturbance then moves away from
its source, down the rope to the other end. The height of each point on
the rope now depends also upon time, as each point eventually oscillates
up and down and back to the initial position, as the pulse passes.
The disturbance is thus a pattern of displacement moving along the rope.
The motion of the displacement pattern from one end of the rope toward
the other is an example of a wave. The hand snapping one end is the source
of the wave. The rope is the medium in which the wave moves.
Consider another example. When a pebble falls into a pool of still liq-
uid, a series of circular crests and troughs spreads over the surface. This
moving displacement pattern of the liquid surface is a wave. The pebble is
the source; the moving pattern of crests and troughs is the wave; and the
liquid surface is the medium. Leaves or other objects floating on the sur-
face of the liquid bob up and down as each wave passes. But they do not
experience any net displacement on the average. No material has moved
from the wave source along with the wave, either on the surface or among
the particles of the liquid—only the energy and momentum contained in
the disturbance have been transmitted. The same holds for rope waves,
sound waves in air, etc.
As any one of these waves moves through a medium, the wave produces
a changing displacement of the successive parts of the medium. Thus, we
can refer to these waves as waves of displacement. If you can see the medium
and recognize the displacements, then you can easily see waves. But waves
also may exist in media you cannot see, such as air; or they may form as
disturbances of a state you cannot detect with your unaided eyes, such as
pressure or an electric field.
You can use a loose spring coil (a Slinky) to demonstrate three different
kinds of motion in the medium through which a wave passes. First, move
8.2 THE PROPERTIES OF WAVES
333
FIGURE 8.2
The transverse distur-
bance moves in the horizontal
plane of the ground, rather than in
the vertical plane.

the end of the spring from side to side, or up and down as in Figure 
8.3 (a). A wave of side-to-side or up-and-down displacement will travel
along the spring. Now push the end of the spring back and forth, along
the direction of the spring itself, as in sketch (b). A wave of back-and-forth
displacement will travel along the spring. Finally, twist the end of the spring
quickly clockwise and counterclockwise, as in sketch (c). A wave of angu-
lar displacement will begin to travel along the spring. (See also the sug-
gested laboratory exploration on waves in the Student Guide.)
Waves like those in (a), in which the displacements are perpendicular to
the direction the wave travels, are called transverse waves. Waves like those
in (b), in which the displacements are in the direction the wave travels, are
called longitudinal waves. Waves like those in (c), in which the displace-
ments are twisting in a plane perpendicular to the direction the wave trav-
els, are called torsional waves.
All three types of wave motion can be set up in solids. In fluids, how-
ever, transverse and torsional waves die out very quickly and usually can-
not be produced at all, except on the surface. Therefore, sound waves in
air and water are longitudinal. The molecules of the medium are displaced
back and forth along the direction in which the sound energy travels.
It is often useful to make a graph on paper, representing the wave pat-
terns in a medium. This is of course easy to do for transverse waves, but
not for longitudinal or torsional waves. But there is a way out. For exam-
ple, the graph in Figure 8.4 represents the pattern of compressions at a given
moment as a (longitudinal) sound wave goes through the air. The graph line
goes up and down because the graph represents a snapshot of the increase
and decrease in density of the air along the path of the wave. It does not
represent an up-and-down motion of the molecules in the air themselves.
To describe completely transverse waves, such as those in ropes, you must
specify the direction of displacement. When the displacement pattern of a
transverse wave is along one line in a plane perpendicular to the direction
334
8. WAVE MOTION
Transverse
Longitudinal
(a)
(b)
(c)
Torsional
FIGURE 8.3
"Snapshots" of three
types of waves on a spring. In (c),
the small markers have been put
on the top of each coil in the
spring.

of motion of the wave, the wave is said to be polarized. See the diagrams in
Figure 8.5. For waves on ropes and springs, you can observe the polariza-
tion directly. In Section 8.18 you will see that for light waves, for example,
polarization can have important effects.
All three kinds of waves—longitudinal, transverse, and torsional—have
an important characteristic in common. The disturbances move away from
their sources through the media and continue on their own (although their
amplitude may diminish owing to energy loss to friction and other causes).
We stress this particular characteristic by saying that these waves propagate.
This means more than just that they "travel" or "move." An example will
clarify the difference between waves that propagate and those that do not.
You may have seen one of the great wheat plains of the Middle West,
8.2 THE PROPERTIES OF WAVES
335
Normal
(b)
(a)
x
P
FIGURE 8.4
(a) "Snapshot representation of a sound wave progressing to the right. The
dots represent the density of air molecules. (b) Graph of air pressure, P, versus position, x,
at the instant of the snapshot.
A. Unpolarized wave on a rope
B. Polarized wave on a rope
FIGURE 8.5
Polarized/unpolarized waves on rope.

Canada, or Central Europe. Such descriptions usually mention the "beau-
tiful, wind-formed waves that roll for miles across the fields." The medium
for such a wave is the wheat, and the disturbance is the swaying motion of
the wheat. This disturbance does indeed travel, but it does not propagate;
that is, the disturbance does not originate at a source and then go on by it-
self. Rather, it must be continually fanned by the wind. When the wind
stops, the disturbance does not roll on, but stops, too. The traveling "waves"
of swaying wheat are not at all the same as rope and water waves. This
chapter will concentrate on waves that originate at sources and propagate
themselves through the medium. For the purposes of this chapter, waves
are disturbances which propagate in a medium.
8.3 WAVE PROPAGATION
Waves and their behavior are perhaps best studied by beginning with large
mechanical models and focusing our attention on pulses. Consider, for ex-
ample, a freight train, with many cars attached to a powerful locomotive,
but standing still. If the locomotive starts abruptly, its pull on the next
neighboring car sends a displacement wave running down the line of cars.
336
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.6 A displacement.

The shock of the starting displacement proceeds from the locomotive,
clacking through the couplings one by one. In this example, the locomo-
tive is the source of the disturbance, while the freight cars and their cou-
plings are the medium. The "bump" traveling along the line of cars is the
wave. The disturbance proceeds all the way from end to end, and with it
goes energy of displacement and motion. Yet no particles of matter are trans-
ferred that far; each car only jerks ahead a bit.
How long does it take for the effect of a disturbance created at one point
to reach a distant point? The time interval depends of course on the speed
with which the disturbance or wave propagates. This speed, in turn, depends
upon the type of wave and the characteristics of the medium. In any case,
the effect of a disturbance is never transmitted instantly over any distance.
Each part of the medium has inertia, and each portion of the medium is
compressible. So time is needed to transfer energy from one part to the next.
The same comments also apply to transverse waves. The series of
sketches in the accompanying diagram (Figure 8.7) represents a wave on a
rope. Think of the sketches as frames of a motion picture film, taken at
equal time intervals. We know that the material of the rope does not travel
8.3 WAVE PROPAGATION
337
X
FIGURE 8.7
A rough representation of
the forces at the ends of a small section
of rope as a transverse pulse moves
past.

along with the wave. But each bit of the rope goes through an up-and-
down motion as the wave passes. Each bit goes through exactly the same
motion as the bit to its left, except a little later.
Consider the small section of rope labeled X in the first diagram. When
the pulse traveling on the rope first reaches X, the section of rope just to
the left of X exerts an upward force on X. As X is moved upward, a restor-
ing downward force is exerted by the next section. The further upward X
moves, the greater the restoring forces become. Eventually, X stops mov-
ing upward and starts down again. The section of rope to the left of X now
exerts a restoring (downward) force, while the section to the right exerts
an upward force. Thus, the trip down is similar, but opposite, to the trip
upward. Finally, X returns to the equilibrium position when both forces
have vanished.
The time required for X to go up and down, that is, the time required
for the pulse to pass by that portion of the rope, depends on two factors.
These factors are the magnitude of the forces on X and the mass of X. To put
it more generally: The speed with which a wave propagates depends on 
the stiffness and on the density of the medium. The stiffer the medium, the
greater will be the force each section exerts on neighboring sections. Thus,
the greater will be the propagation speed. On the other hand, the greater
the density of the medium, the less it will respond to forces. Thus, the
slower will be the propagation. In fact, the speed of propagation depends
on the ratio of the stiffness factor and the density factor. The exact mean-
ing of stiffness and density factors is different for different kinds of waves
and different media. For tight strings, for example, the stiffness factor is
the tension T in the string, and the density factor is the mass per unit length,
m/l. The propagation speed v is given by
v .
8.4 PERIODIC WAVES
Many of the disturbances we have considered so far have been sudden and
short-lived, set up by a brief motion like snapping one end of a rope or
suddenly displacing one end of a train. In each case, you see a single wave
running along the medium with a certain speed. As noted, this kind of wave
is called a pulse.
Now consider periodic waves, continuous regular rhythmic disturbances
in a medium, resulting from periodic vibrations of a source. A good example
T

m/l
338
8. WAVE MOTION

of an object in periodic vibration is a swinging pendulum. Neglecting the
effects of air resistance, each swing is virtually identical to every other swing,
and the swing repeats over and over again in time. Another example is the
up-and-down motion of a weight at the end of a coiled spring. In each case,
the maximum displacement from the position of equilibrium is called the
amplitude, A, as shown in the diagram below for the case of the spring. The
time taken to complete one vibration is called the period, T, usually given
in seconds. The number of vibrations per second is called the frequency, f.
Note that T and f are reciprocals, in the sense that T  1/f.
What happens when a periodic vibration is applied to the end of a rope?
Suppose that the left end of a taut rope is fastened to the oscillating (vi-
brating) weight on a spring in Figure 8.8. As the weight vibrates up and
down, you observe a wave propagating along the rope (see the illustration).
The wave takes the form of a series of moving crests and troughs along the
length of the rope. The source executes "simple harmonic motion" up and
down. Ideally, every point along the length of the rope executes simple har-
monic motion in turn. The wave travels to the right as crests and troughs
follow one another. Each point or small segment along the rope simply os-
8.4 PERIODIC WAVES
339
t = 0
t =
T
1
4
t = T
λ
t =
T
1
2
t =
T
3
4
A
A
EQUILIBRIUM
POSITION
λ
A
A
FIGURE 8.8
Spring-mass system attached to a rope, and graph of the periodic motion.

cillates up and down at the same frequency as the source. The amplitude
of the wave is represented by A. The distance between any two consecu-
tive crests or any two consecutive troughs is the same all along the length
of the rope. This distance, called the wavelength of the periodic wave, is
conventionally represented by the Greek letter  (lambda).
If a single pulse or a wave crest moves fairly slowly through the medium,
you can easily find its speed. In principle, all you need is a clock and a me-
ter stick. By timing the pulse or crest over a measured distance, you can
get the speed.
To be sure, it is not always so simple to observe the motion of a pulse
or a wave crest. But the speed of a periodic wave can be found indirectly,
if one can measure both its frequency and its wavelength. Here is how this
works. Using the example of the rope wave, we know that as the wave pro-
gresses, each point in the medium oscillates with the frequency and period
of the source. The diagram in Figure 8.8 illustrates a periodic wave mov-
ing to the right, as it might look in snapshots taken every one-quarter pe-
riod. Follow the progress of the crest that started out from the extreme left
at time t  0. The time it takes this crest to move a distance of one wave-
length is equal to the time required for one complete oscillation of the
source, or equally of any point on the rope; that is, the crest moves one
wavelength  during one period of oscillation T. The speed v of the crest
is therefore given by the equation
v 

.
All parts of the wave pattern propagate with the same speed along the rope.
Thus, the speed of any one crest is the same as the speed of the wave as a
whole. Therefore, the speed v of the wave is also given by
v 

.

T
wavelength

period of oscillation

T
distance moved

corresponding time interval
340
8. WAVE MOTION

But T  1/f, where f  frequency. Therefore,
v  f 
or
wave speed  frequency  wavelength.
We can also write this relationship as
 
or
f 
.
These expressions show that, for waves of the same speed, the frequency
and wavelength are inversely proportional; that is, a wave of twice the fre-
quency would have only half the wavelength, and so on. This inverse rela-
tionship of frequency and wavelength will turn out to be very useful in later
chapters.
We now go to the last of the definitions that will help to understand how
waves behave. The diagram below represents a periodic wave passing
through a medium. Sets of points are marked that are moving "in step" as
the periodic wave passes. The crest points C and C have reached maximum
displacement positions in the upward direction. The trough points D and
D have reached maximum displacement positions in the downward direc-
v

v
f
8.4 PERIODIC WAVES
341
D
p
p′
p″
C
C′
D′
FIGURE 8.9 A "snapshot" of a periodic wave moving to the right. Letters indi-
cate sets of points with the same phase.

tion. The points C and C have identical displacements and velocities at any
instant of time. Their vibrations are identical and in unison. The same is
true for the points D and D. Indeed there are infinitely many such pairs of
points along the medium that are vibrating identically when this wave passes.
Note that C and C are a distance  apart, and so are D and D.
Points that move "in step," such as C and C, are said to be in phase with
one another. Points D and D also move in phase. Indeed, points separated
from one another by distances of , 2, 3, . . . , and n (n being any whole
number) are all in phase with one another. These points can be anywhere
along the length of the wave. They need not correspond with only the high-
est or lowest points. For example, points such as P, P, P, are all in phase
with one another. Each such point is separated by a distance  from the
next one in phase with it.
On the other hand, we can also see that some pairs of points are exactly
out of step. For example, point C reaches its maximum upward displace-
ment at the same time that D reaches its maximum downward displace-
ment. At the instant that C begins to go down, D begins to go up (and vice
versa). Points such as these are one-half period out of phase with respect to
one another. C and D also are one-half period out of phase. Any two points
separated from one another by distances of 1⁄2, 3⁄2, 5⁄2, etc., are one-half
period out of phase.
8.5 WHEN WAVES MEET
With the above definitions in hand, we can explore a rich terrain. So far,
we have considered single waves. What happens when two waves encounter
each other in the same medium? Suppose two waves approach each other
on a rope, one traveling to the right and one traveling to the left. The se-
ries of sketches in Figure 8.10 shows what would happen if you made this
experiment. The waves pass through each other without being modified.
After the encounter, each wave looks just as it did before and is traveling
onward just as it did before. (How different from two particles meeting
head-on!) This phenomenon of waves passing through each other un-
changed can be observed with all types of waves. You can easily see that
this is true for surface ripples on water. It must be true for sound waves
also, since two conversations can take place across a table without distort-
ing each other.
What happens during the time when the two waves overlap? The dis-
placements they provide add together at each point of the medium. The
342
8. WAVE MOTION

displacement of any point in the overlap region is just the sum of the dis-
placements that would be caused at that moment by each of the two waves
separately, as shown in Figure 8.10. Two waves travel toward each other on
a rope. One has a maximum displacement of 0.4 cm upward and the other
a maximum displacement of 0.8 cm upward. The total maximum upward
displacement of the rope at a point where these two waves pass each other
is 1.2 cm.
What a wonderfully simple behavior, and how easy it makes everything!
Each wave proceeds along the rope making its own contribution to the
rope's displacement no matter what any other wave is doing. This property
of waves is called superposition. Using it, one can easily determine ahead of
time what the rope will look like at any given instant. All one needs to do
is to add up the displacements that will be caused by each wave at each
point along the rope at that instant. Another illustration of wave super-
position is shown in Figure 8.11. Notice that when the displacements are
in opposite directions, they tend to cancel each other.
The superposition principle applies no matter how many separate waves or
disturbances are present in the medium. In the examples just given, only
8.5 WHEN WAVES MEET
343
FIGURE 8.10
The superposition of two rope pulses
at a point.

two waves were present. But you would find by experiment that the su-
perposition principle works equally well for three, ten, or any number of
waves. Each makes its own contribution, and the net result is simply the
sum of all the individual contributions (see Figure 8.12).
If waves add as just described, then you can think of a complex wave as
the sum of a set of simple, sinusoidal waves. In 1807, the French mathe-
matician Augustin Jean Fourier advanced a very useful theorem. Fourier
stated that any continuing periodic oscillation, however complex, could 
be analyzed as the sum of simpler, regular wave motions. This, too, can be
demonstrated by experiment. The sounds of musical instruments can be
analyzed in this way also. Such analysis makes it possible to "imitate" in-
struments electronically, by combining and emitting just the right propor-
tions of simple vibrations, which correspond to pure tones.
344
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.11
Superposition of two pulses on a rope.

8.6 A TWO-SOURCE INTERFERENCE PATTERN
The figures on page 346 show ripples spreading from a vibrating source
touching the water surface in a "ripple tank." The drawing shows a "cut-
away" view of the water level pattern at a given instant. The image on the
right introduces a phenomenon that will play an important role in later
parts of the course. It shows the pattern of ripples on a water surface dis-
turbed by two vibrating sources. The two small sources go through the up-
and-down motions together, that is, they are in phase. Each source creates
its own set of circular, spreading ripples. The image captures the pattern
made by the overlapping sets of waves at one instant. This pattern is called
an interference pattern.
You can interpret what you see here in terms of what you already know
about waves. You can predict how the pattern will change with time. First,
tilt the page so that you are viewing the interference pattern from a glanc-
ing direction. You will see more clearly some nearly straight gray bands.
One can explain this feature by the superposition principle.
To start with, suppose that two sources produce identical pulses at the
same instant. Each pulse contains one crest and one trough. (See Figure
8.16.) In each pulse the height of the crest above the undisturbed or aver-
age level is equal to the depth of the trough below. The sketches show the
patterns of the water surface after equal time intervals. As the pulses spread
out, the points at which they overlap move too. In the figure, a completely
darkened small circle indicates where a crest overlaps another crest. A half-
darkened small circle marks each point where a crest overlaps a trough. A
blank small circle indicates the meeting of two troughs. According to the
superposition principle, the water level should be highest at the completely
darkened circles (where the crests overlap). It should be lowest at the blank
8.6 A TWO-SOURCE INTERFERENCE PATTERN
345
a
a + b
a + b + c
b
c
FIGURE 8.12
Sketch of complex waves as addition of two
or three waves.

346
8. WAVE MOTION
WAVES IN A RIPPLE TANK
When something drops in the water, it
produces periodic wave trains of crest and
troughs, somewhat as shown in the "cut-
away" drawing at the left below.
Figure 8.13 is an instantaneous photo-
graph of the shadows of ripples produced
by a vibrating point source. The crests and
troughs on the water surface show up in the
image as bright and dark circular bands. In
the photo below right, there were two point
sources vibrating in phase. The overlap-
ping waves create an interference pattern.
FIGURE 8.13-8.15
When an object drops in the water, it produces periodic wave trains of crests
and troughs, somewhat as shown in the "cut-away" drawing here. Also represented here are two
ripple patterns produced by one vibrating point source (left) and two point sources vibrating in
phase (right). The overlapping waves create an interference pattern.
FIGURE 8.14
FIGURE 8.13
FIGURE 8.15

circles, and at average height at the half-darkened circles. Each of the
sketches in Figure 8.16 represents the spatial pattern of the water level at
a given instant.
At the points marked with darkened circles in the figure, the two pulses
arrive in phase. At the points indicated by open circles, the pulses also ar-
8.6 A TWO-SOURCE INTERFERENCE PATTERN
347
a
FIGURE 8.16
Pattern produced when two cir-
cular pulses, each of a crest and a trough, spread
through each other. The very small circles indi-
cate the net displacement at those points (dark
circle  double height peak; half-dark circle 
average level; blank circle  double depth
trough).

rive in phase. In either case, the waves reinforce each other, causing a greater
amplitude of either the crest or the trough. Thus, the waves are said to in-
terfere constructively. In this case, all such points are at the same distance
from each source. As the ripples spread, the region of maximum distur-
bance moves along the central dotted line in (a). At the points marked with
half-darkened circles, the two pulses arrive completely out of phase. Here
the waves cancel and so are said to interfere destructively, leaving the water
surface undisturbed.
When two periodic waves of equal amplitude are sent out instead of sin-
gle pulses, overlap occurs all over the surface, as is also shown in Figure
8.17. All along the central dotted line in Figure 8.17, there is a doubled
disturbance amplitude. All along the lines labeled N, the water height re-
mains undisturbed. Depending on the wavelength and the distance between
the sources, there can be many such lines of constructive and destructive
interference.
Now you can interpret the ripple tank interference pattern shown in the
previous drawings (Figures 8.14 and 8.15). The gray bands are areas where
waves cancel each other at all times; they are called nodal lines. These bands
correspond to lines labeled N in the drawing above. Between these bands
are other bands where crest and trough follow one another, where the waves
reinforce. These are called antinodal lines.
348
8. WAVE MOTION
S1
A3
N3
A2
N2
A1
N1
N1
A1
A2
N2
N3
A3
A0
S2
FIGURE 8.17
Analysis of interference pattern. The dark circles indicate where crest is meeting crest,
the blank circles where trough is meeting trough, and the half-dark circles where crest is meeting trough.
The other lines of maximum constructive interference are labeled A0, A1, A2, etc. Points on these lines
move up and down much more than they would because of waves from either source alone. The lines
labeled N1, N2, etc. represent bands along which there is maximum destructive interference. Points on
these lines move up and down much less than they would because of waves from either source alone.

Such an interference pattern is set up by overlapping waves from two
sources. For water waves, the interference pattern can be seen directly. But
whether visible or not, all waves, including earthquake waves, sound waves,
or X rays, can set up interference patterns. For example, suppose two loud-
speakers powered by the same receiver are working at the same frequency.
By changing your position in front of the loudspeakers, you can find the
nodal regions where destructive interference causes only a little sound to
be heard. You also can find the antinodal regions where a strong signal
comes through.
The beautiful symmetry of these interference patterns is not accidental.
Rather, the whole pattern is determined by the wavelength  and the source
separation S1S2. From these, you could calculate the angles at which the
nodal and antinodal lines spread out to either side of A0. Conversely, you
might know S1S2, and might have found these angles by probing around in
the two-source interference pattern. If so, you can calculate the wavelength
even if you cannot see the crests and troughs of the waves directly. This is
very useful, for most waves in nature cannot be directly seen. Their wave-
length has to be found by letting waves set up an interference pattern, prob-
ing for the nodal and antinodal lines, and calculating  from the geometry.
The above figure shows part of the pattern of the diagram in Figure 8.17.
At any point P on an antinodal line, the waves from the two sources arrive
in phase. This can happen only if P is equally far from S1 and S2, or if P is
some whole number of wavelengths farther from one source than from the
other. In other words, the difference in distances (S1P  S2P) must equal
n,  being the wavelength and n being zero or any whole number. At any
point Q on a nodal line, the waves from the two sources arrive exactly out
8.6 A TWO-SOURCE INTERFERENCE PATTERN
349
S1
P
Q
S2
FIGURE 8.18
Detail of interference pattern.

of phase. This occurs because Q is an odd number of half-wavelengths (1⁄2,
3⁄2, 5⁄2, etc.) farther from one source than from the other. This condition
can be written S1Q  S2Q  (n  1⁄2).
The distance from the sources to a detection point may be much larger
than the source separation d. In that case, there is a simple relationship be-
tween the node position, the wavelength , and the separation d. The wave-
length can be calculated from measurements of the positions of nodal lines.
(The details of the relationship and the calculation of wavelength are de-
scribed in the Student Guide for this chapter.)
This analysis allows you to calculate from simple measurements made
on an interference pattern the wavelength of any wave. It applies to water
ripples, sound, light, etc. You will find this method very useful later. One
important thing you can do now is find  for a real case of interference of
waves in the laboratory. This practice will help you later in finding the
wavelengths of other kinds of waves.
8.7 STANDING WAVES
If you and a partner shake both ends of a taut rope with the same frequency
and same amplitude, you will observe an interesting result. The interfer-
ence of the identical waves coming from opposite ends results in certain
points on the rope not moving at all! In between these nodal points, the
entire rope oscillates up and down. But there is no apparent propagation
of wave patterns in either direction along the rope. This phenomenon is
called a standing wave or a stationary wave. The remarkable thing behind
this phenomenon is that the standing oscillation you observe is really the
effect of two traveling waves.
To see this, let us start with a simpler case. To make standing waves on
a rope (or Slinky), there do not have to be two people shaking the oppo-
site ends. One end can be tied to a hook on a wall or to a door knob. The
train of waves sent down the rope by shaking one end back and forth will
reflect back from the fixed hook. These reflected waves interfere with the
new, oncoming waves, and it is this interference that can produce a stand-
ing pattern of nodes and oscillation. In fact, you can go further and tie both
ends of a string to hooks and pluck (or bow) the string. From the plucked
point a pair of waves go out in opposite directions, and are then reflected
from the ends. The interference of these reflected waves that travel in op-
posite directions can produce a standing pattern just as before. The strings
of guitars, violins, pianos, and all other stringed instruments act in just this
fashion. The energy given to the strings sets up standing waves. Some of
350
8. WAVE MOTION

the energy is then transmitted from the vibrating string to the body of the
instrument; the sound waves sent forth from there are at essentially the
same frequency as the standing waves on the string.
The vibration frequencies at which standing waves can exist depend on
two factors. One is the speed of wave propagation along the string. The
other is the length of the string. A connection between the length of string
and the musical tone it can generate was recognized over 2000 years ago,
and contributed indirectly to the idea that nature is built on mathematical
principles. Early in the development of musical instruments, people learned
how to produce certain pleasing harmonies by plucking a string constrained
to different lengths by stops. Harmonies result if the string is plucked while
constrained to lengths in the ratios of small whole numbers. Thus, the
length ratio 2:1 gives the octave, 3:2 the musical fifth, and 4:3 the musical
fourth. This striking connection between musical harmony and simple
numbers (integers) encouraged the Pythagoreans to search for other nu-
merical ratios or harmonies in the Universe. This Pythagorean ideal
strongly affected Greek science, and many centuries later inspired much of
Kepler's work. In a general form, the ideal flourishes to this day in many
beautiful applications of mathematics to physical experience.
The physical reason for the appearance of harmonious notes and the re-
lation between them were not known to the Greeks. But using the super-
position principle, we can understand and define the harmonic relation-
ships much more precisely. First, we must stress an important fact about
standing wave patterns produced by reflecting waves from the boundaries
of a medium. One can imagine an unlimited variety of waves traveling back
and forth. But, in fact, only certain wavelengths (or frequencies) can produce
8.7 STANDING WAVES
351
FIGURE 8.19
Time exposure: A vibrator at the left produces a wave train that runs along
the rope and reflects from the fixed end at the right. The sum of the oncoming and re-
flected waves is a standing wave pattern.

standing waves in a given medium. In the example of a stringed instrument,
the two ends are fixed and so must be nodal points. This fact puts an 
upper limit on the length of standing waves possible on a fixed rope of
length l. Such waves must be those for which one-half wavelength just fits
on the rope (l  /2). Shorter waves also can produce standing patterns,
having more nodes. But always, some whole number of one-half wavelengths
must just fit on the rope, so that l  n/2. For example, in the first of the
three illustrations in Figure 8.20, the wavelength of the interfering waves,
1, is just 2l. In the second illustration, 2 is 1⁄2(2l); in the third, it is 1⁄3(2l).
The general mathematical relationship giving the expression for all possi-
ble wavelengths of standing waves on a fixed rope is thus
n 
,
where n is a whole number representing the harmonic. Or we can write
simply,
n 
.
That is, if 1 is the longest wavelength possible, the other possible wave-
lengths will be 1⁄ 21, 1⁄31, . . . (1/n)1. Shorter wavelengths correspond to
higher frequencies. Thus, on any bounded medium, only certain frequencies of
standing waves can be set up. Since frequency f is inversely proportional to
wavelength, f  1/, we can rewrite the expression for all possible standing
waves on a plucked string as
fn  n.
1
n
2l
n
352
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.20
Standing wave patterns:
first three nodes.

353
VIBRATION OF A DRUM
FIGURE 8.21
A marked rubber "drumhead" vibrating in several of its possible modes. Here we
see side-by-side pairs of still photographs from three of the symmetrical modes and from an anti-
symmetrical mode.

In other circumstances, fn may depend on n in some other way. The low-
est possible frequency of a standing wave is usually the one most strongly
present when the string vibrates after being plucked or bowed. If f1 repre-
sents this lowest possible frequency, then the other possible standing waves
would have frequencies 2f1, 3f1, . . . , nf1. These higher frequencies are
called "overtones" of the "fundamental" frequency f1. On an "ideal" string,
there are in principle an unlimited number of such frequencies, but each
being a simple multiple of the lowest frequency.
In real media, there are practical upper limits to the possible frequen-
cies. Also, the overtones are not exactly simple multiples of the fundamental
frequency; that is, the overtones are not strictly "harmonic." This effect is
still greater in systems more complicated than stretched strings. In a flute,
saxophone, or other wind instrument, an air column is put into standing
wave motion. Depending on the shape of the instrument, the overtones
produced may not be even approximately harmonic.
As you might guess from the superposition principle, standing waves of
different frequencies can exist in the same medium at the same time. A
strongly plucked guitar string, for example, oscillates in a pattern which is
the superposition of the standing waves of many overtones. The relative
oscillation energies of the different instruments determine the "quality" of
the sound they produce. Each type of instrument has its own balance of
overtones. This is why a violin sounds different from a trumpet, and both
sound different from a soprano voice, even if all are sounding at the same
fundamental frequency.
8.8 WAVE FRONTS AND DIFFRACTION
Unlike baseballs, bullets, and other pieces of matter in motion, waves can
go around corners. For example, you can hear a voice coming from the
other side of a hill, even though there is nothing to reflect the sound to
you. You are so used to the fact that sound waves do this that you scarcely
notice it. This spreading of the energy of waves into what you might ex-
pect to be "shadow" regions is called diffraction.
Once again, water waves will illustrate this behavior most clearly. From
among all the arrangements that can result in diffraction, we will concen-
trate on two. The first is shown in the second photograph in Figure 8.22.
Straight water waves (coming from the bottom of the second picture) are
diffracted as they pass through a narrow slit in a straight barrier. Notice
that the slit is less than one wavelength wide. The wave emerges and spreads
in all directions. Also notice the pattern of the diffracted wave. It is basi-
354
8. WAVE MOTION

cally the same pattern a vibrating point source would set up if it were placed
where the slit is.
The bottom photograph shows a second barrier arrangement. Now there
are two narrow slits in the barrier. The pattern resulting from superposi-
tion of the diffracted waves from both slits is the same as that produced by
two point sources vibrating in phase. The same kind of result is obtained
8.8 WAVE FRONTS AND DIFFRACTION
355
FIGURE 8.22
(a) Diffraction of water ripples
around the edge of a barrier; (b) diffraction of rip-
ples through a narrow opening; (c) diffraction of
ripples through two narrow openings.
(a)
(b)
(c)

when many narrow slits are put in the barrier; that is, the final pattern just
matches that which would appear if a point source were put at the center
of each slit, with all sources in phase.
One can describe these and all other effects of diffraction if one under-
stands a basic characteristic of waves. This characteristic was first stated by
Christiaan Huygens in 1678 and is now known as Huygens' principle. To un-
derstand it one first needs the definition of a wave front.
For a water wave, a wave front is an imaginary line along the water's sur-
face, with every point along this line in exactly the same stage of vibration;
that is, all points on the line are in phase. For example, crest lines are wave
fronts, since all points on the water's surface along a crest line are in phase.
Each has just reached its maximum displacement upward, is momentarily
at rest, and will start downward an instant later.
Since a sound wave spreads not over a surface but in three dimensions,
its wave fronts form not lines but surfaces. The wave fronts for sound waves
from a very small source are very nearly spherical surfaces, just as the wave
fronts for ripples, made by a very small source of waves on the surface of
water, are circles.
Huygens' principle, as it is generally stated today, is that every point on a
wave front may be considered to behave as a point source for waves generated in
the direction of the wave's propagation. As Huygens said:
There is the further consideration in the emanation of these waves,
that each particle of matter in which a wave spreads, ought not to
communicate its motion only to the next particle which is in the
straight line drawn from the [source], but that it also imparts some
of it necessarily to all others which touch it and which oppose them-
selves to its movement. So it arises that around each particle there
is made a wave of which that particle is the center.
The diffraction patterns seen at slits in a barrier are certainly consistent
with Huygens' principle. The wave arriving at the barrier causes the water
in the slit to oscillate. The oscillation of the water in the slit acts as a source
for waves traveling out from it in all directions. When there are two slits
and the wave reaches both slits in phase, the oscillating water in each slit
acts like a point source. The resulting interference pattern is similar to the
pattern produced by waves from two point sources oscillating in phase.
Consider what happens behind the breakwater wall as in the aerial pho-
tograph of the harbor. By Huygens' principle, water oscillation near the
end of the breakwater sends circular waves propagating into the "shadow"
region.
356
8. WAVE MOTION

8.8 WAVE FRONTS AND DIFFRACTION
357
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 8.23
(a) Each point on a wave front can be thought of as a point source of waves. The waves
from all the point sources interfere constructively only along their envelope, which becomes the new
wave front. (b) When part of the wave front is blocked, the constructive interference of waves from
points on the wave front extends into "shadow" region. (c) When all but a very small portion of a wave
front is blocked, the wave propagating away from that small portion is nearly the same as that from a
point source.
FIGURE 8.24
Reflection, refraction, and diffraction of
water waves around an island. 

You can understand all diffraction patterns if you keep both Huygens'
principle and the superposition principle in mind. For example, consider a
slit wider than one wavelength. In this case, the pattern of diffracted waves
contains no nodal lines unless the slit width is about  (see the series of
images in Figure 8.25).
Figure 8.26 helps to explain why nodal lines appear. There must be points
like P that are just  farther from side A of the slit than from side B; that
is, there must be points P for which distance AP differs from distance BP
by exactly . For such a point, AP and OP differ by one-half wavelength,
/2. By Huygens' principle, you may think of points A and O as in-phase
point sources of circular waves. But since AP and OP differ by /2, the two
waves will arrive at P completely out of phase. So, according to the super-
position principle, the waves from A and O will cancel at point P.
358
8. WAVE MOTION
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 8.25
Single-slit diffraction of water waves
with slits of different sizes.

This argument also holds true for the pair of points consisting of the
first point to the right of A and the first to the right of O. In fact, it holds
true for each such matched pair of points, all the way across the slit. The
waves originating at each such pair of points all cancel at point P. Thus, P
is a nodal point, located on a nodal line. On the other hand, if the slit width
is less than , then there can be no nodal point. This is obvious, since no
point can be a distance  farther from one side of the slit than from the other.
Slits of widths less than  behave nearly as point sources. The narrower they
are, the more nearly their behavior resembles that of point sources.
One can compute the wavelength of a wave from the interference pat-
tern set up where diffracted waves overlap. (See the Student Guide for such
a calculation.) This is one of the main reasons for interest in the interfer-
ence of diffracted waves. By locating nodal lines formed beyond a set of
slits, you can calculate  even for waves that you cannot see. Moreover, this
8.8 WAVE FRONTS AND DIFFRACTION
359
A
λ
λ/2
O
B
P
FIGURE 8.26
Diagram of a single slit showing how
nodal lines appear (see text).
FIGURE 8.27
Wave on rope reflected from a wall
to which it is attached.

is one very important way of identifying a series of unknown rays as con-
sisting of either particles or waves.
For two-slit interference, the larger the wavelength compared to the dis-
tance between slits, the more the interference pattern spreads out. That is,
as  increases or d decreases, the nodal and antinodal lines make increas-
ingly large angles with the straight-ahead direction. Similarly, for single-
slit diffraction, the pattern spreads when the ratio of wavelength to the slit
width increases. In general, diffraction of longer wavelengths is more eas-
ily detected. Thus, when you hear a band playing around a corner, you hear
the bass drums and tubas better than the piccolos and cornets, even if they
actually are playing equally loudly.
8.9 REFLECTION
You have seen that waves can pass through one another and spread around
obstacles in their paths. Waves also are reflected, at least to some degree,
whenever they reach any boundary of the medium in which they travel.
Echoes are familiar examples of the reflection of sound waves. All waves
share the property of being capable of reflection. Again, the superposition
principle will help understand what happens when reflection occurs.
Suppose that one end of a rope is tied tightly to a hook securely fastened
to a massive wall. From the other end, a pulse wave is sent down the rope
toward the hook. Since the hook cannot move, the force exerted by the
rope wave can do no work on the hook. Therefore, the energy carried in
the wave cannot leave the rope at this fixed end. Instead, the wave bounces
back, is reflected, ideally with the same energy.
What does the wave look like after it is reflected? The striking result is
that the wave seems to flip upside down on reflection. As the wave comes 
in from left to right and encounters the fixed hook, it pulls up on it. By
Newton's third law, the hook must exert a force on the rope in the oppo-
site direction while reflection is taking place. The details of how this force
varies in time are complicated, but the net effect is that an inverted wave
of the same form is sent back down the rope.
The three sketches in Figure 8.28 show the results of reflection of wa-
ter waves from a straight wall. You can check whether the sketches are ac-
curate by trying to reproduce the effect in a sink or bathtub. Wait until
the water is still, then dip your fingertip briefly into the water, or let a
drop fall into the water. In the upper part of the sketch, the outer crest is
approaching the barrier at the right. The next two sketches show the po-
360
8. WAVE MOTION

8.9 REFLECTION
361
S
S′
FIGURE 8.28
Two-dimensional circular wave re-
flecting from a wall.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 8.29 Two-dimensional plane
wave reflecting from a wall.

sitions of the crests after first one and then two of them have been re-
flected. Notice the dashed curves in the last sketch. They show that the
reflected wave appears to originate from a point S that is as far behind
the barrier as S is in front of it. The imaginary source at point S is called
the image of the source S.
Reflection of circular waves is studied first, because that is what you usu-
ally notice first when studying water waves. But it is easier to see a general
principle for explaining reflection by observing a straight wave front, re-
flected from a straight barrier. The ripple-tank photograph (Figure 8.32a)
shows one instant during such a reflection. (The wave came in from the
upper left at an angle of about 45°.) The sketches below indicate in more
detail what happens as the wave crests reflect from the straight barrier.
The description of wave behavior is often made easier by drawing lines
perpendicular to the wave fronts. Such lines, called rays, indicate the di-
rection of propagation of the wave. Notice Figure 8.30 for example. Rays
have been drawn for a set of wave crests just before reflection and just af-
ter reflection from a barrier. The straight-on direction, perpendicular to
the reflecting surface, is shown by a dotted line. The ray for the incident
362
8. WAVE MOTION
Ray
θi
θr
FIGURE 8.30
Angles of incidence and reflection.
(a)
(b)
P
P
(c)
Parabola
Circle
Circle
FIGURE 8.31
Rays reflecting from concave surfaces (circular and parabolic).

crests makes an angle i with the straight-on direction. The ray for the re-
flected crests makes an angle r with it. The angle of reflection r is equal to
the angle of incidence i; that is,
r  i.
This is an experimental fact, which you can easily verify.
Many kinds of wave reflectors are in use today. One can find them in
radar antennae or infrared heaters. Figure 8.31 (a) and (b) shows how
straight-line waves reflect from two circular reflectors. A few incident and
reflected rays are shown. (The dotted lines are perpendicular to the bar-
rier surface.) Rays reflected from the half-circle (a) head off in all direc-
tions. However, rays reflected from a small segment of the circle (b) come
close to meeting at a single point. A barrier with the shape of a parabola
(c) focuses straight-line rays, quite precisely at a point—which is to say that
a parabolic surface reflects plane waves to a sharp focus. An impressive ex-
ample is a radio telescope. Its huge parabolic surface reflects faint radio
waves from space to focus on a detector. Another example is provided by
the dish used for satellite TV reception.
The wave paths indicated in the sketches could just as well be reversed.
For example, spherical waves produced at the focus become plane waves when
reflected from a parabolic surface. The flashlight and automobile headlamp
are familiar applications of this principle. In them, white-hot wires placed at
the focus of parabolic reflectors produce almost parallel beams of light.
8.9 REFLECTION
363
FIGURE 8.32
(a) Reflection of a water wave from a wall; (b) and (c) ripple tank photographs showing
how circular waves produced at the focus of a parabolic wall are reflected from the wall into straight
waves.
(a)
(b)
(c)

364
8. WAVE MOTION
One of the highly useful wave phenomena we
shall encounter in Chapter 12 is the propaga-
tion and reflection of electromagnetic waves,
such as light and microwaves. An example of
the latter, as a preview of the general useful-
ness of the idea of wave propagation, is Radar.
Radar (an acronym for Radio Detection
and Ranging) is an electromagnetic sensor
for detecting, locating, tracking, and identi-
fying various kinds of objects at various dis-
tances. The most popular form of radar sig-
nal is made up of short continual pulses, and
the shorter the width of this pulse, the more
accurate the radar is at locating the target
Radar, developed during World War II, is
credited with being the key technology that
prevented a victory by the German air force,
especially during its bombing campaign on
cities in England. It shifted the course of the
war, and forever changed the face of military,
astronomical, and weather technology.
Radar is now used for innumerable tasks,
all of which require some form of detection
at distance: police detection of speeders, air
traffic controllers following the path of air-
craft, satellite detection of topography on
Earth and on other bodies in the solar 
system—all utilize the basic principles of
radar. These principles rest on two funda-
mental effects of radio waves, the echo effect
and the Doppler shift.
The echo is a very familiar phenomenon—
shout out your name in a large empty room
and the walls seem to shout it back. This type
of echo results from the reflection of sound
waves off a surface. The same effect can be
obtained with radio waves, which travel at the
speed of ordinary (visible) light in space. A
pulse of radio waves sent out from an antenna
will reflect from any object it hits, and part
of the wave will return to where it originated.
The time it takes between the emission of the
pulse and the reception of the reflected part
of the pulse can be used to determine the dis-
tance between the point and the reflecting
surface. Thus the radar stations in England
could be alerted that a hostile aircraft was
present even if it was still far away, and fighter
planes could scramble to fight off the ex-
pected attack.
The Doppler shift, also common in every-
day life, occurs when waves of any kind are
emitted or reflected by a moving body.
(Everyone has experienced it as the shift in
frequency of a car horn or a train whistle
while in motion.) If waves sent out from a
point are reflected by a moving body, the re-
turning waves will appear to have a higher
frequency as the object moves toward the
original point, and a lower frequency as the
object moves away from it. Therefore mea-
suring the Doppler shift of reflected waves
can be used to determine quickly the speed
and direction of the reflecting surface.
Since these principles apply to sound
waves, it is possible to make a "sound radar,"
or Sonar. That device works well enough in
water, and has been used with great success
to detect and trace submarines. But sonar is
impractical for use in the air, because there,
ordinary sound waves travel less far, and their
echo would be too faint to be useful in pre-
cise detections.
After a radar transmitter has sent out a
short burst, or pulse, of radio waves, the
transmitter shuts off and a receiver is turned
on, measuring the time and Doppler shift of
the detected reflection. From monitoring the
movement of cars on Route 1 to mapping the
surface of Venus, radar has given us a new
way to see the world.
In a standard radar system there is a trans-
mitter, which produces a signal in the form
of electromagnetic energy that is sent to the
■RADAR WAVES AND TECHNOLOGY

8.9 REFLECTION
365
Target
Transmitted
pulse
Echo pulse
from target
Antenna
beamwidth
Radar
antenna
FIGURE 8.33
Radar detection of an aircraft.
antenna. A radar antenna is commonly a par-
abolic reflector, with a small antenna placed
at the center of the parabola to illuminate the
surface of the reflector. The electromagnetic
energy is radiated from this surface in the
form of a narrow beam. When this electro-
magnetic beam passes over a target, the ob-
ject reflects an amount of the radiated energy
back to the radar, where a receiver filters and
amplifies the echoes. The single processor
then differentiates the signals obtained from
a target from those produced by clutter, such
as atmospheric effects. A computer then pro-
cesses this information and the output is dis-
played on a monitor. With the information
that is provided by the radar it is possible to
calculate the location of the target in terms
of range and angular direction.
Development of Radar
The scientific origins of radar can be found in
the work of the German physicist Heinrich
Hertz. Hertz showed, as Maxwell's equations
had predicted, that radio waves exist, and in
the same way as light waves, are reflected from
metallic objects. However, not until the 1930s
did radar become a focus for scientific re-
search, largely in response to the fear of war.
The most important needs of a radar trans-
mitter are often conflicting. For example, to
guarantee the greatest accuracy a transmitter
must be powerful and have a wide bandwidth,
but at the same time it cannot be too heavy
or too large, to fit into an aircraft or ship. One
of the main objectives for researchers work-
ing on radar during World War II was to solve
these conflicts by developing a system that was
small enough to fit in fighter aircraft but
worked at higher frequencies.
The benefits of using microwaves, waves of
wavelength 1 m or less, in radar technology
had been recognized for some time. They in-
cluded greater accuracy, increased efficiency
at reducing clutter, and an expanded potential

366
8. WAVE MOTION
for discriminating between targets. The cav-
ity magnetron, which was invented in Britain
in 1939 at the University of Birmingham,
opened up the possibility of using microwaves
and was small enough to fit in the palm of a
hand. In 1940, as part of a transatlantic scien-
tific exchange, a prototype of the magnetron
was sent to America where it soon became the
basis for some of the most important work on
radar during World War II. As a direct spin-
off of this exchange, a new laboratory, known
as the Radiation Laboratory, was founded at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
that helped to develop more than 150 radar
systems between 1940 and 1950.
Current Uses of Radar Technology
Radar technology is utilized today in many
different ways. Armed forces all over the
world continue to use radar as a detector of
aircraft and ships, as they did in World War
II. However, it is now also used to distinguish
many different kinds of targets, to control
and guide weapons, and to provide informa-
tion on the damage caused by these weapons.
Sophisticated weather forecasting techniques
are also highly dependent on radar technol-
ogy in the form of remote sensing. Radar
technology is also crucial to civilian air traf-
fic control, where it provides information on
air traffic and weather conditions, as well as
a tool for guiding pilots in unfavorable
weather conditions.
Further Reading
R. Buderi, The Invention that Changed the
World (New York: Touchstone Books,
1998).
■RADAR WAVES AND TECHNOLOGY (Continued)
8.10 REFRACTION
What happens when a wave propagates from one medium to another
medium in which its speed of propagation is different? Look at the simple
situation pictured in Figure 8.35. Two one-dimensional pulses approach a
boundary separating two media. The speed of the propagation in medium
1 is greater than it is in medium 2. Imagine the pulses to be in a light rope
(medium 1) tied to a relatively very heavy rope (medium 2). Part of each
pulse is reflected at the boundary. This reflected component is flipped up-
side down relative to the original pulse. (Recall the inverted reflection at a
hook in a wall discussed earlier. The heavier rope here tends to hold the
boundary point fixed in just the same way.) But what happens to that part
of the wave that continues into the second medium?
As shown in the figure, the transmitted pulses are closer together in
medium 2 than they are in medium 1. The reason is that the speed of the
pulses is less in the heavier rope. So the second pulse, while still in the light

367
1
2
FIGURE 8.34
(a) Pulses encountering a boundary between two different media. (b) contin-
uous wave train crossing the boundary between two different media. In both cases, the speed
of propagation is less in medium 2.
λ1
λ2
1
V1
V2
2
(a)
(b)
(a)
Water
Glass
(c)
(b)
FIGURE 8.35
(a) Cross section of waves in a ripple tank; (b) ripples on
water (coming from the left) encounter the shallow region over the cor-
ner of a submerged glass plate; (c) ripples on water (coming from the
left) encounter a shallow region over a glass plate placed at an angle to
the wave fronts.

rope, is catching up with the one that is already in the heavy rope. For the
same reason, each separate pulse is itself squeezed into a narrower form;
that is, when the front of a pulse has entered the region of less speed, the
back part of it is still moving ahead with greater speed.
Something of the same sort happens to a periodic wave at such a bound-
ary. This situation is pictured in Figure 8.35b. For the sake of simplicity,
assume that all of the wave is transmitted and none of it is reflected. Just
as the two pulses were brought closer and each pulse was squeezed and nar-
rowed, the periodic wave pattern is squeezed together, too. Thus, the wave-
length 2 of the transmitted wave is shorter than the wavelength 1 of the
incoming, or incident, wave.
Although the wavelength changes when the wave passes across the
boundary, the frequency of the wave cannot change. If the rope is unbro-
ken, the pieces immediately on either side of the boundary must go up and
down together. The frequencies of the incident and transmitted waves must,
then, be equal. We can simply label both of them f.
The wavelength, frequency, and speed relationship for both the incident
and transmitted waves can be written separately
1f  v1
and
2f  v2.
Dividing one of these equations by the other and eliminating f:

.
This equation tells us that the ratio of the wavelengths in the two media
equals the ratio of the speeds.
The same sort of thing happens when water ripples cross a boundary.
Experiments show that the ripples move more slowly in shallower water.
A piece of plate glass is placed on the bottom of a ripple tank to make the
water shallower there. This creates a boundary between the deeper and
shallower part (medium 1 and medium 2). Figure 8.35a shows the case
where this boundary is parallel to the crest lines of the incident wave. As
with rope waves, the wavelength of water waves in a medium is propor-
tional to the speed in that medium.
Water waves offer a possibility not present for rope waves. The crest lines
can approach the boundary at any angle, not only head-on. Photograph (c)
shows such an event. A ripple-tank wave approaches the boundary at an an-
gle. The wavelength and speed, of course, change as the wave passes across
the boundary. The direction of the wave propagation also changes. As each
v1

v2
1

2
368
8. WAVE MOTION

part of a crest line in medium 1 enters medium 2, its speed decreases, and
it starts to lag behind. In time, the directions of the whole set of crest lines
in medium 2 are changed from their directions in medium 1.
This phenomenon is called refraction. Refraction occurs whenever a wave
passes into a medium in which the wave velocity is different. In this case, the
wave fronts are turned (refracted) so that they are more nearly parallel to 
the boundary. (See Figures 8.35a and 8.35b.) This accounts for something
that you may have noticed if you have been at an ocean beach. No matter
in what direction the waves are moving far from the shore, when they come
near the beach that slopes gently into the deeper water, their crest lines are
nearly parallel to the shoreline. A wave's speed is steadily reduced as it moves
into water that gets gradually more shallow. So the
wave is refracted continuously as if it were always
crossing a boundary between different media, as in-
deed it is. The refraction of sea waves, coming from
one direction, can be so great that wave crests can
curl around a very small island with an all-beach
shoreline and provide surf on all sides.
8.10 REFRACTION
369
FIGURE 8.36
Aerial photograph of the refraction of ocean waves approaching shore. 
The slowing of starlight by in-
creasingly dense layers of the
atmosphere produces refraction
that changes the apparent posi-
tion of the star.

8.11 SOUND WAVES
Sound waves are mechanical disturbances that propagate through a me-
dium, such as the air. Typically, sound waves are longitudinal waves, pro-
ducing changes of density and pressure in the medium through which they
travel. The medium can be a solid, liquid, or gas. If the waves strike the
ear, they cause the ear drum to vibrate, which produces a signal in the
acoustic nerve that can produce the sensation of hearing. The biology and
psychology of hearing, as well as the physics of sound, are important to the
science of acoustics. Here, of course, we will concentrate on sound as an
example of wave motion. Sound has all the properties of wave motion con-
sidered so far. It exhibits reflection, refraction, diffraction, and the same re-
lations among frequency, wavelength, and propagation speed and interfer-
ence. Only the property of polarization is missing, because sound waves are
longitudinal, not transverse. In addition, sound waves travel faster in cold
air than in hot air because of the increased density of the medium, air, when
it is cold.
Vibrating sources for sound waves may be as simple as a tuning fork or
as complex as the human larynx with its vocal cords. Tuning forks and some
electronic devices produce a steady "pure tone." Most of the energy in such
a tone is in simple harmonic motion at a single frequency. Frequency is of-
ten measured in units of hertz (Hz), where 1 Hz is one cycle (or oscilla-
tion) per second; 1 Hz  1/s. (There is no unit for "cycle.")
The normal human ear can hear sound waves with frequencies between
about 20 Hz and 15,000 Hz. Dogs can hear over a much wider range 
(15 Hz-50,000 Hz). Bats, porpoises, and whales generate and respond to
frequencies up to about 120,000 Hz.
Loudness (or "volume") of sound is, like pitch, a psychological variable.
Loudness is strongly related to the intensity of the sound. Sound intensity
is a physical quantity. It is defined in terms of the energy carried by the
wave and is usually measured in the number of watts per square centime-
ter transmitted through a surface perpendicular to the direction of motion
of a wave front. The human ear can perceive a vast range of intensities 
of sound. Figure 8.37 illustrates this range. It begins at a level of 
1016 W/cm2 (relative intensity  1). Below this "threshold" level, the nor-
mal ear does not perceive sound. It is customary to measure loudness in
decibels (db). The number of decibels is 10 times the exponent in the rel-
ative intensity of the sound. Thus, a jet plane at takeoff, making a noise of
1014 relative intensity, is said to emit noise at the 140-db level.
Levels of noise intensity about 1012 times threshold intensity can be felt
as an uncomfortable tickling sensation in the normal human ear. Beyond
370
8. WAVE MOTION

that, the sensation changes to pain and may damage the unprotected ear.
Since many popular music concerts produce, in an auditorium, steady sound
levels at this intensity (and above it for the performers), there are many
cases of impaired hearing among people extensively exposed to such sound.
Often the simplest way of reducing noise is by absorbing it after it is pro-
duced but before it reaches your ears. Like all sound, noise is the energy
of back and forth motion of the medium through which the noise travels.
Noisy machinery can be muffled by padded enclosures in which the energy
of noise is changed to heat energy, which then dissipates. In a house, a thick
rug on the floor can absorb 90% of room noise. (A foot of fresh fluffy snow
is an almost perfect absorber of noise outdoors. Cities and countrysides are
remarkably hushed after a snowfall.)
It has always been fairly obvious that sound takes time to travel from
source to receiver. By timing echoes over a known distance, the French
mathematician Marin Mersenne in 1640 first computed the speed of sound
in air. It took another 70 years before William Derham in England, com-
paring the flash and noise from cannons across 20 km, came close to the
modern measurements. Sound in air at sea level at 20°C moves at about
344 m/s. As for all waves, the speed of sound waves depends on the prop-
erties of the medium: the temperature, density, and elasticity. Sound waves
generally travel faster in liquids than in gases, and faster still in solids. In
seawater, their speed is about 1500 m/s; in steel, about 5000 m/s; in quartz,
about 5500 m/s.
Interference of sound waves can be shown in a variety of ways. In a large
hall with hard, sound-reflecting surfaces, there will be "dead" spots. At these
spots, sound waves coming together after reflection tend to cancel each
other. Acoustic engineers must consider this in designing the shape, posi-
tion, and materials of an auditorium. Another interesting and rather dif-
8.11 SOUND WAVES
371
1
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
1010
1011
1012
1013
1014
1015
1016
1017
Threshold of hearing
Normal breathing
Leaves in a breeze
Library
Quiet restaurant
Two-person conversation
Busy traffic
Vacuum cleaner
Roar of Niagara Falls
Subway train
Propeller plane at takeoff
Machine-gun fire
Small jet plane at takeoff
Wind tunnel
Space rocket at lift-off
Relative intensity
Sound
FIGURE 8.37
Loudness chart.

ferent example of sound interference is the phenomenon known as beats.
When two notes of slightly different frequency are heard together, they in-
terfere. This interference produces beats, a rhythmic pulsing of the sound.
Piano tuners and string players use this fact to tune two strings to the same
pitch. They simply adjust one string or the other until the beats disappear.
Refraction of sound by different layers of air explains why you some-
times cannot hear the thunder after seeing lightning. Similar refraction of
sound occurs in layers of water of different temperatures. Geologists use
the refraction of sound waves to study the Earth's deep structure and to lo-
cate fossil fuels and minerals. Very intense sound waves are set up in the
ground (as by dynamite blasts). The sound waves travel through the Earth
and are received by detection devices at different locations. The path of
the waves, as refracted by layers in the Earth, can be calculated from the
relative intensities and times of sound received. From knowledge of the
paths, estimates can be made of the composition of the layers.
As mentioned, diffraction is a property of sound waves. Sound waves
readily bend around corners and barriers to reach the listener within range.
372
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.38
Boston Symphony concert hall.

Sound waves reflect, as do rope or water waves, wherever they encounter
a boundary between different media. The architectural features called
"whispering galleries" show vividly how sound can be focused by reflection
from curved surfaces. All these effects are of interest in the study of
acoustics. Moreover, the proper acoustical design of public buildings is now
recognized as an important function by all good architects.
So far in this chapter, you have studied the basic phenomena of me-
chanical waves, ending with the theory of sound propagation. The expla-
nations of these phenomena were considered the final triumph of New-
tonian mechanics as applied to the transfer of energy of particles in motion.
Most of the general principles of acoustics were discovered in the 1870s.
Since then, perhaps its most important influence on modern physics has
been its effect on the imagination of scientists. The successes of acoustics
encouraged them to take seriously the power of the wave viewpoint, even
in fields far from the original one—the mechanical motion of particles that
move back and forth or up and down in a medium.
We now turn to an especially important type of wave phenomenon—
light.
B. LIGHT
8.12 WHAT IS LIGHT?
The conviction that the world and everything in it consists of matter in mo-
tion drove scientists prior to the twentieth century to search for mechani-
cal models for light as well as heat; that is, they tried to imagine how the
effects of light, heat, and other phenomena could be explained in detail as
the action of material objects. For example, consider the way light bounces
off a mirror. A model for this effect might picture light as consisting of par-
ticles of matter that behave somewhat like tiny ping-pong balls. On the
other hand, light exhibits interference and diffraction, suggesting a model
involving waves. Such mechanical models were useful for a time, but in the
long run proved far too limited. Still, the search for these models led to
many new discoveries, which in turn brought about important changes in
science, technology, and society.
In most basic terms, light is a form of energy. The physicist can describe
a beam of light by stating measurable values of its speed, wavelength or
frequency, and intensity. But to scientists, as to all people, "light" also means
brightness and shade, the beauty of summer flowers and fall foliage, of red
sunsets, and of the canvases painted by masters. These are different ways
8.12 WHAT IS LIGHT?
373

of appreciating light. One way concentrates on light's measurable aspects,
an approach enormously fruitful in physics and technology. The other way
concerns aesthetic responses to viewing light in nature or art. Still another
way of considering light deals with the biophysical process of vision.
These aspects of light are not easily separated. Thus, in the early his-
tory of science, light presented more subtle and more elusive problems than
did most other aspects of physical experience. Some Greek philosophers
believed that light travels in straight lines at high speed and contains par-
ticles that stimulate the sense of vision when they enter the eye. For cen-
turies after the Greek era, this particle model survived almost intact. Around
1500, Leonardo da Vinci, noting a similarity between sound echoes and the
reflection of light, speculated that light might have a wave character.
A decided difference of opinion about the nature of light emerged among
scientists of the seventeenth century. Some, including Newton, favored a
model largely based on the idea of light as a stream of particles. Others,
374
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.39
Roman temple in
Evora, Portugal. Light beams travel
in straight lines, as shown by the
shadow lines. 

including Huygens, supported a wave model. By the late nineteenth cen-
tury, there appeared to be overwhelming evidence in support of the wave
model. This part of the chapter will deal with the question: How accurate
is a wave model in explaining the observed behavior of light? The wave model
will be taken as a hypothesis, and the evidence that supports it examined.
Remember that any scientific model, hypothesis, or theory has two chief
functions: to explain what is known, and to make predictions that can be
tested experimentally. Both of these aspects of the wave model will be dis-
cussed. The result will be rather surprising. The wave model turns out to
work splendidly to this day for all properties of light known before the
twentieth century. But in Chapter 13 you will find that for some purposes
a particle model must be used. Then in Chapter 15 both models will be
combined, merging two apparently conflicting theories.
The ancient opinion, later proved by experiment, that light travels in
straight lines and at high speed has been mentioned. The daily use of mir-
rors shows that light can also be reflected. Light can also be refracted, and
it shows the phenomena of interference and diffraction, as well as other
phenomena characteristic of waves, such as dispersion, polarization, and
scattering. All of these characteristics lent strong support to the wave model
of light.
8.13 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT
There is ample evidence that light travels in straight lines. A shadow cast
by an object intercepting sunlight has well-defined outlines. Similarly, sharp
shadows are cast by smaller sources closer by. The distant Sun and the
nearby small source are approximate point sources of light. Such point
sources produce sharp shadows.
Images can also demonstrate that light travels in straight lines. Before
the invention of the modern camera with its lens system, a light-tight box
with a pinhole in the center of one face was widely used. As the camera ob-
scura (meaning "dark chamber" in Latin), the device was highly popular in
the Middle Ages. Leonardo da Vinci probably used it as an aid in his sketch-
ing. In one of his manuscripts he says that "a small aperture in a window
shutter projects on the inner wall of the room an image of the bodies which
are beyond the aperture." He includes a sketch to show how the straight-
line propagation of light explains the formation of an image.
It is often convenient to use a straight line to represent the direction in
which light travels. The pictorial device of an infinitely thin ray of light is
useful for thinking about light. But no such rays actually exist. A light beam
8.13 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT
375

emerging from a good-sized hole in a screen is as wide as the hole. You
might expect that if you made the hole extremely small, you would get a
very narrow beam of light, ultimately just a single ray. This is not the case.
Diffraction effects, such as those observed for water and sound waves, ap-
pear when the beam of light passes through a small hole. So an infinitely
thin ray of light, although it is pictorially useful, cannot be produced in
376
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.40
An attempt to produce a "ray" of light. To make the pictures, a parallel beam
of red light was directed through increasingly narrow slits to a photographic plate. Of course,
the narrower the slit, the less light gets through. This was compensated for by longer ex-
posures in these photographs. The slit widths were (a) 1.5 mm; (b) 0.7 mm; (c) 0.4 mm; 
(d) 0.2 mm; and (e) 0.1 mm.
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(c)

practice. But the idea can still be used in order to represent the direction in
which a train of waves in a beam of light is traveling.
The beam of light produced by a laser comes as close as possible to the
ideal case of a thin, parallel bundle of rays. As you will find in Chapter 14,
light is often produced by the action of electrons within the atoms of its
source. Lasers are designed in such a way that their atoms produce light in
unison with one another, rather than individually and at random, as in other
sources of light. As a result, light from a laser can yield a total beam of con-
siderable intensity, and one that is much more nearly monochromatic—
that is, of a single color—than light from any conventional source. In ad-
dition, since the individual wavelets from the atoms of a laser are produced
simultaneously, they are able to interfere with each other constructively to
produce a beam of light that is narrow and very nearly parallel. In fact, such
light spreads out so little that thin beams emitted by lasers on Earth, when
directed at the surface of the Moon 400,000 km away, have been found to
produce spots of light only 1 m in diameter on the Moon.
Given that light can be considered to travel in straight lines, can we tell
how fast it goes? Galileo discussed this problem in his Two New Sciences
(published in 1638). He pointed out that everyday experiences might lead
one to conclude that light propagates instantaneously. But these experi-
ences, when analyzed more closely, really show only that light travels much
faster than sound. For example, "when we see a piece of artillery fired, at
a great distance, the flash reaches our eyes without lapse of time; but the
sound reaches the ear only after a noticeable interval."
But how do you really know whether the light moved "without lapse of
time" unless you have some accurate way of measuring the lapse of time?
Galileo went on to describe an experiment by which two people standing
on distant hills flashing lanterns might measure the speed of light. He con-
cluded that the speed of light is probably finite, not infinite. Galileo, how-
ever, was not able to estimate a definite value for it.
Experimental evidence was first successfully related to a finite speed for
light by a Danish astronomer, Ole Rœmer. Detailed observations of Jupiter's
satellites had shown an unexplained irregularity in the times recorded be-
tween successive eclipses of the satellites by the planet. Such an eclipse was
expected to occur at 45 s after 5:25 a.m. on November 9, 1676 (Julian cal-
endar). In September of that year, Rœmer announced to the Academy of
Sciences in Paris that the observed eclipse would be 10 min late. On No-
vember 9, astronomers at the Royal Observatory in Paris carefully studied
the eclipse. Though skeptical of Rœmer's mysterious prediction, they re-
ported that the eclipse did occur late, just as he had foreseen.
Later, Rœmer revealed the theoretical basis of his prediction to the baf-
fled astronomers at the Academy of Sciences. He explained that the orig-
8.13 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT
377

inally expected time of the eclipse had been calculated from observations
made when Jupiter was near the Earth. But now Jupiter had moved farther
away. The delay in the eclipse occurred simply because light from the area
around Jupiter takes time to reach the Earth. Obviously, this time interval
must be greater when the relative distance between Jupiter and the Earth
in their orbits is greater. In fact, Rœmer estimated that it takes about 
22 min for light to cross the Earth's own orbit around the Sun.
Shortly after this, the Dutch physicist Christian Huygens used Rœmer's
data to make the first calculation of the speed of light. Huygens combined
Rœmer's value of 22 min for light to cross the Earth's orbit with his own
estimate of the diameter of the Earth's orbit. (This distance could be esti-
mated for the first time in the seventeenth century, in good part as a result
of the advances in astronomy described in Chapter 2.) Huygens obtained
a value for the speed of light in space which, in modern units, is about 
2  108 m/s. This is about two-thirds of the currently accepted value. The
error in Huygens' value was due mainly to Rœmer's overestimate of the
time interval. Scientists now know that it takes light only about 16 min to
cross the Earth's orbit.
The speed of light has been measured in many different ways since the
seventeenth century. The development of electronic devices in the twenti-
eth century allowed very precise measurements, making the speed of light
one of the most precisely measured physical constants known today. Be-
cause of the importance of the value of the speed of light in modern phys-
ical theories, physicists continue to improve their methods of measurement.
The most precise recent measurements indicate that the speed of light
in vacuum is 2.99792458  108 m/s. The uncertainty of this value is thought
to be about 1 m/s, or 0.000001%, the precision being limited only by the
precision to which lengths can be measured (times can be measured to sev-
eral orders of magnitude greater precision). The speed of light is usually
represented by the symbol c; for most purposes it is sufficient to use the
approximate value c  3  108 m/s. Indeed, there has been general agree-
ment not to pursue endlessly the search for greater accuracy, and some 
physicists have accepted the speed of light (in vacuum) to be by definition
2.9979  108 m/s.
8.14 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION
What does each model of light predict will happen when light traveling in
one medium (e.g., air) hits the boundary of another medium (e.g., glass)?
The answers to this question depend on whether a particle or a wave the-
378
8. WAVE MOTION

ory of light is used. Here is an opportunity to test
which theory is better.
Reflection and refraction from the wave viewpoint
were discussed in Sections 8.9 and 8.10. Recall the
results obtained there and apply them to light:
1.
A ray may be taken as the line drawn perpendicular to a wave's crest
lines. Such a ray represents the direction in which a train of waves is
traveling.
2.
In reflection, the angle of incidence (i) is equal to the angle of reflec-
tion (r).
3.
Refraction involves a change of wavelength and speed of the wave as
it passes into another medium. When the speed decreases, the wave-
length decreases, and the ray bends in a direction toward a line per-
pendicular to the boundary. This bending toward the perpendicular is
observed, for example, when a ray of light passes from air to glass.
What about explaining the same observations by means of the particle
model? To test this model, first consider the nature of the surface of glass.
Though apparently smooth, it is actually a wrinkled surface. A powerful
microscope would show it to have endless hills and valleys. If particles of
light were at all similar to little balls of matter, then on striking such a wrin-
kled surface they would scatter in all directions. They would not be re-
flected and refracted as noted above. Therefore, Newton argued, there must
actually be "some feature of the body which is evenly diffused over its sur-
face and by which it acts upon the ray without immediate contact." Obvi-
ously, in the case of reflection, the acting force would have to be one that
8.14 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION
379
The incident, reflected, and re-
fracted rays are all in the same
plane, a plane perpendicular to
the surface.
FIGURE 8.41
Two narrow beams
of light, coming from the upper
left, strike a block of glass. Can 
you account for all the observed 
effects? 

repelled the particles of light. Similarly, a force that attracted light parti-
cles instead of repelling them could explain refraction. As a particle of light
approached a boundary of another medium, it would first have to over-
come the repelling force. If it did that, it would then meet an attractive
force in the medium that would pull it into the medium. Since the attrac-
tive force would be a vector with a component in the direction of the par-
ticle's original motion, the particle's speed would increase. If the ray of par-
ticles were moving at an oblique angle to the boundary, it would change
direction as it entered the medium, bending toward the line perpendicular
to the boundary. Notice that to make this argument we have had to make
380
8. WAVE MOTION
θi
θr
FIGURE 8.42
Diagrams illustrating reflection and refrac-
tion of light, viewed as waves and particles.

an assumption about the size of Newton's light "particles." The particles
must be at least as small as the irregularities in the surface of a mirror. Sim-
ilarly, a concrete wall is quite rough, but a tennis ball rebounds from such
a wall almost exactly as light reflects from a mirror.
According to the particle model, therefore, you can make the following
statements about reflection and refraction:
1.
A ray represents the direction in which the particles are moving.
2.
In reflection, the angles of incidence and reflection are equal. This pre-
diction can be derived by applying the law of conservation of momen-
tum to particles repelled by a force as shown on the last sketch.
3.
Refraction involves a change of speed of the particles as they enter an-
other medium. In particular, when an attractive power acts, the speed
increases, and the ray is bent into the medium.
Compare these features of the particle model with the corresponding
features of the wave model. The only difference is in the predicted speed
for a refracted ray. You observe that a ray is bent toward the perpendicular
line when light passes from air into water. The particle theory predicts that
light has a greater speed in the second medium. The wave theory predicts
that light has a lower speed.
You might think that it would be fairly easy to devise an experiment to
determine which prediction is correct. All one has to do is measure the
speed of light after it has entered water and compare it with the speed of
light in air. But in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, when
Huygens was arguing the wave model and Newton a particle model, no
8.14 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION
381
FIGURE 8.43
The surface of a mir-
ror, as shown by a scanning elec-
tron microscope. The surface is a
3-micron thick aluminum film. The
magnification here is nearly 26,000
times (one micron  106 m).

such experiment was possible. The only available way of measuring the
speed of light was an astronomical one. Not until the middle of the nine-
teenth century did Armand H.L. Fizeau and Jean B.L. Foucault measure
the speed of light in water. The results agreed with the predictions of the wave
model: The speed of light is less in water than in air.
The Foucault-Fizeau experiments of 1850 were widely regarded as driv-
ing the last nail in the coffin of the Newtonian particle theory of light, for,
by the time these experiments were done, most physicists had already ac-
cepted the wave model for other reasons. Some of these stemmed from the
work of the English scientist Thomas Young, to whom we now turn.
8.15 INTERFERENCE AND DIFFRACTION
Early in the nineteenth century, when Newton's prestige still contributed
greatly to the support of the particle theory of light, Thomas Young re-
vived the wave theory of light. In experiments made between 1802 and
1804, Young found that light shows the phenomenon of interference de-
382
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.44
Thomas Young (1773-1829) was
an English linguist, physician, and expert in
many fields of science. At the age of 14, he was
familiar with Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Arabic,
Persian, French, and Italian, and later was one
of the first scholars successful at decoding
Egyptian hieroglyphic inscriptions. He studied
medicine in England, Scotland, and Germany.
While still in medical school, he made original
studies of the eye and later developed the first
version of what is now known as the three-color
theory of vision. Young also did research in
physiology on the functions of the heart and
arteries and studied the human voice mecha-
nism, through which he became interested in
the physics of sound and sound waves. Young
then turned to optics and showed that many of
Newton's experiments with light could be ex-
plained in terms of a simple wave theory of
light. This conclusion was strongly attacked by
some scientists in England and Scotland who
were upset by the implication that Newton
might have been wrong. 

scribed in general for transverse waves in Section 8.6. The particle theory
of light could not easily explain the interference patterns produced by light.
Young's famous "double-slit experiment" provided convincing evidence that
light does have properties that are explainable only in terms of waves.
Young's experiment should be done in the laboratory, rather than only
talked about; we will describe it only briefly here. Basically, it involves split-
ting a single beam of light into two beams in order to ensure that they are
in phase. The split beams are then allowed to overlap, and the two wave
trains interfere, constructively in some places and destructively in others.
To simplify the interpretation of the experiment, assume that it is done with
light that has a single definite wavelength .
Young used a black screen with a small hole punched in it to produce a
narrow beam of sunlight in a dark room. In the beam he placed a second
black screen with two narrow slits cut in it, close together. Beyond this
screen he placed a white screen. The light coming through each slit was
diffracted and spread out into the space beyond the screen. The light from
each slit interfered with the light from the other, and the interference pat-
tern showed on the white screen. Where interference was constructive,
there was a bright band on the screen. Where interference was destructive,
the screen remained dark.
It is remarkable that Young actually found, by experiment, numerical val-
ues for the very short wavelength of light (see the Student Guide Calcula-
tion for this chapter). Here is his result:
From a comparison of various experiments, it appears that the
breadth of the undulations constituting the extreme red light 
must be supposed to be, in air, about one 36 thousandth of an inch
[7  107 m], and those of the extreme violet about one 60 thou-
sandth [4  107 m].
In announcing his result, Young took special pains to forestall criticism
from followers of Newton, who was generally considered a supporter of
the particle theory. He pointed out that Newton himself had made several
statements favoring a theory of light that had some aspects of a wave the-
ory. Nevertheless, Young was not taken seriously. It was not until 1818,
when the French physicist Augustin Fresnel proposed his own mathemat-
ical wave theory, that Young's research began to get the credit it deserved.
Fresnel also had to submit his work for approval to a group of physicists
who were committed to the particle theory. One of them, the mathemati-
cian Simon Poisson, tried to refute Fresnel's wave theory of light. If it re-
ally did describe the behavior of light, Poisson said, a very peculiar thing
ought to happen when a small solid disk is placed in a beam of light. Dif-
8.15 INTERFERENCE AND DIFFRACTION
383

fraction of some of the light waves all around the edge of the round disk
should lead to constructive interference, producing a bright spot in the cen-
ter of the disk's shadow on a white screen placed behind the disk. But the
particle theory of light allowed no room for ideas such as diffraction and
constructive interference. In addition, such a bright spot had never been
reported, and even the very idea of a bright spot in the center of a shadow
seemed absurd. For all of these reasons, Poisson announced that he had re-
futed the wave theory.
Fresnel accepted the challenge, however, and immediately arranged for
Poisson's seemingly ridiculous prediction to be tested by experiment. The
result was that a bright spot did appear in the center of the shadow!
384
8. WAVE MOTION
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 8.46
(a) A double-slit fringe pattern. When white light is used in Young's experiment, each
wavelength produces its own fringe pattern slightly shifted from the others. The result is a central white
band surrounded by fringes that are increasingly colored. (b) When the separation between slits, a, is
decreased, the distance of the fringes from the central axis increases and the fringes broaden. All of this
can be seen easily with an ordinary long-filament display light bulb, viewed through the space between
two straight fingers.
FIGURE 8.45
Thomas Young's original drawing showing interference effects in overlapping
waves. The alternate regions of reinforcement and cancellation in the drawing can be seen best
by placing your eye near the right edge and sighting at a grazing angle along the diagram.

Thereafter, increasing numbers of scientists realized the significance of
the Young double-slit experiment and the "Poisson bright spot." By 1850,
the wave model of light was generally accepted; physicists had begun to
concentrate on working out the mathematical consequences of this model
and applying it to the different properties of light.
8.15 INTERFERENCE AND DIFFRACTION
385
FIGURE 8.47
Augustin Jean Fresnel
(1788-1827) was an engineer of bridges
and roads for the French government.
In his spare time, he carried out exten-
sive experimental and theoretical work
in optics. Fresnel developed a compre-
hensive wave model of light that suc-
cessfully accounted for reflection, re-
fraction, interference, and polarization.
He also designed a lens system for
lighthouses that is still used today. 
FIGURE 8.48
Diffraction pattern
caused by an opaque circular disk,
showing the Poisson bright spot
in the center of the shadow. Note
also the bright and dark fringes of
constructive and destructive inter-
ference.

8.16 WHAT IS COLOR?
The coloring agents found in prehistoric painting and pottery show that
humans have appreciated color since earliest times. But no scientific the-
ory of color was developed before the time of Newton. Until then, most
of the accepted ideas about color had come from artist-scientists like da
Vinci, who based their ideas on experiences with mixing pigments.
Unfortunately, the lessons learned in mixing pigments rarely apply to
the mixing of different-colored light beams. In ancient times, it was thought
that light from the Sun was "pure." Color resulted from adding impurity,
as was considered to be the case when a beam of "pure light" was refracted
in glass and emerged with colored fringes.
Newton became interested in colors even while he was still a student 
at Cambridge University. In 1672, at the age of 29, Newton published a 
theory of color in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London. This was his first published scientific paper. He wrote:
In the beginning of the Year 1666, at which time I applyed myself
to the grinding of Optick glasses of other figures than Spherical, I
procured me a Triangular glass-Prisme, to try therewith the cele-
brated Phaenomena of Colours. And in order thereto haveing dark-
ened my chamber, and made a small hole in my window-shuts, to
386
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.49
Katherine Burr Blodgett
(1898-1979). Dr. Blodgett developed "in-
visible" glass by applying 44 layers of a
one-molecule thick transparent liquid
soap to glass to reduce reflections from
its surface. Today, nearly all camera lenses
and optical devices have non-reflective
coatings on their surfaces which facilitate
the efficient passage of light. 

let in a convenient quantity of the Suns light, I placed my Prisme
at his entrance, that it might be thereby refracted to the opposite
wall. It was at first a very pleasing divertisement, to view the vivid
and intense colours produced thereby. . . . 
The cylindrical beam of "white" sunlight from the circular opening
passed through the prism and produced an elongated patch of colored light
on the opposite wall. This patch was violet at one end, red at the other,
and showed a continuous gradation of colors in between. For such a pat-
tern of colors, Newton invented the name spectrum.
But, Newton wondered, where do the colors come from? And why is the im-
age spread out in an elongated patch rather than circular? Newton passed
the light through different thicknesses of the glass, changed the size of the
hole in the window shutter, and even placed the prism outside the window.
8.16 WHAT IS COLOR?
387
FIGURE 8.50
Title page from the
first edition of Newton's Opticks
(1704), in which he described his
theory of light. 

None of these changes had any effect on the spectrum. Perhaps some 
unevenness or irregularity in the glass produced the spectrum, Newton
thought. To test this possibility, he passed the colored rays from one prism
through a second similar prism turned upside down. If some irregularity in
the glass caused the beam of light to spread out, then passing this beam
through the second prism should spread it out even more. Instead, the sec-
ond prism, when properly placed, brought the colors back together fairly
well. A spot of white light was formed, as if the light had not passed through
either prism.
By such a process of elimination, Newton convinced himself of a belief
that he probably had held from the beginning: White light is composed of col-
ors. The prism does not manufacture or add the colors; they were there all
the time, but mixed up so that they could not be distinguished. When white
light passes through a prism, each of the component colors is refracted at
a different angle. Thus, the beam is spread into a spectrum.
As a further test of this hypothesis, Newton cut a small hole in a screen
on which a spectrum was projected. In this way, light of a single color could
be separated out and passed through a second prism. He found that the
second prism had no further effect on the color of this beam, though it re-
fracted the beam more. That is, once the first prism had done its job of
separating the colored components of white light, the second prism could
not change the color of the components.
Summarizing his conclusions, Newton wrote:
Colors are not Qualifications of Light derived from Refraction or Re-
flection of natural Bodies (as 'tis generally believed) but Original
and Connate Properties, which in divers Rays are divers. Some Rays
are disposed to exhibit a Red Colour and no other; some a Yellow
and no other, some a Green and no other, and so of the rest. Nor
are there only Rays proper and particular to the more Eminent
Colours, but even to all their intermediate gradations.
Apparent Colors of Objects
So far, Newton had discussed only the colors of rays of light. In a later sec-
tion of his paper he raised the important question: Why do objects appear
to have different colors? Why is the grass green, a paint pigment yellow or
red? Newton proposed a very simple answer:
That the Colours of all Natural Bodies have no other Origin than
this, that they . . . Reflect one sort of Light in greater plenty than
another.
388
8. WAVE MOTION

In other words, a red paint pigment looks red to us
because when white sunlight falls on it, the pigment
absorbs most of the rays of other colors of the spec-
trum and reflects mainly the red to our eyes.
According to Newton's theory, color is not a prop-
erty of an object by itself. Rather, color depends on
how the object reflects and absorbs the various col-
ored rays that strike it. Newton backed up this hy-
pothesis by pointing out that an object may appear
to have a different color when a different kind of
light shines on it. For example, consider a pigment
that reflects much more red light than green or blue
light. When illuminated by white light, it will reflect
mostly the red component of the white light, and so
will appear red. But if it is illuminated with blue
light, there is no red there for it to reflect, and it can
reflect only a very little of the blue light. Thus, it
will appear to be dark and perhaps dimly blue. (However, Newton was not
suggesting that the rays themselves possess color, only that they raise the
sensation of color in the eye, or the mind.)
Reactions to Newton's Theory
Newton's theory of color met with violent opposition at first. Other British
scientists, especially Robert Hooke, objected on the grounds that postulat-
ing a different kind of light for each color was unnecessary. It would be
simpler to assume that the different colors were produced from pure white
light by some kind of modification. For example, the wave front might be
twisted so that it is no longer perpendicular to the direction of motion.
Newton was aware of the flaws in Hooke's theory, but he disliked pub-
lic controversy. In fact, he waited until after Hooke's death in 1703 to pub-
lish his own book, Opticks (1704), in which he reviewed the properties of
light and his many convincing experiments on light.
Newton's Principia was a more important work from a purely scientific
viewpoint. But his Opticks had also considerable influence on the literary
world. This was in part because the work was written in English rather
than in Latin and because the book contained little mathematics. English
poets gladly celebrated the discoveries of their country's greatest scientist.
Most poets, of course, were not deeply versed in the details of Newton's
theory of gravity. The technical aspects of the geometric axioms and proofs
in the Principia were beyond most of its readers. Although some students,
including young Thomas Jefferson, learned their physics out of that book,
8.16 WHAT IS COLOR?
389
Most colors observed for real
materials are "body" colors, pro-
duced by selective absorption of
light which penetrates a little
beyond the surface before being
scattered back. This explains
why the light transmitted by col-
ored glass has the same color as
the light reflected from it. Thin
metallic films, however, have
"surface" color, resulting from
selective regular reflection.
Thus, the transmitted light will
be the complement of the re-
flected light. For example, the
light transmitted by a thin film
of gold is bluish-green, while
that reflected is yellow.

translations and popularized versions soon appeared. But Newton's theory
of colors and light provided good material for poetic fancy, as in James
Thomson's, "To the Memory of Sir Isaac Newton" (1727):
. . . First the flaming red,
Springs vivid forth; the tawny orange next;
And next delicious yellow; by whose side
Fell the kind beams of all-refreshing green.
Then the pure blue, that swells autumnal skies,
Ethereal played; and then, of sadder hue,
Emerged the deepened indigo, as when
The heavy-skirted evening droops with frost;
While the last gleamings of refracted light
Died in the fainting violet away.
Leaders of the nineteenth-century Romantic movement in literature and
the German "Nature Philosophers" did not think so highly of Newton's
theory of color. The scientific procedure of dissecting and analyzing natu-
ral phenomena by experiments was distasteful to them. They preferred 
to speculate about the unifying principles of all natural forces, hoping 
somehow to grasp nature as a whole. The German philosopher Friedrich
Schelling wrote in 1802:
Newton's Opticks is the greatest illustration of a whole structure 
of fallacies which, in all its parts, is founded on observation and 
experiment.
The German poet Goethe (mentioned in Chapter 4) rejected Newton's
theory of colors and proposed his own theory, based upon his own direct
observations as well as passionate arguments. Goethe insisted on the pu-
rity of white light in its natural state, rejecting Newton's argument that
white light is a mixture of colors. Instead, he suggested, colors may be pro-
duced by the interaction of white light and its opposite—darkness. Goethe's
observations on the psychology of color perception were of some value to
science. But his theory of the physical nature of color could not stand up
under further detailed experiment. Newton's theory of the colors of the
spectrum remained firmly established.
8.17
WHY IS THE SKY BLUE?
Newton suggested that the apparent colors of natural objects depend on
which color is most strongly reflected or scattered to the viewer by the ob-
ject. In general, there is no simple way of predicting from the surface struc-
390
8. WAVE MOTION

ture, chemical composition, etc., what colors a substance will reflect or scat-
ter. However, the blue color of the clear sky can be explained by a fairly
simple argument.
As Thomas Young showed experimentally (Section 8.15), different wave-
lengths of light correspond to different colors. The wavelength of light may
be specified in units of nanometers (abbreviated nm; 1 nm  109 m) or, 
alternatively, in Ångstroms (Å), named after Anders Jonas Ångstrom, a
Swedish astronomer who, in 1862, used spectroscopic techniques to detect
the presence of hydrogen in the Sun. One angstrom (symbol Å) is equal 
to 1010 m. The range of the spectrum visible to humans is from about 
400 nm (4000 Å) for violet light to about 700 nm (7000 Å) for red light.
Small obstacles can scatter the energy of an incident wave of any sort in
all directions, and the amount of scattering depends on the wavelength.
This fact can be demonstrated by simple experiments with water waves in
8.17 WHY IS THE SKY BLUE?
391
RED
GREEN
BLUE
Red
Blue
Red
FIGURE 8.51
If you look at a sunset on a hazy day, you receive primarily unscattered colors, such as
red, whereas if you look overhead, you will receive primarily scattered colors, the most dominant of
which is blue.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Blue
Green
Red

a ripple tank. As a general rule, the larger the wavelength is compared to the
size of the obstacle, the less the wave is scattered by the obstacle. For particles
smaller than one wavelength, the amount of scattering of light varies in-
versely with the fourth power of the wavelength. For example, the wave-
length of red light is about twice the wavelength of blue light. Therefore,
the scattering of red light is only about one-sixteenth as much as the scat-
tering of blue light.
Now it is clear why the sky is blue. Light from the sun is scattered by sep-
arate molecules of vapor, particles of dust, etc., in the air above, all of which
are usually very small compared to the wavelengths of visible light. Thus, on
a clear day light of short wavelengths (blue light) is much more strongly scat-
tered by the particles than is light of longer wavelengths, and so-to-speak
fills the firmament from end to end. When you look up into a clear sky, it
is mainly this scattered light that enters your eyes. The range of scattered
short wavelengths (and the color sensitivity of the human eye) leads to the
sensation of blue. On the other hand, suppose you look at a sunset on a hazy
day. You receive directly from the Sun a beam that has had the blue light al-
most completely scattered out in all directions, while the longer wavelengths
have not been scattered out. So you perceive the Sun as reddish.
If the Earth had no atmosphere, the sky would appear black, and stars
would be visible by day. In fact, starting at altitudes of about 16 km, where
the atmosphere becomes quite thin, the sky does look black, and stars can
be seen during the day, as astronauts have found.
If light is scattered by particles considerably larger than one wavelength
(such as water droplets in a cloud), there is not much difference in the scat-
tering of different wavelengths. So we receive the mixture we perceive as white.
The blue-gray haze that often covers large cities is caused mainly by par-
ticles emitted by internal combustion engines (cars, trucks) and by indus-
trial plants. Most of these pollutant particles are invisible, ranging in size
from 106 m to 109 m. Such particles provide a framework to which gases,
liquids, and other solids adhere. These larger particles then scatter light
and produce haze. Gravity has little effect on the particles until they be-
come very large by collecting more matter. They may remain in the atmo-
sphere for months if not cleaned out by repeated rain, snow, or winds. The
influences of such clouds of haze or smog on the climate and on human
health are substantial.
8.18 POLARIZATION
Hooke and Huygens proposed that light is in many ways like sound, that
is, that light is a wave propagated through a medium. Newton could not
392
8. WAVE MOTION

accept this proposal and argued that light must also have some particle-like
properties, in addition to its wave nature. He noted two properties of light
that, he thought, could not be explained unless light had particle proper-
ties. First, a beam of light is propagated in space in straight lines, while
waves such as sound spread out in all directions and go around corners.
This objection could not be answered until early in the nineteenth century,
when Thomas Young measured the wavelength of light and found how ex-
tremely small it is. Even the wavelength of red light, the longest wavelength
of the visible spectrum, is less than one-thousandth of a millimeter. As long
as a beam of light shines on objects or through holes of ordinary size (a
few millimeters or more in width), the light will appear to travel in straight
lines. As we saw, diffraction and scattering effects do not become strikingly
evident until a wave passes over an object or through a hole whose size is
about equal to or smaller than the wavelength.
Newton based his second objection on the phenomenon of "polariza-
tion" of light. In 1669, the Danish scientist Erasmus Bartholinus discov-
ered that crystals of Iceland spar (calcite) could split a ray of light into two
rays. Writing or small objects viewed through the crystal looked double.
Newton thought this behavior could be explained by assuming that light
is made up of particles that have different "sides," for example, rectangu-
lar cross sections. The double images, he thought, represent a sorting out
of light particles that had entered the medium with different orientations.
Around 1820, Young and Fresnel gave a far more satisfactory explana-
tion of polarization, using a modified wave theory of light. Before then,
scientists had generally assumed that light waves, like sound waves, must
be longitudinal. Young and Fresnel showed that if light waves are transverse,
this could account for the phenomenon of polarization.
In a transverse wave of a mechanical type, the motion of the medium it-
self, such as a rope, is always perpendicular to the
direction of propagation of the wave. This does not
mean that the motion of the medium is always in the
same direction. In fact, it could be in any direction
in a plane perpendicular to the direction of propa-
gation. However, if the motion of the medium is
mainly in one direction (e.g., vertical), the wave is
polarized. Thus, a polarized wave is really the sim-
plest kind of transverse wave. An unpolarized trans-
verse wave is more complicated, since it is a mixture
of various transverse motions. All of this applies to
light waves, which do not need a medium in which
to propagate.
Scientific studies of polarization continued
throughout the nineteenth century. For instance, the
8.18 POLARIZATION
393
Ordinary light, when scattered
by particles, shows polarization
to different degrees, depending
on the direction of scattering.
The eyes of bees, ants, and other
animals are sensitive to the po-
larization of scattered light from
the clear sky. This enables a bee
to navigate by the Sun, even
when the Sun is low on the
horizon or obscured. Following
the bees' example, engineers
have equipped airplanes with po-
larization indicators for use in
Arctic regions.

way in which Iceland spar separates an unpolarized light beam into two po-
larized beams is sketched in Figure 8.53. Practical applications, however,
were frustrated, mainly because polarizing substances like Iceland spar were
scarce and fragile. One of the best polarizers was the synthetic crystal "her-
apathite," or sulfate of iodo-quinine. The needle-like herapathite crystals
absorb light that is polarized in the direction of the long crystal axis and
absorb very little of the light polarized in a direction at 90° to the long axis.
Herapathite crystals were so fragile that there seemed to be no way of
using them. But in 1928, Edwin H. Land, while still a freshman in college,
invented a polarizing plastic sheet he called "Polaroid." His first polarizer
was a plastic film in which many small crystals of herapathite were em-
bedded. When the plastic was stretched, the needle-like crystals lined up
in one direction. Thus, they all acted on incoming light in the same way.
Some properties of a polarizing material are easily demonstrated. For
example, you can obtain two polarizing sheets from the lenses of a pair of
polarizing sunglasses, or from the "three-dimensional" eyeglasses used in
Imax theatres. Hold one of the lenses in front of a light source. Then look
at the first lens through the second one. Rotate the first lens. You will no-
tice that, as you do so, the light alternately brightens and dims. You must
rotate the sheet through an angle of 90° to go from maximum brightness
to maximum dimness.
How can this effect be explained? The light that strikes the first lens, or
polarizing sheet, is originally unpolarized, that is, a mixture of waves po-
larized in different directions. The first sheet transmits only those waves
that are polarized in one direction, and it absorbs the rest. The transmit-
ted wave going toward the second sheet is now polarized in one direction.
Whenever this direction coincides with the direction of the long molecules
394
8. WAVE MOTION
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 8.52
The same short-wave train on the rope approaches the slotted board in each of the three
sketches. Depending on the orientation of the slot, the train of waves (a) goes entirely through the slot;
(b) is partly reflected and partly transmitted with changed angles of rope vibration; or (c) is completely
reflected.

in the second sheet, the wave will not be absorbed by the second sheet (i.e.,
the wave will set up vibrations within the molecules of the crystals which
will transmit most of its energy). However, if the direction is perpendicular
to the long axis of the crystal molecules, the polarized light will not go
through the second sheet but instead will be absorbed.
In conclusion, we see that interference and diffraction effects required a
wave model for light. To explain polarization phenomena, the wave model
was made more specific; polarization could be explained only if the light
waves are transverse waves. Altogether, this model for light explains very
satisfactorily all the characteristics of light considered so far.
8.19 THE ETHER
One factor seems clearly to be missing from the wave model for light. Ear-
lier in this chapter we defined waves as disturbances that propagate in some
substance or "medium," such as a rope or water. What is the medium for
the propagation of light waves?
Is air the medium for light waves? No, because light can pass through
airless space, as it does between the Sun or other stars and the Earth. Even
before it was definitely known that there is no air between the Sun and
the Earth, Robert Boyle had tried the experiment of pumping almost all
of the air out of a glass container. He found that the objects inside re-
mained visible.
A wave is a disturbance, and it was difficult to think of a disturbance
without specifying what was being disturbed. So it was natural to propose
that a medium for the propagation of light waves existed. This hypotheti-
cal medium was called the ether. The word "ether" was originally the name
8.19 THE ETHER
395
FIGURE 8.53
Double refraction by a crystal of Iceland
spar. The "unpolarized" incident light can be thought of
as consisting of two polarized components. The crystal
separates these two components, transmitting them
through the crystal in different directions and with dif-
ferent speeds.

for Aristotle's fifth element, the pure transparent fluid that filled the heav-
enly sphere and was later called "quintessence." In the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, the ether was imagined to be an invisible fluid of very
low density. This fluid could penetrate all matter and fill all space. It might
somehow be associated with the "effluvium" (something that "flows out")
that was imagined to explain magnetic and electric forces. But light waves
must be transverse in order to explain polarization, and transverse waves
usually propagate only in a solid medium. A liquid or a gas cannot transmit
transverse waves for any significant distance for the same reason that you
cannot "twist" a liquid or a gas. So nineteenth-century physicists assumed
that the ether must be a solid.
As stated in Section 8.3, the speed of propagation increases with the stiff-
ness of the medium, and decreases with its density. The speed of propaga-
tion of light is very high compared to that of other kinds of waves, such as
sound. Therefore, the ether was thought to be a very stiff solid with a very
low density. Yet it seems absurd to say that a stiff, solid medium (ether) fills
all space. The planets move through space without slowing down, so ap-
parently they encounter no resistance from a stiff ether. And, of course,
you feel no resistance when you move around in a space that transmits light
freely.
Without ether, the wave theory of light seemed improbable. But the
ether itself had absurd properties. Until early in this century, this problem
remained unsolved, just as it had for Newton. We shall shortly see how,
following Einstein's modification of the theory of light, the problem was
solved.
396
8. WAVE MOTION
FIGURE 8.54
Polarized waves.

SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
diffraction
period
ether
polarization
frequency
propagation
Huygens' principle
ray
in phase
spectrum
interference
superposition principle
longitudinal wave
transverse wave
medium
wave
nodal lines
wave front
out of phase
wavelength
AN IMPORTANT EQUATION
v  f.
AN IMPORTANT UNIT
1 Hz  1/s.
FURTHER READING
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapter 23.
D. Park, The Fire within the Eye: A Historical Essay on the Nature and Meaning of
Light (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).
J. Hecht, City of Light: The Story of Fiber Optics. Sloan Technology Series (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1999).
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
A. WAVES
8.1 What Is a Wave?
1.
How would you answer the question, What is a wave?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
397

8.2 The Properties of Waves
1.
What kinds of mechanical waves can propagate in a solid?
2.
What kinds of mechanical waves can propagate in a fluid?
3.
What kinds of mechanical waves can be polarized?
4.
Suppose that a mouse runs along under a rug, causing a bump in the rug that
travels with the mouse across the room. Is this moving disturbance a propa-
gating wave?
8.3 Wave Propagation
1.
What is transferred along the direction of wave motion?
2.
On what two properties of a medium does wave speed depend?
3.
If a spring is heated to make it less stiff, does it carry waves faster or slower?
If the boxcars in a train are unloaded and empty, does the longitudinal start-
up wave travel faster or slower?
8.4 Periodic Waves
1.
Of the variables frequency, wavelength, period, amplitude, and polarization, which
ones describe:
(a) space properties of waves?
(b) time properties of waves?
2.
A vibration of 100 Hz (cycles per second) produces a wave:
(a) What is the wave frequency?
(b) What is the period of the wave?
(c) If the wave speed is 10 m/s, what is the wavelength?
3.
If points X and Y on a periodic wave are one-half period "out of phase" with
each other, which of the following must be true?
(a) X oscillates at half the frequency at which Y oscillates.
(b) X and Y always move in opposite directions.
(c) X is a distance of one-half wavelength from Y.
8.5 When Waves Meet
1.
Two periodic waves of amplitudes A1 and A2 pass through a point P. What is
the greatest possible displacement of P?
2.
What is the displacement of a point produced by two waves together if the
displacements produced by the waves separately at that instant are 5 cm and
6 cm, respectively? What is the special property of waves that makes this
simple result possible?
8.6 A Two-Source Interference Pattern
1.
Are nodal lines in interference patterns regions of cancellation or of rein-
forcement?
2.
What are antinodal lines? antinodal points?
398
8. WAVE MOTION

3.
Nodal points in an interference pattern are places where:
(a) the waves arrive "out of phase";
(b) the waves arrive "in phase";
(c) the point is equidistant from the wave sources;
(d) the point is one-half wavelength from both sources.
4.
Under what circumstances do waves from two in-phase sources arrive at a point
out of phase?
8.7 Standing Waves
1.
When two identical waves of the same frequency travel in opposite directions
and interfere to produce a standing wave, what is the motion of the medium at:
(a) the nodes of the standing wave?
(b) the places between nodes (called antinodes or loops) of the standing wave?
2.
If the two interfering waves have the same wavelength , what is the distance
between the nodal points of the standing wave?
3.
What is the wavelength of the longest traveling waves that can produce a stand-
ing wave on a string of length l?
4.
Can standing waves of any frequency higher than that of the fundamental be
set up in a bounded medium?
8.8 Wavefronts and Diffraction
1.
What characteristic do all points on a wave front have in common?
2.
State Huygens' principle in your own words.
3.
Can there be nodal lines in a diffraction pattern from an opening less than one
wavelength wide? Explain.
4.
What happens to the diffraction pattern from an opening as the wavelength
of the wave increases?
5.
Can there be diffraction without interference? interference without diffraction?
8.9 Reflection
1.
What is a "ray"?
2.
What is the relationship between the angle at which a wave front strikes a bar-
rier and the angle at which it leaves?
3.
What shape of reflector can reflect parallel wave fronts to a sharp focus?
4.
What happens to wave fronts originating at the focus of such a reflecting 
surface?
8.10 Refraction
1.
If a periodic wave slows down on entering a new medium, what happens to:
(a) its frequency?
(b) its wavelength?
(c) its direction?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
399

2.
Complete the sketch below to show roughly what happens to a wave train that
enters a new medium beyond the vertical line in which its speed is greater.
8.11 Sound Waves
1.
List five wave behaviors that can be demonstrated with sound waves.
2.
Can sound waves be polarized? Explain.
B. LIGHT
8.12 What Is Light?
1.
How would you answer the question in the title above?
8.13 Propagation of Light
1.
Can a beam of light be made increasingly narrow by passing it through nar-
rower and narrower slits? What property of light does such an experiment
demonstrate?
2.
What reason did Rœmer have for thinking that the eclipse of a particular satel-
lite of Jupiter would be observed later than expected?
3.
What was the most important outcome of Rœmer's work?
8.14 Reflection and Refraction
1.
What evidence showed conclusively that Newton's particle model for light
could not explain all aspects of refraction?
2.
If light has a wave nature, what changes take place in the speed, wavelength,
and frequency of light on passing from air into water?
8.15 Interference and Diffraction
1.
How did Young's experiments support the wave model of light?
2.
In what way is diffraction involved in Young's experiments?
400
8. WAVE MOTION

3.
What phenomenon did Poisson predict on the basis of Fresnel's wave theory?
What was the result?
4.
What does the Poisson-Fresnel debate tell about the way science grows?
5.
Recall from discussions earlier in the text how difficult it often is for new sci-
entific ideas to be accepted.
(a) List the cases, just by names.
(b) Some people object to science as being "too dogmatic" and unchallenge-
able. Do these cases help or undermine such asssertions?
8.16 What Is Color?
1.
How would you answer the question "What is color"?
2.
How did Newton show that white light was not "pure"?
3.
Why could Newton be confident that, say, green light was not itself composed
of different colors of light?
4.
How would Newton explain the color of a blue shirt?
5.
Why was Newton's theory of color attacked by the Nature Philosophers?
8.17 Why Is the Sky Blue?
1.
Why is the sky blue?
2.
How does the scattering of light waves by tiny obstacles depend on the wave-
length?
3.
What would you expect the sky to look like on the Moon? Why?
8.18 Polarization
1.
What two objections did Newton have to a pure wave model?
2.
Of the phenomena we have discussed, which ones agree with the wave model
of light?
8.19 The Ether
1.
Why did scientists assume that there existed an "ether" that transmitted light
waves?
2.
What remarkable property must the ether have if it is to be the mechanical
medium for the propagation of light?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1. On the basis of the evidence presented in this chapter, can light be consid-
ered to consist of particles or of waves? Give evidence in support of your 
answer.
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
401

2. The drawing below represents a pulse that propagates to the right along a
rope. What is the shape of a pulse propagating to the left that could for an
instant cancel this one completely?
3. What shape would the nodal regions have for sound waves from two loud-
speakers that emit the same sound?
4. Explain why it is that the narrower a slit in a barrier is, the more nearly it can
act like a point source of waves.
5. If light is also a wave, why have you not seen light being diffracted by the slits
of a picket fence, or diffracted around the corner of a house?
6. If the frequency of a wave traveling in a medium is increased, what will hap-
pen to its speed? What determines the speed of waves in a medium?
7. How can sound waves be used to map the floors of oceans?
8. Waves reflect from an object in a definite direction only when the wavelength
is small compared to the dimensions of the object. This is true for sound waves
as well as for any other. What does this tell you about the sound frequencies
a bat must generate if it is to catch a moth or a fly? Actually, some bats can
detect the presence of a wire about 0.12 mm in diameter. Approximately what
frequency would that require?
9. Suppose the reflecting surfaces of every visible object were somehow altered
so that they completely absorbed any light falling on them; how would the
world appear to you?
10. Because of atmospheric refraction, you see the Sun in the evening some min-
utes after it is really below the horizon, and also for some minutes before it
is actually above the horizon in the morning.
(a) Draw a simple diagram to illustrate how this phenomenon occurs.
(b) What would sunset be like on a planet with a very thick and dense (but
still transparent) atmosphere?
11. Using the phenomena of diffraction and interference, show how the wave the-
ory of light can explain the bright spot found in the center of the shadow of
a disk illuminated by a point source.
12. It is a familiar observation that clothing of certain colors appears different in
artificial light and in sunlight. Explain why.
13. To prevent car drivers from being blinded by the lights of approaching auto-
mobiles, polarizing sheets could be placed over the headlights and windshields
of every car. Explain why these sheets would have to be oriented in the same
way on every vehicle and must have their polarizing axis at 45° to the vertical.
14. A researcher has discovered some previously unknown rays emitted by a 
radioactive substance. She wants to determine if the rays are made up of
waves or particles. Design a few experiments that she could use to answer
her question.
402
8. WAVE MOTION

15. When Wilhelm Roentgen discovered X rays, which we now know to have a
wavelength of the order of 1010 m, he could not decide by experiment
whether X rays were particles or waves. Why do you think he might have had
that difficulty?
Quantitative
1.
(a) What is the speed of sound in air if middle C (256 Hz) has a wavelength
of 1.34 m?
(b) What is the wavelength in water of middle C if sound waves travel at 
1500 m/s in water?
(c) What is the period of a wave sounding middle C in air? in water?
2.
Assuming that light is a wave phenomenon, what is the wavelength of green
light if the first node in a diffraction pattern is found 10 cm from the center
line at a distance of 4 m from the slits which have a separation distance of
2.5  103 cm?
3.
A convenient unit for measuring astronomical distances is the light year, de-
fined as the distance that light travels in 1 year. Calculate the number of me-
ters in a light year to two significant figures.
4.
Suppose a space vehicle had a speed one-thousandth that of light. How long
would it take to travel the 4.3 light years from Earth to the closest known star
other than the Sun, alpha Centauri? Compare the speed given for the space
vehicle with the speed of approximately 10 km/s maximum speed (relative to
the Earth) that a space capsule reaches on an Earth-Mars trip.
5.
Calculate how much farther than expected Jupiter must have been from Earth
when Rœmer predicted a 10-min delay for the eclipse of 1676.
6.
Green light has a wavelength of approximately 5  107 m (500 nm). What
frequency corresponds to this wavelength? Compare this frequency to the car-
rier frequency of the radio waves broadcast by a radio station you listen to.
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
403

This page intentionally left blank 

9.1
The New Physics
9.2
Albert Einstein
9.3
The Relativity Principle
9.4
Constancy of the Speed of Light
9.5
Simultaneous Events
9.6
Relativity of Time
9.7
Time Dilation
9.8
Relativity of Length
9.9
Relativity of Mass
9.10 Mass and Energy
9.11 Confirming Relativity
9.12 Breaking with the Past
9.1 THE NEW PHYSICS
Following Newton's triumph, work expanded not only in mechanics but
also in the other branches of physics, in particular, in electricity and mag-
netism. This work culminated in the late nineteenth century in a new and
successful theory of electricity and magnetism based upon the idea of elec-
tric and magnetic fields. The Scottish scientist James Clerk Maxwell, who
formulated the new electromagnetic field theory, showed that what we ob-
serve as light can be understood as an electromagnetic wave. Newton's
physics and Maxwell's theory account, to this day, for almost everything we
observe in the everyday physical world around us. The motions of planets,
cars, and projectiles, light and radio waves, colors, electric and magnetic
405
Einstein and
Relativity
Theory
C
H
A
P
T
E
R 99

effects, and currents all fit within the physics of Newton, Maxwell, and their
contemporaries. In addition, their work made possible the many wonders
of the new electric age that have spread throughout much of the world
since the late nineteenth century. No wonder that by 1900 some distin-
guished physicists believed that physics was nearly complete, needing only
a few minor adjustments. No wonder they were so astonished when, just 
5 years later, an unknown Swiss patent clerk, who had graduated from the
Swiss Polytechnic Institute in Zurich in 1900, presented five major research
papers that touched off a major transformation in physics that is still in
progress. Two of these papers provided the long-sought definitive evidence
for the existence of atoms and molecules; another initiated the develop-
ment of the quantum theory of light; and the fourth and fifth papers in-
troduced the theory of relativity. The young man's name was Albert Ein-
stein, and this chapter introduces his theory of relativity and some of its
many consequences.
Although relativity theory represented a break with the past, it was a
gentle break. As Einstein himself put it:
We have here no revolutionary act but the natural continuation of
a line that can be traced through centuries. The abandonment of
certain notions connected with space, time, and motion hitherto
treated as fundamentals must not be regarded as arbitrary, but only
as conditioned by the observed facts.*
The "classical physics" of Newton and Maxwell is still intact today for
events in the everyday world on the human scale—which is what we would
expect, since physics was derived from and designed for the everyday world.
However, when we get away from the everyday world, we need to use rel-
ativity theory (for speeds close to the speed of light and for extremely high
densities of matter, such as those found in neutron stars and black holes)
or quantum theory (for events on the scale of atoms), or the combination
of both sets of conditions (e.g., for high-speed events on the atomic scale).
What makes these new theories so astounding, and initially difficult to
grasp, is that our most familiar ideas and assumptions about such basic con-
cepts as space, time, mass, and causality must be revised in unfamiliar, yet
still understandable, ways. But such changes are part of the excitement of
science—and it is even more exciting when we realize that much remains
to be understood at the frontier of physics. A new world view is slowly
emerging to replace the mechanical world view, but when it is fully revealed
406
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
* Ideas and Opinions, p. 246.

9.1 THE NEW PHYSICS
407
FIGURE 9.1
Albert Einstein (1879-1955). (a) in
1905; (b) in 1912; and (c) in his later years.
(c)
(a)
(b)

it will probably entail some very profound and unfamiliar ideas about na-
ture and our place in it.
9.2 ALBERT EINSTEIN
Obviously to have founded relativity theory and to put forth a quantum
theory of light, all within a few months, Einstein had to be both a brilliant
physicist and a totally unhindered, free thinker. His brilliance shines
throughout his work, his free thinking shines throughout his life.
Born on March 14, 1879, of nonreligious Jewish parents in the south-
ern German town of Ulm, Albert was taken by his family to Munich 1 year
later. Albert's father and an uncle, both working in the then new profes-
sion of electrical engineering, opened a manufacturing firm for electrical
and plumbing apparatus in the Bavarian capital. The firm did quite well in
the expanding market for recently developed electrical devices, such as tele-
phones and generators, some manufactured under the uncle's own patent.
The Munich business failed, however, after the Einsteins lost a municipal
contract to wire a Munich suburb for electric lighting (perhaps similar in
our day to wiring fiber-optic cable for TV and high-speed Internet access).
In 1894 the family pulled up stakes and moved to Milan, in northern Italy,
where business prospects seemed brighter, but they left Albert, then aged
15, behind with relatives to complete his high-school education. The
teenager lasted alone in Munich only a half year more. He quit school,
which he felt too militaristic, when vacation arrived in December 1894, and
headed south to join his family.
Upon arriving in Milan, the confident young man assured his parents
that he intended to continue his education. Although underage and with-
out a high-school diploma, Albert prepared on his own to enter the Swiss
Federal Polytechnic Institute in Zurich, comparable to the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology or the California Institute of Technology, by tak-
ing an entrance examination. Deficiencies in history and foreign language
doomed his examination performance, but he did well in mathematics and
science, and he was advised to complete his high-school education, which
would ensure his admission to the Swiss Polytechnic. This resulted in his
fortunate placement for a year in a Swiss high school in a nearby town.
Boarding in the stimulating home of one of his teachers, the new pupil
blossomed in every respect within the free environment of Swiss education
and democracy.
Einstein earned high marks, graduated in 1896, and entered the teacher
training program at the Swiss Polytechnic, heading for certification as a
408
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

high-school mathematics and physics teacher. He was a good but not an
outstanding student, often carried along by his friends. The mathematics
and physics taught there were at a high level, but Albert greatly disliked
the lack of training in any of the latest advances in Newtonian physics or
Maxwellian electromagnetism. Einstein mastered these subjects entirely by
studying on his own.
One of Einstein's fellow students was Mileva Mari´c, a young Serbian
woman who had come to Zurich to study physics, since at that time most
other European universities did not allow women to register as full-time
students. A romance blossomed between Mileva and Albert. Despite the
opposition of Einstein's family, the romance flourished. However, Mileva
gave birth to an illegitimate daughter in 1902. The daughter, Liserl, was
apparently given up for adoption. Not until later did Einstein's family fi-
nally accede to their marriage, which took place in early 1903. Mileva and
Albert later had two sons, Hans Albert and Eduard, and for many years
were happy together. But they divorced in 1919.
Another difficulty involved Einstein's career. In 1900 and for sometime
after, it was headed nowhere. For reasons that are still unclear, probably
anti-Semitism and personality conflicts, Albert was continually passed over
for academic jobs. For several years he lived a discouraging existence of
temporary teaching positions and freelance tutoring. Lacking an academic
sponsor, his doctoral dissertation which provided further evidence for the
existence of atoms was not accepted until 1905. Prompted by friends of the
family, in 1902 the Federal Patent Office in Bern, Switzerland, finally of-
fered Einstein a job as an entry-level patent examiner. Despite the full-time
work, 6 days per week, Albert still found time for fundamental research in
physics, publishing his five fundamental papers in 1905.
The rest, as they say, was history. As the importance of his work became
known, recognized at first slowly, Einstein climbed the academic ladder,
arriving at the top of the physics profession in 1914 as Professor of The-
oretical Physics in Berlin.
In 1916, Einstein published his theory of general relativity. In it he pro-
vided a new theory of gravitation that included Newton's theory as a spe-
cial case. Experimental confirmation of this theory in 1919 brought Ein-
stein world fame. His earlier theory of 1905 is now called the theory of
special relativity, since it excluded accelerations.
When the Nazis came to power in Germany in January 1933, Hitler be-
ing appointed chancellor, Einstein was at that time visiting the United
States, and vowed not to return to Germany. He became a member of the
newly formed Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. He spent the rest
of his life seeking a unified theory which would include gravitation and
electromagnetism. As World War II was looming, Einstein signed a letter
9.2 ALBERT EINSTEIN
409

to President Roosevelt, warning that it might be possible to make an
"atomic bomb," for which the Germans had the necessary knowledge. (It
was later found that they had a head-start on such research, but failed.) Af-
ter World War II, Einstein devoted much of his time to organizations ad-
vocating world agreements to end the threat of nuclear warfare. He spoke
and acted in favor of the founding of Israel. His obstinate search to the end
for a unified field theory was unsuccessful; but that program, in more mod-
ern guise, is still one of the great frontier activities in physics today. Albert
Einstein died in Princeton on April 18, 1955.
9.3 THE RELATIVITY PRINCIPLE
Compared with other theories discussed so far in this book, Einstein's the-
ory of relativity is more like Copernicus's heliocentric theory than New-
ton's universal gravitation. Newton's theory is what Einstein called a "con-
structive theory." It was built up largely from results of experimental
evidence (Kepler, Galileo) using reasoning, hypotheses closely related to
empirical laws, and mathematical connections. On the other hand, Coper-
nicus' theory was not based on any new experimental evidence but pri-
marily on aesthetic concerns. Einstein called this a "principle theory," since
it was based on certain assumed principles about nature, of which the de-
duction could then be tested against the observed behavior of the real world.
For Copernicus these principles included the ideas that nature should be
simple, harmonious, and "beautiful." Einstein was motivated by similar con-
cerns. As one of his closest students later wrote,
You could see that Einstein was motivated not by logic in the nar-
row sense of the word but by a sense of beauty. He was always look-
ing for beauty in his work. Equally he was moved by a profound
religious sense fulfilled in finding wonderful laws, simple laws in
the Universe.*
Einstein's work on relativity comprises two parts: a "special theory" and
a "general theory." The special theory refers to motions of observers and
events that do not exhibit any accelerations. The velocities remain uniform.
The general theory, on the other hand, does admit accelerations.
Einstein's special theory of relativity began with aesthetic concerns which
led him to formulate two fundamental principles about nature. Allowing
410
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
* Banesh Hoffmann in Strangeness in the Proportion, H. Woolf, ed., see Further Reading.

himself to be led wherever the logic of these two principles took him, he
then derived from them a new theory of the basic notions of space, time,
and mass that are at the foundation of all of physics. He was not con-
structing a new theory to accommodate new or puzzling data, but deriving
by deduction the consequences about the fundamentals of all physical the-
ories from his basic principles.
Although some experimental evidence was mounting against the classical
physics of Newton, Maxwell, and their contemporaries, Einstein was con-
cerned instead from a young age by the inconsistent way in which Maxwell's
theory was being used to handle relative motion. This led to the first of Ein-
stein's two basic postulates: the Principle of Relativity, and to the title of his
relativity paper, "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies."
Relative Motion
But let's begin at the beginning: What is relative motion? As you saw in Chap-
ter 1, one way to discuss the motion of an object is to determine its aver-
age speed, which is defined as the distance traveled during an elapsed time,
say, 13.0 cm in 0.10 s, or 130 cm/s. In Chapter 1 a small cart moved with
that average speed on a tabletop, and the distance traveled was measured
relative to a fixed meter stick. But suppose the table on which the meter
stick rests and the cart moves is itself rolling forward in the same direction
as the cart, at 100 cm/s relative to the floor. Then relative to a meter stick
on the floor, the cart is moving at a different speed, 230 cm/s (100  130),
while the cart is still moving at 130 cm/s relative to the tabletop. So, in mea-
suring the average speed of the cart, we have first to specify what we will
use as our reference against which to measure the speed. Is it the tabletop,
or the floor, or something else? The reference we finally decide upon is
called the "reference frame" (since we can regard it to be as a picture frame
around the observed events). All speeds are thus defined relative to the refer-
ence frame we choose.
But notice that if we use the floor as our reference frame, it is not at rest
either. It is moving relative to the center of the Earth, since the Earth is
9.3 THE RELATIVITY PRINCIPLE
411
100 cm/s
130 cm/s
FIGURE 9.2
Moving cart on a
moving table. 

rotating. Also, the center of the Earth is moving relative to the Sun; and
the Sun is moving relative to the center of the Milky Way galaxy, and on
and on. . . . Do we ever reach an end? Is there something that is at absolute
rest? Newton and almost everyone after him until Einstein thought so. For
them, it was space itself that was at absolute rest. In Maxwell's theory this
space is thought to be filled with a substance that is not like normal mat-
ter. It is a substance, called the "ether," that physicists for centuries hy-
pothesized to be the carrier of the gravitational force. For Maxwell, the
ether itself is at rest in space, and accounts for the behavior of the electric
and magnetic forces and for the propagation of electromagnetic waves (fur-
ther details in Chapter 12).
Although every experimental effort during the late nineteenth century
to detect the resting ether had ended in failure, Einstein was most con-
cerned from the start, not with this failure, but with an inconsistency in
the way Maxwell's theory treated relative motion. Einstein centered on the
fact that it is only the relative motions of objects and observers, rather than
any supposed absolute motion, that is most important in this or any the-
ory. For example, in Maxwell's theory, when a magnet is moved at a speed
v relative to a fixed coil of wire, a current is induced in the coil, which can
be calculated ahead of time by a certain formula (this effect is further dis-
cussed in Chapter 11). Now if the magnet is held fixed and the coil is moved
at the same speed v, the same current is induced but a different equation is
needed to calculate it in advance. Why should this be so, Einstein won-
dered, since only the relative speed v counts? Since absolutes of velocity,
as of space and time, neither appeared in real calculations nor could be de-
termined experimentally, Einstein declared that the absolutes, and on their
basis in the supposed existence of the ether, were "superfluous," unneces-
sary. The ether seemed helpful for imagining how light waves traveled—
but it was not needed. And since it could not be detected either, after Ein-
stein's publication of his theory most physicists eventually came to agree
that it simply did not exist. For the same reason, one could dispense with
the notions of absolute rest and absolute motion. In other words, Einstein
concluded, all motion, whether of objects or light beams, is relative motion. It
must be defined relative to a specific reference frame, which itself may or
may not be in motion relative to another reference frame.
The Relativity Principle—Galileo's Version
You saw in Section 3.10 that Galileo's thought experiments on falling ob-
jects dropped from moving towers and masts of moving ships, or butter-
flies trapped inside a ship's cabin, indicated that to a person within a ref-
erence frame, whether at rest or in uniform relative motion, there is no
412
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

way for that person to find out the speed of his own reference frame from
any mechanical experiment done within that frame. Everything happens
within that frame as if the frame is at rest.
But how does it look to someone outside the reference frame? For in-
stance, suppose you drop a ball in a moving frame. To you, riding with the
moving frame, it appears to fall straight down to the floor, much like a ball
dropped from the mast of a moving ship. But what does the motion of the
ball look like to someone who is not moving with you, say a classmate stand-
ing on the shore as your ship passes by? Or sitting in a chair and watching
you letting a ball drop as you are walking by? Try it!
Looking at this closely, your classmate will notice that from her point of
view the ball does not fall straight down. Rather, as with Galileo's falling
ball from the mast or the moving tower, the ball follows the parabolic tra-
jectory of a projectile, with uniform velocity in the horizontal direction as
well as uniform acceleration in the vertical direction.
The surprising result of this experiment is that two different people in
two different reference frames will describe the same event in two differ-
ent ways. As you were walking or sailing past, you were in a reference frame
with respect to which the ball is at rest before being released. When you
let it go, you see it falling straight down along beside you, and it lands at
9.3 THE RELATIVITY PRINCIPLE
413
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 9.3
(a) Falling ball as seen by
you as you walk forward at constant
speed; (b) falling ball as seen by station-
ary observer.

your feet. But persons sitting in chairs or standing on the shore, in their
own reference frame, will report that they see something entirely different:
a ball that starts out with you—not at rest but in forward motion—and on
release it moves—not straight down, but on a parabola toward the ground,
hitting the ground at your feet. Moreover, this is just what they would ex-
pect to see, since the ball started out moving horizontally and then traced
out the curving path of a projectile.
So who is correct? Did the ball fall straight down or did it follow the
curving path of a projectile? Galileo's answer was: both are correct. But how
can that be? How can there be two different observations and two differ-
ent explanations for one physical event, a ball falling to someone's feet?
The answer is that different observers observe the same event differently
when they are observing the event from different reference frames in rel-
ative motion. The ball starts out stationary relative to one frame (yours),
whereas it is, up to its release, in constant (uniform) motion relative to the
other reference frame (your classmate's). Both observers see everything hap-
pen as they expect it from Newton's laws applied to their situation. But
what they see is different for each observer. Since there is no absolute ref-
erence frame (no reference frame in uniform velocity is better or preferred
over any other moving with uniform velocity), there is no absolute motion,
and their observations made by both observers are equally valid.
Galileo realized that the person who is at rest relative to the ball could
not determine by any such mechanical experiment involving falling balls,
inclined planes, etc., whether or not he is at rest or in uniform motion rel-
ative to anything else, since all of these experiments will occur as if he is
simply at rest. A ball dropping from a tower on the moving Earth will hit
the base of the tower as if the Earth were at rest. Since we move with the
Earth, as long as the Earth can be regarded as moving with uniform ve-
locity (neglecting during the brief period of the experiment that it actually
rotates), there is no mechanical experiment that will enable us to determine
whether or not we are really at rest or in uniform motion.
Note: The observation of events are frame dependent. But the laws of
mechanics are not. They are the same in reference frames that are at rest
or in relative uniform motion. All objects that we observe to be moving
relative to us will also follow the same mechanical laws (Newton's laws,
etc.). As discussed in Section 3.10, this statement applied to mechanical
phenomena is known as the Galilean relativity principle.
The Relativity Principle—Einstein's Version
In formulating his theory of relativity, Einstein expanded Galileo's princi-
ple into the Principle of Relativity by including all of the laws of physics, such
414
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

as the laws governing light and other effects of electromagnetism, not just
mechanics. Einstein used this principle as one of the two postulates of his
theory of relativity, from which he then derived the consequences by de-
duction. Einstein's Principle of Relativity states:
All the laws of physics are exactly the same for every observer in
every reference frame that is at rest or moving with uniform rela-
tive velocity. This means that there is no experiment that they can
perform in their reference frames that would reveal whether or not
they are at rest or moving at uniform velocity.
Reference frames that are at rest or in uniform velocity relative to an-
other reference frame have a technical name. They are called inertial ref-
erence frames (since Newton's law of inertia holds in them). Reference frames
that are accelerating relative to each other are called noninertial reference
frames. They are not included in this part of the theory of relativity. That
is why this part of the theory of relativity is called the theory of special rela-
tivity. It is restricted to inertial reference frames, those which are either at
rest or moving with uniform velocity relative to each other.
Notice that, according to Einstein's Relativity Principle, Newton's laws
of motion and all of the other laws of physics remain the same for phe-
nomena occurring in any of the inertial reference frames. This principle
does not say that "everything is relative." On the contrary, it asks you to
look for relationships that do not change when you transfer your attention
from one moving reference frame to another. The physical measurements
but not the physical laws depend on the observer's frame of reference.
9.4 CONSTANCY OF THE SPEED OF LIGHT
The Relativity Principle is one of the two postulates from which Einstein
derived the consequences of relativity theory. The other postulate concerns
the speed of light, and it is especially important when comparing observa-
tions between two inertial reference frames in relative motion, since we
rely chiefly on light to make observations.
You recall that when Einstein quit high school at age 15 he studied on
his own to be able to enter the Swiss Polytechnic Institute. It was proba-
bly during this early period that Einstein had a remarkable insight. He
asked himself what would happen if he could move fast enough in space to
catch up with a beam of light. Maxwell had shown that light is an electro-
magnetic wave propagating outward at the speed of light. If Albert could
9.4 CONSTANCY OF THE SPEED OF LIGHT
415

ride alongside, he would not see a wave propagating. Instead, he would see
the "valleys" and "crests" of the wave fixed and stationary with respect to
him. This contradicted Maxwell's theory, in which no such "stationary"
landscape in free space was possible. From these and other, chiefly theo-
retical considerations, Einstein concluded by 1905 that Maxwell's theory
must be reinterpreted: the speed of light will be exactly the same—a uni-
versal constant—for all observers, no matter whether they move (with con-
stant velocity) relative to the source of the light. This highly original in-
sight became Einstein's second postulate of special relativity, the Principle
of the Constancy of the Speed of Light:
Light and all other forms of electromagnetic radiation are propa-
gated in empty space with a constant velocity c which is indepen-
dent of the motion of the observer or the emitting body.
Einstein is saying that, whether moving at uniform speed toward or away
from the source of light or alongside the emitted light beam, any observer
always measures the exact same value for the speed of light in a vacuum,
which is about 3.0  108 m/s or 300,000 km/s (186,000 mi/s). (More pre-
cisely, it is 299,790 km/s.) This speed was given the symbol c for "constant."
If light travels through glass or air, the speed will be slower, but the speed
of light in a vacuum is one of the universal physical constants of nature. (An-
other is the gravitational constant G.) It is important to note that, again,
this principle holds only for observers and sources that are in inertial ref-
erence frames. This means they are moving at uniform velocity or are at
rest relative to each other.
In order to see how odd the principle of the constancy of the speed of
light really is, let's consider a so-called "thought experiment," an experiment
that one performs only in one's mind. It involves two "virtual student re-
searchers." One, whom we'll call Jane, is on a platform on wheels moving
at a uniform speed of 5 m/s toward the second student, John, who is stand-
ing on the ground. While Jane is moving, she throws a tennis ball to John
at 7 m/s. John catches the ball, but before he does he quickly measures its
speed (this is only a thought experiment!). What speed does he obtain? . . .
The answer is 5 m/s  7 m/s  12 m/s, since the two speeds combine.
416
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
FIGURE 9.4
Running along-
side a beam of light.

Let's try it in the opposite direction. Jane is on the platform now mov-
ing at 5 m/s away from John. She again tosses the ball to John at 7 m/s,
who again measures its speed before catching it. What speed does he mea-
sure? . . . This time it's 5 m/s  7 m/s  2 m/s. The velocities are sub-
tracted. All this was as expected.
Now let's try these experiments with light beams instead of tennis balls.
As Jane moves toward John, she aims the beam from a laser pen at John
(being careful to avoid his eyes). John has a light detector that also measures
the speed of the light. What is the speed of the light that he measures? . . .
Neglecting the minute effect of air on the speed of light, Jane and John are
surprised to find that Einstein was right: The speed is exactly the speed of
light, no more, no less. They obtain the same speed when the platform moves
away from John. In fact, even if they get the speed of the platform almost
up to nearly the speed of light itself (possible only in a thought experiment),
the measured speed of light is still the same in both instances. Strange as 
it seems, the speed of light (or of any electromagnetic wave) always has 
the same value, no matter what the relative speed is of the source and the
observer.
9.4 CONSTANCY OF THE SPEED OF LIGHT
417
5 m/s
7 m/s
from Jane
Jane
John
?
FIGURE 9.5
Ball thrown from a cart moving in the same di-
rection. Jane is moving at 5 m/s, and the ball is thrown to John
at a speed of 7 m/s.
5 m/s
7 m/s
from Jane
Jane
John
?
FIGURE 9.6
Ball thrown from a cart moving in the opposite 
direction.

Let's consider some consequences that followed when Einstein put to-
gether the two fundamental postulates of special relativity theory, the Prin-
ciple of Relativity and the Principle of the Constancy of the Speed of Light
in space.
9.5 SIMULTANEOUS EVENTS
Applying the two postulates of relativity theory to a situation similar to
Galileo's ship, Einstein provided a simple but profound thought experiment
that demonstrated a surprising result. He discovered that two events that
occur simultaneously for one observer may not occur simultaneously for
another observer in relative motion with respect to the events. In other
words, the simultaneity of events is a relative concept. (Nevertheless, the
laws of physics regarding these events still hold.)
Einstein's thought experiment, an experiment that he performed through
logical deduction, is as follows in slightly updated form. An observer, John,
is standing next to a perfectly straight level railroad track. He is situated at
the midpoint between positions A and B in Figure 9.8. Imagine that he is
holding an electrical switch which connects wires of equal length to lights
bulbs placed at A and B. Since he is at the midpoint between A and B, if
he closes the switch, the bulbs will light up, and very shortly thereafter
John will see the light from A and from B arriving at his eyes at the same
moment. This is because the light from each bulb, traveling at the constant
speed of light and covering the exact same distance to John from each bulb,
will take the exact same time to reach his eyes. John concludes from this
that the two light bulbs lit up simultaneously.
Now imagine a second observer, Jane, standing at the middle of a flat
railroad car traveling along the track at a very high uniform speed to the
right. Jane and John have agreed that when she reaches the exact midpoint
between A and B, John will instantly throw the switch, turning on the light
418
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
v = c
v = c
Jane
John
?
~
FIGURE 9.7
Light beam directed
from a moving cart.

bulbs. (Since this is a thought experiment, we may neglect his reaction time,
or else he might use a switch activated electronically.)
John and Jane try the experiment. The instant Jane reaches the midpoint
position between A and B, the switch is closed, the light bulbs light up, and
John sees the flashes simultaneously. But Jane sees something different: to
her the flashes do not occur simultaneously. In fact, the bulb at B appeared
to light up before the bulb at A. Why? Because she is traveling toward B
and away from A and, because the speed of light is the same regardless of
the motion of the observer, she will encounter the beam from B before the
beam from A reaches her. Consequently, she will see the flash at B before
she sees the flash at A. The conclusion: The two events that John perceives
to occur simultaneously do not occur simultaneously for Jane. The reasons
for this discrepancy are that the speed of light is the same for both ob-
servers and that each observer is moving in a different way relative to the
events in question.
It might be argued that Jane could make a calculation in which she com-
puted her speed and the speed of light, and then very simply find out if the
flashes actually occurred as she saw them or as John claimed to see them.
However, if she does this, then she is accepting a specific frame of refer-
ence: That is, she is assuming that she is the moving observer and that John
is the stationary observer. But according to the relativity postulate motions
are relative, and she need not assume that she is moving since there is no
preferred frame of reference. Therefore she could just as well be the sta-
tionary observer, and John, standing next to the track, could be the mov-
ing observer! If that is so, then Jane could claim that the flash at B actu-
ally did occur before the flash at A and that John perceived them to occur
simultaneously only because from her point of view he was moving toward
9.5 SIMULTANEOUS EVENTS
419
v
A
B
C
C
Jane
John
FIGURE 9.8
Einstein's thought experiment demonstrating the 
relativity of simultaneous events.

A and away from B. On the other hand, John could argue just the reverse,
that he is at rest and it is Jane who is moving.
Which interpretation is correct? There is no "correct" interpretation be-
cause there is no preferred frame of reference. Both observers are moving
relative to each other. They can agree on what happened only if they agree
on the frame of reference, but that agreement is purely arbitrary.
The conclusion that the simultaneity of two events, such as two flashes
from separate light bulbs, depends upon the motion of the observer, led to
the possibility that time itself might also be a relative concept when exam-
ined in view of the relativity postulates.
9.6 RELATIVITY OF TIME
Let's see what happens to the measurement of time when understood
through special relativity.
We'll follow Einstein's original argument and examine another, some-
what updated thought experiment. In this experiment one observer—again
we'll call her Jane—is in a spaceship moving at an extremely fast uniform
speed relative to the Earth and in the horizontal direction relative to an-
other observer, John, who is stationary on the Earth. In Jane's spaceship
(i.e., in her reference frame) there is a clock that measures time in precise
intervals by using a laser pulse. The pulse travels straight up from a laser,
hits a mirror, and is reflected back down. When the pulse returns to the
starting point, it is detected by a photosensor, which then registers the
elapsed time t, a fraction of a second, say, 107 s, and emits another pulse
upward. Since the speed of light is constant and the distance that it travels
is fixed, it takes the second pulse the exact same amount of time to make
the round trip. So another 107 s is registered by the detector. These iden-
tical time intervals are used as a clock to keep time.
Since Jane is traveling at uniform velocity, Einstein's Principle of Rela-
420
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
d
Mirror
Laser beam
Detector
FIGURE 9.9
Laser clock in spaceship (as seen
from spaceship frame of reference).

tivity tells her that the clock behaves exactly as it would if she were at rest.
In fact, according this principle, she could not tell from this experiment (or
any other) whether her ship is at rest or moving relative to John, without
looking outside the spaceship. But to John, who is not in her reference
frame but in his own, she appears to him to be moving forward rapidly in
the horizontal direction relative to him. (Of course, it might be John who
is moving backward, while Jane is stationary; but the observation and the
argument that follows will be the same.)
Observing Jane's laser clock as her spaceship flies past him, what does
John see? Just as before, in the experiment with the ball observed to be
falling toward the floor when released by a moving person, John sees some-
thing quite different from what Jane sees. Because her spaceship is moving
with respect to him, he observes that the light pulse follows a diagonal path
upward to the upper mirror and another diagonal path downward to the
detector. Let us give the symbol t for the time he measures for the round
trip of the light pulse.
Here enters the second postulate: the measured speed of light must be
the same as observed by both John and Jane. But the distance the light
pulse travels during one round trip, as Jane sees it, is shorter than what
John sees. Call the total distance the pulse travels from the emitter to the
upper mirror and back d for Jane and d for John. The speed of light, c,
which is the same for each, is
Jane:
c 
,
John:
c 
.
d

t
d
t
9.6 RELATIVITY OF TIME
421
Jane
John
D
D
v
d
FIGURE 9.10
Laser clock in spaceship (as
seen from an outside observer's frame of
reference).

422
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
DERIVATION OF TIME DILATION: 
THE LIGHT CLOCK
The "clock" consists of a stick of length l
with a mirror and a photodetector P at each
end. A flash of light at one end is reflected
by the mirror at the other end and returns
to the photodetector next to the light
source. Each time a light flash is detected,
the clock "ticks" and emits another flash.
Diagram (a) below shows the clock as
seen by an observer riding with the clock.
The observer records the time t between
ticks of the clock. For this observer, the
total distance traveled by the light pulse
during the time t is d  2l. Since the light
flash travels at the speed of light c:
d  2l  ct.
So
l  ct/2.
Diagram (b) shows the same clock as seen
by an observer who is "stationary" in his
or her own framework, with the clock ap-
paratus moving by. This observer observes
and records the time t between ticks of
the clock. For this observer, the total dis-
tance traveled by the light beam is d in
time t. Since light travels at the same
speed for all observers moving at uniform
speed relative to each other, we have
d  ct.
Let's look at the left side of drawing (b).
Here the motion of the clock, the vertical
distance l, and the motion of the light
beam form a right triangle. The base of
the triangle is the distance traveled by the
clock in time t/2, which is vt/2. The dis-
tance the beam travels in reaching the mir-
ror is d/2. Using the Pythagorean theo-
rem, we obtain

 
2
 l2 
 
2
.
From the above, we can substitute d  ct
and l  ct/2:

 
2

 
2

 
2
.
vt

2
ct
2
ct

2
vt

2
d
2
Mirror R
Photodetector
P
(a)
R
d′/2
d′/2
P
(b)
R
P
R
P
v

Since d is larger than d, t must be larger than t, in order for the ratios on
the right side of both equations to have the same value, c. This means that
the time interval (t) for the round trip of the light pulse, as registered on
the clock as John observes it, is longer than the time interval (t) regis-
tered on the clock as Jane observes it.
The surprising conclusion of this thought experiment (which is really a
deduction from the postulates of relativity theory) is:
Time intervals are not absolute and unchanging, but relative. A
clock (such as Jane's), or any repetitive phenomenon which is mov-
ing relative to a stationary observer appears to the stationary ob-
server to run slower than it appears to do when measured by the
observer moving with the clock—and it appears to run slower the
faster the clock is moving. This is known as time dilation.
Just how much slower does a clock seem when it is moving past an ob-
server? To get the answer, you can use the diagram in Figure 9.10 of John
and Jane and apply the Pythagorean theorem. After a bit of basic algebra
(see the derivation in the insert), you obtain the exact relationship between
the time elapsed interval registered by a clock that is stationary with re-
spect to the observer (as in the case of Jane)—call it now Ts—and the
9.6 RELATIVITY OF TIME
423
Squaring and canceling like terms, we
have
c2t2  c2t2  v2t2.
Now, let's solve for t:
c2t2  v2t2  c2t2,
t2 (c2  v2)  c2t2,
t2 
,
t2 
,
or
t 
,
Since 1  v2/c2 is here always less than 1,
the denominator is less than 1, and the
fraction is larger than t alone. Thus, the
time interval t registered by the clock as
seen by the stationary observer is "dilated"
compared to the time interval t registered
by the clock as seen by the observer riding
with the clock. In other words, the mov-
ing clock appears to run slower as mea-
sured by the stationary observer than when
the clock is not moving with respect to the
observer. Note also the crucial role of Ein-
stein's second postulate in this derivation.
t

1  v2
/c2

t2

1  v2/c2
c2t2

c2  v2

time elapsed interval for the same phenomenon—call it Tm—as measured
by someone who observes the clock in motion at constant velocity v (as in
the case of John). The result is given by the following equation:
Tm 
.
In words: Tm, John's observation of time elapsed registered by the mov-
ing clock, is different from Ts, Jane's observation of time elapsed regis-
tered on the same clock, which is stationary in her frame, by the effect of
the factor 1  v2
/c2
 in the denominator.
9.7 TIME DILATION
What may make the equation for time dilation appear complicated is the
term in the square root, which contains much of the physics. Study this
equation and all of the symbols in it. The symbol c is the speed of light,
and v is the speed of the clock moving relative to the observer measuring
the time elapsed interval Tm. As shown on page 427, for actual objects v
is always less than c. Therefore v/c is always less than one, and so is v2/c2.
In the equation on this page, v2/c2 is subtracted from 1, and then you take
the square root of the result and divide it into Ts, the time elapsed in-
terval registered by the "stationary" clock.
Before we look at the full meaning of what the equation tries to tell us,
consider a case where v  0, for example, when Jane's spaceship has stopped
relative to the Earth where John is located. If v  0, then v2/c2 will be zero,
so 1  v2/c2 is just 1. The square root of 1 is also 1; so our equation re-
duces to Tm  Ts: The time interval seen by John is the same as seen
by Jane, when both are at rest with respect to each other, as we of course
expect.
Now if v is not zero but has some value up to but less than c, then v2/c2
is a decimal fraction; so 1  v2/c2 and its square root are also decimal frac-
tions, less than 1. (Confirm this by letting v be some value, say 1⁄2c.) Di-
viding a decimal fraction into Ts will result in a number larger than Ts;
so by our equation giving Tm, Tm will turn out to be larger than Ts.
In other words, the time interval as observed by the stationary observer
watching the moving clock is larger (longer) than it would be for someone
who is riding with the clock. The clock appears to the observer to run
slower.
Ts

1 

v
c2
2

424
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

What Happens at Very High Speed?
Let's see what happens when the speed of the moving clock (or any repet-
itive process) is extremely fast, say 260,000 km/s (161,000 mi/s) relative to
another inertial reference frame. The speed of light c in vacuum is, as al-
ways, about 300,000 km/s. When the moving clock registers a time inter-
val of 1 s in its own inertial frame (Ts  1 s), what is the time interval for
someone who watches the clock moving past at the speed of 260,000 km/s?
To answer this, knowing that Ts is 1 s, we can find Tm by substituting
the relevant terms into the equation for Tm:
 
2


2
 [0.867]2  0.75.
Therefore
1    1  0.
75

 0.25
  0.5.
So
Tm  0
1
.5
s

 2 s.
This result says that a clock moving at 260,000 km/s that registers an in-
terval of 1 s in its own inertial frame appears to an observer at rest relative
to the clock to be greatly slowed down. While the person riding with the
clock registers a 1-s interval, the resting observer will measure it (with re-
spect to his own clock) to be 2 s. Note again that the clock does not seem
to be slowed down at all to the person moving with the clock; but to the out-
side observer in this case the time interval has "dilated" to exactly double the
amount.
What Happens at an Everyday Speed?
Notice also in the previous situation that we obtain a time dilation effect
of as little as two times only when the relative speed is 260,000 km/s, which
is nearly 87% of the speed of light. For slower speeds, the effect decreases
v2

c2
260,000 km/s

300,000 km/s
v
c
9.7 TIME DILATION
425

very rapidly, until at everyday speeds we cannot notice it at all, except in
very delicate experiments. For example, let's look at a real-life situation, say
a clock ticking out a 1-s interval inside a jet plane, flying at the speed of
sound of 760 mi/hr, which is about 0.331 km/s. What is the correspond-
ing time interval observed by a person at rest on the ground? Again we
substitute into the expression for time dilation.
v
c

2

3
0
0
.
0
3
,
3
0
1
00
km
km
/s
/s

2
 [1.10  106]2  1.22  1012
1   1  (1
.22 
1012)

 0.9999
99999
99878
  0.99999999999938.
So
Tm 
 1.00000000000061 s.
With such an incredibly minute amount of time dilation, no wonder this ef-
fect was never observed earlier! Because the effect is so tiny, Newton's physics
is still fine for the everyday world of normal speeds for which it was de-
signed. This is also why it is false to say (as Einstein never did) that rela-
tivity theory proved Newton wrong. Nevertheless, the effect on moving
clocks is there, and was in fact confirmed in a famous experiment involving
a very precise atomic clock flown around the world on a jet airliner. It has
also been tested and confirmed by atomic clocks flown on satellites and on
the space shuttle at speeds of about 18,000 mi/hr. But the effect is so small
that it can be neglected in most situations. It becomes significant only at
relative speeds near the speed of light—which is the case in high-energy lab-
oratory experiments and in some astrophysical phenomena.
What Happens When the Speed 
Reaches the Speed of Light?
If we were to increase the speed of an object far beyond 260,000 km/s, the
time dilation effect becomes more and more obvious, until, finally, we ap-
1 s

0.99999999999938
v2

c2
426
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

proach the speed of light v  c. What happens as this occurs? Examining
the time dilation equation, v2/c2 would approach 1 as v approaches c, so the
denominator in the equation, Tm  Ts/(1  v
2/c2)
, would become
smaller and smaller, becoming zero at v  c. As the denominator approaches
zero, the fraction Ts/(1  v
2/c2)
 would grow larger and larger without
limit, approaching infinity at v  c. And Tm would thus become infinite
when the speed reaches the speed of light c. In other words, a time inter-
val of 1 s (or any other amount) in one system would be, by measurement
with the clock in the other system, an infinity of time; the moving clock
will appear to have stopped!
What Happens If v Should Somehow 
Become Greater Than c?
If this could happen, then v2/c2 would be greater than 1, so (1  v2/c2)
would be negative. What is the square root of a negative number? You will
recall from mathematics that there is no number that, when squared, gives
a negative result. So the square root of a negative number itself has no
physical reality. It is often called an "imaginary number." In practice, this
means that objects cannot have speeds greater than c. This is one reason
that the speed of light is often regarded as the "speed limit" of the Uni-
verse. Neither objects nor information can travel faster in vacuum than does light.
As you will see in Section 9.9, nothing that has mass can even reach the
speed of light, since c acts as an asymptotic limit of the speed.
Is It Possible to Make Time Go Backward?
The only way for this to happen would be if the ratio Ts/(1  v
2/c2)
 is
negative, indicating that the final time after an interval has passed is less
than the initial time. As you will also recall from mathematics, the solution
of every square root has two values, one positive and one negative. Usu-
ally in physics we can ignore the negative value because it has no physical
meaning. But if we choose it instead, we would obtain a negative result,
suggesting that time, at least in theory, would go backward. But this would
also mean that mass and energy are negative. That could not apply to or-
dinary matter, which obviously has positive mass and energy.
In Sum
You will see in the following sections that the square root in the equation
for time dilation also appears in the equations for the relativity of length
and mass. So it is important to know its properties at the different values
9.7 TIME DILATION
427

of the relative speed. Because it is so important in these equations, the
square root (1  v
2/c2)
 is often given the symbol , the Greek letter
gamma.
We summarize the properties of   1  v2
/c2
, discussed in this section:
v  0,
  1,
0  v  c,
  a fraction between 0 and 1, depending on
the value of v2/c2
v  260,000 km/s,
  0.5,
v  c,
  0,
v 
 c,
  imaginary.
9.8 RELATIVITY OF LENGTH
The two postulates of relativity theory also lead to the relativity of a sec-
ond fundamental measured quantity, length. Einstein again applied the two
postulates to a thought experiment (not a real experiment) on a simple mea-
suring process. This was one way of deducing the physical consequences
from his two fundamental postulates. Again the constant speed of light is
the key, while the relativity principle is the underlying assumption.
We'll give Jane and John a rest and ask Alice and Alex, two other virtual
researchers, to perform this thought experiment. Let Alice be at rest, while
Alex is riding on a platform moving at uniform velocity relative to her. Alex
carries a meter stick to measure the length of his platform in the direction
it is moving. He obtains exactly 1 m. Alice tries to measure the length of
Alex's platform with her meter stick as Alex's platform moves past her at
constant velocity. She has to be quick, since she must read the two ends of
the meter stick at the exact same instant; otherwise if she measures one end
first, the other end will have moved forward before she gets to it. But there
is a problem: light from the front and the rear of the platform take a cer-
tain amount of time to reach her, and in that brief lapse of time, the plat-
form has moved forward.
Using only a little algebra and an ingenious argument (see the insert
"Length Contraction"), Einstein derived an equation relating the meas-
urements made by our two observers. The calculation, which is similar to
the one for time dilation, yielded the result that, because the speed of light
428
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

is not infinite, Alice's measurement of the length of the moving platform
always turns out to be shorter than the length that Alex measures. The
faster the platform moves past her, the shorter it is by Alice's measurement.
The lengths as measured by the two observers are related to each other by
the same square root as for time dilation. Alex, who is at rest relative to his
platform, measures the length of the platform to be ls, but Alice, who must
measure the length of Alex's moving platform from her stationary frame,
measures its length to be lm. Einstein showed that, because of the constant
speed of light, these two lengths are not equal but are related instead by
the expression
lm  ls1 .
Again the square root appears, which is now multiplied by the length ls
in Alex's system to obtain the length lm as measured by Alice. Again, you
will notice that when v  0, i.e., when both systems are at rest with respect
to each other, the equation shows there is no difference between lm and ls,
as we expect. When the platform moves at any speed up to nearly the speed
of light, the square root becomes a fraction with the value less than 1, which
indicates that lm is less than ls. The conclusion:
Length measurements are not absolute and unchanging, but rela-
tive. In fact, an object moving relative to a stationary observer ap-
pears to that observer in that reference frame to be shorter in the
direction of motion than when its length is measured by an ob-
server moving with the object—and it appears shorter the faster the
object is moving.
v2

c2
9.8 RELATIVITY OF LENGTH
429
Alex
Alice
v
Meter
stick
Platform
FIGURE 9.11
Length and contraction of a
meter stick.

This effect is known as length contraction. But note that the object is not
actually contracting as it moves—the observed "contraction," which is in
the direction of motion only, not perpendicular to it, is an effect of the
measurement made from another system—as was the effect on the relative
observations of elapsed time, the "time delay."
When v  0.8c, for example, the apparent foreshortening seen by Alice
of Alex's platform moving to the right, and of Alex himself and everything
moving with him, would be about 0.6 ls. Moreover, it is symmetrical! Since
Alex can consider his frame to be at rest, Alice seems to be moving fast to
the left, and it is she and her platform which seem to Alex to be fore-
shortened by the same amount.
The apparent contraction continues all the way up to the speed of light,
at which point the length of the moving object would appear to the sta-
tionary observer to be zero. However, no mass can be made to reach the
speed of light, so we can never attain zero length, although in accelerators
(colliders) elementary particles come pretty close to that limit.
430
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
LENGTH CONTRACTION
Consider a meter stick in a spaceship mov-
ing past you at high speed v. The meter
stick is aligned in the direction of motion.
Alex is an observer riding on the space-
ship. He has a high-speed timing device
and a laser emitter. With that equipment,
she intends to measure the speed of light
by emitting a laser pulse along a meter
stick, which is aligned along the direction
of motion of his spaceship. He will time
the duration required for the light pulse
to traverse the length of the meter stick.
After performing the measurement, the
time interval he measures is Ts and the
length of the meter stick is ls, the s indi-
cating that they are stationary relative to
her. Calculating the speed of the light
pulse, ls/Ts, he obtains the speed of light
c, as expected.
Meanwhile, Alice is fixed on Earth as
Alex's spaceship speeds past. She observes
his experiment and makes the same meas-
urements using her own clock—however
her result for the time interval Tm regis-
tered on Alex's moving clock is different
from Alex's measurement because of time
dilation. Nevertheless, according to Ein-
stein's second postulate Alice must obtain
the exact same value for the speed of the
light pulse, c. The only way this is possi-
ble is if the length of the meter stick in
Alex's moving spaceship as measured by
Alice, lm as measured with her own mea-
suring device, appears to have contracted
by the same amount that the time inter-
val she measured on the moving clock has
expanded. The moving length lm must
therefore appear to be contracted in the
direction of motion according to the rela-
tionship
lm  ls1 .
v2

c2

9.9 RELATIVITY OF MASS
You saw in Section 3.4 that inertial mass is the property of objects that re-
sists acceleration when a force is applied. The inertial mass, or simply "the
mass," is the constant of proportionality between force and acceleration in
Newton's second law of motion
Fnet  ma.
Therefore a constant force will produce a constant acceleration. So, once
an object is moving, if you keep pushing on it with the same force, it will
keep accelerating, going faster and faster and faster without limit, accord-
ing to this formula. Newton's second law thus contains no speed limit. But
this is inconsistent with the relativity theory, which imposes a speed limit
for objects in space of about 300,000 km/s (186,000 mi/s), the speed of
light. The way out is to amend Newton's second law. Einstein's way was to
note that m, the inertial mass, does not stay constant but increases as the
speed increases—as in fact is experimentally observed, for example, for
high-speed elementary particles. When the speed increases, it takes more
and more force to continue the same acceleration—eventually an infinite
force trying to reach the speed of light. Einstein deduced from the two pos-
tulates of special relativity theory that the inertia of a moving object in-
creases with speed, and it does so in the same way as the time relation in
time dilation. (The derivation is provided in the Student Guide for this chap-
ter.) Using our familiar square root factor, we can write
mm 
.
Here mm is the mass of the object in relative motion, and ms is the mass of
the same object before it starts to move. Often ms is called the "rest mass."
Similarly to the measurement of time intervals, as an object's speed in-
creases the mass as observed from a stationary reference frame also increases.
It would reach an infinite (or undefined) mass if it reached the speed of light.
This is another reason why anything possessing mass cannot actually be
made to attain the speed of light; it would require applying an infinite force
to accelerate it to that speed. By the same argument, entities that do move
at the speed of light, such as light itself, must therefore have zero rest mass.
Following Einstein's result that the mass of an object increases when it
is in motion relative to a stationary observer, Newton's equation relating
the force and the acceleration can be written as a more general law
Fnet 
a.
ms

1  v2
/c2

ms

1  v2
/c2

9.9 RELATIVITY OF MASS
431

Notice that as the relative speed decreases to zero, this equation transforms
continuously into Newton's equation
Fnet 
a  F  ma, as v  0.
This indicates again that Einstein's physics did not break with Newton's
physics. Instead Einstein's physics is a continuation of Newton's physics.
ms

1  v2
/c2

432
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
0
2 m0
m0
m
v
1/4 C
C
1/2 C
3/4 C
THE RELATIVISTIC INCREASE OF MASS WITH SPEED
v/c
m/m0
v/c
m/m0
0.0
0.01
0.10
0.50
0.75
0.80
0.90
1.000
1.000
1.005
1.155
1.538
1.667
2.294
0.95
0.98
0.99
0.998
0.999
0.9999
0.99999
    3.203
    5.025
     7.089
   15.82
  22.37
  70.72
223.6
FIGURE 9.12
The increase of mass with speed. Note
that the increase does not become large until v/c well
exceeds 0.50.

9.10 MASS AND ENERGY
After Einstein completed his paper on the special theory of relativity in
1905 he discovered one more consequence of the relativity postulates, which
he presented, essentially as an afterthought, in a three-page paper later that
year. In terms of the effect of physics on world history, it turned out to be
the most significant of all his findings.
We discussed in Chapter 5 that when work is done on an object, say hit-
ting a tennis ball with a racket, the object acquires energy. In relativity the-
ory, the increase in speed, and hence the increase in kinetic energy of a ten-
nis ball or any object, results in an increase in mass (or inertia), although
in everyday cases it may be only an infinitesimal increase.
Examining this relation between relative speed and effective mass more
closely, Einstein discovered that any increase in the energy of an object should
yield an increase of its measured mass—whether speeding up the object, or
heating it, or charging it with electricity, or merely by doing work by rais-
ing it up in the Earth's gravitational field. In short, Einstein discovered that
a change in energy is equivalent to a change in mass. Moreover, he found
that the equivalence works both ways: An increase or decrease in the energy
in a system correspondingly increases or decreases its mass, and an increase
or decrease in mass corresponds to an increase or decrease in energy. In other
words, mass itself is a measure of an equivalent amount of energy.
To put Einstein's result in symbols and using the delta () symbol: a
change in the amount of energy of an object is directly proportional to a
change in its mass, or
E  m.
Einstein found that the proportionality constant is just the square of the
speed of light, c2:
E  (m)c2,
or, expressed more generally,
In its two forms, this is probably the most famous equation ever writ-
ten. What it means is that an observed change of mass is equivalent to a
change of energy, and vice versa. It also means that an object's mass itself,
even if it doesn't change, is equivalent to an enormous amount of energy,
since the proportionality constant, c2, the square of the speed of light in
E  mc2.
9.10 MASS AND ENERGY
433

vacuum, is a very large number. For example, the amount of energy con-
tained in just 1 g of matter is
E  mc2  (0.001 kg)(3  108 m/s)2
 (1  103 kg)(9  1016 m2/s2)
 9  1013 kg m2/s2
 9  1013 J.
This enormous amount of energy is roughly equivalent to the chemical en-
ergy released in 20 tons of TNT, or the amount of energy consumed in
the whole United States on average in 30 s. It is the source of the energies
released by radioactive substances, our Sun and other stars, by nuclear
weapons, and by nuclear reactors producing electrical energy.
Not only are mass and energy "equivalent," we may say mass is energy.
This is just what Einstein concluded in 1905: "The mass of a body is a mea-
sure of its energy content." We can think of mass as "frozen energy," frozen
at the time the Universe cooled soon after the Big Bang and energy clumped
together into balls of matter, the elementary particles of which ordinary
matter is made. Thus any further energy pumped into a mass will increase
its mass even more. For instance, as we accelerate protons in the labora-
tory to nearly the speed of light, their mass increases according to the rel-
ativistic formula for mm. This increase can also be interpreted as an increase
in the energy content of the protons. These two different deductions of
relativity theory—mass increase and energy-mass equivalence—are consis-
tent with each other.
This equivalence has exciting significance. First, two great conservation
laws become alternate statements of a single law. In any system whose to-
tal mass is conserved, the total energy is also conserved. Second, the idea
arises that some of the rest energy might be transformed into a more fa-
miliar form of energy. Since the energy equivalent of mass is so great, a
very small reduction in rest mass would release a tremendous amount of
energy, for example, kinetic energy or electromagnetic energy.
9.11 CONFIRMING RELATIVITY
Einstein's theory is not only elegant and simple, it is extraordinarily far-
reaching, although its consequences were and still are surprising when first
encountered. By noticing an inconsistency in the usual understanding of
434
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

Maxwell's theory, and by generalizing Galileo's ideas
on relative motion in mechanics, Einstein had been
led to state two general postulates. Then he applied
these two postulates to a study of the procedures 
for measuring the most fundamental concepts in
physical science—time, length, mass, energy—and,
as one does in a geometry proof, he followed 
these postulates to wherever the logic led him. The
logic led him to conclude that the measurements of
these quantities can be different for different ob-
servers in motion relative to each other. While the
laws of physics—properly amended, as in the case of
Fnet  ma becoming Fnet  (ms/1  v2
/c2)
 a—and
the speed of light are the same for all observers, these
basic quantities that enter into the laws of physics, such as time or mass,
are not the same for all, they are relative with respect to the measurement
frame. This is why it is called the theory of relativity. More precisely, it is
called the theory of special relativity, since in this theory the relative veloc-
ities of the observers must be uniform (no acceleration), hence applying
only to inertial systems.
But, you may object, anyone can come up with a couple of postulates,
correctly deduce some strange consequences from them, and claim that
they now have a new theory. In fact, this happens all too often, and usu-
ally is rejected as poor science. Why do we accept Einstein's theory as good
science? The answer is of course eventual experimental confirmation, in-
ternal consistency, and consistency with other well-established theories.
Every theory in science, whether deduced from a few postulates or induced
from experimentally based hypotheses, must pass the rigorous test of ex-
perimental examination by various researchers, usually over a long period
of time. In fact, as one astronomer recently remarked, the more profound
the theory, the more extensive the experimental evidence that is required
before it can be accepted. In addition, of course, the derivation of the the-
ory cannot contain any logical mistakes or unfounded violations of accepted
laws and principles. And it must be compatible with existing theories, or
else it must show how and why these theories must be revised.
Far from being "dogmatic," as some would have it, scientists are always
skeptical until the evidence is overwhelming. Indeed, it took more than a
decade of research to confirm that relativity theory is indeed internally con-
sistent as well as experimentally sound. The above sections also indicate
how and why the classical physics of Newton and Maxwell had to be re-
vised for application to phenomena at high relative speeds. But as the rel-
ative speed decreases, all of the results of relativity theory fade smoothly
9.11 CONFIRMING RELATIVITY
435
Note: Einstein did not initially
call his theory the theory of rel-
ativity. That term was given to it
by others. Einstein later said he
would have preferred calling it
the theory of invariance. Why?
Because, as said before, the laws
of physics remain invariant, un-
changed, the same for the "sta-
tionary" and the "moving" ob-
server. That is extremely
important, and makes it obvious
why it is so wrong to say that
Einstein showed that "every-
thing is relative."

into the classical physics of the everyday world. There is no "incommen-
surability" between the worlds of Newton and Einstein.
Relativity theory is so well tested that it is now used as a tool for study-
ing related theories and for constructing new experiments. Most of these
experiments involve sub-microscopic particles moving at extremely high
speeds, such as are found in modern-day accelerators. But some are also at
everyday speeds. Here are a few of the most well-known confirmations of
the postulates and deductions of special relativity theory.
The Constancy of the Speed of Light
The validity of the two postulates of relativity theory also extends to clas-
sical physics (e.g., mechanics), as Galileo showed for the early relativity pos-
tulate with the tower experiment, and as Einstein apparently realized as he
thought about running alongside a light beam. A direct confirmation of the
constancy of the speed of light has been obtained from the study of dou-
ble stars, which are stars that orbit about each other. If the orbit of one star
is close to the line of sight from the Earth, then at one side of the orbit it
is moving toward the Earth, on the other side it is moving away. Careful
studies of the speed of light emitted by such stars as they move toward and
away from us at high speed show no difference in the speed of light, con-
firming that the speed of light is indeed independent of the speed of the
source.
Another of the many experiments involved a high-speed particle in an
accelerator. While moving at close to the speed of light, it emitted elec-
tromagnetic radiation in opposite directions, to the front and to the rear.
Sensitive instruments detected the radiation and measured its speed. As-
tonishing as it may seem to the uninitiated, the speed of the radiation emit-
436
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
v
v
Double
star
Light beams from
double star
To
Earth
FIGURE 9.13
Light beams from a double-star system.

ted in both directions turned out to be exactly the speed of light, even
though the particle itself was moving close to the speed of light—a strik-
ing confirmation of the constant-light-speed postulate, which amounts to
a law of nature.
The Relativity of Time
The relativity theory predicts that a moving clock, as seen by a stationary
observer, will tick slower than a stationary clock. We noted earlier that this
effect has been tested and confirmed using atomic clocks inside airplanes
and satellites.
An equally dramatic confirmation of the relativity of time occurred with
the solution to a curious puzzle. Cosmic rays are high-speed protons, nu-
clei, and other particles that stream through space from the Sun and the
galaxy. When they strike the Earth's atmosphere, their energy and mass 
are converted into other elementary particles—a confirmation in itself of
the mass-energy equivalence. One of the particles they produce in the
atmosphere is the so-called mu-meson, or simply the muon. When produced
in the laboratory, slow muons are found to have a short life. On average
they last only about 2.2 106 s, at which time there is a 50-50 chance that
each one will decay into other elementary particles. (106 s is a microsec-
ond, symbol: s.)
The puzzle is that the muons created in the upper atmosphere and mov-
ing at high speed were found to "live" longer before they decay than those
laboratory-generated ones. They last so long that many more survive the
long trip down to the detectors on the ground than should be possible.
Considering the speed they are traveling and the distance they have to tra-
verse from the upper atmosphere to sea-level (about 30 km), their average
lifetime of 2.2 s, as measured for slow muons, should not be sufficient for
them to survive the journey. Most of them should decay before hitting the
ground; but in fact most of them do reach the ground. How can this be?
The answer is the time dilation predicted by relativity theory. Relative to
the detectors on the ground, the muons are moving at such high speed that
9.11 CONFIRMING RELATIVITY
437
v
Light
detector
c
c
Light
detector
Accelerator tube
FIGURE 9.14
Particle in an accelerator emitting light beams simultaneously in
opposite directions.

their "clock" appears slowed, allowing them to survive long enough to reach
the ground. The amount of slowing, as indicated by the number of muons
reaching the ground, was found to be exactly the amount predicted by rel-
ativity theory.
Relativity of Length
Recall that one of the basic ideas of relativity theory is that all speed is rel-
ative to the observer who measures the speed. So let's return to the puzzle
of the long-lived muons, only this time we will jump to the perspective of
the hapless muon crashing through the Earth's atmosphere. From the
muon's point of view, it is at rest, while the Earth is flying up toward it at
close to the speed of light. Since the Earth is now moving with respect to
the muon's own frame of reference, the distance from the top of the atmo-
sphere to the ground undergoes a length contraction when seen from the
point of view of the muon. The contraction is so great that, from the muon's
perspective, it has no trouble covering this short distance in the mere 
2.2 s of the short life it has in its "stationary" reference frame. Again, the
observations are in complete agreement with the predictions of special rel-
ativity theory.
Relativity of Mass
Relativity theory predicts that the observed mass of an object will increase
as the relative speed of the object increases. Interestingly, this effect had
been observed even before Einstein's theory, when scientists were puzzled
to notice an increase in the mass of high-speed electrons in vacuum tubes.
This effect is easily observed today in particle accelerators, where elemen-
tary charged particles such as electrons or protons are accelerated by elec-
tromagnetic fields to speeds as high as 0.9999999 the speed of light. The
masses of these particles increase by exactly the amount predicted by Ein-
stein's formula. At that speed the increase of their mass (mm is about 2236
times the rest mass; mm  2236 ms). In fact, circular accelerators have to
be designed to take the mass increase into account. As the particles are ac-
celerated to high speeds by electric fields, they are curved into a circular
path by magnetic fields to bring them back and let them undergo repeated
accelerations by the fields. You saw in Section 3.12 that an object moving
in a circular path requires a centripetal force. This force is given by the
equation F  mv2/R. Here R is the radius of the circle, which is fixed; v is
the particle's speed, which increases; and m is the moving mass, which also
increases according to relativity theory.
If scientists do not take the mass increase into account in their particle
438
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

accelerators, the magnetic force would not be enough to keep the particles
on the circular track of the accelerator, and they would hit the wall or come
out there through a portal. A simple circular accelerator is called a cyclotron.
But when the increase of the accelerating force is precisely synchronized
with the increases in speed and relativistic mass, it is called a synchrocyclotron.
Equivalence of Mass and Energy
Einstein regarded the equivalence of mass and energy, as expressed in the
equation E  mc2, to be a significant theoretical result of special relativity,
but he did not believe it had any practical importance when he announced
his finding. The hidden power became most obvious, of course, in the ex-
plosion of the atomic (more precisely "nuclear") bombs in 1945. The
tremendous energy unleashed in such a bomb is derived from the trans-
formation in the nuclei of a small amount of uranium or plutonium mass
into the equivalent, huge amount of energy.
9.11 CONFIRMING RELATIVITY
439
FIGURE 9.15
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab), in Batavia, Illinois, one
of the world's most powerful particle accelerators. 

Nuclear bombs and reactors are powered by the splitting of heavy atoms.
An opposite process, a fusion reaction, takes place using the joining to-
gether of nuclei of light elements. Again, a tiny amount of the mass is con-
verted into energy according to Einstein's formula. Despite much effort, it
has not yet been possible to control this fusion process on a scale sufficient
to produce electricity for domestic and industrial use; however, the absence
of harmful radioactive by-products would make such a device very desir-
able. But the nuclear fusion process does have a very practical importance:
It powers the energy output of the Sun and all other stars in the Universe.
Without it, life could not exist on the surface of the Earth. (Nuclear fis-
sion and fusion and their applications are further discussed in Chapter 18.)
The conversion of energy into mass can also be observed in the colli-
sions of elementary particles that have been accelerated to enormously high
speeds. Photographs of the results, such as the one here, display the cre-
ation of new particles.
440
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
FIGURE 9.16
Trajectories of a
burst of elementary particles in
the magnetic field inside a bu-
ble chamber.

9.12 BREAKING WITH THE PAST
Although Einstein's theory of special relativity did not represent a major
break with classical physics, it did break with the mechanical world view.
Our understanding of nature provided by special relativity, together with
subsequent advances in quantum mechanics, general relativity theory, and
other innovations, will slowly shape the new world view that is emerging.
Special relativity introduced an important break with the mechanical
world view concerning the notion of absolute rest and absolute motion,
which ceased to exist as a result of Einstein's work. Until that time, most
physicists defined absolute rest and motion in terms of the so-called ether,
the stuff that filled all of the space and transmitted light and electric and
magnetic forces. As noted earlier, Einstein simply ignored the ether as "su-
perfluous," since only relative motions were used in his theory. At the same
time, and even before, a large number of careful experiments of different
sorts to detect the ether had failed completely. One of these, the most fa-
mous one, was a series of experiments, during the 1880s, in which the Amer-
ican scientists Albert A. Michelson and Edward Morley attempted to de-
tect the "wind" of ether experienced by the Earth as it moved through the
supposed stationary ether on its orbit around the Sun. If such an ether ex-
isted, scientists believed, it should cause an "ether wind" over the surface
of the Earth along the direction of motion. Since light was believed to be
a wave moving through the ether, somewhat like sound waves through the
air, it should be affected by this wind. In particular, a light wave traveling
into the wind and back should take longer to make a round trip than a wave
traveling the exact same distance at a right angle, that is, across the wind
and back. (See the calculation in the Student Guide.) Comparing two such
waves, Michelson and Morley could find no difference in their times of
travel, within the limits of precision of their experiment. Within a few years
of Einstein's theory, most physicists had abandoned the notion of an ether.
If it could not be detected, why keep it?
9.12 BREAKING WITH THE PAST
441
v
Ether wind
FIGURE 9.17
Earth moving through the sta-
tionary ether, according to nineteenth-century
concepts.

Not only did the loss of the ether rule out the concepts of absolute rest
and absolute motion, but scientists had to rethink their understanding of
how forces, such as electricity, magnetism, and gravity, operate. Ether was
supposed to transmit these forces. Suddenly there was no ether; so what
are these fields? Scientists finally accepted the idea that fields are inde-
pendent of matter. There was now more to the world than just matter in
motion. There were now matter, fields, and motion, which meant that not
everything can be reduced to material interactions and Newton's laws. Non-
material fields had also to be included, and be able to carry energy across
empty space in the form of light beams. The world was suddenly more
complicated than just matter and motion. (You will read more about fields
in Chapter 10.)
Another break with the mechanical world view concerned the concepts
of space and time. Newton and his followers in the mechanical view had
regarded space and time to be absolute, meaning the same for all observers,
regardless of their relative motion. Einstein demonstrated in special rela-
tivity that measurements of space and time depend upon the relative mo-
tion of the observers. Moreover, it turned out that space and time are ac-
tually entwined with each other. You can already see this in the problem of
making measurements of the length of a moving platform. The ends of the
meter stick must be read off at the ends of the platform at the same instant
in time. Because of the postulate of the constancy of the speed of light, a
442
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
Recombined beams observed here
Half-silvered mirror
Light
originates
here
Reflector 1
Reflector 2
Beam split
here
FIGURE 9.18
Schematic diagram of the Michelson-Morley experi-
ment.

person at rest on the platform and a person who sees the platform moving
will not agree on when the measurements are simultaneous. In 1908 the
German mathematician Hermann Minkowski suggested that in relativity
theory time and space can be viewed as joined together to form the four
dimensions of a universal four-dimensional world, called spacetime. Four-
dimensional spacetime is universal because an "interval" measured in this
world would turn out to be the same for all observers, regardless of their
relative motion at uniform velocity, but the "interval" would include both
distance and time.
The space in which we live consists, of course, of three dimensions:
length, width, and breadth. For instance, the event of a person sitting down
on a chair in a room can be defined, in part, by the person's three coordi-
nates. Starting at one corner of the room, the length along one wall may
be 3 m, the length along the other wall may be 4 m, and the height to his
chair seat may be 0.5 m. But to specify this event fully, you must also spec-
ify the time: say, 10:23 a.m. These four coordinates, three of space and one
of time, form the four dimensions of an event in spacetime. Events take place
not only in space but also in time. In the mechanical world view, space and
time are the same for all observers and completely independent of each
other. But in relativity theory, space and time are different for different ob-
servers moving relative to each other, and space and time are entwined to-
gether into a four-dimensional construct, "spacetime," which is the same
for all observers.
SOME NEW CONCEPTS AND IDEAS
constructive theory
reference frame
ether
reference frame, inertial
length contraction
relative motion
mass-energy equivalence
spacetime
Michelson-Morley experiment
theory of special relativity
principle of constancy of speed of light
time dilation
principle of relativity
FURTHER READING
D. Cassidy, Einstein and Our World (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995).
A. Einstein, Ideas and Opinions (New York: Bonanza Books, 1988).
FURTHER READING
443

A. Einstein, Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (New York: Crown, 1995),
and many other editions; originally published 1917.
A. Einstein, The World As I See It (New York: Citadel Press, 1993).
A. Einstein and Leopold Infeld, The Evolution of Physics (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1967).
A. Fölsing, Albert Einstein: A Biography, E. Osers, transl. (New York: Penguin, 1998).
P. Frank, Einstein: His Life and Times, rev. ed. (New York: Da Capo).
M. Gardner, Relativity Simply Explained (New York: Dover, 1997).
B. Hoffmann, Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel (New York: Viking Press, 1972).
G. Holton, Einstein, History, and Other Passions (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2000).
G. Holton, Thematic Origins of Scientific Thought: Kepler to Einstein (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1988), Part II: "On Relativity Theory."
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, the Human Adventure. (Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 2001), Chapter 30.
E.F. Taylor, and J.A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics: Introduction to Special Relativity,
2nd ed. (New York: Freeman, 1992).
H. Woolf, ed., Some Strangeness in the Proportion: A Centennial Symposium to Cele-
brate the Achievements of Albert Einstein (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1980).
Web sites
See the course Web site at: http://www.springer-ny.com/
A. Einstein: http://www.aip.org/history/einstein
A. Einstein: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/einstein
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1.
What is "relative" in the theory of relativity?
2.
What is special about the theory of special relativity?
3.
Why did Einstein later say he would have preferred if it had been called the
theory of invariance (or constancy)?
4.
State in your own words the two principles, or postulates, on which special rel-
ativity is based.
5.
What are four deductions of the theory?
6.
Briefly describe an experimental confirmation of each of these four deductions.
9.1 The New Physics
1.
What is "classical physics"?
2.
What was new about the new physics?
444
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

9.2 Albert Einstein
1.
Who was Albert Einstein? What did he do?
2.
Give a brief synopsis of his life. Give a brief synopsis of his views apart from
science.
9.3 The Relativity Principle
1.
How does Einstein's theory compare with other theories described in previous
chapters?
2.
What is relative motion? Give an example.
3.
A student measures the speed of a cart on a laboratory table to be 
150 cm/s toward the north. The laboratory table is on wheels and is moving
forward at 150 cm/s to the north. What is the speed of the cart relative to 
the floor?
4.
What do Einstein's Relativity Principle and the Galilean Relativity Principle
have in common? In what ways are they different?
5.
A sailing ship is moving at uniform velocity on a calm sea. A ball drops from
the mast of the ship.
(a) Where does the ball land?
(b) Compare the observation of the falling ball by a person riding on the ship
with the observation of another person standing on the shore. Explain any
difference.
(c) If these are different, then which observation is correct?
6.
Can the observer on the ship that is moving smoothly forward determine (from
a windowless cabin within) if he is really moving or not? Explain.
7.
Two people moving relative to each other while observing a falling ball see two
different trajectories. Why would they be wrong to say as a result that "every-
thing is relative"?
8.
What does the statement mean that physical measurements, but not physical
laws, depend on the observer's frame of reference?
9.4 Constancy of the Speed of Light
1.
A small asteroid is headed straight toward the Earth at 20 km/s. Suddenly a
gas jet on the asteroid fires a chunk of rock toward the Earth with a speed of
3 km/s relative to the asteroid. Scientists on Earth measure the speed of the
chunk as it flies toward them. What is the measured speed? 
2.
An elementary particle is moving toward the Earth at 0.999999 the speed of
light. It emits a light wave straight at the Earth. The light wave is detected
by equipment on the ground and the speed of the wave is measured. What
will the measured speed be? With what speed does the light move away from
the elementary particle, as measured by an experimenter moving along with
the particle?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
445

9.5-9.7 Relativity of Time and Time Dilation
1.
In your own words explain the thought experiment that shows that to an ob-
server who is stationary, a moving clock consisting of a laser and mirror runs
slower than it does to an observer riding with the clock.
2.
Examine the formula for time dilation and define every symbol in it.
3.
Using the formula for time dilation, explain why a stationary observer will mea-
sure that time slows down for events in the moving system, for relative speeds
greater than zero but less than c.
4.
The equation for time dilation refers to any relative speed v up to the speed
of light c.
(a) What happens when v  0?
(b) Why is it that we don't notice any time dilation at even the fastest speeds
we can encounter in the everyday world, for example, a supersonic jet plane?
5.
Explain why the time dilation equation indicates that there can be no relative
speeds of objects greater than the speed of light.
9.8-9.9 Relativity of Length and Mass
1.
In your own words present the thought experiment that shows that to an ob-
server who is stationary, a moving meter stick appears shorter than it does to
an observer riding with the meter stick.
2.
Examine the formula for length contraction and define every symbol in it.
3.
Using the formula for length contraction, show what happens when the me-
ter stick is moving at 260,000 km/s and its length is measured by an observer
at rest.
4.
Why would it take an infinite force to accelerate any mass up to the speed 
of light?
5.
Why can't anything that possesses mass at zero speed attain the speed of light?
6.
Why is it wrong to say that Einstein's relativity represents a sharp break with
Newtonian mechanics?
7.
Why is it wrong to say that time is really dilated and length is really contracted
in a moving system?
8.
Why has it been wrong to say, as some did, that relativity theory undermines
morality because it shows that "it all depends on your point of view"?
9.10 Mass and Energy
1.
What does it mean to say that mass and energy are equivalent?
2.
Illogically, one often hears that mass can be "converted" into energy, and en-
ergy be "converted" into mass. What would be a more accurate way of ex-
pressing the facts summarized by E  mc2?
3.
If mass and energy are interchangeable, what happens to the law of conserva-
tion of energy?
9.11 Confirming Relativity
1.
By using different frames of reference, give two explanations for the fact that
numerous high-speed muons generated in the upper atmosphere are able to
446
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

survive the trip to the Earth's surface, even though they are so short-lived that
only a few should survive.
2.
Aside from the increasing speed of the elementary particles, why does the cen-
tripetal force in a circular accelerator have to be constantly increased as a bunch
of particles moves faster and faster?
9.12 Breaking with the Past
1.
In what ways did relativity theory introduce a sharp break with the mechani-
cal world view?
2.
How were electric forces, fields, and the ether believed to be related?
3.
What was the Michelson-Morley experiment? What were they attempting to
detect? How did they attempt to detect it? What was their result?
4.
What impact on the mechanical view did the rejection of the ether have?
5.
What other break with the past did special relativity introduce?
6.
What is four-dimensional spacetime? Give an example of an event in four-
dimensional spacetime.
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1.
Two observers are in uniform relative motion with respect to each other. They
are in direct communication by cell phone and are attempting to decide who
is really in motion and who is really at rest. What arguments can each one give
to claim that he is at rest and the other person is moving?
2.
Some people have argued that the theory of relativity supports the idea that
"everything is relative." Would you agree or disagree with this conclusion, and
how would you support your position, say in a discussion with others in class?
3.
A person is exercising on a tread mill in a gym. The speed of the tread mill is
set at 3 mi/hr. What is the speed of the exerciser relative to the ground? What
is the exerciser's speed relative to the belt of the tread mill?
4.
In studying this Part One of the text, you have followed some of the immense
transformation of humankind's culture, from the pre-scientific period to cur-
rent research questions. After thoughtful reflection on this experience, write a
page or two summarizing the stages in this adventure of the creative mind.
Quantitative
5.
On a piece of graph paper, plot the results, for a few distributed points, of the
equation for length contraction, with lm on the y-axis and the ratio v/c on the
x-axis from 0 to 1.
(a) Study this graph and explain why using this relativistic equation is usually
not needed for relative speeds below about 20% of the speed of light.
(b) From this graph explain why objects cannot attain the speed of light.
(c) Explain why objects cannot go faster than the speed of light.
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
447

6.
How fast would a pitcher have to throw a baseball to have its mass increase 
by 1%?
7.
How much would be the rate of your body's "clock," the heart beat, decrease
as measured by someone at rest on the ground, if you were flying in a plane
at the speed of sound, about 330 m/s?
8.
In Question 7, if you weighed yourself on a supersensitive scale during flight,
how much would your weight seem to have increased, if at all, as observed
from the ground?
9.
If you have an opportunity to use the computer program "Space-Time," use
the program to take a "trip" to Alpha Centauri, and observe the twin paradox.
How is the paradox resolved?
448
9. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY

FIELDS
AND
ATOMS
FIELDS
AND
ATOMS
P
A
R
T
T
W
O

This page intentionally left blank 

1 A Revolution in Science
2 The Mechanical World View
3 Energy and Atoms
1. A REVOLUTION IN SCIENCE
The work of Isaac Newton concluded the scientific revolution that began
in large part in A.D. 1549 when Nicholaus Copernicus first argued that the
Earth is not stationary at the center of the Universe but rotates on its axis
once a day and orbits the Sun once a year, along with the other planets.
The revolution in science extended over the work of numerous "giants,"
as Newton called them—Galileo, Kepler, Descartes, and many others—
resulting, by Newton's death in 1724, in the basis for the understanding of
the physical world that we have today, what we call modern physics.
Many of the characteristics of modern physics that were established dur-
ing the scientific revolution actually derived from the work of ancient
thinkers, especially the work of the Ancient Greeks. This was because the
Greeks were the first influential thinkers to seek explanations of natural
events in terms of rational causes, rather than in the actions of supernatu-
ral beings. This meant that, for the first time, people regarded nature as
accessible to human inquiry and study and governed by humanly under-
standable, rational principles. Truly scientific research was now possible.
As established by the scientific revolution, scientific research consists of
the gathering of data through active experimentation and testing, not just
passive observation or no observation at all. Galileo called experimental in-
quiry the "interrogation" of nature. The experimental evidence and closely
related hypotheses are then joined together through rational processes and
further experimental testing into a theory about the workings of nature that
451
Prologue to 
Part Two

is then subject thereafter to revision, or even rejection, as new evidence be-
comes available.
Two of the main characteristic assumptions about nature that we have
today can be traced, through Newton and the scientific revolution, back to
the Ancient Greeks. The first is that nature is governed by a few, simple,
clear rational laws and principles. From Plato and his followers, Newton
and others came to realize that many of these principles can be expressed
in mathematical terms and that the basic concepts of nature behave ac-
cording to the rules of mathematics. Many centuries later, Albert Einstein
declared: "the supreme task of the physicist is to arrive at those universal
elementary laws from which the cosmos can be built up by pure deduc-
tion."* In another statement he declared:
I am convinced that we can discover by means of purely mathe-
matical constructions the concepts and the laws connecting them
with each other, which furnish the key to the understanding of nat-
ural phenomena.†
452
PROLOGUE TO PART TWO
Albert Einstein (1879-1955). 
* Ideas and Opinions, p. 226.
† Ideas and Opinions, p. 274.

A second characteristic assumption of contemporary physics goes back
even further than Plato to the Greek thinker Democritus. Smelling the
baking of bread one day, he reasoned that something must travel from the
bread to his nose, even though he could not see anything traveling. He sur-
mised that what traveled were extremely small, invisible "atoms" of bread.
These and other considerations led to the hypothesis that the natural world
consists of myriads of tiny atoms moving through empty space and clump-
ing together to form the matter we see around us. Although this hypoth-
esis was out of favor for nearly two millennia, it was revived and established
as a foundation of physical science during the Scientific Revolution. The
reason for the sudden popularity of atoms at that time is that, assuming na-
ture consists of these inert bits of matter, the laws governing the events of
nature can be clearly understood by referring to atoms, without having to
refer to hidden spirits or other nonmaterial causes.
By assuming that matter consists of inert atoms moving around and
clumping together in empty space, the behavior of everyday matter could
be easily obtained from the properties of the atoms themselves and the few
simple laws that govern their motion. These simple laws were Newton's fa-
mous three laws of motion (although they are not quite so simple as they may
seem). They are:
1.
The Law of Inertia:
Every object continues in its state of rest or of uniform velocity (mo-
tion at uniform speed in a straight line) unless acted upon by an un-
balanced force (a net force). Conversely, if an object is at rest or in
motion with uniform velocity, all forces that may be acting on it must
cancel so that the net force is zero.
1. A REVOLUTION IN SCIENCE
453
Isaac Newton (1642-1727). 

2.
The Force Law:
The net force acting on an object is numerically equal to, and in the
same direction as, the acceleration of the object multiplied by its
mass. In symbols: Fnet  ma.
3.
The Law of Action and Reaction:
If one object exerts a force on another object, the second object at
the same time exerts a force on the first object. These two forces,
each acting on one of the two objects, are equal in magnitude and
opposite in direction.
These laws are valid for all matter everywhere in the Universe, and they
apply to matter in any form it takes, from planets and galaxies to space
satellites and moving electrons in computers. They are still valid today.
We will not go into the details of these laws here (see Section 3.3), but
you should be aware that for some concepts in these laws, such as force,
acceleration, and velocity, the direction of the force or acceleration is as
important as how large they are, their "magnitude." Concepts in which the
direction and the magnitude are important are given a special name. They
are called vectors. They are represented in this text in boldface. Other quan-
tities that do not have a direction—such as mass and temperature—are
called scalars. They are usually given in this text in italics, as are symbols
representing only magnitudes of vectors.
You should also be aware that all quantities that can be measured are
measured in carefully defined units. Although the American-English sys-
tem of pounds, feet, and gallons is common in the United States, the met-
ric system is used in science, since it is a decimal system. In this system,
distance is usually measured in meters (m) or centimeters (cm), time in sec-
onds (s), and force in newtons (N). Here
1 N  1 kg m/s2.
(See the Student Guide for further details. Your instructor may go over these
units with you in class.)
Newton's crowning achievement was his discovery of the law of univer-
sal gravitation. According to this law, every massive object in the Universe
attracts any other massive object with a force that can be given by a math-
ematical expression. This expression says that the force is equal to a con-
stant times the product of the two masses, divided by the square of the dis-
tance between their centers, or in symbols:
F 
.
This law is still valid today. For instance, it guides the launching of satel-
lites from Earth or the fall of apples to the ground. However, while it is
Gm1m2

R2
454
PROLOGUE TO PART TWO

simple, it is not very clear. What exactly is this force and how does it oper-
ate? Newton was unable to provide an explanation in terms of only atoms
moving through space; and it is still a problem today. But that does not pre-
vent us from using the concept and equation for gravitational force today.
In the end atoms moving through space and time and clumping together
by gravitation and other forces formed the basic conception of the entire
Universe known as the "mechanical world view."
2. THE MECHANICAL WORLD VIEW
Once scientists realized the usefulness of the combination of the atomic hy-
pothesis with the laws of motion and the force laws, all of which are based
on experimental evidence, they were convinced that they had found the ul-
timate principles by which we can understand events in the physical world.
This was an extremely important discovery. Since in physics the science of
mechanics has to do with the study of matter in motion, this point of view
became known as the "mechanical world view," which dominated physical
science until well into the twentieth century. It is still prevalent today for
everyday events on the human scales of distance, time, and speed, but not
in situations where relativity and the quantum theory are important.
According to the mechanical world view, or the "mechanical philoso-
phy," the physical world—the Earth, planets, and the entire Universe—can
be understood in terms of atoms of matter interacting with each other as
they move through space and time according to Newton's laws of motion
and the pushes and pulls of gravitation and other forces. These mechani-
cal principles were considered to be so fundamental that for centuries most
scientists believed that a rational divine being must have established the
Universe and everything in it according to mechanical principles.
In the mechanical view, atoms moved around and clumped together
against the background of a flat, fixed, infinite space and in an unending
linear unfolding of time. In an era when the first mechanical "grandfather"
clocks were being invented, the Universe seemed to these scientists a clock-
work universe, one that operates like a gigantic mechanical clock, con-
structed and set in motion by God in the beginning, and running smoothly
against the backdrop of space and time ever since.
3.
ENERGY AND ATOMS
The idea of a clockwork universe, based on the mechanical world view, en-
abled physical scientists to make enormous progress toward understanding
the physical Universe. With this outlook scientists could be confident that
3. ENERGY AND ATOMS
455

all of the complex phenomena and their numerous unanswered questions
about their world and the entire Universe would eventually be understood
in terms of the basic, well-known principles of mechanical philosophy. Fired
with the new confidence engendered by Newton's success, scientists turned
to new areas of research in an attempt to discover the mechanical princi-
ples underlying these as yet unexplained phenomena, such as the behavior
of heat, light, and electricity and magnetism. The first two of these are dis-
cussed in Part One of this text; we will start with electricity and magnet-
ism in this part of the course.
Applying the mechanical world view to these fields led to great scien-
tific progress in the centuries ahead. They also led to such important tech-
nological inventions as the steam engine, the electric generator, and the
electric motor, which together helped to unleash the Industrial Revolution
and the electric age, transforming the economic and social fabric of the
world in which we live today. But, in the end, as you will see in the fol-
lowing chapters, these sciences also pointed to the limitations of the me-
chanical philosophy, leading ultimately to the contemporary theories of rel-
ativity theory and quantum mechanics. Part One of this text, which focuses
on the study of motion, ended with relativity theory. This part, in which
we investigate atoms and electromagnetism, will lead us into the strange
and exciting world of quantum mechanics. We include the discussion of
electromagnetism with that of atoms, because the structure and behavior
of the atom itself involves electrical forces, while many properties of mat-
ter in the everyday world arise from the electrical behavior of atoms.
Before we enter the atomic world, you should know about the concepts
of energy and atoms, which are more fully treated in Part One.
Energy
Energy is closely tied to forces. It is transported or transformed into dif-
ferent forms by the action of forces. For instance, a force exerted by a hand
on a ball can transform the chemical energy in your muscles into the en-
ergy of motion of the ball. The energy of motion is called kinetic energy.
This action is called work, and it is in the performance of useful work that
machines are used in industrial processes. Like the arm throwing a ball, the
work done by a machine represents the transformation of one form of en-
ergy, such as heat energy or electrical energy, into another form of energy,
such as the spinning of a wheel.
During the 1800s researchers came to recognize many different forms of
energy—heat energy, electrical energy, chemical energy, mechanical energy,
and others. After careful studies they came to recognize that all of these
forms of energy are different manifestations of one underlying entity—
456
PROLOGUE TO PART TWO

energy—which can appear in the different forms that we observe. Further
study, along with the encouragement of some philosophical notions about
energy, led to the idea that in all energy-conversion processes occurring any-
where in nature—on Earth, in the Sun, inside an electric generating plant,
etc.—the total amount of energy in the Universe, is never changed, it always
stays the same—that is, the total amount of energy in the Universe is "con-
served," although it can be transferred into different forms. This is the Law
of Conservation Energy. It is still a fundamental law of nature today. It states:
All natural events involve a transformation of energy from one form
to another, but the total quantity of energy does not change dur-
ing the transformation.
How Do We Know that Atoms Really Exist?
Since at least the time of the Ancient Greeks, many thinkers have postu-
lated the existence of atoms. By "atoms" the Greeks meant invisibly small,
hard, unbreakable balls of matter that make up the different elements con-
stituting the material objects in the physical world. Such an idea was dis-
regarded for many centuries until it was revived during the Scientific Rev-
olution of the seventeenth century by such esteemed thinkers as Descartes,
Boyle, Newton, and Gassendi. Studies of heat and chemistry during the
nineteenth century lent strong support for this existence of the supposed
atoms which, of course, no one could actually see (and which we can only
barely see with today's apparatus). But not until about 1916 were the last
doubters finally satisfied.
There are now several answers to the question: How do we know that
atoms really exist? The first answer is that in chemistry during the nineteenth
century the work of John Dalton and many others showed that the elements com-
bine in definite integral proportions to form chemical compounds. This indicated
that the atoms of the different elements combined in whole-number ratios
to form molecules. These combinations never occurred in fractions of
amounts, suggesting that there are indivisible integral units of each ele-
ment, which we can call atoms. For instance, 1 unit of sodium combined
with 1 unit of chlorine to produce 1 unit of salt, but never 1.5 units of so-
dium and 1.1 units of chlorine.
Second, we know that atoms exist because the atomic theory of matter is highly
successful in accounting for properties of matter that cannot be easily explained in
any other way. During the late nineteenth century, the properties of gases
and the behavior of heat as a form of energy in different situations were all
shown to be comprehensible in terms of the motions and interactions of
the atoms, according to Newton's laws of motion.
3. ENERGY AND ATOMS
457

But still some suggested that, although the atomic hypothesis was helpful
and convenient, that did not make it necessarily valid. The third answer to
the question proved to be decisive: in 1905 Albert Einstein showed that 
the atomic theory provides the only detailed account of the purely random motion of
large-scale molecules or microscopic pollen grains suspended in a stationary liquid.
The phenomenon, known as "Brownian motion" when pollen is involved,
could be explained only by assuming that the suspended grains are subjected
to random collisions by the much smaller molecules of the liquid, colliding
randomly with each grain from different directions. Careful comparisons over
the next few years resulted in complete agreement between Einstein's pre-
dictions and the observed random motion of Brown's pollen grains. Since
then scientists have never seriously doubted the existence of atoms as the
fundamental building blocks of all the forms of matter that we observe around
us. Today, scanning tunneling microscopes and other high-resolution pro-
cesses enable us, at last, to see direct evidence of individual atoms.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
atoms
laws of motion
Brownian motion
mechanical world view 
clockwork universe
scalars
conservation of energy
vectors
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
1. A Revolution in Science
1.
What was the Scientific Revolution, and why is it important for us today?
2.
What were some of the consequences of the scientific revolution for physics?
3.
What was Newton's "crowning achievement?" How would you express it in
your own words?
2. The Mechanical World View
1.
Describe the mechanical world view in your own words.
2.
What were some of the consequences of this world view for science?
3. Energy and Atoms
1.
What is energy?
2.
What is meant by the conservation of energy?
3.
How do we know that atoms really exist?
4.
How does Brownian motion relate to the existence of atoms?
458
PROLOGUE TO PART TWO

-
+
10.1
Gilbert's Magnets
10.2
Electric Charges and Electric Forces
10.3
Forces and Fields
10.4
Electric Currents
10.5
Electric Potential Difference
10.6
Electric Potential Difference and Current
10.7
Electric Potential Difference and Power
10.8
Currents Act on Magnets
10.9
Currents Act on Currents
10.10 Magnetic Fields and Moving Charges
10.1 GILBERT'S MAGNETS
Two natural substances, amber and lodestone, have awakened curiosity since
ancient times. Amber is sap that oozed long ago from certain softwood
trees, such as pine. Over many centuries, it hardened into a semitranspar-
ent solid akin to model plastics and ranging in color from yellow to brown.
It is a handsome ornamental stone when polished, and sometimes contains
the remains of insects that were caught in the sticky sap. Ancient Greeks
recognized a strange property of amber. If rubbed vigorously against cloth,
it can attract nearby objects, such as bits of straw or grain seeds.
Lodestone is a metallic mineral that also has unusual properties. It at-
tracts iron. Also, when suspended or floated, a piece of lodestone always
turns to one particular position, a north-south direction. The first known
written description of the navigational use of lodestone as a compass in
Western countries dates from the late twelfth century, but its properties
were known even earlier in China. Today, lodestone would be called mag-
netized iron ore.
459
Electricity and
Magnetism
C
H
A
P
T
E
R10
10

The histories of lodestone and amber are the early histories of magne-
tism and electricity. The modern developments in these subject areas be-
gan in 1600 with the publication in London of William Gilbert's book 
De Magnete (On Magnets). Gilbert (1544-1603) was an influential physi-
cian, who served as Queen Elizabeth's chief physician. During the last 20
years of his life, he studied what was already known of lodestone and am-
ber. Gilbert made his own experiments to check the reports of other writ-
ers and summarized his conclusions in De Magnete. The book is a classic
in scientific literature, primarily because it was a thorough and largely suc-
cessful attempt to test complex speculation by detailed experiment.
Gilbert's first task in his book was to review and criticize what had pre-
viously been written about lodestone. He discussed various theories about
the cause of magnetic attraction. When it was discovered that lodestone
and magnetized needles or iron bars tend to turn in a north-south direc-
tion, many authors offered explanations. But, says Gilbert:
they wasted oil and labor, because, not being practical in the research
of objects of nature, being acquainted only with books . . . they con-
structed certain explanations on the basis of mere opinions.
460
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
FIGURE 10.1
William Gilbert (1544-
1603). 

As a result of his own researchers, Gilbert himself proposed the real cause
of the lining-up of a suspended magnetic needle or lodestone: The Earth
itself is a lodestone and thus can act on other magnetic materials. Gilbert
performed a clever experiment to show that his hypothesis was a likely one.
Using a large piece of natural lodestone in the shape of a sphere, he showed
that a small magnetized needle placed on the surface of the lodestone acts
just as a compass needle does at different places on the Earth's surface. (In
fact, Gilbert called his lodestone the terrella, or "little Earth.") If the di-
rections along which the needle lines up are marked with chalk on the lode-
stone, they form meridian circles. Like the lines of equal longitude on a
globe of the Earth, these circles converge at two opposite ends that may
be called "poles." At the poles, the needle points perpendicular to the sur-
face of the lodestone. Halfway between, along the "equator," the needle
lies along the surface. Small bits of iron wire, when placed on the spheri-
cal lodestone, also line up in these same directions.
Nowadays, discussion of the actions of magnets generally involves the
idea that magnets set up "fields" all around themselves, as further discussed
in Section 10.3. The field can act on other objects, near or distant. Gilbert's
description of the force exerted on the needle by his spherical lodestone
was a step toward the modern field concept:
The terrella's force extends in all directions. . . . But whenever iron
or other magnetic body of suitable size happens within its sphere
of influence it is attracted; yet the nearer it is to the lodestone the
greater the force with which it is borne toward it.
Gilbert also included a discussion of electricity in his book. He intro-
duced the word electric as the general term for "bodies that attract in the
same way as amber." (The word electric comes from the Greek word 
electron, which means "amber." Today the word electron refers to the small-
est free electric charge.) Gilbert showed that electric and magnetic forces
are different. For example, a lodestone always attracts iron or other mag-
netic bodies. An electric object exerts its attraction only when it has been
recently rubbed. On the other hand, an electric object can attract small
pieces of many different substances. But magnetic forces act only between
10.1 GILBERT'S MAGNETS
461
N
S
FIGURE 10.2
The Earth as a lodestone showing tiny magnets lined
up at different locations on Earth.

a few types of substances. Objects are attracted to a rubbed electric object
along lines directed toward one center region. But magnets always have two
regions (poles) toward which other magnets are attracted.
Gilbert went beyond summarizing the known facts of electricity and
magnets. He suggested new research problems that were pursued by oth-
ers for many years. For example, he proposed that while the poles of two
lodestones might either attract or repel each other, electric bodies could
never exert repelling forces. However, in 1646, Sir Thomas Browne pub-
lished the first observation of electric repulsion. In order to systematize
such accounts, scientists introduced a new concept, electric charge. In the
next section, you will see how this concept can be used to describe the
forces between electrically charged bodies.
10.2 ELECTRIC CHARGES AND ELECTRIC FORCES
As Gilbert strongly argued, the behavior of electrified objects must be
learned in the laboratory rather than by just reading about it. This section,
therefore, is only a brief outline to prepare you for your own experience
with the phenomena.
As discussed earlier, amber, when rubbed, acquires in a seemingly mys-
terious way the property of picking up small bits of grain, cork, paper, hair,
etc. To some extent, all materials show this effect when rubbed, including
rods made of glass or hard rubber, or strips of plastic. There are two other
important basic observations:
1.
When two rods of the same material are both rubbed with another ma-
terial, the rods repel each other. Examples that were long ago found to
work especially well are two glass rods rubbed with silk cloth, or two
hard rubber rods rubbed with fur.
2.
When two rods of different material are rubbed (e.g., a glass rod rubbed
with silk, and a rubber rod rubbed with fur), the two rods may attract
each other.
Electric Charges
These and thousands of similar experimentally observable facts about elec-
trified objects can be summarized in a systematic way by adopting a very
simple model. While describing a model for electrical attraction and repul-
sion, remember that this model is not an experimental fact which you can
observe separately. It is, rather, a set of invented ideas which help to de-
462
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM

scribe and summarize observations. It is easy to forget this important dif-
ference between experimentally observable facts and invented explanations.
Both are needed, but they are not the same thing! The model adopted,
based upon experimental evidence, consists of the concept of charge, along
with three rules regarding charges. An object that is rubbed and given the
property of attracting small bits of matter is said "to be electrically charged"
or "to have an electric charge." All objects showing electrical behavior are
found to have either one or the other of the two kinds of charge. The study
of their behavior is known as electrostatics, since the charges are usually static,
that is, not moving. (The study of moving charges is known as electro-
dynamics.)
The three empirical rules regarding electrostatic charges are:
1.
There are only two kinds of electric charge.
2.
Two objects charged alike (i.e., having the same kind of charge) repel
each other.
3.
Two objects charged oppositely attract each other.
When two different uncharged materials are rubbed together (e.g., the
glass rod and the silk cloth), they acquire opposite kinds of charge. Ben-
jamin Franklin, who did many experiments with electric charges, proposed
a mechanical model for such phenomena. In his model, charging an object
electrically involved the transfer of an "electric fluid" that was present in
all matter. When two objects were rubbed together, some electric fluid from
one object passed into the other. One body then had an extra amount of
electric fluid and the other had a lack of that fluid. An excess of fluid pro-
duced one kind of electric charge, which Franklin called "positive." A lack
of the same fluid produced the other kind of electric charge, which he called
"negative."
Previously, some theorists had proposed a different, "two-fluid" model
involving both a "positive fluid" and a "negative fluid." In that model, nor-
mal matter contained equal amounts of these two fluids, so that they can-
celed out each other's effects. When two different objects were rubbed to-
gether, a transfer of fluids occurred. One object received an excess of
positive fluid, and the other received an excess of negative fluid.
There was some dispute between advocates of one-fluid and two-fluid
models, but both sides agreed to speak of the two kinds of electrical charges
as either positive () or negative (). It was not until the late 1890s that ex-
perimental evidence gave convincing support to any model for "electric
charge." Franklin thought of the electric fluid as consisting of tiny parti-
cles, and that is the present view, too. Consequently, the word "charge" is
10.2 ELECTRIC CHARGES AND ELECTRIC FORCES
463

often used in the plural. For example, we usually say "electric charges trans-
fer from one body to another."
What is amazing in electricity, and indeed in other parts of physics, is
that so few concepts are needed to deal with so many different observa-
tions. For example, a third or fourth kind of charge is not needed in addi-
tion to positive and negative. Even the behavior of an uncharged body can
be understood in terms of  and  charges. Any piece of matter large
enough to be visible can be considered to contain a large amount of elec-
tric charge, both positive and negative. If the positive charge is equal to the
negative charge, the piece of matter will appear to have zero charge, no
charge at all. The effects of the positive and negative charges simply can-
cel each other when they are added together or are acting together. (This
is one advantage of calling the two kinds of charge positive and negative
rather than, say, x and y.) The electric charge on an object usually means
a slight excess (or net) of either positive or negative charge that happens to
be on that object.
The Electric Force Law
What is the "law of force" between electric charges? In other words, how
does the force depend on the amount of charge and on the distance between
the charged objects?
464
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
FIGURE 10.3
Benjamin Franklin
(1706-1790), American statesman,
inventor, scientist, and writer, was
greatly interested in the phenome-
non of electricity. His famous kite
experiment and invention of the
lightning rod gained him wide
recognition. Franklin is shown here
observing the behavior of a bell
whose clapper is connected to a
lightning rod. 

The first evidence of the nature of such a force
law was obtained in an indirect way. About 1775,
Benjamin Franklin noted that a small cork hanging
near an electrically charged metal can was strongly
attracted to the can. But when he lowered the cork
by a thread into the can, he found that no force was
experienced by the cork no matter what its position
inside the can. Franklin did not understand why the
walls of the can did not attract the cork when it was
inside but did when it was outside. He asked his
friend Joseph Priestley to repeat the experiment.
Priestley verified Franklin's results and went on
to reach a brilliant conclusion from them. He re-
membered from Newton's Principia that gravita-
tional forces behave in a similar way. Inside a hol-
low planet, the net gravitational force on an object
(the sum of all the forces exerted by all parts of the
planet) would be exactly zero. This result also fol-
lows mathematically from the law that the gravitational force between any
two individual pieces of matter is inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them
F 
.
Priestley therefore proposed that forces exerted by charges vary inversely
as the square of the distance, just as do forces exerted by massive bodies.
The force exerted between bodies owing to the fact that they are charged
is called "electric" force, just as the force between uncharged bodies is called
"gravitational" force. (Remember that all forces are known by their me-
chanical effects, by the push or acceleration they cause on material objects.)
Priestly had based his proposal on reasoning by analogy, that is, reason-
ing from a parallel, well-demonstrated case. Such reasoning alone could
not prove that electrical forces are inversely proportional to the square of
1
R2
10.2 ELECTRIC CHARGES AND ELECTRIC FORCES
465
Fgrav
R
F  1
R2
Fgrav
FIGURE 10.4
Two bodies under mutual gravitation.
Joseph Priestley (1773-1804), a
Unitarian minister and physical
scientist, was persecuted in 
England for his radical political
ideas. One of his books was
burned, and a mob looted his
house because of his sympathy
with the French Revolution. He
moved to America, the home of
Benjamin Franklin, who had
stimulated Priestley's interest in
science. Primarily known for his
identification of oxygen as a sep-
arate element that is involved in
combustion and respiration, he
also experimented with electric-
ity. In addition, Priestley can
claim to be the developer of car-
bonated drinks (soda-pop).

the distance between charges. But it strongly encouraged other physicists
to test Priestley's hypothesis by experiment.
The French physicist Charles Coulomb provided direct experimental ev-
idence for the inverse-square law for electric charges suggested by Priest-
ley. Coulomb used a torsion balance which he had invented (see Figure 10.5).
A horizontal, balanced insulating rod is suspended by a thin silver wire.
The wire twists when a force is exerted on the end of the rod, and the twist-
ing effect can be used as a measure of the force.
Coulomb attached a charged body, a, to one end of the rod and placed an-
other charged body, b, near it. The electrical force Fel exerted on a by b caused
the wire to twist. By measuring the twisting effect for different separations
between the centers of spheres a and b, Coulomb found that the force be-
tween spheres varied in proportion to 1/R2, just as Priestley had deduced
Fel 
,
where R represents the distance between the centers of the two charges.
The electric force of repulsion for like charges, or attraction for unlike charges,
varies inversely as the square of the distance between charges.
1
R2
466
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
FIGURE 10.5
Coulomb's torsion
balance. 

Coulomb also demonstrated how the magnitude of the electric force de-
pends on the magnitudes of the charges. There was not yet any accepted
method for measuring quantitatively the amount of charge on an object.
(In fact, nothing said so far would suggest how to measure the magnitude
of the charge on a body.) Yet Coulomb used a clever technique based on
symmetry to compare the effects of different amounts of charge. He first
showed that if a charged metal sphere touches an uncharged sphere of the
same size, the second sphere becomes charged also. You might say that, at
the moment of contact between the objects, some of the charge from the
first "flows" or is "conducted" to the second. Moreover, after contact has
been made, the two spheres are found to share the original charge equally.
(This is demonstrated by the observable fact that they exert equal forces
on some third charged body.) Using this principle, Coulomb started with
a given amount of charge on one sphere. He then shared this charge by
contact among several other identical but uncharged spheres. Thus, he
could produce charges of one-half, one-quarter, one-eighth, etc., of the
10.2 ELECTRIC CHARGES AND ELECTRIC FORCES
467
FIGURE 10.6
Charles Augustin
Coulomb (1738-1806) was born
into a family of high social posi-
tion and grew up in an age of po-
litical unrest. He studied science
and mathematics and began his ca-
reer as a military engineer. While
studying machines, Coulomb in-
vented his torsion balance, with
which he carried out intensive 
investigations on the mechanical
forces caused by electrical charges.
These investigations were analo-
gous to Cavendish's work on grav-
itation. 

original amount. In this way, Coulomb varied the charges on the two orig-
inal test spheres independently and then measured the change in force be-
tween them using his torsion balance.
Coulomb found that, for example, when the charges on the two spheres
are both reduced by one-half, the force between the spheres is reduced to
one-quarter of its previous value. In general, he found that the magnitude
of the electric force is proportional to the product of the charges. The sym-
bols qa and qb can be used for the net charge on bodies a and b. The mag-
nitude Fel of the electric force that each charge exerts on the other is pro-
portional to qa  qb. This may be written in symbols as
Fel  qaqb.
Coulomb summarized his two results in a single equation that describes the
electric forces two small charged spheres A and B exert on each other
Fel  k
.
In this equation, R represents the distance between the centers of the two
charged spheres, and k is a constant whose value depends on the units of
charge and of length that are used. This form of the electric force law be-
tween two electric charges is now called Coulomb's law. Note one striking
fact about Coulomb's law: It has exactly the same form as Newton's law of
universal gravitation
Fgrav  G
!
m1m2

R2
qaqb

R2
468
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
FIGURE 10.7
The equal sharing of charge between a charged
and an uncharged sphere.

Here m1 and m2 are two masses separated by the distance R between their
centers. Yet these two great laws arise from completely different sets of ob-
servations and apply to completely different kinds of phenomena. Why they
should match so exactly is, to this day, a fascinating puzzle.
The Unit of Charge
Coulomb's law can be used to define a unit of charge, as long as we have
defined the units of the other quantities in the equation. For example, we
can assign k a value of exactly 1 and then define a unit charge so that two
unit charges separated by a unit distance exert a unit force on each other.
There actually is a set of units based on this choice. However, another sys-
tem of electrical units, the "mksa" system, is more convenient to use. In
this system, the unit of charge is derived not from electrostatics, but from
the unit of current—the ampere (A). (See Section 10.5.) The resulting unit
of charge is called (appropriately) the coulomb (C). It is defined as the amount
of charge that flows past a point in a wire in 1 s when the current is equal
to 1 A.
The ampere (A), or "amp," is a familiar unit frequently used to describe
the current in electrical appliances. The effective amount of current in a
common 100-W light bulb in the United States is approximately 1 A.
Therefore, the amount of charge that goes through the bulb in 1 s is about
1 C. It might seem that a coulomb is a fairly small amount of charge. How-
ever, 1 C of net charge collected in one place is unmanageably large! In the
light bulb, 1 C of negative charge moves through the filament each sec-
ond. However, these negative charges are passing through a (more or less)
stationary arrangement of positive charges in the filament. Thus, the net
charge on the filament is zero.
Taking the coulomb (1 C) as the unit of charge, you can find the con-
stant k in Coulomb's law experimentally. Simply measure the force between
10.2 ELECTRIC CHARGES AND ELECTRIC FORCES
469
R
Fel = k qa qb
qb
qa
R2
R
Fgrav = G M1 M2
M2
M1
R2
FIGURE 10.8
Magnitudes of electrical and gravitational
forces between two spheres.

known charges separated by a known distance. The value of k turns out to
equal about nine billion newton-meters squared per coulomb squared, or
in symbols
k  9  109 N m2/C2.
In view of this value of k, two objects, each with a net charge of 1 C,
separated by a distance of 1 m, would exert forces on each other of nine
billion N. (See if you can verify this from Coulomb's law.) This electric
force is roughly as large as the gravitational force of one million tons! We
can never directly observe such large electric forces in the laboratory be-
470
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
FIGURE 10.9
A typical bolt of lightning represents about 40,000 amperes
(on average) and transfers about 50 coulombs of charge between the cloud
and the ground. 

cause we cannot actually collect so much net charge (just 1 C) in one place.
Nor can we exert enough force to bring two such charges so close together.
The mutual repulsion of like charges is so strong that it is difficult to keep
a charge of more than one-thousandth of a coulomb on an object of ordi-
nary size. If you rub a pocket comb on your sleeve enough to produce a
spark when the comb is brought near a conductor (such as a sink faucet),
the net charge on the comb will be far less than one-millionth of a coulomb.
Lightning discharges usually take place when a cloud has accumulated 
a net charge of a few hundred coulombs distributed over its very large 
volume.
Electrostatic Induction
As noted, and as you have probably observed, an electrically charged ob-
ject can often attract small pieces of paper. But the paper itself has no net
charge; it exerts no force on other pieces of paper. At first sight then, its
attraction to the charged object might seem to contradict Coulomb's law.
After all, the force ought to be zero if either qa or qb is zero.
To explain the observed attraction, recall that uncharged objects contain
equal amounts of positive and negative electric charges. When a charged
body is brought near a neutral object, it may rearrange the positions of
some of the charges in the neutral object. The negatively charged comb
does this when held near a piece of paper. Some of the negative charges in
the paper shift away from the comb, leaving a corresponding amount of
positive charge near the comb. The paper still has no net electric charge.
But some of the positive charges are slightly closer to the comb than the
corresponding negative charges are. So the attraction to the comb is greater
than the repulsion. (Remember that the force gets weaker with the square
of the distance, according to Coulomb's law. The force would be only one-
fourth as large if the distance were twice as large.) In short, there is a net
10.2 ELECTRIC CHARGES AND ELECTRIC FORCES
471
+
++
−−−−−
+
+
+
FIGURE 10.10
Electrostatic in-
duction in neutral paper near a
charged comb.

attraction of the charged body for the neutral object. This explains the old
observation of the effect rubbed amber had on bits of grain and the like.
To put the observation another way: A charged body induces a shift of
charge in or on the nearby neutral body. Thus, the rearrangement of elec-
tric charges inside or on the surface of a neutral body caused by the influ-
ence of a nearby charged object is called electrostatic induction. In Chapter
12, you will see how the theory of electrostatic induction played an im-
portant role in the development of the theory of light as an electromag-
netic wave.
10.3 FORCES AND FIELDS
Gilbert described the action of the lodestone by saying it had a "sphere of
influence" surrounding it. By this he meant that any other magnetic body
coming inside this "sphere" would be attracted. In addition, the strength
of the attractive force would be greater at places closer to the lodestone.
In modern language, we should say that the lodestone is surrounded by a
magnetic field. We can trace the magnetic field, for instance, of a bar mag-
net, by placing many small bits of iron fillings in the vicinity of a bar 
magnet that is on a table or other surface.
The world "field" is used in many different ways. Here, some familiar
kinds of fields will be discussed, and then the idea of physical fields as used
in science will be gradually developed. This exercise should remind you
that most terms in physics are really adaptations of commonly used words,
but with important changes. Velocity, acceleration, force, energy, and work
are such examples, too.
One ordinary use of the concept of a field is illustrated by the "playing
field" in various sports. The football field, for example, is a place where
teams compete according to rules that confine the important action to the
area of the field. "Field" in this case means a region of interaction.
In international politics, people speak of "spheres" or "fields" of influ-
ence. A field of political influence is also a region of interaction. But un-
like a playing field, it has no sharp boundary line. A country usually has
greater influence on some countries and less influence on others. So in the
political sense, "field" refers also to an amount of influence, more in some
places and less in others. Moreover, the field has a source, that is, the coun-
try that exerts the influence.
There are similarities here to the concept of field as used in physics. But
there is also an important difference. To define a field in physics, it must
472
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM

be possible to assign a numerical value of field strength to every point in
the field. This part of the field idea will become clearer if you consider
some situations that are more directly related to the study of physics. First
think about these situations in everyday language, then in terms of physics:
(a)
You are walking along the sidewalk toward a street lamp; you observe
that the brightness of the light is increasing.
(b)
You are standing on the sidewalk as an automobile passes by with its
horn blaring; you observe that the sound gets louder and then softer.
You can also describe these experiences in terms of fields:
(a)
The street lamp is surrounded by a field of illumination. The closer
you move to the lamp, the stronger is the field of illumination as reg-
istered on your eye or on a light meter (photometer) you might be
carrying. For every point in the space around the street lamp, you can
assign a number that represents the strength of the field of illumina-
tion at that place.
(b)
The automobile horn is surrounded by a sound field. You are stand-
ing still in your frame of reference (the sidewalk). A pattern of field
10.3 FORCES AND FIELDS
473
FIGURE 10.11
Iron fillings on a surface above a bar magnet align to show magnetic field
lines. 

values goes past you with the same speed as the car. You can think of
the sound field as steady but moving with the horn. At any instance,
you could assign a number to each point in the field to represent the
intensity of sound. At first the sound is faintly heard as the weakest
part of the field reaches you. Then the more intense parts of the field
go by, and the sound seems louder. Finally, the loudness diminishes
as the sound field and its source (the horn) move away.
Notice that each of the above fields is produced by a single course. In
(a) the source is a stationary street lamp; in (b) it is a moving horn. In both
cases the field strength gradually increases as your distance from the source
decreases. One numerical value is associated with each point in the field.
So far, our examples have been simple scalar fields. No direction has been
involved in the value of the field at each point. Figure 10.12 shows maps 
of two fields for the layer of air over North America on two consecutive
days. There is a very important difference between the field mapped on the
left and that mapped on the right. The air pressure
field (on the left) is a scalar field; the wind velocity field
(on the right) is a vector field. For each point in the
pressure field, a single number (a scalar quantity)
gives the value of the field at that point. But for each
point in the wind velocity field, the value of the field
is given by both a numerical value (magnitude) and
a direction, that is, by a vector.
These field maps can help in more or less accurately predicting what
conditions might prevail in the field on the next day. Also, by superimpos-
ing the maps for pressure and wind velocity, you can discover how these
two kinds of fields are related to each other.
Physicists actually use the term "field" in three different senses:
1.
the value of the field at a point in space;
2.
the set or collection of all values everywhere in the space where that
field exists;
3.
the region of space in which the field has values other than zero.
In reading the rest of this chapter, you will not find it difficult to decide
which meaning applies each time the term is used.
The Gravitational Force Field
Before returning to electricity and magnetism, let us illustrate a bit further
the idea of a field. A good example is the gravitational force field of the
Earth. The force exerted by the Earth on any object above its surface acts
474
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Note that meteorologists have 
a convention for representing
vectors different from the one
we have been using. What are
the advantages and disadvantages
of each?

10.3 FORCES AND FIELDS
475
PRESSURE AND VELOCITY FIELDS
These maps, adapted from those of the
U.S. Weather Bureau, depict two fields,
air pressure at the Earth's surface and
high-altitude wind velocity, for two suc-
cessive days. Locations at which the pres-
sure is the same are connected by lines.
The set of such pressure "contours" rep-
resents the overall field pattern. The wind
velocity at a location is indicated by a line
(showing direction) and (not visible here)
feather lines—one for every 10 mi/hr.
(The wind velocity over the tip of Florida,
for example, is a little to the east of due
north and is approximately 30 mi/hr.)
m
(b)
(a)
(d)
(c)
Air pressure at the earth's surface
High-altitude wind velocity
Jan. 10
Jan. 11
LOW
HIGH
HIGH
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
FIGURE 10.12
Weather Bureau maps of air pressure fields and wind velocity fields on two con-
secutive days.

in a direction toward the center of the Earth. So the field of force of grav-
itational attraction is a vector field, which can be represented by arrows
pointing toward the center of the Earth. In Figure 10.13 a few such ar-
rows are shown, some near, some far from the Earth. The strength, or nu-
merical magnitude, of the Earth's gravitational force field at any chosen
point depends on the distance of the point from the center of the Earth.
This follows from Newton's theory, which states that the magnitude of 
the gravitational attraction is inversely proportional to the square of the
distance R:
Fgrav  G
,
where M is the mass of the Earth, m is the mass of the test body, R is the
distance between the centers of Earth and the test body, and G is the uni-
versal gravitational constant.
In this equation, Fgrav also depends on the mass of the test body. It would
be more convenient to define a field that depends only on the properties
Mm

R2
476
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
M
m
Fgrav
g
M
(c)
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 10.13
Gravitational force field.

of the source, whatever the mass of the test body. Then you could think of
that field as existing in space and having a definite magnitude and direc-
tion at every point. The mass of the test body would not matter. In fact, it
would not matter whether there were any test body present at all. As it
happens, such a field is easy to define. By slightly rearranging the equation
for Newton's law of gravitation, you can write
Fgrav  m
.
Then define the gravitational field strength g around a spherical body
of mass M as having a magnitude GM/R2 and a direction the same as the
direction of Fgrav, so that
Fgrav  mg,
where the magnitude of g is GM/R2. Thus, note that the magnitude of g
at a point in space is determined by the source mass M and the distance 
R from the source, and does not depend on the mass of any test object.
The total or net gravitational force at a point in space is usually deter-
mined by more than one source. For example, the Moon is acted on by 
the Sun as well as by the Earth and to a smaller extent by the other plan-
ets. In order to define the field resulting from any configuration of mas-
sive bodies, take Fgrav to be the net gravitational force due to all sources.
Then define g in such a way that you can still write the simple relationship
Fgrav  mg; that is, define g by the equation
g 
.
Thus, the gravitational field strength at any point is the ratio of the net
gravitational force Fgrav acting on a test body at that point to the mass m
of the test body. The direction of the vector g is the same as that of Fgrav.
Electric Fields
The strength of any force field can be defined in a similar way. According
to Coulomb's law, the electric force exerted by one relatively small charged
body on another depends on the product of the charges of the two bodies.
Consider a charge q placed at any point in the electric field set up by an-
Fgrav

m
GM

R2
10.3 FORCES AND FIELDS
477

other charge Q. Coulomb's law, describing the force Fel experienced by q,
can be written as
Fel  K
,
or
Fel  q
 .
As in the discussion of the gravitational field, the expression for force here
is divided into two parts. One part, kQ/R2, depends only on the charge Q of
the source and distance R from it. This part can be called "the electric field
strength owing to Q." The second part, q, is a property of the body being
acted on. Thus, the vector electric field strength E owing to charge Q is 
defined as having magnitude kQ/R2 and the same direction as Fel. The elec-
tric force is then the product of the test charge and the electric field strength
F  qE
and
E 
.
The last equation defines E for an electric force
field. Thus, the electric field strength E at a point
in space is the ratio of the net electric force Fel act-
ing on a test charge at that point to the magnitude
q of the test charge. (Note that E is quite analogous
to g defined earlier, but for a different field.) This
F
q
kQ

R2
Qq

R2
478
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Q
q
Fel
Q
E
FIGURE 10.14
Electric force of charge Q on charge q (a), and
the corresponding field (b).
(a)
(b)
Recall that Fel is called an "elec-
tric" force because it is caused
by the presence of charges. But,
as with all forces, we know it ex-
ists and can measure it only by
its mechanical effects on bodies.

definition applies whether the electric field results from a single point
charge or from a complicated distribution of charges. This, true for all fields
we shall encounter, is a "superposition principle." Fields set up by many
sources of the same sort superpose, forming a single net field. The vector
specifying the magnitude of the net field at any point is simply the vector
sum of the values of the fields due to each individual source. (Once more,
one marvels at the simplicity of nature and the frugality of concepts needed
to describe it.)
So far, we have passed over a complication not encountered in dealing
with gravitation. There are two kinds of electric charge, positive () and
negative (). The forces they experience when placed in the same electric
field are opposite in direction. By agreement, scientists define the direc-
tion of the vector E as the direction of the force exerted by the field on a
positive test charge. Given the direction and magnitude of the field vector
at a point, then by definition the force vector Fel acting on a charge q is
Fel  qE. A positive charge, say 0.00001 C, placed at this point will ex-
perience a force Fel in the same direction as E at that point. A negative
charge, say 0.00001 C, will experience a force of the same magnitude,
but in the opposite direction. Changing the sign of q from  to  auto-
matically changes the direction of Fel to the opposite direction.
10.4 ELECTRIC CURRENTS
Touching a charged object to one end of a metal chain will cause the en-
tire chain to become charged. The obvious explanation is that the charges
move through and spread over it. Electric charges move easily through
some materials, called conductors. Metal conductors were most commonly
used by the early experimenters, but salt solutions and very hot gases also
conduct charge easily. Other materials, such as glass and dry fibers, con-
duct charge hardly at all. Such materials are called nonconductors or insu-
lators. Dry air is a fairly good insulator. (Damp air is not; you may have dif-
ficulty keeping charges on objects in electrostatic experiments on a humid
day.) If the charge is great enough, however, even dry air will suddenly be-
come a conductor, allowing a large amount of charge to shift through it.
The heat and light caused by the sudden rush of charge produces a "spark."
Sparks were the first obvious evidence of moving charges. Until late in the
eighteenth century, a significant flow of charge, that is, an electric current,
could be produced only by discharging a highly charged object. In study-
ing electric currents, Benjamin Franklin believed the moving charges to be
positive. Because of this, he defined the direction of flow of an electric cur-
10.4 ELECTRIC CURRENTS
479

rent to be the direction of flow of positive charges. Today, we know that
the moving charges in a current can be positive or negative or both. In
most wires, the flowing charges are negative electrons. However, ever since
Franklin's early work, the direction of flow of an electric current is defined as the
direction of flow of positive charges, regardless of the actual sign of the moving
charges. This is acceptable because the flow of negative charges in one di-
rection is electrically equivalent to the flow of positive charges in the other
direction.
In 1800, Alessandro Volta discovered a much better way of producing
electric currents than using short-lived discharge devices. Volta's method
involved two different metals, each held with an insulating handle. When
put into contact and then separated, one metal took on a positive charge
and the other a negative charge. Volta reasoned that a much larger charge
could be produced by stacking up several pieces of metal in alternate lay-
ers. This idea led him to undertake a series of experiments that produced
an amazing result, as reported in a letter to the Royal Society in England
in March of 1800:
Yes! the apparatus of which I speak, and which will doubtless 
astonish you, is only an assemblage of a number of good conduc-
tors of different sorts arranged in a certain way. 30, 40, 60 pieces
or more of copper, or better of silver, each in contact with a piece
480
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
FIGURE 10.15
Alessandro Volta
(1745-1827) was given his title of
Baron by Napoleon in honor of his
electrical experiments. He was
Professor of Physics at the Uni-
versity of Pavia, Italy. Volta
showed that the electric effects
previously observed by Luigi Gal-
vani, in experiments with frog
legs, were due to the metals and
not to any special kind of "animal
electricity." 

of tin, or what is much better, of zinc, and an equal number of lay-
ers of water or some other liquid which is a better conductor than
pure water, such as salt water or lye and so forth, or pieces of card-
board or of leather, etc., well soaked with these liquids.
Volta piled these metals in pairs, called "cells," in a vertical arrangement
known as a "pile." Volta showed that one end, or "terminal," of the pile
was charged positive, and the other charged negative. He then attached
wires to the first and last disks of his apparatus, which he called a "battery."
Through these wires, he obtained electricity with exactly the same effects
as the electricity produced by rubbing amber, or by friction in electrostatic
machines.
Most important of all, if the ends of the wires from Volta's battery were
connected together, or attached to a conducting object, the battery pro-
duced a more or less steady electric current through the wires for a long
period of time. This arrangement is known today as a circuit. The current,
which flows through the wires of the circuit from the positive side of the
battery to the negative side (by the earlier definition) is known as a direct
current, or DC current. (A current that alternates in direction is known as
an alternating current, or AC current. Most household circuits around the
world provide AC current.) In addition, unlike the older charge devices,
Volta's battery did not have to be charged from the outside after each use.
Now the properties of electric currents as well as of static electric charges
could be studied in a controlled manner. (Far better batteries have been
produced as well. But one may say that Volta's invention started the series
of inventions of electrical devices that have so greatly changed civilization.)
10.4 ELECTRIC CURRENTS
481
Silver
Zinc
−
−
+
+
Voltaic "cell"
Voltaic "pile"
or battery
FIGURE 10.16
Voltaic cell and battery.

10.5 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE
Sparks and heat are produced when the terminals of an electric battery are
connected. These phenomena show that energy from the battery is being
transformed into light, sound, and heat energy. The battery itself converts
chemical energy to electrical energy. This, in turn, is changed into other
forms of energy (such as heat) in the conducting path between the terminals.
In order to understand electric currents and how they can be used to trans-
port energy, a new concept, which has the common name voltage, is needed.
In Chapter 5 we defined a change in potential energy as equal to the work
required to move an object without friction from one position to another.
For example, a book's gravitational potential energy is greater when the
book is on a shelf than when it is on the floor. The increase in potential
energy is equal to the work done in raising the book from floor to shelf.
This difference in potential energy depends on three factors: the mass m
of the book, the magnitude of the gravitational field strength g, and the
difference in height d between the floor and the shelf.
Similarly, the electrical potential energy changes when work is done in
moving an electric charge from one point to another in an electric field.
Again, this change of potential energy (PE) can be directly measured by
the work that is done. The magnitude of this change in potential energy,
of course, depends on the magnitude of the test charge q. Dividing (PE)
by q gives a quantity that does not depend on how large q is. Rather, it de-
pends only on the intensity of the electric field and on the location of the
beginning and end points. The new quantity is called electric potential dif-
ference. Electric potential difference is defined as the ratio of the change in
electrical potential energy (PE) of a charge q to the magnitude of the charge. In
symbols
V 
.
(PE)

q
482
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
d
m
(a)
d
q
(c)
Fgrav
d
q
(b)
Fel
Fel
FIGURE 10.17
Gravitational and electrical potentials. The electric potential difference is
the same between two points, regardless of the path.

The units of electric potential difference are those
of energy divided by charge, or joules per coulomb.
The term used as the abbreviation for joules per
coulomb is volt (V). The electrical potential differ-
ence (or voltage) between two points is 1 V if 1 J of
work is done in moving 1 C of charge from one point
to the other
1 volt  1 joule/coulomb  1 J/C.
The potential difference between two points in a
steady electric field depends on the location of the
points. It does not depend on the path followed by the test charge. Whether
the path is short or long, direct or roundabout, the same work is done per
unit charge. Similarly, a hiker does the same work against the gravitational
field per kilogram of mass in the pack he or she is carrying, whether climb-
ing straight up or spiraling up along the slopes. Thus, the electrical po-
tential difference between two points in a field is similar to the difference
in gravitational potential energy between two points.
A simple case will help you to see the great importance of this defini-
tion of potential difference. Calculate the potential difference between two
points in a uniform electric field of magnitude E produced by oppositely
charged parallel plates. Work must be done in moving a positive charge q
from one point to the other directly against the direction of the electric
force. The amount of work required is the product of the force Fel exerted
on the charge (where Fel  qE), and the distance d through which the charge
is moved in the same direction. Thus,
(PE)  qEd.
Substituting this expression for (PE) in the definition of electric poten-
tial difference gives, for the simple case of a uniform field,
V 

 Ed.
In practice it is easier to measure electric potential difference V (with a
voltmeter) than to measure electric field strength E. The relationship just
qEd

q
(PE)

q
10.5 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE
483
As is true for gravitational po-
tential energy, there is no ab-
solute zero level of electric po-
tential energy. The difference in
potential energy is the signifi-
cant quantity. The symbol v is
used both for "potential differ-
ence" as in the equation above,
and as an abbreviation for volt,
the unit of potential difference
(as in 1 V  1 J/C).

given is often useful in the form E  V/d, which can be used to find the
intensity of a uniform electric field.
Electric potential energy, like gravitational potential energy, can be con-
verted into kinetic energy. A charged particle placed in an electric field, but
free of other forces, will accelerate. In doing so, it will increase its kinetic
energy at the expense of electric potential energy. (In other words, the elec-
tric force on the charge acts in such a way as to push it toward a region of
lower potential energy.) A charge q "falling" through a potential difference
V increases its kinetic energy by qV if nothing is lost by friction.
(KE)  qV.
The amount of increase in kinetic energy is equal to the decrease in poten-
tial energy. So the sum of the two at any moment remains constant. This
is just one particular case of the general principle of energy conservation,
even though only electric forces are acting.
The conversion of electric potential energy to kinetic energy is used in
electron accelerators (a common example is a television picture tube or some
computer monitors). An electron accelerator usually begins with an elec-
tron "gun." The "gun" has two basic parts: a wire and a metal can in an
evacuated glass tube. The wire is heated red-hot, causing electrons to es-
cape from its surface. The nearby can is charged positively, producing an
electric field between the hot wire and the can. The electric field acceler-
ates the electrons through the vacuum toward the can. Many electrons stick
to the can, but some go shooting through a hole in one end of it. The
stream of electrons emerging from the hole can be further accelerated or
focused by additional charged cans.
484
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
hot wire
positively
charged can
electron
beam
FIGURE 10.18
Electrically charged particles (electrons) are
accelerated in an "electron gun" as they cross the potential
difference between a hot wire (filament) and a "can" in an
evacuated glass tube.

Such a beam of charged particles has a wide range of uses both in tech-
nology and in research. For example, a beam of electrons can make a flu-
orescent screen glow, as in a television picture tube or an electron micro-
scope, or they can produce X rays for medical purposes or research. If a
beam of heavier charged particles is used, they can break atoms apart for
the study of their composition. When moving through a potential differ-
ence of 1 V, an electron with a charge of 1.6  1019 C increases its kinetic
energy by 1.6  1019 J, in accord with the equation
(KE)  qV.
This amount of energy is called an electron volt, which is abbreviated 
eV. Multiples are 1 keV ( 1000 eV), 1 MeV ( 106 eV), and 1 GeV 
( 109 eV). Energies of particles in accelerators are commonly expressed
in such multiples. In a television tube, the electrons in the beam are ac-
celerated across an electric potential difference of about 25,000 V. Thus,
10.5 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE
485
FIGURE 10.19
Stanford Linear Accelerator, with underground features highlighted.

each electron has an energy of about 25 keV. Large accelerators now 
operating can accelerate charged particles to kinetic energies of about 
800 GeV.
10.6 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL 
DIFFERENCE AND CURRENT
The acceleration of an electron by an electric field in a vacuum is the sim-
plest example of a potential difference affecting a charged particle. A more
familiar example is electric current in a metal wire. In this arrangement,
the two ends of the wire are attached to the two terminals of a battery.
Chemical changes inside a battery produce an electric field that continu-
ally drives charges to the terminals, making one charged negatively, leav-
ing the other charged positively. The "voltage" of the battery tells how
much energy per unit charge is available when the charges move in any ex-
ternal path from one terminal to the other, for example, along a wire.
Electrons in a metal do not move freely as they
do in an evacuated tube, but continually interact with
the metal atoms. If the electrons were really com-
pletely free to move, a constant voltage would make
them accelerate so that the current would increase
with time. This does not happen. A simple relation
between current and voltage, first found by Georg
Simon Ohm, is at least approximately valid for most
metallic conductors: The total current I in a conductor
is proportional to the potential difference V applied be-
tween the two ends of the conductor. Using the symbol I for the current, V for
the potential difference, and  for proportionality, we may write
V  I
or
V  constant  I.
This simple relation is called Ohm's law. It is usually written in the form
V  IR,
where R is a constant called the resistance of the conducting path. It is mea-
sured in units of ohm, symbol  (Greek letter omega). Ohm's law may be
stated a different way: The resistance R is constant for different values of volt-
age and current.
486
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
In metallic conductors, the mov-
ing charge is the negative elec-
tron, with the positive atom
fixed. But all effects are the same
as if positive charge were mov-
ing in the opposite direction. By
an old convention, the latter is
the direction usually chosen to
describe the direction of current.

Resistance depends on the material and dimensions of the path, such as
the length and diameter of a wire. For example, a thin tungsten wire has a
much larger resistance than the same length of a fat copper wire. But Ohm's
law assumes that the resistance R of a given conducting path does not de-
pend on the current or the voltage. In fact, resistance is not strictly con-
stant for any conducting path; it varies with changes in temperature, for
example. But Ohm's law applies closely enough for practical technical work,
though it does not have the general validity of the law of universal gravi-
tation or Coulomb's law.
10.7 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL 
DIFFERENCE AND POWER
Suppose a charge could move freely from one terminal to the other in an
evacuated tube. The work done on the charge would then simply increase
the kinetic energy of the charge. However, a charge moving through some
material such as a wire transfers energy to the material by colliding with
atoms. Thus, at least some of the work goes into heat energy owing to the
increased vibration of the atoms. A good example of this process is a flash-
10.7 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE AND CURRENT
487
FIGURE 10.20 Georg Simon Ohm
(1789-1854). 

light bulb. A battery forces charges through the filament wire in the bulb.
The electric energy carried by the charges is converted to heat energy in the
filament. The hot filament in turn radiates energy, a small fraction of which
is in the form of visible light. Recall now that "voltage" (electric potential
difference) is the amount of work done per unit of charge transferred. So the
product of voltage and current gives the amount of work done per unit time:
V (joules/coulomb)  I (coulombs/second)  VI (joules/second).
Work done per unit time is called power, symbol P. The unit of electrical
power, equal to 1 J/s, is called a watt (W). Using the definition of ampere
(1 C/s) and volt (1 J/C), the equation for power P provided to an electri-
cal circuit is
P (watts)  V (volts)  I (amperes).
Thus, a 60-W bulb, connected to a 110-V circuit, carries 0.5 A of current.
What energy transformation does this equation imply? During their mo-
tion, the charges do work against material by colliding with atoms in the
conductor. Thus the electric energy of the charges is converted into heat
energy. Using the relation P  VI and substituting IR for V, we obtain the
important equation
P  IR  I,
P  I2R.
Thus, the heat produced each second (given by P, the energy available per second)
by a current is proportional to the square of the current. Joule was the first to
find this relationship experimentally. The discovery was part of his series
of researches on conversion of different forms of energy (Chapter 6). The
fact that heat production is proportional to the square of the current is very
important in making practical use of electric energy. You will learn more
about this in Chapter 11.
10.8
CURRENTS ACT ON MAGNETS
Early in the eighteenth century, reports began to appear that lightning
changed the magnetization of compass needles and made magnets of knives
and spoons. Some researchers believed that they had magnetized steel nee-
dles by discharging a charged object through them. These reports suggested
488
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM

that electricity and magnetism were closely related in some way. But the
casual observations were not followed up with deliberate, planned experi-
ments that might have led to useful concepts and theories.
None of these early reports surprised the nineteenth-century Nature
Philosophers in Europe. They were convinced that all phenomena observed
in nature were only different effects of a single "force." Their belief in the
unity of physical forces naturally led them to expect that electrical and mag-
netic forces were associated or related in some way.
The first concrete evidence of a connection between electricity and mag-
netism came in 1820, when the scientist Hans Christian Oersted of Copen-
hagen, Denmark performed an extremely important series of experiments.
Oersted placed a long horizontal wire directly beneath a magnetic compass
needle. The wire thus lay along the Earth's magnetic north-south line, with
the magnetic needle naturally lined up parallel to the wire. When Oersted
connected the wire to the terminals of a battery, the compass needle swung
toward an east-west orientation, nearly perpendicular to the wire! Charge
at rest does not affect a magnet. But here was evidence that charge in mo-
tion (a current) does exert an odd kind of force on a magnet.
Oersted's results were the first ever found in which a force did not act
along a line connecting the sources of the force. (Forces between planets,
between electric charges, or between magnetic poles all act along such a
line.) The force exerted between the current-carrying wire and each mag-
netic pole of the compass needle is not along the line from the wire to the
pole. In fact, for the needle to twist as it does, the force must be acting per-
pendicular to such a line. The magnetic needle is not attracted or repelled
by the wire, but is twisted sideways by forces on its poles.
This was a totally new kind of effect. No wonder it had taken so long
before anyone found the connection between electricity and magnetism.
Closer examination revealed more clearly what was happening in this ex-
periment. The long, straight, current-carrying wire sets up a magnetic field
around it, given the symbol B. This field turns a small magnet so that the
north-south line on the magnet is tangent to a circle whose center is at the
wire and whose plane lies perpendicular to the wire. Thus, the current pro-
duces a circular magnetic field, not a centrally directed magnetic field as
had been expected.
The direction of the magnetic field vector at each point is defined as the
direction of the force on the north-seeking pole of a compass needle placed at that
10.8 CURRENTS ACT ON MAGNETS
489
FIGURE 10.21
Needle-like iron oxide crystals in
the magnetic field of a bar magnet. The bar mag-
net is under a paper on which the iron oxide crys-
tals have been spread.

490
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
HANS CHRISTIAN OERSTED
Hans Christian Oersted (1777-1851), a
Danish physicist, studied the writings of
the Nature Philosopher Schelling and
wrote extensively on philosophical sub-
jects himself. In an essay published in
1813, Oersted predicted that a connection
between electricity and magnetism would
be found. In 1820, he discovered that a
magnetic field surrounds an electric cur-
rent when he placed a compass over a 
current-carrying wire. In later years he
vigorously denied the suggestion of other
scientists that his discovery of electro-
magnetism had been accidental.
FIGURE 10.23
−
+
−
+
FIGURE 10.22
Oersted's experiment. (a) No current. Compass needle put across a wire points
N-S. (b) Current flows. Compass needle is twisted to E-W position by magnetic force produced
by current in top part of wire.
(b)
(a)

point. Conversely, the force on the south-seeking pole will be in a direction
exactly opposite to the field direction. A compass needle will respond to
these forces on each end by turning until it points as closely as possible in
the direction of the field. We noted earlier that with a bar magnet you can
obtain the "shape" of the magnetic field by sprinkling tiny slivers of iron
on a sheet placed over the magnet. In the same way, the magnetic field
around a current-carrying wire can be visualized (see Figure 10.26). The
10.8 CURRENTS ACT ON MAGNETS
491
FIGURE 10.24
Representation of an array of tiny compasses on a sheet of cardboard placed per-
pendicular to a brass rod. When there is a strong current in the rod as in (b), the compass nee-
dles are deflected from their normal north-south line by the magnetic field set up by the current.
This experiment, too, indicates that the lines of magnetic force owing to the current are circular
around the rod.
(a)
(b)
I
B
−
+
FIGURE 10.25
Remember this useful rule: If the thumb points in
the direction of the flow of charge, the fingers curl in the direc-
tion of the lines of the magnetic field. The magnitude of the mag-
netic field is discussed in Sec. 14.13. Use the right hand for posi-
tive charge flow, left hand for negative charge flow.

slivers become magnetized and behave like tiny compass needles, indicat-
ing the direction of the field. The slivers also tend to link together end-to-
end. Thus, the pattern of slivers indicates magnetic lines of force around
any current-carrying conductor or bar magnet. These lines form a "pic-
ture" of the magnetic field.
You can use a similar argument to find the "shape" of a magnetic field
produced by a current in a coil of wire, instead of a straight wire. To do
this, bend the wire into a loop so that it goes through the paper in two
places. The magnetic effects of the different parts of the wire on the iron
slivers produce a field pattern similar to that of a bar magnet.
10.9 CURRENTS ACT ON CURRENTS
Oersted's experiment was one of those precious occasions when a discov-
ery suddenly opens up an exciting new subject of research—a whole "ocean
of ignorance" waiting to be conquered. In this case, no new equipment was
needed. At once, dozens of scientists throughout Europe and America be-
gan intensive studies on the magnetic effects of electric currents. The work
of André-Marie Ampère (1775-1836) stands out among all the rest. Am-
père was called the "Newton of electricity" by James Clerk Maxwell, who
decades later constructed a complete theory of electricity and magnetism.
Ampère's work is filled with elegant mathematics. Without describing his
theory in detail, we can trace some of his ideas and review some of his 
experiments.
492
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
FIGURE 10.26
Iron fillings in the magnetic field
produced by current in a coil of wire.

Ampère's thoughts raced forward as soon as he heard Oersted's news. He
began with a line of thought somewhat as follows: Magnets exert forces on
each other, and magnets and currents exert forces on each other. Do cur-
rents then exert forces on other currents? The answer is not necessarily
yes. Arguing from symmetry is inviting, and often turns out to be right.
But the conclusions to which such arguments lead are not logically or phys-
ically necessary. Ampère recognized the need to let experiment answer his
question. He wrote:
When Monsieur Oersted discovered the action which a current ex-
ercises on a magnet, one might certainly have suspected the exis-
tence of a mutual action between two circuits carrying currents; but
this was not a necessary consequence; for a bar of soft iron also acts
on a magnetized needle, although there is not mutual action be-
tween two bars of soft iron.
Ampère put his hunch to the test. On September 30, 1820, within a week
after word of Oersted's work reached France, Ampère reported to the
10.9 CURRENTS ACT ON CURRENTS
493
FIGURE 10.27
André-Marie Ampère (1775-
1836) was born in a village near Lyons,
France. There was no school in the village, and
Ampère was self-taught. His father was exe-
cuted during the French Revolution, and Am-
père's personal life was deeply affected by his
father's death. Ampère became a professor of
mathematics in Paris and made important con-
tributions to physics, mathematics, and the
philosophy of science. 

French Academy of Sciences. He had indeed found that two parallel 
current-carrying wires exert forces on each other. They did so even though
the wires showed no evidence of net electric charges.
Ampère made a thorough study of the forces between currents. He in-
vestigated how they depend on the distance between the wires, the relative
positions of the wires, and the amount of current. In the laboratory, you
can repeat these experiments and work out the "force law" between two
currents. We need not go into the quantitative details here, except to note
that the force between currents is easy to measure, and in turn can be used
to measure how much current is flowing. In fact, the magnetic force be-
tween currents is now the quantity preferred for defining the unit of cur-
rent. This unit is called the ampere, as mentioned in Section 10.2. One am-
pere (1 A) is defined as the amount of current in each of two long, straight,
parallel wires, set 1 m apart, that causes a force of exactly 2  107 N to
act on each meter of each wire.
Question: How many amps of current are flowing through the filament
of a 100-W electric light bulb when connected to a 120-V outlet?
Answer: Referring to the relationship between power (in watts), voltage
(in volts), and current (in amps) in Section 10.7:
P  VI,
or
I  V
P
,
I  
1
1
0
2
0
0
W
V
  0.83 W/V  0.83 A.
494
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
v⊥
(a) When the charge q moves with
velocity v perpendicular to B,
+
B
v⊥
(b) there is a force F as shown, 
directly out of plane of paper,
proportional to q, v⊥, and B.
+
B
F
v
F
v⊥
(c) If v is not perpendicular (⊥) to
B, there is a smaller force, propor-
tional to v instead of v⊥.
+
B
q
q
q
FIGURE 10.28
Magnetic field and force on moving charge.

10.10 MAGNETIC FIELDS 
AND MOVING CHARGES
In the last two sections, the interactions of currents with magnets and with
each other were discussed. The concept of magnetic field greatly simplifies
the description of these phenomena.
As you saw in studying Coulomb's law, electrically charged bodies exert
forces on each other. When the charged bodies are at rest, the forces are
"electric" forces, or Coulomb forces. "Electric fields" act as the sources of
these forces. But when the charged bodies are moving (as when two par-
allel wires carry currents), new forces in addition to the electric forces are
present. These new forces are called "magnetic" and are caused by "mag-
netic fields" set up by the moving charges.
Magnetic interaction of moving charged bodies is not as simple as elec-
tric interaction. Remember the description of Oersted's experiment. The
direction of the force exerted by a field set up by a current on a magnet
needle is perpendicular both to the direction of the current and to the line
between the magnet needle and the current. For the moment, however, it
is not necessary to examine the forces on current-carrying conductors. Af-
ter all, the force on a wire is believed to be caused by forces on the indi-
vidual electric charges moving in it. How do such individual charges be-
have when moving freely in an external magnetic field? Once some simple
rules have been established for the behavior of free charged particles, cur-
rent in wires will be discussed further in the next chapter. There you will
see how these simple rules are enough to explain the operation of electric
generators and electric motors. (You will also see how these inventions have
changed civilization.)
The rules summarized in the remainder of this section are best learned
in the laboratory. All you need is a magnet and a device for producing a
beam of charged particles, for example, the "electron gun" in an oscillo-
scope tube.
10.10 MAGNETIC FIELDS AND MOVING CHARGES
495
v
B
F
+
FIGURE 10.29
Remember this useful rule: If your fingers point along B
and your thumb along v, F will be in the direction your palm would push.
For positive charges use the right hand, and for negative use the left hand.

The Force on a Moving Charged Body
Suppose you have a fairly uniform magnetic field, symbol B, produced ei-
ther by a bar magnet or by a current in a coil. How does this external field
act on a moving, charged body (say, an electron)? You can find by experi-
ment that the charge experiences a force and that the force depends on
three quantities:
(1)
the charge q of the body;
(2)
the velocity v of the body; and
(3)
the strength of the external field B through which the body is 
moving.
The force depends not only on the magnitude of the velocity, but also
on its direction. If the body is moving in a direction perpendicular to the field
B, the magnitude of the force is proportional to both of these quantities;
that is,
F  qvB
which can also be written as
F  kqvB,
where k is a proportionality constant that depends on the units chosen for
F, q, v, and B.
But if the charge is moving in a direction parallel to B, there is no force
on it, since the angle is zero between the field and the velocity vector of
the charge. For all other directions of motion, the magnitude of the force
is somewhere between the full value and zero. In fact, the force is propor-
tional to the component of the velocity that is perpendicular to the field di-
rection. We give this the symbol v⊥. Therefore, a more general expression
for the force is
F  qv⊥B
or
F  kqv⊥B,
where k is the same constant as before. The direction of the force is always per-
pendicular to the direction of the field. It is also perpendicular to the direction of
motion of the charged body.
496
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM

The force exerted by an external magnetic field on a moving charged
particle can be used to define the unit of magnetic field B. This is done by
taking the proportionality constant k as equal to one. This definition is con-
venient here, since we are dealing mainly with how magnetic fields act on
moving charges (rather than with forces between bar magnets). So in the
special case when B and v are at right angles to each other, the magnitude
of the deflecting force becomes simply
F  qvB.
The Path of a Charged Body 
in a Magnetic Field
The force on a moving charged body in a magnetic field is always "off to
the side"; that is, the force is perpendicular to the body's direction of mo-
tion at every moment. Therefore, the magnetic force does not change the
speed of the charged body. This is analogous to the case of the gravitational
force from the Sun acting on a planet in (near enough) circular orbit. Rather,
in each case the central force changes the direction of the velocity vector,
but not its magnitude. If a charged body is moving exactly perpendicular
to a uniform magnetic field, there will be a constant sideways push. The
body will move along a circular path, in a plane perpendicular to the di-
rection of the magnetic field. If B is strong enough, the particle will be
trapped in a circular orbit.
What if the charged body's velocity has some component along the di-
rection of the field but not exactly parallel to it? The body will still be de-
flected into a curved path (see Figure 10.30), but the component of its mo-
tion along the field will continue undisturbed. So the particle will trace out
a coiled (helical) path (Figure 10.30b). If the body is initially moving ex-
actly parallel to the magnetic field (Figure 10.30a), there is no deflecting
force at all, since v⊥is zero.
10.10 MAGNETIC FIELDS AND MOVING CHARGES
497
+
+
FIGURE 10.30
Charged particle in B field.
(a)
(b)

Some important examples of the deflection of charged particles by mag-
netic fields include particle accelerators and bubble chambers. One example
of "coiled" motion is found in the Van Allen radiation belts, a doughnut-
shaped region encircling the Earth and extending from a few hundred kilo-
meters to about fifty thousand kilometers above the Earth's surface. A stream
of charged particles, mainly from the Sun, but also from outer space, con-
tinually sweeps past the Earth. Many of these particles are deflected into spi-
ral paths by the magnetic field of the Earth and become "trapped" in the
Earth's field. Trapped particles from the geomagnetic tail sometimes spiral
their way toward the Earth's magnetic poles. When they hit the atmosphere,
they excite the atoms of the gases to radiate light. This is the cause of the
aurora ("northern lights" and "southern lights").
Since magnets acts on currents and currents act on currents, the forces
produced by magnets and currents can be used to perform work by push-
ing or pulling on the currents on which they act. The harnessing of this
work in useful forms had profound economic and social consequences. This
behavior of magnets and currents made possible the invention of the elec-
tric motor, which turns electrical energy into mechanical work, and the
electric generator, which turns mechanical work into electrical energy. To-
gether these devices helped to open the electric age, in which we still live.
498
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
FIGURE 10.31
The glow of the aurora borealis is produced when the upper atmosphere is
excited by charged particles moving through the Earth's magnetic field. 

SOME QUANTITATIVE EXPRESSIONS 
IN THIS CHAPTER
Magnitude of gravitational force on m1 or m2:
Fgrav  G
m
R
1m
2
2
.
Magnitude of electric force on q1 or q2:
Fel  kel
q
R
1q
2
2
.
Magnitude of magnetic force on a moving charge, if v and B are perpen-
dicular:
F  qvB.
Gravitational field strength:
g 
.
Electric field strength, E, is defined as the electric force per unit of test
charge:
E 
.
Ohm's law:
V  IR.
Potential difference, V, is defined as the ratio of the change in electrical
potential energy of charge to the magnitude of the charge:
V  
P
q
E
.
Electric power:
P  VI
or
P  I2R.
Fe

q
Fgrav

m
SOME QUANTITATIVE EXPRESSIONS IN THIS CHAPTER
499

SOME IMPORTANT NEW UNITS
One amp of current  one coulomb of charge per second, 1 A  1 C/s.
1 volt  1 joule/coulomb, 1 V  1 J/C.
1 ohm  1 volt/amp, 1   1 V/A.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
AC current
electrostatic induction
ampere
electrostatics
charge
insulators
conductors
lines of force
Coulomb's law
lodestone
current
magnetic field
DC current
Ohm's law
electric field
pole
electric field strength
potential difference
electrodynamics
voltage
FURTHER READING
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapter 24.
B. Franklin, The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (New York: Dover, 1996), and
many other editions.
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS*
10.1 Gilbert's Magnets
1.
What are amber and loadstone?
2.
What are some of the strange properties of amber and loadstone?
3.
How did Gilbert make it plausible that the Earth behaves like a spherical 
loadstone?
500
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
* These questions are intended as an aid to study. Your instructor may ask you to work on these in
groups, or individually, or as a class.

4.
How does the attraction of objects by amber differ from the attraction by 
lodestone?
10.2 Electric Charges and Electric Forces
1.
What are some important observations about static charges?
2.
What are the three general rules about electric charges?
3.
Why did people think that electricity involves a fluid?
4.
How did Priestley discover that the electric force is proportional to 1/R2?
5.
How did Coulomb arrive at the electric force law?
6.
Compare and contrast the electric, magnetic, and gravitational forces.
7.
If the distance between two charged objects is doubled, how is the electric force
between them affected? How is the force affected if the charge on one of them
is cut to one-quarter its former size.
8.
State Coulomb's law in your own words. What is the direction of the force be-
tween two charged particles? What is the value of k?
10.3 Forces and Fields
1.
What is the difference between a scalar field and a vector field?
2.
Describe how you can find by experiment the magnitude and directions of:
(a) the gravitational field at a certain point in space;
(b) the electric field at a certain point in space.
3.
On a sheet of paper draw a circle to represent a ball of charge. Label it a neg-
ative charge, i.e., q. Then choose three points on the paper and draw the di-
rection of the electric field at each point. Finally, draw the direction of the
force vector on a negative charge at each point.
4.
A negative test charge is placed in an electric field where the electric field
vector is pointing downward. What is the direction of the force on the test
charge?
5.
What is the electric field at a point if a test particle of 3  105 C experiences
a force of 102 N upward?
10.4 Electric Currents
1.
Describe Volta's pile and how it operated.
2.
What were some of the advantages of the pile?
3.
What is the difference between AC and DC current?
10.5 Electric Potential Difference
1.
How is the electric potential difference between two points defined?
2.
Does the potential difference between two points depend on:
(a) the path followed as a charge moves from one point to the other?
(b) the magnitude of the charge that moves?
3.
How is the unit of electron-volt (eV) defined?
4.
What are eV units used in some situations instead of Joules? What are some
situations in which they are used?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
501

10.6 Electric Potential Difference and Current
1.
How does the current in a conductor change if the potential difference be-
tween the ends of the conductor is doubled?
2.
How would you test whether Ohm's law applies to a given piece of wire?
10.7 Electric Potential Difference and Power
1.
What happens to the electrical energy used to move a charge through a con-
ducting material?
2.
How does the energy per second converted to heat in a conductor change if
the current in the conductor is doubled?
3.
Show that the kilowatt-hour is a measure of energy and not of power.
10.8 Currents Act on Magnets
1.
Describe, with drawings, Oersted's discovery. Why is it important to this day?
2.
Under what conditions can electric charges affect magnets?
3.
What was surprising about the force a current exerted on a magnet?
4.
What are the shape and direction of the magnetic field produced near a straight
wire carrying a steady current?
10.9 Currents Act on Currents
1.
What was Ampère's hunch?
10.10 Magnetic Fields and Moving Charges
1.
Which of the following affect the magnitude of the deflecting force on a mov-
ing charged particle?
(a) The component of the velocity parallel to the magnetic field?
(b) The component of the velocity perpendicular to the magnetic field?
(c) The magnetic find itself?
(d) The magnitude of the charge?
(e) the sign of the charge?
2.
What are differences between deflecting forces on a charged object due to:
(a) gravity?
(b) an electric field?
(c) a magnetic field?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS*
1.
What is an electromagnet and how does it work?
2.
A battery is used to light a flashlight bulb. Trace as many of the energy con-
versions as you can in this circuit.
502
10. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
* These questions go beyond the text itself.

3.
What are the magnetic fields around the wires carrying steady currents in the
figures below?
4.
Show that for a charge Q moving a distance D under the influence of an elec-
tric field E, its kinetic energy will be KE  QED.
Quantitative
In the following, take the value of ke in Coulomb's law to be about nine billion
newton-meters squared per coulomb squared, or ke  9  109 N m2/C2. The value
of the gravitational constant G is 6.67  1011 N m2/kg2.
1.
If you compare the gravitational force between two 1-kg masses with the elec-
tric force between two 1-C charges at the same distance, which force is larger,
and by how much?
2.
What is the electric force between two positive charges of 1 C placed 1 m
from each other?
3.
How does the force in Question 2 compare with the gravitational force be-
tween two 1-kg masses placed 1 m apart?
4.
What is the electric field at a point where a test charge of 3  105 C expe-
riences a force of 102 N upward?
5.
The electric charge on an electron is 1.6  1019 C. How many electrons
would be required to make 1 C of charge?
6.
An electron crosses a potential of 10 V. What is the change in its kinetic en-
ergy, in eV?
7.
An alpha particle (helium nucleus of charge 2e) crosses the same potential
of 10 V. What is the change in its kinetic energy, in eV? How many joules is
this?
8.
Find out the electric power ratings of some common household devices that
you would normally use. During the course of 1 day, note which devices you
use and for approximately how long. Include light bulbs, TV, computer, a
hair dryer, electric water heater, washer and dryer, etc. Obtain your total en-
ergy consumption for that day. How many hours could your total energy con-
sumption keep a 100-W light bulb burning?
9.
A household consumed 5500 kilowatt-hours in 1 month.
(a) How many joules of energy is this?
(b) How many hours could this amount of energy keep a 100-W light bulb
burning?
10.
What is the power used by a circuit in which 3 A flow across a 240-V sup-
ply? What is the resistance of this circuit?
(a)
(b)
(c)
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
503

This page intentionally left blank 

11.1
Transporting Energy from One Place to Another
11.2
Faraday's First Electric Motor
11.3
The Discovery of Electromagnetic Induction
11.4
Generating Electricity: The Generator
11.5
Putting Electricity to Work: The Motor
11.6
The Electric Light Bulb
11.7
AC versus DC: The Niagara Falls Power Plant
11.8
The Energy Picture Today
11.9
Conservation
11.10 Renewable and Alternative Energy Sources
11.1 TRANSPORTING ENERGY FROM 
ONE PLACE TO ANOTHER
In Chapter 6, we discussed the development of steam engines during the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. These engines enabled industrialization
by making available the vast stores of energy contained in coal, wood, and
oil. By burning fuel, chemical energy is converted into heat energy, which in
turn can be used to boil water to produce steam. By letting the steam expand
against a piston or a turbine blade, heat energy can be converted to me-
chanical energy. In this way, a steam engine can power machinery.
Steam engines had two major defects, however. First, the mechanical en-
ergy was available only at the place where the steam engine was located.
Second, practical steam engines were big, hot, and dirty. As the use of ma-
chines run by steam engines increased, people were crowded together in
factories, and their homes stood in the shadow of the smoke stacks. Even
steam-powered locomotives, though useful for transportation, were limited
by their size and weight. They also added further air pollution.
Using one central power plant for sending out energy for use at a dis-
tance could partially overcome these defects. The energy transmitted by
the central power plant could drive machines of any desired size and power
505
The Electric Age
C
H
A
P
T
E
R11
11
-
+

at the most practical locations. After Volta's development of the battery,
many scientists and inventors speculated that electricity might provide such
a means of distributing energy and running machines. But the energy in
batteries is quickly used up unless it is delivered at a low rate. A better way
of generating electric currents was needed. When such a way was found,
it changed the whole shape of life in homes, factories, farms, and offices.
It even changed the very appearance of cities and landscapes.
In this chapter you will see another example of how discoveries in basic
physics have given rise to new technologies. These technologies have rev-
olutionized and benefited modern civilization. But they have brought some
new problems in their turn.
The first clue to the broader use of electricity came from Oersted's dis-
covery that a magnetic needle is deflected by a current supplied by a bat-
tery to a conductor. It was quickly realized that since an electric current
can exert a force on a magnet, the force might be harnessed to perform
useful work. In addition, many physicists naturally speculated that a mag-
net could somehow produce a current in a wire. (Such reasoning from sym-
metry is common in physics and is often useful.) Soon after the news of
Oersted's discovery reached Paris, the French physicists Biot, Savart, and
Ampère began research on the interactions of electricity and magnetism.
(Some of their results were mentioned in Chapter 10.) A flood of other ex-
periments and speculations on electromagnetism poured from all over the
world into the scientific journals. Yet the one key discovery—how to gen-
erate an ample and continuous electric current—still eluded everyone.
11.2 FARADAY'S FIRST ELECTRIC MOTOR
Scientific journals regularly print brief announcements of the technical 
details of new discoveries. From time to time they also provide valuable in-
depth surveys of recent broad advances in science. The need for such a re-
view article is especially great after a burst of activity of the kind that fol-
lowed Oersted's discovery of electromagnetism in 1820.
In 1821, the editor of the British journal Annals of Philosophy asked the
English physicist Michael Faraday to review the experiments and theories
of electromagnetism that had appeared in the previous year. In preparing
for this review, Faraday made a remarkable discovery. Repeating Oersted's
experiment (Section 10.9), he put a compass needle at various places around
a current-carrying wire. Faraday was particularly struck by one fact: The
force exerted by the current on each pole of the magnet tended to carry
the pole along a circular line around the wire. As he expressed it later, 
the wire is surrounded by circular lines of force: a circular magnetic field.
506
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE

Faraday then constructed an "electromagnetic rotator" based on this idea.
It worked. Though very primitive, it was the first device for producing con-
tinuous motion by the action of a current: the first electric motor.
As in many other cases, Faraday was also guided by the idea that for every
effect of electricity on magnetism, there must exist a corresponding effect
of magnetism on electricity. Of course, it was not always so obvious what
form the corresponding effect would take. But it led him to design an
arrangement in which the magnet was fixed and the current-carrying wire
rotated around it. (If a current exerts a force on a magnet, the magnet should
exert an equal force on the current, according to Newton's third law.) This
device, too, was eventually developed into a type of electric motor.
11.3
THE DISCOVERY OF 
ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION
Armed with his idea involving "lines of force" of electric and magnetic fields,
Faraday joined the search for a way of producing currents by magnetism.
Scattered through his diary in the years after 1824 are many descriptions of
11.3 THE DISCOVERY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION
507
N
+
+
N
FIGURE 11.1
Two versions of Faraday's electromagnetic rotator. In each, the
cup was filled with mercury so that a current could be passed between the
base and overhead support. In one version (a), the north end of a bar mag-
net revolves along the circular magnetic lines of force surrounding the fixed
current. In the other version (b), the rod carrying the current revolves around
the fixed bar magnet, moving always perpendicular to the magnetic lines of
force coming from the pole of the magnet. 
(a)
(b)

such experiments. Each report ended with a note: "exhibited no action" or
"no effect."
Finally, in 1831, came the breakthrough. Like many discoveries that 
follow much research and discussion among scientists, this one was made
almost at the same time by two scientists working independently in dif-
508
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
MICHAEL FARADAY
Michael Faraday (1791-1867) was the 
son of an English blacksmith. In his own
words:
My education was of the most ordinary
description, consisting of little more
than the rudiments of reading, writing
and arithmetic at a common day-school.
My hours out of school were passed at
home and in the streets.
At the age of 12 he went to work as an
errand boy at a bookseller's store. Later he
became a bookbinder's assistant. When
Faraday was about 19 he was given a ticket
to attend a series of lectures given by
Humphry Davy at the Royal Institution in
London. The Royal Institution was an im-
portant center of research and education
in science, and Davy was Superintendent
of the Institution. Faraday became
strongly interested in science and under-
took the study of chemistry by himself. In
1813, he applied to Davy for a job at the
Royal Institution and Davy hired him as a
research assistant. Faraday soon showed
his genius as an experimenter. He made
important contributions to chemistry,
magnetism, electricity, and light, and
eventually succeeded Davy as Superinten-
dent of the Royal Institution.
Because of his many discoveries, Fara-
day is generally regarded as one of the
greatest experimental scientists. Faraday
was also a fine lecturer and had an ex-
traordinary gift for explaining the results
of scientific research to nonscientists. His
lectures to audiences of young people are
still delightful to read. Two of them, "On
the Various Forces of Nature" and "The
Chemical History of a Candle," have been
republished in paperback editions.
Faraday was a modest, gentle, and
deeply religious man. Although he re-
ceived many international scientific hon-
ors, he had no wish to be knighted, pre-
ferring to remain without title.
FIGURE 11.2

ferent countries. Faraday was not quite the first to produce electricity 
from magnetism. Electromagnetic induction—the production of a current by 
magnetism—was actually discovered first by the American scientist Joseph
Henry. At the time Henry was teaching mathematics and philosophy at an
academy in Albany, New York. Unfortunately for the reputation of Amer-
ican science, teachers at the Albany Academy were expected to spend all
their time on teaching and related duties. There was little time left for re-
search. Henry had hardly any opportunity to follow up his discovery, which
he made during a one-month vacation. He was not able to publish his work
until a year later. In the meantime, Faraday had made a similar discovery
and published his results.
But Faraday is known as the discoverer of electromagnetic induction not
simply because he was the first to publish his results. More importantly, he
conducted exhaustive investigations into all aspects of the subject. His 
earlier experiments and his ideas about lines of force had suggested that a
current in one wire should somehow induce a current in a nearby wire.
Oersted and Ampère had shown that a steady electric current produced a
steady magnetic field around the circuit carrying the current. Perhaps a
steady electric current could somehow be generated if a wire were placed
near or around a very strong magnet. Or a steady current might be 
produced in one wire by a large steady current in another wire nearby. 
Faraday tried all these possibilities, with no success.
The solution Faraday found in 1831 came partly by accident. He was
experimenting with two wire coils that had been wound around an iron
ring (see Figure 11.3). He noted that a current appeared in one coil—called
the secondary—while the current in the other coil—called the primary—was
being switched on or off. When a current was turned on in the primary
coil A, a current was induced in secondary coil B, but it lasted only a mo-
ment. As soon as there was a steady current in coil A, the current in coil
B disappeared. When the current in coil A was turned off, a current again
appeared briefly in coil B.
To summarize Faraday's result:
A current in a stationary wire can induce a current in another sta-
tionary wire only while the current is changing. A steady current
in one wire cannot induce a current in another wire.
Faraday was not satisfied with merely observing and reporting his acci-
dental arrangement and its important result. Guided by his concept of "lines
of force," he tried to find out the basic principles involved in electromag-
netic induction.
According to Faraday's theory, the changing current in coil A would
change the lines of magnetic force in the whole iron ring. The change in
11.3 THE DISCOVERY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION
509

lines of magnetic force in the part of the ring near coil B would then in-
duce a current in B. But if this was really the correct explanation, Faraday
asked himself, should it not be possible to produce the same effect in an-
other way? In particular, he asked:
1.
Is the iron ring really necessary to produce the induction effect? Or
does the presence of iron merely strengthen an effect that would also
occur without it?
2.
Is coil A really necessary? Or could current be induced simply by chang-
ing the magnetic lines of force through coil B in some other way, such
as by moving a simple magnet relative to the wire?
Faraday answered these questions almost immediately by performing fur-
ther experiments. First, he showed that the iron ring was not necessary.
510
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
A
B
+ −
N
S
+ −
N
S
FIGURE 11.3
Various ways of producing electromagnetic induction.
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)

Starting or stopping a current in one coil of wire would induce a momen-
tary current in a nearby coil, with only air (or a vacuum) between the coils.
(See the drawing in Figure 11.3b. Note that there is no battery in the 
circuit at the right in (b), only a meter to measure the induced current.)
Second, he studied what happened when a bar magnet was inserted into or
removed from a coil of wire. He found that a current was induced at the
instant of insertion or removal. (See drawing (c).) In Faraday's words:
A cylindrical bar magnet . . . had one end just inserted into the end
of the helix cylinder; then it was quickly thrust in the whole length
and the galvanometer [current-meter] needle moved; when pulled
out again the needle moved, but in the opposite direction. The ef-
fect was repeated every time the magnet was put in or out. . . . 
Note that his arrangement amounted to a primitive electric generator; it pro-
vided electric current by having some mechanical agent move a magnet.
Having done these and many other experiments, Faraday started his gen-
eral principle of electromagnetic induction. Basically, it is that changing lines of
magnetic force can induce a current in a wire. The needed "change" in lines
of force can be produced either by a magnet moving relative to a wire or
by a changing current in another circuit. In the case of the moving mag-
net, Faraday described the wire in which current was induced as being "cut
across" by lines of force from the magnet. In the case of the effect caused
by a changing current in another circuit, the lines of force from the latter
"cut across" the wire. He later used the word field to refer to the arrange-
ment and intensity of lines of force in space. Using this term, one can say
a current can be induced in a circuit by changes set up in a magnetic field
11.3 THE DISCOVERY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION
511
FIGURE 11.4
Detail of a page in Faraday's diary where he recorded the first successful ex-
periment in electromagnetic induction.

around the circuit. Such changes may result either from relative motion of
wire and field or simply from a change in intensity of the inducing field.
So far, Faraday had produced only momentary surges of current by in-
duction. This was hardly an improvement over batteries as a source of cur-
rent. Was it possible to produce a continual current by electromagnetic in-
duction? To do this would require a situation in which magnetic lines of
force were continually changing relative to the conductor. Using a simple
magnet, the relative change could be produced either by keeping the mag-
net or the conductor in motion. This is just what Faraday did. He placed
a copper disk between the poles of a magnet, and applied mechanical 
energy to keep it turning. (See Figure 11.3d.) A steady current was pro-
duced in a circuit connected to the disk through brass contacts or "brushes."
His device—called the "Faraday disk dynamo"—was the first constant-
current electric generator. While this particular arrangement did not turn
out to be very practical, it showed at last that continuous generation of
electricity was possible.
These first experimental means of producing a continuous current were
important aids to understanding the connection between electricity and
magnetism. Moreover, they suggested the possibility of eventually gener-
ating electricity on a large scale. The production of electrical current in-
volves changing energy from one form to another. When electrical energy
appears, the law of conservation of energy requires that it be at the cost of
some other form of energy. In the electric battery, chemical energy (the
energy of formation of chemical compounds) is converted to electrical en-
ergy. Batteries are useful for many portable applications (automobiles, com-
puters, cell phones, for example). But it is not practical to produce large
amounts of electrical energy by this means. There is, however, a vast sup-
ply of mechanical energy available from many sources. Electrical energy
could be produced on a large scale if some reasonably efficient means of
converting mechanical energy to electrical energy were available. This me-
chanical energy might be in the form of wind, or falling water, or contin-
uous mechanical motion produced by a steam engine. The discovery of
electromagnetic induction showed that, at least in principle, it is possible
to produce electricity by mechanical means. In this sense, Faraday can
rightly be regarded as the founder of the modern electrical age.
11.4 GENERATING ELECTRICITY: 
THE GENERATOR
Faraday had shown that when a conducting wire moves relative to a mag-
netic field, an electric current is produced. Whether it is the wire or the
512
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE

magnetic field that moves does not matter. What counts is the relative mo-
tion of one with respect to the other. Once the principle of electromag-
netic induction was known, experimenters tested many combinations of
wires and magnets in relative motion. One basic type of generator (or 
"dynamo," as it was often called) was widely used in the nineteenth cen-
tury. In fact, it remains the basic model for many generators today.
This form of generator is basically a coil of wire made to rotate in a
steady magnetic field, thereby "cutting" the lines of force, using Faraday's
image. The coil is connected to an external circuit by sliding contacts. In
Figure 11.5, the "coil" is shown for simplicity as a single rectangular loop
of wire. This loop rotates around an axis xy between the north and south
poles of a magnet. Two conducting rings, labeled d and e are permanently
attached to the loop and, therefore, also rotate around the axis. Conduct-
ing contacts, called "brushes," here labeled g and f, complete a circuit
through a meter (h) that indicates the current produced. The complete cir-
cuit is abdfhgea. (Note that one part of the wire goes through ring d with-
out touching it and connects to e.)
Initially, the loop is at rest between the magnetic poles and no charge
flows through it. Now suppose the loop is rotated counterclockwise. The
wire's long sides a and b now have a component of motion perpendicular
to the direction of the magnetic lines of force; that is, the wire "cuts across"
lines of force. This, according to the principle of electric induction, is the
condition for inducing an electric current in the loop. The greater the rate
at which the lines are cut, the greater the induced current.
To understand better what is going on in the wire, one should under-
stand its operation in terms of the force on the movable charges in the wire.
It is the movement of these charges, which are, by convention, assumed to
be positive, that forms the current. The charges in the part of the loop la-
beled b are being physically moved together with the loop across the mag-
netic field. Therefore, they experience a magnetic force given by qvB (as
described in Section 10.11). This force pushes the charges in the wire "off
to the side"—that is, perpendicular to both the velocity vector and the mag-
netic field vector. In this situation, "off to the side" is along the wire.
What about side a? It is also moving through the field and "cutting" lines
of force, but in the opposite direction. So the charges inside a experience
a push along the wire in the direction opposite to those in b. This is just
what is needed; the two effects reinforce each other in generating a cur-
rent around the whole loop. The "push" on the charges that produces 
the current can also be regarded as resulting from a potential difference
("voltage") induced in the loop of wire. Thus, a generator produces both
"voltage" and current.
The generator just described produces alternating current (abbreviations
AC). The current is called "alternating" because it regularly reverses 
11.4 GENERATING ELECTRICITY: THE GENERATOR
513

514
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
time
current
a
B
b
h
y
x
g
f
e
d
N
S
FIGURE 11.5
An alternating current
generator. The graph shows the elec-
tric current generated as successive po-
sitions of the single loop are reached.
(a)
(b)

11.4 GENERATING ELECTRICITY: THE GENERATOR
515
time
current
N
S
FIGURE 11.6
A direct current genera-
tor. The graphs show the current at dif-
ferent positions of the loop.
(a)
(b)

(alternates) its direction. At the time this kind of generator was first de-
veloped, in the 1830s, alternating current could not be used to run ma-
chines. Instead direct current (DC) was needed.
In 1832, Ampère announced that his talented instrument maker, Hip-
polyte Pixii, had solved the problem of generating direct current. Pixii mod-
ified the AC generator by means of a device called the commutator. The
name comes from the word commute, to interchange or to go back and forth.
The commutator is a split cylinder inserted in the circuit. In the AC gen-
erator, brushes f and g are always connected to the same part of the loop.
But with the commutator, the brushes reverse connections each time the loop
passes through the vertical position. Just as the direction of current induced
in the loop is at the point of reversing, the contacts reverse. As a result, the
current in the outside circuit is always in the same direction; in short, it is
a direct current. Although the current in the outside circuit in that system
is always in the same direction, it is not constant. It rises and falls rapidly
between zero and its maximum value. In working generators, many sets of
loops and commutators are connected together on the same shaft. In this
way, their induced currents reach their maximum and zero values at differ-
ent times. The total current from all of them together is then more uniform.
Whether a generator delivers alternating current or direct current, the
electric power (energy per unit time) produced at every instant is given by
the same equation developed in Section 10.7:
P  V 	 I  I2R.
For example, suppose that a wire (e.g., the filament wire in a light bulb) with
resistance R is substituted for the meter at h. If the current generated in the
circuit at a given time is I, the electrical energy per unit time delivered to
the wire is given by I2R. For alternating current, the power output varies
from instant to instant. But the average output power is simply P  (I2)avR.
This electrical energy, of course, does not appear by itself, without any source.
That would violate the law of conservation of energy. In the generator, the
"source" of energy is clearly the mechanical energy which is supplied to keep
the coils rotating in the magnetic field. This mechanical energy may be pro-
vided by a steam or gasoline engine, or by water power, wind power, or even
by human exertion. The electric generator is, in principle, simply a device
for converting mechanical energy into electrical energy.
11.5 PUTTING ELECTRICITY TO WORK: THE MOTOR
After the invention of the electric motor in 1873, the greatest obstacle to
its practical use was the lack of cheap electric current to run it. The chem-
ical energy in a battery was quickly exhausted. The electric generator, 
516
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE

invented almost simultaneously by Faraday and Henry in 1832, was at first
not at all economical in producing electrical current when mechanical en-
ergy was expended on it. Generators that used mechanical power efficiently
to produce electric power were needed. But to design such generators re-
quired an understanding of the details of operation, and this understand-
ing took nearly 50 years to acquire.
A chance event marked the effective take-off of the electric power age.
This event was an accidental discovery at the Venice Exhibition of 1873.
The story goes that an unknown worker at the Exhibition just happened
to connect two dynamos (generators) together. The first dynamo, which
was mechanically driven, generated current, and this current then passed
through the coils of the second dynamo. Amazingly, the second dynamo
then ran as an electric motor, driven by the electricity generated by the
first dynamo.
The exhibitors at the Exhibition immediately utilized the accidental dis-
covery that a generator run in reverse by the input of current could func-
tion as a motor through the output of mechanical work. They used a small
artificial waterfall to drive the generator. Its current then drove the motor,
which in turn operated a device that did mechanical work. This, in effect, is
the basic operation of a modern electrical transmission system. A turbine driven,
say, by steam or moving water, drives a generator which converts the me-
chanical energy to electrical energy. Conducting wires transmit the elec-
tricity over long distances to motors, toasters, electric lights, computers,
etc. These devices in turn convert the electrical energy to mechanical en-
ergy, heat, or light.
The steam turbine, invented by the English engineer Charles Parsons in
1884, has now largely replaced older kinds of steam engines. At present,
steam turbines drive the electric generators in most electric-power stations.
These steam-run generators supply most of the power for the machinery
of modern civilization. Even in nuclear power stations, the nuclear energy
11.5 PUTTING ELECTRICITY TO WORK: THE MOTOR
517
Electrical energy
Mechanical energy
Mechanical
energy
MOTOR
GENERATOR
FIGURE 11.7
Generator and motor.

is generally used to produce steam, which then drives turbines and electric
generators. (Other means may be used to drive turbines such as wind and
water. See Section 11.10.)
The basic principle of the Parsons turbine is simpler than that of the
Newcomen and Watt engines. A jet of high-pressure steam strikes the
blades of a rotor, driving the rotor around at high speed. The steam ex-
pands after passing through the rotor, so the next rotor must be larger. This
accounts for the characteristic shape of turbines. Large electric-power sta-
tion turbines using more than 500,000 kg of steam an hour can generate
electrical energy at a rate greater than one billion joules per second.
The development of electrical generators shows an interaction of science
and technology different from that of the development of steam engines.
As was pointed out in Chapter 7, the early steam engines arose from the
efforts of practical inventors. These inventors had no knowledge of the cur-
rent theory of heat (thermodynamics). But their development of the steam
engine, and attempts by Sadi Carnot and others to improve its efficiency
through theoretical analysis, contributed greatly to the establishment of
518
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
FIGURE 11.9
Power station with a set
of water-driven electric generators. 
FIGURE 11.8
The general principle of hydro-
electric power generation is illustrated in this
sketch. Water flowing from a higher to a lower
level turns turbine blades attached to a generator
shaft. The details of construction vary widely.

thermodynamics. In that case, the advance in technology came before the
advance of science. In the case of electromagnetism, the reverse occurred.
Ampère, Faraday, Kelvin, Maxwell, and others had built up a large amount
of scientific knowledge before any serious practical application succeeded.
The scientists, who understood electricity better than anyone else, were
not especially interested in commercial applications. And the inventors, who
hoped to make huge profits from electricity, knew very little scientific the-
ory. After Faraday announced his discovery of electromagnetic induction,
people started making generators to produce electricity immediately. But
it was not until decades later that inventors and engineers understood
enough to work with such necessary concepts as lines of force and field
vectors. With the introduction of the telegraph, telephone, radio, and 
alternating-current power systems, a much greater mathematical knowl-
edge was needed to work with electricity. Universities and technical schools
started to give courses in electrical engineering. Gradually, a group of spe-
cialists developed who were familiar with the physics of electricity and who
also knew how to apply it.
11.5 PUTTING ELECTRICITY TO WORK: THE MOTOR
519
FIGURE 11.10
Steam turbine rotors. 

11.6 THE ELECTRIC LIGHT BULB
The enormous growth of the electrical industry resulted from the great
public demand for electrical products. One of the first commercially suc-
cessful electrical products was the electric light bulb, which brought the
benefits of electricity to the general public and made electricity the domi-
nant form of early private energy consumption. The success of the light
bulb mirrors in some respects the success of such other technological in-
ventions as the microchip or television. It is an outstanding case study of
the relationship between physics, industry, and society.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, most buildings and homes
were lit by candles and oil lamps. It is said that, during his school years,
Abraham Lincoln did most of his reading by the fireplace. There was al-
most no street lighting in cities except for a few lamps hung outside houses
at night. The natural gas industry was just starting to change this situation.
London got its first street lighting system in 1813, when gas lights were
installed on Westminster Bridge. However, the social effects of gas light-
ing were not all beneficial. For example, gas lighting in factories enabled
employers to extend an already long and difficult working day into one still
longer.
As the British chemist Humphry Davy and other scientists showed, light
can be produced simply by heating a wire to a high temperature by pass-
ing a current through it. This method is known as incandescent lighting.
The major technical drawback here was that the wire filament gradually
burned up. The obvious solution was to enclose the filament in a glass con-
tainer from which all the air had been removed. But this was easier said
than done. The vacuum pumps available in the early nineteenth century
could not produce a strong enough vacuum for this purpose. It was not un-
til 1865, when Hermann Sprengel in Germany invented an improved vac-
uum pump, that the modern electric light bulb became possible. (Spren-
gel's pump also greatly aided Crookes and others in scientific experiments
leading to important discoveries in atomic physics. These discoveries will
be discussed in Chapter 13.)
Thomas A. Edison was not the first to invent an incandescent light, nor
did he discover any essentially new scientific principles. What he did was
to develop a practical light bulb for use in homes. Even more important,
he worked out a distribution system for electricity. His system not only
made the light bulb a practical device, but it opened the way for mass con-
sumption of electrical energy in the United States.
Edison started by making an important business assumption about how
people would want to use their light bulbs. He decided that each customer
520
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE

must be able to turn on and off any single bulb without affecting the other
bulbs connected to the circuit. This meant that the bulbs must be con-
nected "in parallel," like the rungs of a ladder, rather than "in series." (See
Figure 11.13.)
The choice of parallel rather than series circuits had important techni-
cal consequences. In a series circuit, the same current goes through each
bulb. In a parallel circuit, only part of the total current available from the
source goes through any one bulb. To keep the total current needed from
being too large, the current in each bulb has to be small.
As noted in Section 10.7, the heating effect of a current depends on both
the resistance of the wire and the amount of current. The rate at which
heat and light energy are produced is given by P  I2R. According to this
relationship, the rate goes up directly as the resistance, but increases as the
square of the current. Therefore, in order to produce more light, most in-
ventors used high-current, low-resistance bulbs and assumed that parallel
circuits would not be practical. Edison realized that, in addition to the prac-
ticality of parallel circuits, a small current can have a large lighting effect
if the resistance is high enough.
So Edison began a search for a suitable high-resistance, nonmetallic sub-
stance for his light-bulb filaments. To make such a filament, he first had to
11.6 THE ELECTRIC LIGHT BULB
521
FIGURE 11.11
Edison in his labo-
ratory. 

bake or "carbonize" a thin piece of a substance. Then he sealed it inside
an evacuated glass bulb with wires leading out. His assistants, including
Lewis Howard Latimer, tried more than 1600 kinds of material:
paper and cloth, thread, fishline, fiber, celluloid, boxwood, coconut
shells, spruce, hickory, hay, maple shavings, rosewood, punk, cork,
flax, bamboo, and the hair out of a redheaded Scotchman's beard.
Edison made his first successful high-resistance lamp in October 1879
with carbonized cotton thread in a high-vacuum sealed bulb. It burned con-
tinuously for 2 days before it fell apart. The following year, Edison pro-
duced lamps with filaments made from bamboo and paper. The Edison Elec-
tric Light Company began to install lighting systems in 1882. After only 
3 years of operation, the Edison company had sold 200,000 lamps. It had a
virtual monopoly of the field and paid big dividends to its stockholders.
The electric light bulb has changed somewhat since Edison's original in-
vention. For example, the carbonized filaments of the older lamps were 
522
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
FIGURE 11.12
Lewis Howard La-
timer (1848-1928), the son of an
escaped slave, became one of the
original associates of Thomas 
Edison. Latimer was an inventor,
patent authority, poet, draftsman,
author, and musician. 

replaced in newer bulbs by thin tungsten wires. Tungsten had the advan-
tages of greater efficiency and longer life.
The widespread use of light bulbs confirmed the soundness of Edison's
assumptions about what people would buy. It also led to the rapid devel-
opment of systems of power generation and distribution. The need for more
power for lighting spurred the invention of better generators, the harness-
ing of water power, and the invention of the steam turbine. Success in pro-
viding large quantities of cheap energy made other uses of electricity prac-
tical. Once homes were wired for electric lights, the current could be used
to run sewing machines, vacuum cleaners, washing machines, toasters, and
(later on) refrigerators, radios, television sets, and computers. Once elec-
tric power was available for public transportation, cities could grow rapidly
in all dimensions. Electric elevators made high-rise buildings practical,
11.6 THE ELECTRIC LIGHT BULB
523
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 11.13
(a) Bulbs in a parallel circuit; (b) bulbs in a series circuit.

while electric tramways and subways rapidly transported people from their
homes to jobs and markets.
We are now so accustomed to more sophisticated applications of elec-
tricity that it is hard to realize the impact of something as simple as the
light bulb. But most people who lived through the period of electrification,
which was as late as the 1930s and 1940s in many rural areas of the United
States, agreed that the electrical appliance that made the greatest differ-
ence in their lives was the electric light bulb, which made the evenings fit
for finishing chores indoors, as well as for leisure activities or reading. The
last was one of the reasons given by President Franklin D. Roosevelt for
his interest in promoting large-scale rural electrification, as in the Ten-
nessee Valley Authority (TVA). In addition, of course, electric machines
have been able to lighten many heavy physical labors and to make possible
work that human or animal strength could never have accomplished.
524
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
FIGURE 11.14
Two drawings of Edison's invention.
(b)
(a)

11.7 AC VERSUS DC: THE NIAGARA FALLS
POWER PLANT
Section 11.4 stated that the earliest electric generators produced alternat-
ing current (AC), which could be changed into direct current (DC) by the
use of a commutator. Throughout most of the nineteenth century, most
engineers believed that only DC was useful in practical applications of elec-
tricity. However, as the demand for electric power increased, some disad-
vantages of DC became evident. One problem was that the commutator
complicated the mechanical design of generators, especially if the ring had
to rotate at high speed. This difficulty became even more serious after the
introduction of steam turbines in the 1890s, since turbines work most ef-
fectively at high speeds. Another disadvantage was there was no conven-
ient way of changing the generated voltage of a DC supply.
Why should it be necessary to change the voltage with which current is
driven through a transmission system? One reason involves the amount of
power lost in heating the transmission wires. The power output of a gen-
erator depends (as indicated in Section 10.8) on the output voltage of the
generator and the amount of current:
Ptotal  VI.
The power made available by the generator is transmitted to the line and
to the consumer. (For this reason, commercial power is often given in units
of volt-amps.) The same amount of power can be delivered at smaller I if
V is somehow made larger. As noted in Section 10.7, when there is a cur-
rent I in a transmission wire of resistance R, the portion of the power lost
as heat in transmission is equal to the resistance times the square of the
current:
Pheat loss  I2R.
The power finally available to consumers is Ptotal  Pheat loss. For transmis-
sion lines of a given resistance R, where the value of R is fixed by the wires
themselves, the current I should be as small as possible in order to mini-
mize the power loss. Obviously, therefore, electricity should be transmit-
ted at low current and at high voltage.
However, most generators cannot produce electricity at very high volt-
ages. To do so would require excessively high speeds of the moving parts.
Some way of "stepping up" the generated electricity to a high voltage for
transmission is needed. But some way of "stepping down" voltage again at
11.7 AC VERSUS DC: THE NIAGARA FALLS POWER PLANT
525

526
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
the other end, where the consumer uses the power, is also needed. For most
applications of electricity, especially in homes, it is neither convenient nor
safe to use high voltages. In short, transformers are needed at both ends of
the transmission line.
A transformer can easily be made by a simple change in Faraday's in-
duction coil (Section 11.4). Recall that Faraday wound a coil of wire—called
the secondary coil—around one side of an iron ring. He then induced a cur-
rent in this secondary coil by changing a current in another coil—the 
primary coil—wound around the other side of the ring. A current is in-
duced in the secondary coil whenever the primary current changes. If the
primary current is changing all the time, then a current is continually in-
duced in the secondary. An AC applied to the primary coil (e.g., from a
generator without a commutator) induces an AC in the secondary coil.
After the American engineer George Westinghouse saw an AC electri-
cal system in Italy he bought the American patent rights for it. When the
FIGURE 11.15
Transformer coils. 
FIGURE 11.16
The commercial distribu-
tion of AC electric power requires elab-
orate transmission facilities. Generator
output voltages of about 104 volts are
stepped up to about 105 volts for trans-
mission, stepped down to about 104 volts
for local distribution, and further stepped
down to about 102 volts by neighborhood
power-pole transformers. Within the
home, they may be stepped down further
(often to 6 volts for doorbells and elec-
tric trains) and stepped up by transform-
ers in radio and TV sets for operating
high-voltage tubes.

11.7 AC VERSUS DC: THE NIAGARA FALLS POWER PLANT
527
Westinghouse Electric Company introduced the AC system to the United
States with improved transformers in 1886, the Edison Electric Light Com-
pany (which later merged into General Electric) already had a monopoly
on electric lighting and had already invested heavily in DC generating plants
and distribution systems for most of the large cities. A bitter public con-
troversy erupted between the two companies. Edison attempted to show
that AC was unsafe because of the high voltage (tension) used for trans-
mission in "high-tension" wires. In the middle of the dispute, the New York
State legislature accepted Edison's suggestion of electrocution as a means
of capital punishment. This event seems to have added to the popular fear
of high voltage. Nevertheless, Westinghouse's AC system continued to
grow. There were no spectacular accidents, and the public began to accept
AC as reasonably safe.
The final victory of the AC system in the United States was assured in
1893 when businessmen in Buffalo, New York, chose AC for the new hy-
droelectric plant at Niagara Falls. It was a close decision. AC could be gen-
erated and transmitted more efficiently, but the demand for electricity in
1890 was mainly for lighting. This meant that there would be a peak de-
mand in the evening. The system would have to operate at less than full
capacity during the day and late at night. Because of this variation, some
engineers believed that a DC system would be cheaper to operate. How-
ever, European systems began demonstrating that this was not the case, and
FIGURE 11.17
Dam on Niagara River. 

528
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
expert opinion gradually changed in favor of AC over DC. Today, electric
power in the United States is delivered to homes and factories in an AC
that alternates at a frequency of 60 cycles per second, or 60 Hz. Most of
the rest of the world uses AC current at 50 Hz.
It turned out that the critics had been wrong about the variation of de-
mand for electricity throughout the day, as electricity found many uses be-
sides lighting. During periods of lower demands, hydroelectric plants of-
ten use their excess capacity to store energy by pumping water up into
reservoirs. The potential energy thus created can be used later to produce
electricity during periods of peak demand as the potential energy is con-
verted back into mechanical energy to run the generators. (We return to
hydroelectric power in Section 11.10.)
11.8
THE ENERGY PICTURE TODAY
The average human being requires in his or her nutrition about eight mil-
lion joules, or 2000 Calories, of energy for an average work day. (Nutrient
labels required on all food packaging are based on an assumed diet of 2000
Calories, which is 2000 kcal.) This is roughly equivalent to the energy out-
put of a 100-W light bulb burning for 24 hr. For millions of years the av-
erage daily consumption of energy per person on this planet remained at
this amount. Then, about 10,000 years ago, the amount of energy use be-
gan to rise with the establishment of empires, the domestication of animals
for work in agriculture, and the introduction of machines—all of which
consumed additional energy. Energy consumption has risen steadily ever
since, until today the amount of energy consumption per day, averaged over
the world's population, is about one billion joules per person per day—
over one hundred times the subsistence level. This figure is even more 
astounding when we realize that the number of people on Earth has also
increased dramatically, and that most of those people do not live in energy-
intensive industrial societies. The world population today is about six bil-
lion people, compared with only about one million people 10,000 years ago.
What are these billions of joules of energy per day used for, and where
do they come from? Of course, the picture differs from nation to nation
and between industrial and developing nations. We focus here on the
United States economy, which, according to recent estimates, consumes
about 85  1018 J of energy per year—or about one hundred billion joules
per person per day. The table below shows the distribution of this energy
and its usage by each sector of the United States economy in the mid-
1990s.

Distribution of Energy Usage in the United States Economy in Units of 1018 J
Useful work
Wasted
Total energy
Sector of economy
and heating
energy
consumed
Industrial
12
12
24
Residential and commercial
12
5
17
Transportation
5
19
24
Power generation
*
20
20
and transmission
Column total
29
56
85
Percent of total energy
34%
66%
100%
* 10  1018 J for this purpose were included above in the useful energy consumed by the industrial
and residential/commercial sectors.
Derived from A. Hobson, Physics: Concepts and Connections (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1999), p. 448.
The table indicates that nearly two-thirds of the energy consumed in the
United States is wasted. This waste arises not only from careless use of 
the energy provided, but also in large part from the restrictions on the ef-
ficiencies of heat engines owing to the second law of thermodynamics. The
impact of the second law is greatest in the transportation and power gen-
eration sectors of the economy, which rely heavily on heat engines. For in-
stance, the transportation sector, which displays the lowest energy efficiency
(20.8%) of the above sectors of the economy, is dominated by the internal
combustion engine. The average automobile cruising without acceleration
at the most efficient highway speed (55 mi/hr) has an energy efficiency of
only about 13%; that is, of the 70 kW of energy obtained from the fuel
tank, 61 kW are unused in some fashion and only 9 kW are converted into
the useful work needed to overcome air resistance and rolling resistance.
Highway speeds above 55 mi/hr yield significantly lower efficiencies for
such vehicles. Sport utility vehicles and light trucks, which currently rep-
resent a large fraction of new private passenger vehicles, have even lower
overall efficiencies than automobiles. (Heat-engine efficiencies are further
discussed in the next section.)
Energy Resources
Where does the energy consumed come from? The pie graph and table on
next page show the main sources of energy in the United States and their
percentage contributions to the economy (as of 2000). (Following the cat-
egories used by the Department of Energy, "renewables" include all sources
other than fossil fuels and nuclear power.)
11.8 THE ENERGY PICTURE TODAY
529

530
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
Energy Sources for the United States Economy, 2000
Percent
Fossil Fuels
Crude oil
35.2
Coal
27.9
Natural gas
19.4
Natural gas from plant liquid
2.52
Nuclear Power
7.77
Renewables
Hydroelectric
3.25
Wood and biomass
3.53
Geothermal
0.33
Solar
0.076
Wind
0.038
Renewables (7.22%)
Fossil fuels (85.01%)
Nuclear Power (7.77%)
Source: US Dept. of Energy, http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/
aer/overview.html
As you can see, 85% of the nation's energy needs are provided by three
fossil fuels—oil, coal, and natural gas—in which chemical energy from the
remains of organisms that lived millions of years ago is stored. The re-
maining 15% is provided by nuclear power and renewables. All of the nu-
clear and hydroelectric power and most of the coal is used for the produc-
tion of electricity through steam-powered generators. Some of the oil and
natural gas is also used for this purpose, especially in the Northeast, where
it is easier and cheaper to import natural gas and oil, e.g., from Canada,
than it is to ship coal from the Midwest. However, all of the wood and most
of the oil and natural gas are used for nonelectric purposes—wood and gas
for heating, oil for transportation.
While the United States is heavily dependent upon fossil fuels for its en-
ergy needs, the outlook is not promising. Some analysts have pointed out
that industries in the more developed nations have used up in 200 years

most of the reserves of chemical energy accumulated over the last 200 mil-
lion years. According to current estimates, the world's remaining supply of
coal will last only about another two centuries at the current rate of usage,
while the estimated remaining supply of oil will last only another 50 years
or so at the current usage rate. If such estimates are accurate, they indicate
that we cannot continue the current energy scenario much longer. For ex-
ample, the United States is over 50% dependent on imported energy
sources, but many of the reserves are in politically unstable regions. De-
veloping nations are demanding an increasing share of the fossil fuels in
order to attain the benefits of industrialization for their economies. And
the burning of fossil fuels is contributing to pollution and to significant cli-
mate change through the greenhouse effect leading to global warming. This
is further discussed in Section 12.5.
11.9 CONSERVATION
Nuclear energy was once thought to be the answer to our increasing en-
ergy needs, and it may well be in the future—especially considering the ur-
gency of supplying energy for commercial use. However, in the wake of
the Three Mile Island and Chernobyl accidents and
in view of the possibility of a terrorist attack on 
nuclear reactors, the American public has turned
against nuclear energy, and federal regulators have
not renewed the licenses of reactors located near
densely populated areas. All active construction of
new fission reactors has ceased in the United States,
often at great losses to the utility companies (which have shifted the losses
to their consumers through higher rates). Although there is only a little air
pollution (not radioactive) from nuclear reactors, there is the problem of
heat pollution as well as radioactive waste. All of the equipment, spent fuel
rods, water, and even the clothing of the workers are radioactive and must
be safely stored for thousands of years (until several half-lives of the ra-
dioactive elements involved have passed). These problems have both a tech-
nological as well as a political component, and until these can be resolved,
fission reactors will probably not be the long-term solution to this nation's
energy needs. As further discussed in Chapter 18, fusion energy, which
would have none of the problems of present-day nuclear reactors, is not
yet a practical reality, but it may well be in the years ahead.
With nuclear energy not a long-term solution for the United States at
this time, there are at least two other ways in which the United States,
11.9 CONSERVATION
531
Note that other industrial 
nations, in particular France and
Japan, rely heavily on nuclear
energy for their electrical needs
and continue to build new
plants.

532
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
which currently has the largest economy and the greatest total energy con-
sumption on Earth, can provide for its long-term energy needs:
•
conservation of energy through reduction of energy losses;
•
the opening of renewable and other alternative sources of energy.
As with the steam engine and the early electric age, the problem of energy
usage is primarily a scientific and technological one, but the fundamental
decisions are ultimately made by the public through their representatives
and, especially, through individual consumer choices. (Increasing produc-
tion of crude oil or natural gas from national reserves cannot be a long-
term solution.)
Efficiency of a Power Plant
An electric power plant, whether powered by fossil fuels (coal, oil, or gas)
or nuclear fuel, needs both a heat engine and a generator in order to pro-
duce electricity. The thermodynamic limit of the efficiency of a heat en-
gine sets very severe constraints on how much of the energy released from
burning the fuel is ultimately available as electrical energy. (This limit does
not, of course, apply to hydroelectric plants.)
As discussed in Section 6.3, any engine that converts heat into mechan-
ical work must also release heat into the environment. A diagram of this
process, which can be applied to Watt's steam engine or to a large steam
turbine, is sketched in Figure 11.18. T1 and T2 are the temperatures of the
hot and cold reservoirs, respectively; Q1 is the heat fed into the engine; Q2
is the waste heat released into the environment; and W is the useful me-
chanical work obtained from the engine.
The second law of thermodynamics states that in the best possible cir-
cumstances the efficiency (eff) of the heat engine can be no greater than
eff  1 
.
This law is discussed in detail in Section 6.3.
T1

T2
T1
Engine
W
T2
Q1
Q2
FIGURE 11.18
Block dia-
gram of physical quantities
in the operation of a heat
engine.

What does this mean for a power plant? Fuel is burned in a combustion
chamber, the chemical (or nuclear) energy is converted into thermal en-
ergy that keeps the combustion chamber at the temperature T1. Water,
heated by the combustion chamber in the boiler, circulates through the
plant as steam during parts of its route and as liquid during others. In most
plants, very high-pressure steam is created in the boiler. This steam pushes
against the blades of a turbine, doing work on the turbine, and leaves the
turbine as steam at a much lower pressure and temperature. The electric
generator converts the mechanical work done on the turbine into electric
energy; this process is not restricted by the second law because no thermal
energy is involved. Finally, the steam must be condensed so that the water
can retrace its route through the plant. This is done by allowing heat Q2
to escape to the environment at temperature T2. The whole process is shown
schematically in Figure 11.18.
For the best efficiency (as close to 1 as possible), T2 should be as low as
possible, and T1 as high as possible, so that T2/T1 is as small as possible.
However, T2 is fixed by the environment, since cooling air or water must
be used at whatever temperature is available outside. This is generally about
20-25°C (about 300 K). T1 is limited by technology and chemistry. 
Metals weaken and melt when they get too hot. For a modern fossil-fuel
plant, T1 may be as high as 500°C (about 770 K). In a nuclear power plant,
caution suggests more conservative limits, and therefore T1 is typically
400°C (about 670 K). The lower temperature is necessary, in particular, to
avoid damaging the fuel rods.
The maximum possible efficiencies of fossil-fuel and nuclear-power
plants is thus
eff  1 
 1  300/730  0.59
(fossil-fuel plant)
 1  300/670  0.55
(nuclear-power plant)
(The sign  means "approximately equal to.") Therefore, even if there were
no losses of any kind whatsoever, a power plant could only turn about half of
the thermal energy into electrical energy. For each joule of electrical en-
ergy produced, 2 J of energy will have to be provided originally by the fuel.
The remaining joule will be released to the environment (into a river, the
ocean, or the air) as thermal pollution.
The preceding paragraph describes the maximum possible efficiency of
a perfect Carnot engine. Real power plants are significantly less efficient.
Modern fossil-fuel plants can achieve about 38% or 40% in practice; nu-
clear plants, because of the lower value of T1, can manage about 30%. Older
fossil plants have efficiencies of 30% or less. These additional losses are
T2

T1
11.9 CONSERVATION
533

534
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
due to the fact that turbines are not ideal Carnot engines (they have fric-
tion; some heat simply leaks through them without doing any work at all)
and to the fact that there are losses in generators, transformers, and power
lines. A useful rule of thumb is that the overall efficiency of a power plant
is about 33%.
What this analysis shows is, very roughly, that any time you use 1 J of
electrical energy, about 3 J of thermal energy were produced at the power
plant, and 2 J were released into the environment, mostly near the plant.
For example, if you heat a room with a small electric heater, about three
times as much fuel has to be burned to produce the needed energy when
the same fuel is burned directly within the room itself (in a gas stove, for
example). Through state and federal incentive programs, some progress is
being made in convincing consumers to buy, and manufacturers to pro-
duce, more energy-efficient appliances. But this cannot significantly reduce
the overall waste of energy in electrical production and transmission. This
is the trade-off for the fact that electricity is such a convenient source of
power. Only new technologies and discoveries can make a major difference
in reducing this waste.
Because it is largely a consumer decision, the reduction of waste in the
area of transportation may occur more readily. Transportation as a whole
accounts for about 70% of the crude oil consumed in the United States
FIGURE 11.19
The Hong Kong skyline at night. 

and for about one-third of the total energy lost. The fuel efficiency of au-
tomobiles is controlled by technology, as discussed earlier, but advances in
technology are strongly driven by consumer choice. On this point the track
record in the United States has been spotty at best. Automobile efficiency
began to go up following the oil crisis of the mid-1970s, when the public
supported improvements in fuel efficiency and conservation. The picture
changed beginning in the mid-1980s, when gas prices turned far lower than
those in any other industrial nation, and when conservation became less
11.9 CONSERVATION
535
1975
YEAR
FUEL ECONOMY (miles per gallon)
10
14
18
22
26
30
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
Trucks
Total
Cars
FIGURE 11.20
Average gas mileage of U.S. vehicles over time (at moderate highway speed).

536
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
Telephone Technology
The word telephone comes from the Greek
roots tele, "far," and phone, "sound." It was
used as far back as the seventeenth century to
refer to the communication device using a
string with a mouthpiece and hearing devices
at either end. However, in its modern use it
refers to the invention by the Scottish-born
American inventor Alexander Graham Bell.
Bell had a lifelong preoccupation with
speech and communication, and while profes-
sor of "Vocal Physiology and Elocution" at
Boston University, he began work on a ma-
chine that would transmit the voice along elec-
tric wires. In 1875, drawing on Hans Christ-
ian Oersted's and Michael Faraday's work on
electromagnetism, Bell placed a metal dia-
phragm near an electromagnet; and then used
the sound of a human voice to vibrate the di-
aphragm, which in turn changed the magnetic
field, thus inducing a varying current.
The following year Bell improved on this
model by placing a wire in mercury, which
could be used in a circuit to vary resistance
and therefore produce an undulating current
when vibrated by a voice. In March 1876, in
Boston, MA, Watson heard from the device
Bell saying in the next room, "Mr. Watson,
come here. I want to see you."
Bell received patent no. 174,465 for the
development of this device to transmit speech
sounds over electric wires, which is said to be
one of the most valuable patents in history.
Over the next few years, Bell was lionized as
the inventor of the telephone. In tribute, all
telephone service was suspended for a minute
during his burial.
Automobile Technology
By 1910, America had overtaken Europe as
the leading producer of automobiles. The
most successful of this first generation of
American automobile manufacturers was
Henry Ford, who opened his first plant in
1903 in Detroit, Michigan. The automobile
industry was competitive, and the main rea-
son Ford succeeded where others failed seems
to have been his central objective to manu-
facture quality automobiles at a price which
the average American family could afford.
With low cost-high quality in mind, Ford
introduced the Model T in 1908, which
could be purchased at the time for $825, with
the advertising claim "No car under $2000
offers more, and no car over $2000 offers
more except the trimmings." In 1910 Ford
opened the Highland Park assembly plant,
which was a 60-acre site in Detroit. Contin-
uous conveyor belts were introduced at this
plant in 1912, and moving assembly lines in
1913. These methods of mass production en-
abled Ford to reduce the cost of the Model
T further by more than half, while increas-
ing the number of units produced. Not only
did these methods of mass production help
to increase the standard of living of the av-
erage American family, but with the intro-
duction of the (then remarkable) 8-hour day
into his plants, Ford also increased the de-
mand for his motorcars by increasing factory
workers' pay and leisure time.
Further Reading
R.V. Bruce, Alexander Graham Bell and the
Conquest of Solitude, In: C.W. Pursell,
Jr., ed., Technology in America (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989), pp. 105-
116.
J.J. Flink, Henry Ford and the Triumph of
the Automobile, In: C.W. Pursell., Jr.,
ed., Technology in America (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1989), pp. 172-173.
■TWO AMERICAN TECHNOLOGIES

popular. At that point the United States began to grow even more depen-
dent on imported oil from the Middle East and elsewhere, imported oil
now exceeding 50% of total crude-oil consumption. During the same pe-
riod, the average fuel usage calculated for all automobiles remained con-
stant at about 25 miles per gallon, while the amount of gasoline used in-
creased owing to more driving.
The picture changed for the worse during the 1990s with the popular-
ity of less efficiency sport utility vehicles (SUVs), the low prices for gas
during that decade, and a general public apathy about conservation efforts.
Some states have passed laws requiring at least a minimum number of "zero
emission vehicles" on the road by the year 2010. At present, manufactur-
ers and the government are devoting increased financial resources to re-
search and development of battery-operated cars, buses, and trucks as well
as hybrid (electric and internal combustion) vehicles.
11.10 RENEWABLE AND 
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES
Electric generators are not the only means of producing electricity, nor is
electricity the only means of producing heat and light. The burning of
wood, coal, and even oil and gas can produce rudimentary heat and light
without electricity, as does the use of solar heating. In solar heating, direct
sunlight is used to light and warm buildings during the day. It is also used
to heat coils of water on buildings. The heated water is then circulated into
a building to provide heat as well as hot water. More indirectly, solar power
is also used to grow foodstuffs, which of course is also an essential source
of energy for us.
Solar power is receiving intense study as a means of producing electric-
ity because of the vast amount of energy potentially available. Just outside
the Earth's atmosphere the Sun's radiation provides 1360 W of power to
each square meter of surface. By the time the radiation reaches the Earth's
surface, much of it is lost, because of atmospheric absorption and clouds.
Since the Earth rotates, more or less direct sunlight is available in any par-
ticular spot on the Earth's surface for only about 8 hr (on the average) each
day. Depending upon the location, then, between 150 and 450 W/m2 are
delivered to ground level when averaged over a 24-hr period. This power
can be used to boil water with which to power an ordinary steam turbine
generating plant, or to heat water for household use.
Sunlight can also be converted directly into electricity in photocells or
"solar" cells by a process called photovoltaic conversion. The basic operation
11.10 RENEWABLE AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES
537

FIGURE 11.21
Major electric transmission lines in the continental United States.

of the photocell is explained in Chapter 16. Such devices are used today
mostly to power individual buildings, pocket calculators, and satellites in
outer space. However, even in the best photocell is unable to turn all the
energy that strikes it into electrical energy, for much of the light is reflected,
transmitted, or turned into wasted heat within the cell.
When solar power could solve many of the problems resulting from fuel
shortages and avoid the environmental pollution of other energy sources,
the generation of even a significant fraction of our nation's electric power
directly from the Sun is dependent on finding ways of building far less ex-
pensive collection systems for accepting the Sun's energy, and storage sys-
tems for providing the electricity when it is needed (at night, for example,
or on cloudy days). Probably the most widely practiced use of solar energy
will remain for the foreseeable future at the local level—the heating of
houses and the production of hot water for home use.
One of the most attractive alternative energy sources for electricity gen-
eration is wind energy, the kinetic energy of moving air set into motion by
the effects of solar energy on the Earth's atmosphere. The energy in the
wind can generate electricity by turning the blades of a propeller attached
to an electric generator. Such devices are being used to provide the elec-
11.10 RENEWABLE AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES
539
FIGURE 11.22
Solar energy
collectors in the Mojave Desert
of California. 

540
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
tricity for cities such as San Jose, California, through the turning of a vast
array of propeller-driven generators (wind turbines) in a mountain pass 
outside the city. Such arrays could also be used successfully in other windy
areas of a country, supplying a fraction of the energy needs in those re-
gions. However, winds are never steady and some regions of the nation do
not have sufficient winds to generate much electricity. Moreover, some peo-
ple regard the sight of large arrays of wind turbines across the countryside
as a blight upon the landscape. In addition, measures must be taken to keep
birds away from the spinning propellers. Thus, while wind energy offers
the possibility of large-scale energy production for local use, its prospects
at this time are limited as a large-scale commercial source of energy.
Another means of providing the work necessary to turn the coils in an
electric generator is to use the potential energy of falling water in a hydro-
electric power plant. As discussed earlier (Section 11.7), water from a dam
or a water fall flows over the blades of a crank shaft connected to a tur-
bine, turning the kinetic energy of the water into the mechanical work nec-
essary to generate electric current. In this way, the Niagara Falls power
plant discussed earlier, as well as the Hoover Dam and others, provide
FIGURE 11.23
Wind turbines in California for generating electricity. 

enormous amounts of hydroelectric power. However, also like wind energy,
hydroelectric power is limited only to regions of the country near such a
dam or a water fall. In addition, there are often important environmental
effects caused by the damming of a river: the impounding of nutrient-rich
sediments that are denied to downstream marine life; the disruption of bird
or fish migrations, such as the return of salmon to upstream spawning
grounds; and the destruction of scenery. Because of the practical and envi-
ronmental shortcomings, hydroelectric power still accounts for only about
3.25% of this nation's total energy needs.
Strange as it may seem, at present the only other means of providing the
mechanical work necessary to turn the crank in a generator is to make use
of steam-engine technology—using heat to boil water to produce steam
that performs the work necessary to generate an electric current. As noted
earlier, the burning of fossil fuels—coal, oil, and natural gas—is still the
most widely used means of heating water to produce the steam. But there
11.10 RENEWABLE AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES
541
FIGURE 11.24
The out-flow end of water-driven electric generators producing power at
Wilson Dam (part of the Tennessee Valley Authority). The plant can generate electric en-
ergy at a rate of over 100,000,000 watts. 

are at least four other possible heat sources—again, all with significant dis-
advantages. These alternatives are:
•
geothermal energy—tapping the heat inside the Earth arising from 
geological pressure and radioactive decay;
•
biomass energy—the heat released in the chemical breakdown of 
organic materials, such as wood, compost heaps, and garbage;
•
solar-thermal energy—focusing the Sun's rays to heat water to produce
the necessary steam (discussed above);
•
nuclear energy—using the heat produced in nuclear fission to boil 
water (Section 11.5, further discussed in Chapter 18).
The first three of these alternatives, as well as wind and hydroelectric
power, are classified as renewable energy sources. In contrast, fossil fuels and
nuclear fission are not renewable, because there is only a limited supply of
these resources. When they are used up, they're gone forever. The dilemma
is that while the renewable sources involve less pollution and will not be
depleted in the near term, they cannot yet supply our total energy need.
Moreover, all forms of energy conversion have economic and/or environ-
mental consequences.
In the end, the energy problem will have to be solved through partner-
ship comprising scientific research and technology community and the 
542
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
FIGURE 11.25
Geothermal power plant in Iceland. 

public. The balance among these three can change very rapidly. New break-
throughs, such as the harnessing of fusion energy, may be expected, and
new demands by the public expressed through voting patterns and con-
sumer choices can always lead to new choices for our energy needs and our
energy future.
FURTHER READING
M. Brower, Cool Energy: Renewable Solutions to Environmental Problems (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1992).
R. Rhodes and D. Bollen, The Need for Nuclear Power, Foreign Affairs, Jan./Feb.
2000, 30-44.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
AC current
lines of force
commutator
motor
conservation
parallel circuit
DC current
photovoltaic conversion
electromagnetic induction
renewable energy sources
fossil fuels
series circuit
generator
transformer
high-tension wire
turbine
incandescent lighting
wind turbine
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
11.1 Transporting Energy from One Place to Another
1.
What were some of the deficiencies of the steam engine? In what general way
might they be remedied?
11.2 Faraday's First Electric Motor
1.
Why does the magnetic pole of Faraday's "electromagnetic rotator" move in a
circle around a fixed wire?
11.3 The Discovery of Electromagnetic Induction
1.
Why is Faraday considered the discoverer of electromagnetic induction?
2.
What is the general definition of electromagnetic induction?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
543

544
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
11.4 Generating Electricity: The Generator
1.
What is the position of a rotating loop when it generates maximum current?
minimum current? Why?
2.
What is the purpose of the commutator?
3.
Where does the energy delivered by the generator come from?
11.5 Putting Electricity to Work: The Motor
1.
How does interaction between science and technology differ in the development
of electrical technology from the development of steam-engine technology?
2.
How would you make an electric motor out of a generator?
3.
What prevented the electric motor from being an immediate economic 
success?
4.
What chance event led to the beginning of the electric power age?
11.6 The Electric Light Bulb
1.
What device was essential to the development of the incandescent lamp?
2.
Why did Edison require a substance with a high resistance for his light-bulb
filaments?
3.
What were some of the major effects the introduction of electric power had
on everyday life?
11.7 AC versus DC: The Niagara Falls Power Plant
1.
What were some of the disadvantages of DC generation?
2.
What factors made Edison's recommendation for the use of DC for the 
Niagara Falls system less attractive?
3.
Give one reason why it is more economical to transmit electric power at high
voltage and low current than at low voltage and high current.
4.
Why will transformers not operate if steady DC is furnished for the primary
coil?
11.8 The Energy Picture Today
1.
Why is there growing concern about the energy future of the United States
and the world?
2.
How is the energy used by the United States economy distributed among the
different sectors?
3.
Where does the energy used by the United States economy come from?
4.
Why is there concern about these energy sources, and what are some of their
other disadvantages?
11.9 Conservation
1.
Why isn't nuclear fission energy at present the answer to our energy needs?
2.
What limits the efficiency of electric power plants? How efficient are they 
at best?

3.
What are the current possibilities and prospects for reducing waste energy in
personal transportation?
4.
Where does the ultimate decision lie regarding conservation of energy 
resources?
11.10 Renewable and Alternative Energy Sources
1.
List all of the various energy options discussed in this section. Describe what
each one entails in your own words.
2.
Using your list of energy sources in Question 1, indicate the following:
(a) Which ones are renewable and which are not?
(b) Which ones involve direct production of electricity?
(c) Which ones can provide heat and light without the use of electricity?
(d) Which ones can provide the mechanical work to run a generator?
(e) Which ones can provide the heat to create steam to generate electricity?
3.
Using your list in Question 1, list the advantages and disadvantages of each of
these energy sources.
4.
Why haven't any of these alternatives replaced fossil fuels as the main energy
source for advanced industrial economies?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1. During the course of 1 day, try to take careful note of all of the electrical ap-
pliances and devices that you use. Then try to imagine what your life would
be like if none of these devices existed.
2. During the course of 1 day, try to take careful note of all of the different ways
in which you use energy. Note also the types of energy you use. Then try to
imagine what your life would be like if the only energy you could use is what
you could obtain only from food and the natural environment.
3. What sources of energy were there for industry before the electrical age? How
was the energy transported to where it was needed?
4. Oersted discovered that a magnetic needle was affected by a current. Would
you expect a magnetic needle to exert a force on a current? Why? How would
you detect this force?
5. In which of these cases will electromagnetic induction occur?
(a) A battery is connected to a loop of wire that is being held near another
closed loop of wire.
(b) A battery is disconnected from a loop of wire held near another loop 
of wire.
(c) A magnet is moved through a loop of wire.
(d) A loop of wire is held fixed in a steady magnetic field.
(e) A loop of wire is moved across a magnetic field.
6. It was stated on page 516 that the output of a DC generator can be made
smoother by using multiple windings. If each of two loops set at an angle were
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
545

7. Trace the energy conversions in a system of a generator and motor, from heat
input to work output. In what ways are the first and second laws of thermo-
dynamics obeyed?
8. Why is a generator coil harder to turn when it is connected to an appliance
to which it provides current, such as a lamp, than when it is disconnected
from any appliance?
9. Suppose two vertical bar magnets, each held by one end at the same level, are
dropped simultaneously. One of them passes through a closed loop of wire
on the way down. Which magnet reaches the ground first? Why?
10. Comment on the advisability and possible methods of getting out of a car
over which a high-voltage power line has fallen.
11. Using the data given in Section 11.8, compare the amount of energy required
for the subsistence of an average human being per day with the amount of
energy consumed per person per day in the United States. How would you
account for the difference?
12. For each of the sources of energy listed in this chapter list the advantages and
disadvantages.
13. On the basis of this chapter, and your own readings, how would you assess the
outlook for the world's future energy needs? How would you assess the outlook
for the available solutions, namely other energy sources and conservation?
14. Look up the history of a recent new technology, such as the Intel processor
or Microsoft's computer operating systems, or a successful Internet company,
and compare their sources and strategies for success with Edison's.
15. This chapter has described several instances in which science, technology, and
society have interacted with each other. Summarize some of these interactions
connected to commutators as shown, what would the output current of the
generator be like?
546
11. THE ELECTRIC AGE
N
S

DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
547
and notice any similarities and differences. Can you draw any conclusions
from this?
16. This chapter has described several great technological breakthroughs associ-
ated with fundamental scientific discoveries. Make a list of some of these dis-
coveries and breakthroughs, then list the benefits to humankind as well as any
real or potential detriments. In each case what are the respective responsibil-
ities, if any, of the scientists, the engineers, the industries, the governors, and
the general public in ensuring that the detriments are avoided and the bene-
fits are achieved?

This page intentionally left blank 

-
+
12.1 Faraday's Suggestion
12.2 Maxwell's Principles of Electromagnetism
12.3 The Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves
12.4 Hertz's Experimental Confirmation
12.5 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
12.6 What About the Ether Now?
12.1 FARADAY'S SUGGESTION
On April 11, 1846, the distinguished physicist Charles Wheatstone was
scheduled to give a lecture at the Royal Institution in London. Michael
Faraday was to introduce Wheatstone to the audience. At the last minute,
just as Faraday and Wheatstone were about to enter the lecture hall, Wheat-
stone got stage fright, turned around, and ran out into the street. Faraday
had to improvise and give a lecture himself. Normally, Faraday discussed
in public only his actual experiments. But on this occasion he revealed cer-
tain speculations which, as he later admitted, he would never have made
public had he not suddenly been forced to speak for an hour—although
these speculations soon changed physics.
Faraday's speculations dealt with the nature of light. Faraday, like 
Oersted before him, believed that all the forces of nature are somehow con-
nected. Electricity and magnetism, for example, could not be separate forces
that just happen to exist in the same universe. Rather, they must be differ-
ent forms of one basic phenomenon. This belief paralleled that of Immanuel
Kant, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling, and other German nature
philosophers at the beginning of the nineteenth century. It had inspired
Oersted to search in the laboratory for a connection between electricity
and magnetism. Eventually he found such a connection in his discovery
549
Electromagnetic
Waves
C
H
A
P
T
E
R12
12

that an electric current in a conductor can turn a nearby magnet (see Chap-
ter 10).
Faraday, too, had been guided by a belief in the unity of natural forces.
Could light be another form of this basic "force"? Or rather, to use more
modern terms, is light a form of energy? If so, scientists should be able to
demonstrate experimentally its connection with other forms of energy such
as electricity and magnetism. Faraday did succeed in doing just this. In
1845, he showed that light traveling through heavy glass had its plane of
polarization rotated by a magnetic field applied to the glass.
Having shown a definite connection between light and magnetism, Fara-
day could not resist going one step further in his unrehearsed lecture the
following year, revealing thoughts he had held privately. Perhaps, he sug-
gested, light itself is a vibration of magnetic lines of force. Suppose, for ex-
ample, that two magnetized or charged objects are connected by a mag-
netic or electric line of force. If one of them moved, Faraday reasoned, a
disturbance would be transmitted along the line of force. Furthermore, if
light waves were vibrations of lines of force, then a hypothetical elastic sub-
stance such as "ether" would not be needed in order to explain the prop-
550
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
FIGURE 12.1
Faraday's Christmas Lecture at the Royal Institution, London (painting by
Blaikley). 

agation of light. The concept of the ether could be replaced if it could be
shown that lines of force themselves have the elastic properties needed for
wave transmission.
Faraday could not make his idea more precise. He lacked the mathe-
matical skill needed to prove that waves could propagate along lines of elec-
tric or magnetic force. Other physicists in Britain and Europe might have
been able to develop a mathematical theory of electromagnetic waves. But
at the time these scientists either did not understand Faraday's concept of
lines of force or did not consider them a good basis for a mathematical the-
ory. Ten years passed before James Clerk Maxwell, a Scottish mathemati-
cal physicist, saw the value of the idea of lines of force and started using
mathematics to express Faraday's concepts.
12.2 MAXWELL'S PRINCIPLES OF
ELECTROMAGNETISM
The work of Oersted, Ampère, Henry, and Faraday had established two ba-
sic principles of electromagnetism:
1.
An electric current in a conductor produces magnetic lines of force that circle
the conductor.
2.
When a conductor moves across externally set-up magnetic lines of force, a
current is induced in the conductor.
In the 1860s, James Clerk Maxwell developed a mathematical theory of
electromagnetism. In it, he added to and generalized these principles so
that they applied to electric and magnetic fields in conductors, in insula-
tors, and even in space free of matter. In 1855, less than 2 years after com-
pleting his undergraduate studies at Cambridge University, Maxwell had
already presented to the Cambridge Philosophical Society a long paper 
titled "On Faraday's Lines of Force." It described how these lines are 
constructed:
. . . if we commence at any point and draw a line so that, as we go
along it, its direction at any point shall always coincide with that of
the resultant force at that point, this curve will indicate the direc-
tion of that force for every point through which it passes, and might
be called on that account a line of force. We might in the same way
draw other lines of force, till we had filled all space with curves in-
dicating by their direction that of the force at any assigned point.
12.2 MAXWELL'S PRINCIPLES OF ELECTROMAGNETISM
551

Maxwell stated that his paper was designed to
show how, by a strict application of the ideas and methods of 
Faraday, the connection of the very different orders of phenomena
which he has discovered may be clearly placed before the mathe-
matical mind.
During the next 10 years, Maxwell created his own models of electric
and magnetic induction. In developing his theory, he first proposed a me-
chanical model for the electrical and magnetic quantities observed experi-
552
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
JAMES CLERK MAXWELL
James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879) was
born in Edinburgh, Scotland, in the same
year Faraday discovered electromagnetic
induction. Unlike Faraday, Maxwell came
from a well-off family. He was educated at
the Edinburgh Academy and the Univer-
sity of Edinburgh. He showed a lively in-
terest in how things happened when he
was scarcely three years old. As a child, he
constantly asked, "What's the go of that?"
He studied mechanisms, from a toy top to
a commercial steam engine, until he had
satisfied his curiosity about how they
worked. His formal studies, begun at the
Academy in Edinburgh and continued
through his work as an undergraduate at
Cambridge, gave Maxwell experience in
using mathematics to develop useful par-
allels among apparently unrelated occur-
rences. His first publication appeared in
the proceedings of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh when he was only 14 years old.
In the 1870's, Maxwell organized the
Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge Uni-
versity, which soon became a world cen-
ter for physics research. Maxwell was one
of the main contributors to the kinetic
theory of gases, to statistical mechanics
and thermodynamics, and also the theory
of color vision. His greatest achievement
was his electromagnetic theory. Maxwell
is generally regarded as the most profound
and productive physicist between the time
of Newton and Einstein.
FIGURE 12.2

mentally by Faraday and others. Maxwell then expressed the operation of
the model in a group of equations that gave the relations between the elec-
tric and magnetic fields. He soon found these equations to be the most use-
ful way to represent the theory. Their power allowed him eventually to dis-
card the mechanical model altogether. Maxwell's mathematical view is still
considered by physicists to be the proper approach to the theory of elec-
tromagnetic phenomena. If you go on to take another physics course after
this introductory one, you will find the development of Maxwell's mathe-
matical model (Maxwell's equation, using vector calculus) to be one of the
high points of the course.
Maxwell's work contained an entirely new idea of far-reaching conse-
quences: An electric field that is changing with time must be accompanied by a
magnetic field. Not only do steady electric currents passing through con-
ductors (a "conduction current") produce magnetic fields around the 
conductors, but changing electric fields in insulators such as glass, air, or
even empty space also produce magnetic fields.
It is one thing to accept this newly stated connection between electric
and magnetic fields. But it is harder, and more interesting, to understand
the physical necessity for such a connection. The remainder of this section
is intended to make it clearer.
An uncharged insulator (such as glass, wood, paper, or rubber) contains
equal amounts of negative and positive charges. In the normal state, these
charges are distributed evenly. Thus, the net charge is zero in every region
of the material. But when the insulator is placed in an electric field, these
charges are subjected to electrical forces. The positive charges are pushed
in one direction, the negative in the opposite direction. Unlike the charges
in a conductor, the charges in an insulating material are not free to move
far through the material. The charges can be displaced only a small dis-
tance before restoring forces in the insulator balance the force of the elec-
tric field. If the strength of the field is increased, the charges will be dis-
placed further. But the changing displacement of charges that accompanies
a changing electric field in an insulator briefly forms a current. Maxwell
called this current a displacement current. He assumed that this momentary
displacement current in an insulator surrounds itself with a magnetic field
just as a conduction current of the same magnitude does.
In an insulator, the displacement current is defined as the rate at which
the charge displacement changes. This rate is directly proportional to the rate
at which the electric field is changing in time. Thus, the magnetic field that
circles the displacement current can be considered a consequence of the
time-varying electric field. Maxwell assumed that this model, developed for
matter, also applies to space free of matter (though at first glance this may
seem absurd). Therefore, under all circumstances, as noted above, an elec-
12.2 MAXWELL'S PRINCIPLES OF ELECTROMAGNETISM
553

tric field that is changing with time surrounds itself with a magnetic field.
Previously, it was thought that the only current that produced a magnetic
field was the current in a conductor. Now Maxwell predicted that a mag-
netic field would also arise from a changing electric field, even in empty
space. Unfortunately, this field was very small in comparison to the mag-
netic field produced by the current in the conductors of the apparatus. So
it was not at that time possible to measure it directly. But as you will see,
Maxwell predicted consequences that soon could be tested.
According to Maxwell's theory, then, the two basic principles of elec-
tromagnetism should be expanded by adding a third principle:
3.
A changing electric field in space produces a magnetic field.
The induced magnetic field vector B is in a plane perpendicular to the
changing electric field vector E. The magnitude of B depends on the rate
at which E is changing—not on E itself, but on E/t. Therefore, the
higher the rate of alteration of E, the greater the field B so induced.
For instance, consider a pair of conducting plates connected to a source of
current. Charges are moved onto or away from plates through the conduc-
tors connecting them to the source. Thus, the strength of the electric field E
in the space between the plates changes with time. This changing electric field
produces a magnetic field B as shown. (Of course, only a few of the infinitely
many lines for E and B are shown.)
An additional principle, known before Maxwell, assumed new signifi-
cance in Maxwell's work because it is so symmetrical to Statement 3 above:
4.
A changing magnetic field in space produces an electric field.
The induced electric field vector E is in a plane perpendicular to the chang-
ing magnetic field vector B. Similarly to Principle 3, the magnitude of E
depends on the rate at which B is changing—not on B itself, but on B/t.
For instance, consider the changing magnetic field produced by temporar-
ily increasing the current in an electromagnet. This changing magnetic field
554
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
E
FIGURE 12.3
When an electric field is set up in an insulat-
ing material (as in the diagram here), the positive and neg-
ative charges, which are bound to one another by attraction,
are displaced. This displacement forms a current (the posi-
tive charges are represented by dots, and the negative
charges by shaded circles).

555
I
I
−
+
E
E
B
B
FIGURE 12.4
(a) A changing electric field produces a
magnetic field: When the electric field E between a pair
of charged plates starts to increase in intensity, a mag-
netic field B is induced. The faster E changes, the more
intense B is. When E momentarily has reached its max-
imum value, B has decreased to zero momentarily.
When E diminishes, a B field is again induced, in the
opposite direction, falling to zero as E returns to its orig-
inal strength. (b) A changing magnetic field produces an
electric field. When the magnetic field B between the
poles of an electromagnet starts to increase, an electric
field E is induced. The faster B changes, the more in-
tense E is. When B momentarily has reached its maxi-
mum value, E has decreased to zero momentarily. When
B diminishes, an E field is again induced, in the oppo-
site direction, falling to zero as B returns to its original
strength.
(a)
(b)

induces an electric field in the region around the magnet. If a conductor
happens to be lined up in the direction of the induced electric field, the
free charges in the conductor will move under the field's influence. Thus,
a current in the direction of the induced field will arise in the conductor.
This electromagnetic induction had been discovered experimentally by
Faraday (Section 11.3).
Maxwell's theory, involving the total set of relations between electric and
magnetic fields in space, was not at once directly testable. When the test
finally came, it concerned his prediction of the existence of waves travel-
ing as interrelating electric and magnetic fields, that is, as electromagnetic
waves.
12.3 THE PROPAGATION OF 
ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
Suppose in a certain region of space, an electric field is created that changes
with time. According to Maxwell's theory, an electric field E that varies in
time simultaneously induces a magnetic field B that also varies with time.
(The strength of the magnetic field also varies with the distance from the
region where the changing electric field was created.) Similarly, a magnetic
field that is changing with time simultaneously induces an electric field that
changes with time. (Here, too, the strength of the electric field also changes
with distance from the region where the changing magnetic field was cre-
ated.) The electric and magnetic field changes occur together, much like
the "action" and "reaction" of Newton's third law.
As Maxwell realized and correctly predicted, the mutual induction of
varying electric and magnetic fields should set up an unending sequence of
events. First, a time-varying electric field in one region produces a time-
556
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
E4
B3
E2
B1
Increasing E1
E3
B2
FIGURE 12.5
Electric and magnetic fields linked by in-
duction. An increasing electric field at the left (or cur-
rent) surrounds itself with a magnetic field. As the cur-
rent changes, it induces an interlinking electric field. The
chain-like process continues with finite velocity. This is
only a symbolic picture of the process, which propagates
itself in all directions in space.

and space-varying magnetic field at points near this region. But this 
magnetic field produces a time- and space-varying electric field in the space 
surrounding it. And this electric field produces time- and space-varying
magnetic fields in its neighborhood, and so on. Thus, suppose that an elec-
tromagnetic disturbance is started at one location, say by vibrating charges
in a hot gas or in the transmitter wire of a radio or television station. This
disturbance can travel to distant points through the mutual generation of
the electric and magnetic fields. The fluctuating, interlocked electric, and
magnetic fields propagate through space as a wave.
This wave is an electromagnetic wave, a disturbance
in the electric and magnetic field intensities in space.
In Part One, Chapter 8, we showed that waves
occur when a disturbance created in one region pro-
duces at a later time a disturbance in adjacent re-
gions. Snapping one end of a rope produces, through
the action of one part of the rope on the other, a
displacement at points farther along the rope and at
a later time. Dropping a pebble into a pond pro-
duces a disturbance that moves away from the source
as one part of the water acts on neighboring parts.
Analogously, time-varying electric and magnetic fields produce a distur-
bance that moves away from the source as the varying fields in one region
create varying fields in neighboring regions.
The Speed of Electromagnetic Waves
What determines the speed with which electromagnetic waves travel? For
mechanical waves the speed of propagation is determined by the stiffness
and density of the medium (see Section 8.3). Speed increases with in-
creasing stiffness, but decreases with increasing density. It is given by the
expression
speed 
.
This relationship between wave speed, stiffness, and density holds for me-
chanical wave motions and for many other types of waves. Only the barest
outline of how Maxwell proceeded beyond this point is given here. First,
he assumed that a similar "stiffness and density" relation would hold for
electromagnetic waves. Then he computed what he thought to be the "stiff-
ness" and "density" of electric and magnetic fields propagating through the
hypothetical ether. In finding values for these two properties of the elec-
stiffness

density
12.3 THE PROPAGATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
557
Maxwell had shown that in an
electromagnetic disturbance E
and B should be perpendicular
to each other and to the direc-
tion of propagation of the wave.
Therefore, in the language of
Chapter 8, electromagnetic
waves are transverse. And as was
noted in Chapter 8, it was long
known that light waves are
transverse.

tric and magnetic fields, Maxwell was guided by his mechanical model rep-
resenting the ether. In this model, stiffness was related to the electric field,
and density to the magnetic field. Next, he proved mathematically that the
ratio of these two factors, which should determine the wave speed, is the
same for all strengths of the fields. Finally, Maxwell demonstrated that the
speed of the waves (if they exist!) is a definite quantity that can be deduced
from measurements in the laboratory.
The necessary measurements of the factors involved actually had been
made 5 years earlier by the German scientists Weber and Kohlrausch. Us-
ing their published values, Maxwell calculated that the speed of the supposed
electromagnetic waves (in metric units) should be about 311,000,000 m/s.
He was immediately struck by the fact that this large number was very 
close to a measured speed already well known in physics. In 1849, Armand
Fizeau had measured the speed of light and had obtained a value of about
315,000,000 m/s. (Today, the measured speed of light in vacuum is known
to be 299,792,458 m/s.) The close similarity could have been a chance oc-
currence. But Maxwell believed that there must be a deep underlying reason
558
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
B
E
B
E
FIGURE 12.6
In a microwave oscillator, which you may see in your labora-
tory work, electric oscillations in a circuit are led onto a rod in a metal "horn."
In the horn, they generate a variation in electric and magnetic fields that ra-
diates away into space. This drawing represents an instantaneous "snapshot"
of almost plane wave fronts directly in front of such a horn.

for these two numbers being so nearly the same. The significance for physics
seemed obvious to him. Making an enormous leap of the imagination, 
he wrote:
The velocity of the transverse undulations in our hypothetical
medium, calculated from the electromagnetic experiments of MM.
Kohlrausch and Weber, agrees so exactly with the velocity of light
calculated from the optical experiments of M. Fizeau, that we can
scarcely avoid the inference that light consists in the transverse undu-
lations of the same medium which is the cause of electric and magnetic
phenomena.
It was already long known that light waves are transverse. When Maxwell
found that in an electromagnetic disturbance E and B should be perpen-
dicular to each other and to the direction of propagation of the wave, he
concluded that electromagnetic waves are also transverse.
Here, then, in Maxwell's statement, was an explanation of light waves and at
the same time a joining of the previously separate sciences of electricity and magnet-
ism with optics—a new synthesis. Maxwell realized the importance of his dis-
covery. Now he set to work making the theory mathematically sound and
freeing it from his admittedly artificial model based on the ether hypothesis.
Classical Physics
Maxwell summarized his synthesis of electromagnetism and optics in his
monumental Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, published in 1873. After
the experimental confirmation of his work (see Section 12.14), Maxwell's
synthesis was seen as a great event in physics. In fact, physics had known
no greater time since the 1680s, when Newton was writing his monumen-
tal work on mechanics. Of course, Maxwell's electromagnetic theory had
arisen in Maxwell's mind in a Newtonian, mechanical framework. But it
had grown out of that framework, becoming another great general physi-
cal theory, independent of its mechanical origins.
Like Newtonian mechanics, Maxwell's electromagnetic field theory suc-
ceeded spectacularly. You will see something of that success in the next few
sections. The success occurred on two different levels: the practical and the
theoretical. Practically, it led to a host of modern developments, such as
radio and television. On the theoretical level, it led to a whole new way of
viewing phenomena. The Universe was not only a Newtonian machine 
of whirling and colliding parts; it included fields and energies that no ma-
chine could duplicate. Maxwell's work formed a basis of the special theory
12.3 THE PROPAGATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
559

of relativity. Other physical theories were nourished by it also. In a sense,
the work of Maxwell and Newton, as well as that of Carnot and other
founders of thermodynamics, enabled a fairly complete understanding of
events in the physical world that surrounds us, from the motions of space
satellites, cars, and atoms in gases to the behavior of light and other elec-
tromagnetic waves. The physics of the everyday, visible world, based upon
the work of Newton and Maxwell, has remained to this day and is often
known as classical physics. It is based on three steps of verification: Galileo's
and Newton's verification of terrestrial and celestial phenomena; Oested's
fusion of electric and magnetic phenomena; and Maxwell's addition of light
to Oested's verification
Eventually, however, as research pushed into unfamiliar realms of nature
at the scale of the very small (inside atoms), the very fast (approaching the
speed of light), and the very large (the size of the Universe), results accu-
mulated that could not be explained using classical physics. Something more
was needed. Starting about 1925, after a quarter century of discovery, the
development of quantum mechanics led to a larger synthesis, which in-
cluded Maxwell's electromagnetism (see Chapter 15).
12.4 HERTZ'S EXPERIMENTAL CONFIRMATION
Did Maxwell himself establish without doubt that light actually does con-
sist of electromagnetic waves, or even that electromagnetic waves exist at
all? No. Most physicists remained skeptical for several years. The fact that
the ratio of two quantities determined by electrical experiments came out
nearly equal to the speed of light certainly suggested some connection be-
tween electricity and light. No one would seriously argue that this was 
only a coincidence. But stronger evidence was needed before the rest of
Maxwell's theory, with its notion of the displacement current, could be 
accepted.
What further evidence was needed to persuade physicists that Maxwell's
theory was correct? Maxwell showed that his theory could explain all the
known facts about electricity, magnetism, and light. But so could other the-
ories, although with less sweeping connections between their separate parts.
To a modern physicist, the other theories proposed in the nineteenth cen-
tury seem much more complicated and artificial than Maxwell's. But at the
time, Maxwell's theory seemed strange to physicists who were not accus-
tomed to thinking in terms of fields. It could be accepted over other the-
ories only if it could be used to predict best some newly discovered prop-
erty of electromagnetism or light.
560
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

Maxwell himself made two such predictions from his theory. He did not
live to see them verified experimentally in 1888, for he had died in 1879,
at the age of 48. Maxwell's most important prediction was that electro-
magnetic waves of many different frequencies could exist. All such waves
would propagate through space at the speed of light. Visible light itself
would correspond to waves of only a small range of high frequencies (from
4  1014 Hz to 7  1014 Hz), the range of frequencies detectable by the
human eye. (Recall that the unit "cycles per second" is called the hertz,
symbol Hz, after Heinrich Hertz.)
To test Maxwell's predictions required inventing apparatus that could
both produce and detect electromagnetic waves, preferably of frequencies
other than light frequencies. This was first done by the German physicist
Heinrich Hertz, whose contribution was triggered by a chance observation.
In 1886, Hertz noticed a peculiar effect produced during the sparking of
an induction coil. As was well known, sparks sometimes jump the air gap
between the terminals of an induction coil (see drawing). You will recall
(Chapter 11) that an induction coil can be used to produce high voltages
if there are many more turns of wire on one side than on the other. Ordi-
narily, air does not conduct electricity. But when there is a very large po-
tential difference between two wires a short distance apart, a conducting
pathway may form briefly as air molecules are ionized. A short burst of
electricity then may pass through, attended by a visible spark. Each visible
spark produced is actually a series of many small sparks, jumping rapidly
back and forth (oscillating) between the terminals. Hertz found that he
could control the spark's frequency of oscillation by changing the size and
shape of metal plates attached to the spark gap of the induction coil.
Hertz then took a simple piece of wire and bent it so that there was a
short gap between its two ends. When it was held near an induction coil,
a spark jumped across the air gap in the wire just when a spark jumped across the
terminals of the induction coil. This was a surprising phenomenon. To explain
it, Hertz reasoned that as the spark jumps back and forth across the gap of
the induction coil, it must set up rapidly changing electric and magnetic
12.4 HERTZ'S EXPERIMENTAL CONFIRMATION
561
+ −
S
A
B
FIGURE 12.7
Operation of the induction coil: Starting
and stopping the current in coil A with a vibrating switch
S produces a rapidly changing magnetic field in the iron
core. This rapidly changing field induces high-voltage
peaks in the many-turn coil B and can cause a spark to
jump across the air gap. Spark coils for use in car engines
operate this way.

fields. According to Maxwell's theory, these changes propagate through
space as electromagnetic waves. (The frequency of the waves is the same
as the frequency of oscillations of the sparks.) When the electromagnetic
waves pass over the bent wire, which acted as a detector, they set up rap-
idly changing electric and magnetic fields there, too. A strong electric field
around the detector produces a spark in its air gap, just as the transmitter
field did between the terminals of the induction coil. Since the field is rap-
idly changing, sparks can jump back and forth between the two ends of the
wire. Hertz's observation of the induced spark in the detector was the first
solid clue that electromagnetic waves exist.
Hertz showed that the electromagnetic radiation coming from his in-
duction coil has all the usual properties of light waves. It can be reflected
at the surface of solid bodies, including metallic conductors. In addition,
the angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence. The electromag-
netic radiation can be focused by concave metallic mirrors. It shows dif-
fraction when it passes through an opening in a screen. It displays all in-
terference phenomena, including standing waves. Also, electromagnetic
waves are refracted by prisms made of glass, wood, plastic, and other non-
conducting material. By setting up a standing-wave pattern by using a large
562
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
FIGURE 12.8
Heinrich Hertz (1857-1894) was
born in Hamburg, Germany. During his youth,
Hertz was mainly interested in languages and the
humanities, but he was attracted to science after
his grandfather gave him some experimental ap-
paratus. Hertz did simple experiments in a small
laboratory which he had fitted out in his home.
After completing secondary school (and a year of
military service) he undertook the serious study
of mathematics and physics at the University of
Berlin in 1878. In 1882, Hertz devoted himself
to the study of electromagnetism, including the
recent and still generally unappreciated work of
Maxwell. Two years later he began his famous
series of experiments with electromagnetic
waves. During the course of this work, Hertz dis-
covered the photoelectric effect, which has had
a profound influence on modern physics. His
early death is thought to have been caused by
poisoning of vapor from mercury, then much
used in laboratories without precautions. 

metal reflector, Hertz was also able to determine the distance between con-
secutive nodes and thus measure the wavelength. He determined the fre-
quency of the oscillating electric current through an analysis of his circuits.
Thus, he was able to determine the speed of his waves and found it to be
the same value that Maxwell had predicted: the speed of light!
Hertz's experiments dramatically confirmed Maxwell's electromagnetic
theory, by showing that electromagnetic waves actually exist, that they do
travel with the speed of light, and that they have the familiar characteristics
of light. Now physicists rapidly accepted Maxwell's theory and applied it
with great success to the detailed analysis of a wide range of phenomena.
Thus, at the end of the nineteenth century, Maxwell's electromagnetic
theory stood with Newton's laws of mechanics as an established part of the
foundations of physics.
12.5 THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
Hertz's induction coil produced electromagnetic radiation with a wave-
length of about 1 m. This is about one million times the wavelength of vis-
ible light. Later experiments showed that a very wide and continuous range
of electromagnetic wavelengths (and frequencies) is possible. The entire
possible range is called the electromagnetic spectrum. The electromagnetic
spectrum should not be confused with the visible spectrum, which includes
only the frequencies of visible light. In principle, the electromagnetic spec-
trum ranges from close to 0 Hz to infinite Hz, but in practice the range of
frequencies from about 1 Hz to 1026 Hz, corresponding to wavelengths in
the range from 108 m to 1018 m, has been studied. Many of these fre-
quency regions have been put to practical use.
As shown in the illustration, light, heat, radio waves, and X rays are names
given to radiations in certain regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. In
each of these regions radiation is produced or observed in a particular way.
For example, visible light may of course be perceived directly through its
effect on the retina of the eye. But to detect radio waves requires electronic
equipment. The named regions overlap. For example, some radiation is
called "ultraviolet" or "X ray," depending on where it lies on the total spec-
trum or how it is produced.
All waves in the electromagnetic spectrum, although produced and de-
tected in various ways, behave as predicted by Maxwell's theory. All elec-
tromagnetic waves travel through empty space at the same speed—the speed
of light, 3  108 m/s. They all carry energy; when they are absorbed, the
absorber is heated, as, for example, is food in a microwave oven. Electro-
12.5 THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
563

magnetic radiation, whatever its frequency, can be emitted only if energy
is supplied to the source of radiation, which is, ultimately, a charge that is
undergoing acceleration. This charge acceleration can be produced in many
ways. For example, heating a material will increase the vibrational energy
of charged particles. Also, one can vary the motion of charges on an elec-
tric conductor—an antenna—or cause a charged particle to change its di-
rection. In these and other processes, work is done by the force that is ap-
plied to accelerate the electric charge. Some of the energy supplied to the
antenna in doing this work is "radiated" away; that is, it propagates away
from the source as an electromagnetic wave.
The work of Maxwell and Hertz opened up a new scientific view of na-
ture. It also prepared for a rapid blooming of new technologies, such as ra-
dio, TV, radar, etc. We review below some of the indirect, technological
consequences of a scientific advance.
Radio waves (  10 m to 10,000 m; f  104 Hz to 107 Hz). Electromag-
netic waves in this region are reflected quite well by electrically charged
layers of ions that exist in the upper atmosphere. This reflection makes it
possible to detect radio waves at great distances from the source. Since ra-
dio signals have wavelengths from tens to thousands of meters, such waves
can easily diffract around relatively small obstacles such as trees or build-
ings. But large hills and mountains may cast "dark" shadows.
Radio waves that can cross large distances, either directly or by relay, are
very useful for carrying information. They are used not only for radio trans-
missions but also to carry cellphone communications via geographic "cells"
564
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
1022
Frequency (Hz)
Wavelength (m)
1021 1020 1019 1018 1017 1016 1015 1014 1013 1012
1011
1010
109
108
107
106
105
104
103
1 GHz
1 Mhz
1 khz
102
101
10−13 10−12 10−11 10−10 10−9 10−8 10−7 10−6 10−5 10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1
100
101
102
103
1 nm
1 µm
Visible
400 nm
700 nm
1 mm
1 m
1 km
104
105
106
107
Red
Microwave
TV, FM radio
AM radio
Orange
Yellow
Green
Blue
Violet
GAMMA RAY
XRAY
INFRARED
RADIO
ULTRA-
VIOLET
FIGURE 12.9
A chart of the electromagnetic spectrum, with visible light occupying the range between
400 nm and 700 nm in wavelength (1 nanometer  109 m).

centered around a single radio transmitter. A cellphone is technically a cel-
lular radio transceiver, since it receives and sends radio signals.
In December 1901, the Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi successfully
detected radio waves sent from Newfoundland to Ireland. Marconi's work,
perfected later on Cape Cod, Massachusetts, showed that long-distance ra-
dio communication was possible, because the waves were reflected by the
previously unsuspected layers of ionized particles in the upper atmosphere
and therefore could be received at great distances despite the curvature of
the Earth's surface.
Radio communication is accomplished by changing the signal according
to an agreed code that can be deciphered at the receiving end. The first
radio communication was achieved by turning the signal on and off in an
agreed pattern, such as Morse code (which is recognized today as a digital
code). Later, sounds were coded by continuous variations in the amplitude
(i.e., the intensity) of the broadcast wave. This is known as amplitude mod-
ulation, or AM. Later still, the information was coded as frequency varia-
tions in the broadcast wave, known as frequency modulation, or FM. In
broadcast radio and television, the "decoding" is done in the receiver serv-
ing the loudspeaker or TV monitor, since the output message from the re-
ceiver takes the same form that it had at the transmitter. Radio stations reg-
ularly announce their frequencies in megahertz (MHz) for the FM band
and kilohertz (kHz) for the AM band.
Because signals from different radio stations should not be received at
the same spot on the dial, it is necessary to apportion the allowed fre-
quencies of transmission within a region covered by radio signals. The In-
ternational Telecommunication Union (ITU) controls radio transmission
and other means of international communication. Within the United States,
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulates radio trans-
mission. In order to reduce the interference of one station's signal with an-
other, the FCC assigns suitable frequencies to radio stations (and other
12.5 THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
565
FIGURE 12.10
Radio waves
bouncing off the ionosphere.

transmitters). It also limits their power or the power radiated in particular
directions, and may restrict the hours of transmission.
Television, FM, and Radar ( about 1 m; f about 108 Hz). Waves at high
frequencies of about 108 Hz are not reflected by the layers of electric charge
in the upper atmosphere known as the ionosphere. Rather, the signals travel
in nearly straight lines and pass into space. Thus, they can be used in com-
munication between the Earth and orbiting satellites. But on Earth, TV
signals cannot be received directly between points more than about 80 km
apart, even if there are no mountains in the way. Instead, communications
satellites are used to relay the signals, either directly to the receiver in a
home equipped with a satellite dish, or to a cable-company receiver, which
then relays the signal to its customers over a large region using cables.
566
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 12.11
(a) A "carrier" radio wave; (b) AM 
(amplitude modulation): information is coded as vari-
ations in the amplitude (or intensity) of the carrier; 
(c) FM (frequency modulation): information is coded
as variations in the frequency of the carrier.
Electron beam
Scanning
pattern
Electron source
Magnetic
deflection
coils
FIGURE 12.12
Schematic dia-
gram of a TV picture tube.

12.5 THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
567
How It Works
Television—nearly every family in the
United States owns at least one set, yet most
do not know how it works.
The possibility of television emerged on
the technological horizon with two develop-
ments: the discovery of phosphors, substances
which glow with visible light when exposed
to radiation, for example, when hit by a beam
of electrons; and the use of radio waves to
send signals from a broadcast station which
could then be received in homes and be made
to control thin beams of electrons. Combin-
ing these two elements allowed researchers,
over the course of several decades, to develop
one of the world's most widely used house-
hold appliances.
All television sets, except the recent plasma
screens and digital sets, operate on the same
general principles. A composite video signal,
received from a broadcasting station or tele-
vision cable, incorporates three parts: the lu-
minance signal, which dictates the intensity,
or brightness, of the electron beam; the
chrominance signal, a sine wave that incor-
porates information about which colors the
resulting image should be made up of; and
the synchronization signal, which synchro-
nizes the other signals to ensure they scan si-
multaneously.* Black and white televisions
lack the chrominance signal, and in these, the
intensity of the beam determines different
shades of black and white on the screen.
The received video signal feeds into the
cathode ray tube (CRT), the central feature
of standard television sets. A "cathode" refers
to a negatively charged end, and in the CRT,
the cathode is a heated filament located in-
side a glass tube containing a vacuum. Elec-
trons come off the cathode into the vacuum,
forming a narrow beam, which is attracted by
one or more positively charged "anodes." In-
side a television's CRT, one anode focuses the
beam while another accelerates the electrons
from one end of the tube to the other, where
they hit a flat screen at the end. The 
phosphor-coated screen glows briefly at
whichever spot the electron beam hits it.
Engineers developed a way to control
where the electron beam hits the screen by
placing copper deflection coils inside the
tube; these coils create magnetic fields that
shift the beam in different directions. The
electron beam quickly scans the screen line
by line, eventually forming a still picture
composed of 525 thin horizontal lines, which
our brains interpret as a whole image. This
scanning process occurs 60 times every sec-
ond, although television sets now use a pro-
cess called interlacing, which means that the
beam only "paints" every other line of the
screen each scan, but the eye processes im-
ages at a speed too slow to notice this effect.
On the black and white set, the flat screen
at the end of the CRT is coated with a white
phosphor which glows in different shades of
white or gray each place the electrons hit it.
Color television sets contain some additional
features. Inside the CRT, three electron
beams scan the screen simultaneously. The
screen is coated with red, green, and blue
phosphors arranged in tiny dots or stripes. A
thin metal screen, the shadow mask, which
contains small holes aligned with the phos-
phors, covers the screen to ensure that each
electron beam strikes only phosphor stripes
of the right color. The different electron
beams directed to phosphors producing dif-
ferent colors scan the screen simultaneously,
and light up various combinations of tiny red,
green, and blue dots, or pixels (short for "pic-
ture elements"), which we see assembled into
a fully colored picture. If you use a magnify-
■TELEVISION
* D. Macauley, The Way Things Work (Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin, 1998), p. 246.

ing glass close to a television screen, you will
probably be able to see the individual pixels
that make up the image.
Through this process, a television set
composes rapidly one still image after an-
other on the screen at the rate of at least 15
images, or frames, per second, which your
brain perceives as a fluid moving scene.
TELEVISION: THE INVENTION
The research and development of television
technology happened along two paths, me-
chanical and electronic.
Mechanical Television
Television was inspired by human vision, in
which thousands upon thousands of electri-
cal circuits are used to relay information in
the optic nerve from the retina to the brain.
Designs based on so many electrical circuits,
however, were far too complicated to ever
reach fruition. In 1880 Maurice Leblanc in
France and W.E. Sawyer in the United States
suggested instead that if each element of a
picture could be rapidly scanned, electrical
transmission of pictures could be achieved
using only one circuit between the transmit-
ter and receiver. Paul Nipkow of Germany
adopted this scanning technique in 1884.
The picture to be televised is focused on a
rotating disk. When the first aperture in the
disk has scanned a line of the picture, the next
aperture scans the parallel line directly below.
At each rotation of the disk another line is
scanned until the whole picture has been ex-
amined. In this design, more apertures mean
more lines, and hence greater detail of the
picture. As it passes through each aperture,
the light differs according to the light and
shade of the picture, it then passes through a
photoelectric cell where it is changed into an
electrical image, and then translated into elec-
trical impulses. These impulses are then sent
down a circuit to a receiver, where they pro-
duce light in something like a gas-discharge
lamp. The light from this lamp is then pro-
jected onto another disk, similar to the trans-
mitter, and by a reversal of the transmission
process, the brightness of each segment is re-
produced and the original picture is recon-
structed. In order for this system to work, the
rotation of the disks must be synchronized,
and provided they are rotating at a sufficient
speed, persistence of vision allows the ob-
server to see a whole image rather than a se-
ries of moving segments.
Until the arrival of electronic scanning, it
was this mechanical system, characterized by
the Nipkow disk, which dominated the de-
velopment of television. However, the system
was crude, with the small number of lines re-
sulting in poor definition and the small num-
ber of rotations causing a flicker. Therefore
research turned toward electronic systems.
Electronic Systems
One of the leading players in the develop-
ment of electronic television was Vladimir
Kosma Zworykin. He was convinced that
electronic television was the path he should
follow, and while working for the Radio Cor-
poration of America (RCA), he developed the
Iconoscope which used a CRT for transmit-
ting images.
At the wide end of the Ionoscope is a sheet
of mica, on one side of which is a signal plate,
and the other a silver mosaic treated with 
Lens
Light
sensor
Lens
The
subject
Nipkow disk
Motor
FIGURE 12.13 Diagram of Nipkow disk apparatus.
■TELEVISION (Continued)
568

12.5 THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
569
cesium vapor and oxygen, in which each ele-
ment is encircled by an aluminum oxide in-
sulator. This combination of elements pro-
vides a surface from which electrons are easily
liberated when exposed to light. When an im-
age is focused onto the mosaic surface, it takes
on a positive charge that corresponds to the
light distribution. When the electron beam
passes over the mosaic, the charge of each sec-
tion changes in proportion to the amount of
light that is falling on it. This change is trans-
ferred to the signal plate, which takes on a se-
ries of voltages corresponding to the light
along the particular line.
Although it marked a major breakthrough
in electronic television, the Iconoscope was not
sensitive enough to produce consistently clear
images, and in 1940 it was replaced by the Or-
thicon, based on a similar design but with a
rigid set of squares. The Orthicon, however,
was made obsolete in the same year, by a tube
developed by Corning Glass Company, which
was three to ten times more sensitive than the
Orthicon and thirty to five hundred times
more sensitive than the Iconoscope.
At the beginning of the 1950s, television
technology based on the electrical system had
advanced so far that engineers began looking
toward developing a color system. There
were two possibilities. The first was a system
based on a frame-by-frame sequential trans-
mission of signals, each corresponding to the
primary colors, but this design was incom-
patible with the current black and white
transmissions. The more complex system
proposed at the time was one in which sig-
nals representing the three primary colors
were transmitted simultaneously. This sec-
ond system was developed by the National
Television Systems Committee (NTSC) in
the United States and is now the basis for
color systems all over the world. By the early
1960s, color television was becoming a con-
sumer success in the United States.
Recent developments in television tech-
nology have focused on the development of
High Definition (HDTV), in particular on
the use of digital technology. Instead of con-
ventional analog technology, which transmits
signals in the form of waves, the new digital
HDTV system transmit pictures as digital
data, which is then translated by computers
within the digital television. As well as clearer
pictures and better sound, digital television
also has the potential to transform and ma-
nipulate pictures as well as to receive them,
and could perform the job of both a com-
puter and a television set.
Further Reading
D.E. Fisher and M.J. Fisher, Tube: The In-
vention of Television (New York: Harcourt
Brace, 1996).
FIGURE 12.14
Vladimir Zworykin, one of the 
inventors of television, is shown here holding a
cathode-ray tube. 

570
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
Television, in which both sound and picture (in three primary colors) are
transmitted, uses both frequency and amplitude modulations. The fre-
quency of the wave is changed in a way that is analogous to the sound,
while the picture is transmitted via amplitude modulations. This is called
an analogue wave. However, in a recent development, the analogue TV sig-
nals are gradually being replaced by digital signals for digital TV. Here the
analogue sound and picture waves are approximated by series of 1's and 
0's (or, on and off voltages) that are converted into electromagnetic pulses
and compressed at the sender, then transmitted to the receiver where they
are decompressed and reconverted into continuous sound and light waves.
Signals at wavelengths of only about 1 m are not diffracted much around
objects that have dimensions of several meters, such as cars, ships, or air-
craft. Thus, the reflected portions of signals of wavelengths from 1 m down
to 1 mm can be used to detect such objects. The interference between the
direct waves and reflection of these waves by passing airplanes can distort
a television picture considerably. The signal also may be radiated in the
form of pulses. If so, the time t between the emission of a pulse and 
the reception of its echo measures the distance l of the reflecting object
(l  2 c/t). This technique is called "radio detection and ranging," or radar
(see Section 8.9). By means of the reflection of a beam that is pulsed, both
the direction and distance of an object, such as an aircraft, can be mea-
sured. This helps enormously in regulating traffic at busy airports. But ini-
tially it had an even more important role in alerting fighters in the United
Kingdom during World War II of the approach of German aircraft, e.g.,
during the "Blitz" meant to destroy London.
Microwave radiation (  101 m to 104 m; f  109 Hz to 1012 Hz). Elec-
tromagnetic waves in this region also do not bounce off the ionosphere,
but instead pass easily right through it. These waves can thus be used for
communicating with devices far beyond the Earth's atmosphere, such as
those sent to explore space.
FIGURE 12.15
Satellites are used to relay micro-
waves all over the world. The microwaves can carry
radio or TV information. (Not to scale.)

Microwave radiation also interacts strongly with the charged particles in
ordinary matter, and thus has uses other than communication. When irra-
diated by microwaves, the matter absorbs the energy in the microwaves.
This behavior is used in microwave ovens, in which the kinetic energy of
the oscillating charges in food appears as heat, warming the food very
quickly. Water, for example, readily absorbs radiation with a wavelength on
the order of 10 cm. Thus, any moist substance placed in a region of in-
tense microwave radiation of this wavelength (meat, soup, or a cake batter,
for example) will become hot very quickly. Because the heat is generated
within the substance itself, rather than conducted inward from the outside,
foods can be cooked rapidly in a microwave oven. It is, however, impor-
tant to keep the radiation confined to the oven because when such mi-
crowaves are emitted their radiation can damage living tissue.
Infrared radiation and the greenhouse effect ( about 104 m to 106 m;
f about 1012 Hz to 1014 Hz). Radiation in this region of the electromagnetic
spectrum, just below the red end of the visible spectrum, is often called
"thermal radiation," because it transmits heat. Because of the oscillation of
charges within molecules due to heat energy, all warm objects, such as a
glowing fireplace or warm-blooded creatures, emit infrared electromag-
netic radiation. This is also how heat is transmitted from the Sun to the
Earth, and it is one way in which living creatures can be detected at night
by nocturnal predators or by humans using special "night vision" appara-
tus. Thus, warm objects and animals can be detected or photographed "in
the dark" using infrared-sensitive equipment or film.
12.5 THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
571
FIGURE 12.16
A photograph made with film sensitive only to
infrared radiation. 

The environmental and technological problem of
the phenomenon of global warming is associated with
infrared radiation. Since the Earth is warmed by the
Sun, the surface of the Earth also emits infrared ra-
diation. Much of this radiation is dissipated into
outer space, but some of it is naturally trapped by
water vapor in the atmosphere. Like a blanket, the
water vapor in the air reflects many of the infrared rays back to the Earth's
surface, thus keeping the Earth's surface at just the right temperature for
life to exist. This is known as the greenhouse effect, since greenhouses oper-
ate in the same way. The glass walls and roof of the greenhouse allow the
Sun's visible rays to pass through, but they prevent the invisible infrared
rays from escaping, thus warming the inside of the greenhouse where plants
can grow year round. (You encounter the same effect when you leave the
windows rolled up in a car parked in the sun.)
It has now been substantiated by scientists, including the U.S. National
Academy of Sciences, that since the advent of the Industrial Revolution,
much more of the infrared radiation emitted back into space by the Earth's
surface is becoming trapped in the atmosphere by the gases produced
through the burning of fossil fuels that run electric generators and trans-
portation vehicles. The burning of these fuels produces carbon dioxide, sul-
fur dioxide, water vapor, and other gases and small particles. These gases
allow the Sun's visible and ultraviolet rays to reach the ground, but reflect
the infrared radiation emitted by the Earth's surface back to the Earth,
keeping the infrared rays trapped in the atmosphere and thus causing global
warming. (These gases also cause acid rain.)
This enhanced greenhouse effect accounts for an average rise in the
Earth's temperature during the past century of only a degree or two Cel-
sius, but scientists using computer models predict that this increase does
have a major impact on the ecology on Earth, causing at different locations
increased drought or rainfall, more powerful storms, and crop failures. They
point to the fact that the average temperature of Earth during the last Ice
Age was only about 5°C cooler than it is now. The unusual melting of gla-
ciers and polar ice, the unusually warm winters and summers in recent
decades, and the unusually large rainfalls and flooding around the world
are signs of even more trouble ahead unless the burning of fossil fuels is
curtailed.
During the 1990s a series of international meetings occurred in order to
find a way to reduce the emission of "greenhouse gases." Unfortunately,
the nations of the world could not agree because of economic reasons. The
developing nations do not want to limit their growth, especially after the
developed nations had already achieved their growth without limiting their
572
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
In an actual greenhouse, the
largest contribution to keep the
interior heated is the reduction
of convection, which is the same
principle as used for wine-cooler
jackets.

12.5 THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
573
ASTRONOMY ACROSS THE SPECTRUM
The electromagnetic spectrum comprises
more than the rainbow effect produced by
passing white light through a prism. Elec-
tromagnetic radiation of different wave-
lengths provides different kinds of infor-
mation. You are familiar with the effects
of various parts of the spectrum: sunburn
(ultraviolet rays) (a), visible light (d), heat 
(infrared) (b) and x rays (c). Scientists
make use of electromagnetic radiations in
such fields as astronomy, earth and life sci-
ences, and communications. 
FIGURE 12.17
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

emissions. Some politicians and industrialists in the United States, the
world's largest economy and thus the largest producer of greenhouse gases,
feared the possible economic consequences of agreeing to a suggested 20%
reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions by the year 2010. Further natural
catastrophes related to possible climate change, and further evidence of
global warming, may yet encourage the nations of the world to view the
reduction in greenhouse gases as probably the better economic choice. In
addition, it has been argued that the investment in devices and engines
made to reduce the emission of "greenhouse gases" would stimulate the
economy in a major way.
Visible light (  7  107 m to 4  107 m; f  4  1014 Hz to 8 
1014 Hz). This small band of frequencies is known as visible light because
the visual receptors in the human eye are sensitive only to these frequen-
cies. If light within this band of frequencies is sent through a glass prism
or through the raindrops in a cloud, it can be broken down into its con-
stituent frequencies, which are observed by the human eye as the colors 
of the rainbow. These colors range from red at the low-frequency end 
(4  1014 Hz) to violet at the high-frequency end (8  1014 Hz). The main
colors, in order, are: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet
(which may be remembered by the acronym ROY G BIV). (See Chapter
8, for more on the behavior of visible light.)
The visible-light frequencies are those at which the Sun copiously radi-
ates energy. In the course of evolution, the human eye has taken advantage
of light in that region. In the struggle for survival, humans have evolved as
day creatures. However, many nocturnal predators, including cats, dogs,
and some marsupials have developed the ability to use small amounts of
visible light for night vision, and some are even able to see into the infrared
region of light, which is invisible to human eyes.
574
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
4
5
6
7
Relative
sensitivity
of the eye
Relative
distribution
of sunlight
at noon
x10−7
meters
λ
λ
4
5
6
7
x10−7
meters
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 12.18
Sunlight and eye sensitivity versus wavelength.

Ultraviolet waves and ozone depletion ( about 107 m to 108 m; f about
1015 Hz to 1016 Hz). Electromagnetic waves above the visible range—
ultraviolet, X rays, and gamma rays—can damage living tissue, and some
can cause cancer and genetic mutations. Although X rays and gamma rays
occur naturally in our environment, they are much less abundant than ul-
traviolet rays, which are contained in the Sun's rays. Fortunately, a layer in
the Earth's atmosphere provides some protection against the Sun's damag-
ing ultraviolet rays. This layer contains a molecule called "ozone," a rare
form of oxygen.
Normally two oxygen atoms chemically join to form a stable molecule,
O2. However, under certain circumstances, such as those caused by light-
ning, three oxygen atoms join together loosely to form the molecule, O3,
which is called ozone. At ground level, when ozone combines with exhaust
from automobiles or other engines on a hot day, it produces smog that has
serious health hazards. However, high in the atmosphere it forms a pro-
tection against ultraviolet rays. This molecule vibrates at the frequency of
ultraviolet rays and can thus absorb or reflect these rays from the Sun back
into space.
Unfortunately, man-made chemicals, widely used in industry, known as
CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons), have been destroying the ozone layer since
the 1930s, creating an "ozone hole" and allowing more of the damaging
ultraviolet rays to reach the Earth's surface. This has caused a noticeable
increase in skin cancers and eye cataracts in people, and the endangerment
of some sea creatures and crops.
CFCs were developed in the 1930s for use as a coolant in refrigerators
and air conditioners, and as a propellant in aerosol sprays. When used for
these purposes under normal circumstances CFCs are essentially inert and
very stable. Thus they seemed like ideal insulators, coolants, and propel-
lants. However, during the 1980s it was discovered that when CFCs reach
the upper atmosphere the chlorine in these molecules destroys ozone mol-
ecules in the atmosphere by taking away one of the three oxygen atoms,
leaving ordinary oxygen, O2, behind. Ultraviolet rays then break up the
chlorine and oxygen, freeing the chlorine ion to destroy another ozone
molecule. One chlorine ion can destroy thousands of ozone molecules.
Studies at both the North and South poles of the Earth indicate that the
destruction of ozone is worldwide.
The world reaction to the dangerous ozone depletion has been quite dif-
ferent to this problem compared with the reaction to global warming. This
is mainly because the chemical industry had found a replacement for CFCs
which would not cause any significant economic difficulty. The result was
an international treaty that banned the production and sale of CFCs by
12.5 THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
575

2000. Nevertheless, the chlorine already in the atmosphere can continue
the destruction of the ozone layer for several decades. The result has been
a steady increase in harmful effects of ultraviolet radiation. These effects
are predicted to continue for decades to come until most of the chlorine
previously emitted into the atmosphere is finally rendered harmless. In the
meantime, physicians recommend that in open sunlight everyone wear sun-
glasses that actually filter out ultraviolet rays (in all forms), and not to stay
in the Sun without wearing a hat and applying sunblock lotions to exposed
skin.
X rays (  108 m to 1017 m; f  1016 Hz to 1025 Hz). Atoms emit X
radiation when electrons undergo transitions between the inner shells of
the atoms. X rays are also produced by the sudden deflection or stopping
of electrons when they strike a metal target. The maximum frequency of
the radiation generated is determined by the energy with which the elec-
trons strike the target. In turn, this energy is determined by the voltage
through which the electrons are accelerated. So the maximum frequency
increases with the accelerating voltage. The higher the frequency of the 
X rays, the greater is their power to penetrate matter. But the distance of
penetration also depends on the nature of the material being penetrated.
X rays are readily absorbed by bone, which contains calcium, while they
pass much more easily through less dense organic matter such as flesh,
which contains mainly the light atoms: hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen.
These properties of X rays, combined with their ability to affect a pho-
tographic plate, have led to some of the spectacular medical uses of X-ray
576
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
FIGURE 12.19
X-ray photograph 
of chambered nautilus sea shell. 

photography. Because X rays can damage living cells and even cause ge-
netic mutations, they have to be used with great caution and only by trained
technicians. Since some kinds of diseased cells are injured more easily by
X rays than are healthy cells, a carefully controlled X ray beam is some-
times used to destroy cancerous growths or other harmful cells.
X rays produce interference effects when they fall on a crystal in which
atoms and molecules are arranged in a regular pattern. Different portions
of the incident beam of X rays are reflected or diffracted from different
planes of atoms in the crystal structure. These reflected rays can interfere
constructively, and this fact can be used in either of two ways. If the spac-
ing of the atoms in the crystal is known, the wavelength of the X rays can
be calculated. Conversely, if the X ray wavelength is known, the distance
between crystal planes, and thus the structure of the crystal, can be deter-
mined. X rays are now widely used by chemists, physicists, mineralogists,
and biologists in studying the structure of crystals and complex molecules.
(You will encounter these ideas again in Chapter 13.)
Gamma rays (  1017 m and smaller; f  1025 Hz and higher). The
gamma-ray region of the electromagnetic spectrum overlaps the X ray re-
gion. Gamma radiation is emitted mainly by the unstable nuclei of natural
or artificial radioactive materials. They are also a component of so-called
cosmic radiation, radiation streaming to the Earth from outer space. Gamma
12.5 THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
577
FIGURE 12.20
Cˇerenkov radiation
in reactor. The glow in the photo-
graph is caused when gamma rays
emitted by radioactive cobalt cylin-
ders interact with the surrounding
pool of water. 

rays are the most energetic radiation known, and, in cosmic radiation, they
are produced by the most energy-intensive events in the Universe—the ex-
plosions of supernovae and other cataclysmic events. Many of the cosmic
events that produce the observed gamma rays are not well understood. A
series of gamma-ray sensitive satellites is presently studying these events.
(You will learn more about gamma rays in Chapter 17.)
12.6
WHAT ABOUT THE ETHER NOW?
The "luminiferous ether" had been proposed specifically as a medium for
the propagation of light waves. Maxwell found that the ether could also be
thought of as a medium for transmitting electric and magnetic forces. Later,
he realized that he could drop his specific model of the ether entirely if he
focused on the mathematical form of the theory. Yet, just before his death
in 1879, Maxwell wrote an article in which he still supported the ether (or
aether) concept:
Whatever difficulties we may have in forming a consistent idea of
the constitution of the aether, there can be no doubt that the in-
terplanetary and interstellar spaces are not empty, but are occupied
by a material substance or body, which is certainly the largest, 
and probably the most uniform body of which we have any knowl-
edge. . . . 
Maxwell was aware of the failures of earlier ether theories. Near the be-
ginning of the same article he said:
Aethers were invented for the planets to swim in, to constitute elec-
tric atmospheres and magnetic effluvia, to convey sensations from
one part of our bodies to another, and so on, till all space had been
filled three or four times over with aethers. It is only when we re-
member the extensive and mischievous influence on science which
hypotheses about aethers used formerly to exercise, that we can ap-
preciate the horror of aethers which sober-minded men had dur-
ing the 18th century. . . . 
Maxwell had formulated his electromagnetic theory mathematically, in-
dependent of any particular model of the ether. Why, then, did he con-
tinue to speak of the "great ocean of aether" filling all space? It seemed un-
thinkable to Maxwell that there could be vibrations without something that
vibrates, or waves without a medium. Also, to many nineteenth-century
578
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

physicists the idea of "action at a distance" seemed absurd. How could one
object exert a force on another body far away if something did not trans-
mit the force? One body is said to act on another, and the word on gives
the idea of contact. Thus, according to accepted ways of describing the
world in common language, the ether seemed somehow necessary.
Yet 25 years after Maxwell's death the ether concept had lost much of its
support. Within another decade, it had vanished from the collection of use-
ful concepts. In part, the success of Maxwell's theory itself helped to un-
dermine the general belief in the existence of an ether, simply because his
equations did not depend on details of the ether's structure. In fact, they
could be taken to describe the relations between changes of electric and
magnetic fields in space without any reference to the ether at all.
12.6 WHAT ABOUT THE ETHER NOW?
579
FIGURE 12.21
In this chapter, you have read about how mechanical mod-
els of light and electromagnetism faded away, leaving a model-less, math-
ematical (and therefore abstract) field theory. The situation has been
likened to Lewis Carroll's Cheshire Cat, which disappears leaving only its
grin behind (illustration by John Tenniel).

Another difficulty with belief in the ether was that all attempts to detect
the motion of the Earth relative to the ether failed (see Chapter 9). If light
is a kind of vibration of an ether that fills all space, then light should travel
at a definite speed relative to the ether. But the Earth must also be mov-
ing through the ether in its annual orbit around the Sun. Thus, the Earth
should be moving like a ship, against an "ether wind" at some times, and
with it at other times. Under these conditions, the apparent speed of light
should be observed to differ. When the Earth and a beam of light are mov-
ing in the same direction through the ether, the observed speed of light
should not be the same as when the Earth and the light are moving in op-
posite directions.
Theorists computed the time required for a pulse of light to make a
round trip in a laboratory with and against the ether wind. They compared
this interval with the time calculated for a round trip in the absence of an
ether wind. The expected time difference was found to be very small; only
1015 s for a round trip of 30 m. This is too short a time difference to mea-
sure directly, but it is of the same order as the time for one vibration of
visible light. Therefore, the difference might be detected from observations
of a properly produced interference pattern. In 1887, the American scien-
tists Albert A. Michelson and Edward Morley used a device sensitive enough
to detect an effect only 1% as great as that predicted by the ether theory.
Neither this experiment nor the many similar experiments done since then
have revealed the existence or expected effects of an ether wind.
Supporters of the ether concept offered various explanations for this un-
expected result. For example, they suggested that objects moving at high
speeds relative to the ether might change their size in just such a way as to
make this relative speed undetectable. But even those who made such at-
tempts to rescue the ether concept felt their proposals to be "ad hoc,"
forced, and artificial. Finally, a decisive development led scientists to aban-
don the ether concept. This breakthrough was not a specific experiment,
but a brilliant proposal by a 26-year-old man.
The man was Albert Einstein, who, as discussed in Chapter 9, suggested
that a new and deep union of mechanics and electromagnetism could be
achieved without the ether model, on the basis of the two fundamental pos-
tulates of relativity theory: the relativity principle and the constancy of the
speed of light. The price of accepting these postulates was, Einstein showed,
the necessity of revising some common-sense notions of space and time.
Einstein showed that Maxwell's equations are fully consistent with extend-
ing the principle of relativity to all physics. This was yet another great syn-
thesis of previously separate ideas, like the syntheses forged by Coperni-
cus, Newton, and Maxwell.
580
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
classical physics
greenhouse effect
displacement current
ionosphere
electromagnetic spectrum
ozone
electromagnetic wave
spectrum
global warming
visible spectrum
FURTHER READING
R. Buderi, The Invention that Changed the World [Radar]. Sloan Technology Series
(New York: Touchstone Books, 1998).
G. Cantor, D. Gooding, F.A. Frank, and J.L. James, Michael Faraday (Atlantic High-
lands, NJ: Humanity Books, 1996).
D. Park, The Fire within the Eye: A Historical Essay on the Nature and Meaning of
Light (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997).
C. Susskind, Heinrich Hertz: A Short Life (San Francisco: San Francisco Press, 1995).
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
12.1 Faraday's Suggestion
1.
What did Faraday suggest?
2.
What was the motivation for this suggestion?
12.2 Maxwell's Principles of Electromagnetism
1.
When there is a changing electric field, what else occurs (according to
Maxwell)?
2.
What is a displacement current?
3.
What are the four principles of electromagnetism?
12.3 The Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves
1.
What is an electromagnetic wave?
2.
How is an electromagnetic wave formed?
3.
What discovery did Maxwell make when he calculated the speed that electro-
magnetic waves should travel?
4.
What did Maxwell infer from this result?
5.
What is Maxwell's synthesis?
6.
What is classical physics? Is it still valid today? Under what circumstances are
revisions required?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
581

12.4 Hertz's Experimental Confirmation
1.
What predictions of Maxwell's did Hertz verify?
2.
What did Hertz use as a detector of electromagnetic waves?
3.
How does visible light fit into Maxwell's theory?
4.
How do Faraday, Maxwell, and Hertz represent the stages we often observe in
the formation of a new theory in science?
12.5 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
1.
What is the electromagnetic spectrum and how does it differ from the visi-
ble spectrum?
2.
List the types of electromagnetic waves discussed in this section. For each
one, indicate where it is on the electromagnetic spectrum, and describe a use,
or social impact, or technological application.
3.
Why do ordinary radio waves not cast noticeable "shadows" behind such ob-
stacles as trees or small buildings?
4.
Why are satellites required for TV transmission over long distances, while
some radio waves can be heard at great distances from the source?
5.
How is the frequency of X rays related to their penetration of matter?
6.
How do the wavelengths used in radar compare with the wavelengths of vis-
ible light?
7.
What is global warming and why is it occurring, according to most scientists?
8.
Why is global ozone depletion a cause for concern?
9.
How does ozone depletion occur?
10.
How have the nations of the world responded to each of these crises, and
what is the reason for any difference?
12.6 What About the Ether Now?
1.
Why did Maxwell (and others) adhere for a time to the concept of an ether?
2.
Whose argument finally showed that the ether was an unnecessary hypothesis?
3.
Did the demise of the ether idea lead to a demise of Maxwell's theory? 
Explain.
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1. A current in a conductor can be caused by a steady electric field. Can a dis-
placement current in an insulator be similarly caused? Explain your answer
briefly.
2. What is the "disturbance" that travels in each of the following waves?
(a) water waves?
(b) sound waves?
(c) electromagnetic waves?
582
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

3. In Hertz's detector, it is the electric fieldstrength in the neighborhood of the
wire that makes the sparks jump. How was Hertz able to show that the waves
from the induction-coil-spark gap were polarized?
4. What evidence did Hertz obtain that his induction-coil-generated waves have
many properties similar to visible light waves?
5. Give several factors that contributed to the 25-year delay in the general ac-
ceptance by scientists of Maxwell's electromagnetic wave theory.
6. What evidence is there for believing that electromagnetic waves carry energy?
Does this suggest why the early particle theory of light had some success?
7. You are listening to a radio station while driving in a car when you notice
something strange. The radio signal fades out at some points along the road,
and later returns to the previous level. What is happening?
8. Examine the wavelengths and frequencies of several different electromagnetic
waves. You may notice that as the frequency increases, the wavelength de-
creases. Why is this so?
9. Why must there be some federal control of the broadcast power, frequency,
and direction of signals emitted by radio and TV stations, but no such con-
trols on the distribution of newspapers and magazines?
10. If there are extraterrestrial beings of advanced civilizations, what method for
gathering information about Earth-people might they have? Conversely, why
is it far more probable that any contact with an extraterrestrial civilization, if
it exists, will be made by receiving electromagnetic signals from it rather than
actual "visits"?
11. Some scientists have been speculating about setting up an Earth colony on
Mars. Mars is not hospitable to human life, but it does have a lot of direct
sunlight which is not filtered much by the thin atmosphere there. How could
the colonists make use of the sunlight to create a habitable environment?
How could they protect themselves from some of the dangers of direct 
sunlight?
12. Why do you think the human eye is sensitive to the range of light wavelengths
to which it is actually sensitive?
13. A sensitive thermometer placed in different parts of the visible light spectrum
formed by a quartz prism will show a rise in temperature. This proves that
all colors of light produce heat when absorbed. But the thermometer also
shows an increase in temperature when it is placed in either of the two dark
regions to either side of the end of the visible spectrum. Why is this?
14. During the eighteenth century many scientists were fascinated by what seemed
to them a strange phenomenon. In their laboratory was the customary fire-
place with a fire in it for warmth. A lens was located on a small table some
distance across the room facing the fire. When a sheet of paper was placed
behind the lens, the paper burst into flames, to the amazement of all who ob-
served this. What was happening?
15. What was the principal reason for the loss of scientific support for the ether
concept?
16. At many points in the history of science, the "natural" or common-sense way
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
583

of looking at things has changed greatly. Attitudes toward action-at-a-distance
are a case in point. What are some other examples?
17. Can intuition be educated; that is, can feelings about the fundamental aspects
of reality be changed? Use attitudes toward action-at-a-distance through the
ether as one example, and give others.
Quantitative
1.
An electron oscillating on an antenna produces an electromagnetic wave that
vibrates at 10,000 Hz.
(a) What are the wave's frequency, its period, and its wavelength?
(b) What type of wave is this?
2.
Obtain the frequency range of the FM dial on a radio. What is the corre-
sponding range of wavelengths of the FM waves received by the radio?
3.
How much time would elapse between the sending of a radar signal from the
Earth to the Moon and the detection of its echo on Earth?
584
12. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

-
+
13.1 The Periodic Table
13.2 The Idea of Atomic Structure
13.3 Cathode Rays
13.4 The Smallest Charge
13.5 Thomson's Model of the Atom
13.6 The Photoelectric Effect
13.7 Einstein's Theory of the Photoelectric Effect
13.8 X Rays
13.1 THE PERIODIC TABLE
It has been hypothesized for millennia that all matter is made of tiny, in-
divisible, smallest bits of matter called atoms. Great progress had been made
during the nineteenth century in attributing the thermodynamic laws and
some of the properties of matter, especially gases, to the kinetic-molecular
theory (Chapter 7). In addition, it was known for centuries that there are
different types of so-called fundamental "elements" in nature—gold, silver,
copper, sodium, etc. There are the smallest units into which substances can
be divided by chemical means. Eventually it was found useful to give the
elements special symbols, for example, "C" for carbon, "O" for oxygen,
"H" for hydrogen, and so on.
For many people, such as the English chemist John Dalton (1766-1844),
these different elements indicated that nature is also made up of different
types of atoms, one type of atom for each element. Each element was con-
sidered a collection of identical, indestructible atoms, and this idea was con-
firmed in chemical studies during the nineteenth century. When two or
more atoms link together, they form a molecule. The molecule may be an
element itself if both atoms are the same, such as O2, or it may be a com-
585
Probing 
the Atom
C
H
A
P
T
E
R13
13

pound if the atoms are different, such as H2O. Since atoms are not divisi-
ble, the idea of joining two atoms of hydrogen to, say, 11⁄2 atoms of oxy-
gen instead of exactly one atom of oxygen is meaningless. Dalton's law of
fixed proportions follows quite naturally from the hypothesis that elements
are made up of identical, indestructible atoms. When elements combine to
form compounds, precisely the same ratio of masses of the constituents is
required each time to make a particular compound. For example, 23.0 g of
sodium always combine with 35.5 g of chlorine to produce 58.5 g of salt.
If you start with 25.0 g of sodium and 35.5 g of chlorine, you still get only
58.5 g of salt, but there will be 2.0 g of sodium left over. This rule, the law
of fixed proportions, applies to all compounds.
The law of fixed proportions indicated that the atoms of the elements
that combine to form compounds such as NaCl do not have the same mass.
Since only 23.0 g of sodium combined with 35.5 g of chlorine to form 58.5 g
of NaCl, the chlorine atoms must be more massive than the sodium atoms.
In fact, if one sodium atom has 23.0 "units" of mass, then one chlorine
atom would have 35.5 units of mass. The units of mass could be grams,
kilograms, pounds, or whatever. For convenience, they are called atomic
mass units, for which the standard symbol is u.
586
13. PROBING THE ATOM
FIGURE 13.1
John Dalton (1766-
1844). Born in Eaglesfield, England,
the son of a weaver, Dalton attended
a Quaker school until the age of 12.
He taught at New College, Man-
chester. He is best known for his
theory that matter is composed of
atoms of differing weights that com-
bine in simple, whole-number ratios
by weight. He listed the atomic
weights of known elements relative
to the weight of hydrogen. Dalton's
work formed the basis of the peri-
odic table of the elements. 

We now know that there are just 92 different elements that occur natu-
rally throughout nature, and in fact throughout the entire Universe. These
have a variety of atomic mass units (amu, abbreviated to u). Today, the atomic
mass units are measured relative to one type, or isotope, of carbon known
as carbon-12 (12C), which is defined as having atomic mass of 12.0000 u. 
The atomic masses of all other elements can then be given relative to 
carbon-12. For instance, relative to carbon-12, natural sodium has an atomic
mass of 22.99 u, hydrogen has an atomic mass of 1.008 u, oxygen has an
atomic mass of 15.999 u, uranium has a mass of 238.03 u, and so on. Some
of these elements have similar properties: some are gases at room temper-
ature; some are solid metals. There are differences in densities, melting and
boiling points, electrical conductivity, and so on.
In the 1869, the Russian chemist Dimitri Mendeleev (1834-1907)
arranged the 63 elements then known in a table according to their physi-
cal properties from the lightest (hydrogen) to the heaviest (uranium). He
found that when arranged by chemical properties, the elements tended to
line up vertically and to vary horizontally in a periodic fashion, forming
what is now called the periodic table. Although some elements were missing
at the time and were discovered only later, Mendeleev courageously as-
signed a position on the table to each element known to him, leaving blanks
13.1 THE PERIODIC TABLE
587
FIGURE 13.2
Dimitri Mendeleev
(1834-1907), founder of the mod-
ern periodic table. 

where he hypothesized that an element had not yet been discovered. These
elements were discovered later, confirming Mendeleev's hypothesis!
Only one element can occupy a particular position on the periodic table.
Mendeleev assigned a number to each element at each position. This num-
ber, called the atomic number, now goes from 1 for hydrogen to 92 for ura-
nium. It is given the symbol Z. The atomic number immediately identifies
the element, since it is unique for each element. It is always an integer and
is given at the top of the space in most periodic tables. Thus, when some-
one refers to element Z  3, we know immediately that they are referring to
the element lithium; element 53 is iodine, and so on. 
When the elements are arranged on the modern periodic table as shown
in the color insert, Plate 6, the elements below one another in each col-
umn or group share physical properties to a remarkable degree, as
Mendeleev had discovered. Therefore, these elements can be considered
to belong to the same "family" of elements. For instance, Group I on the
left contains the family of alkali metals: lithium, sodium, potassium, rubid-
ium, and cesium. This is a group of soft metals with very low densities, low
melting points, and similar chemical behavior. Another family of elements,
called the halogens, is found in Group VII: fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and
iodine. These elements combine violently with many metals and form
588
13. PROBING THE ATOM
FIGURE 13.3
Mendeleev's original periodic table of elements as it appeared in 1872. 

white, crystalline salts (halogen means "salt former"). These salts have sim-
ilar formulas, such as NaF, NaCl, NaBr, MgCl2, MgBr2, etc.
Occasionally, for reasons then not known, it was necessary to depart
from the overall scheme of ordering the elements. For example, the chem-
ical properties of argon (Ar) and potassium (K) demand that they be placed
in the eighteenth and nineteenth positions in order to fall into groups
characteristic of their families. On the basis of their atomic masses alone
(39.948 u for argon; 39.102 u for potassium) their positions would have
been reversed.
The beautiful regularity and symmetry of the periodic table indicate that
a model of the atoms that make up the different elements will probably
also display a similar beauty and symmetry. Such a model did arise during
the early twentieth century, and it did not disappoint our expectations. But
we shall see that an enormous amount of ingenuity and detective work was
required to comprehend the structure of the atom.
13.2 THE IDEA OF ATOMIC STRUCTURE
Chemistry in the nineteenth century had succeeded remarkably in ac-
counting for combining proportions and in predicting chemical reactions.
This success had convinced most scientists that matter is indeed composed
of atoms. But there remained a related question: Are atoms really indivis-
ible, as had been assumed, or do they consist of still smaller particles?
You can see how this question arose by thinking a little more about the
periodic table. Mendeleev had arranged the elements in the order of in-
creasing atomic mass. But the atomic masses of the elements cannot ex-
plain the periodic features of Mendeleev's table.
Why, for example, do the 3rd, 11th, 19th, 37th, 55th, and 87th elements,
with quite different atomic masses, have similar chemical properties (e.g.,
they burn when exposed to air)?
Why are these properties somewhat different from those of the 4th, 12th,
20th, 38th, 56th, and 88th elements in the list (which react slowly with air
or water), but greatly different from the properties of the 2nd, 10th, 18th,
36th, 54th, and 86th elements (which rarely combine with any other 
element)?
The periodicity in the properties of the elements led to speculation that
atoms might have structure, that they might be made up of smaller pieces.
The properties changed gradually from group to group. This fact suggested
that some unit of atomic structure might be added from one element to
the next, until a certain portion of the structure is completed. The com-
13.2 THE IDEA OF ATOMIC STRUCTURE
589

pleted condition would occur in the atom of a noble gas (Group VIII in
Plate 6). In an atom of the next heavier element, a new portion of the struc-
ture would be started, and so on. The methods and techniques of classical
chemistry could not supply experimental evidence for such structure. In the
nineteenth century, however, discoveries and new techniques in physics
opened the way to prove that atoms do actually consist of smaller pieces.
Evidence piled up to support the conclusion that the atoms of different el-
ements differ in the number and arrangement of these pieces.
13.3 CATHODE RAYS
In 1855, the German physicist Heinrich Geissler invented a powerful vac-
uum pump. This pump could remove enough gas from a strong glass tube
to reduce the pressure to 0.01% of normal air pressure. It was the first ma-
jor improvement in vacuum pumps after Guericke's invention of the air
pump, two centuries earlier. So we noted, using Geissler's new pump made
possible the electric light bulb, the electron tube, and other technologically
valuable inventions over the next 50 years. It also opened new fields to pure
scientific research.
Geissler's friend Julius Plücker connected one of Geissler's evacuated
tubes to a battery. He was surprised to find that, at the very low pressure
obtained with Geissler's pump, electricity flowed through the tube. Plücker
used apparatus similar to sketch (a) on page 591. He sealed a wire into each
end of a strong glass tube. Inside the tube, each wire ended in a metal plate,
called an electrode. Outside the tube, each wire ran to a source of high
voltage. The negative plate inside the tube is called the cathode, and the
positive plate is called the anode. A meter indicated the current going
through the tube.
Plücker and his student Johann Hittorf noticed that when an electric
current passed through the low-pressure gas in a tube, the tube itself glowed
with a pale green color. Several other scientists observed this effect, but
two decades passed before anyone undertook a thorough study of the glow-
ing tubes. By 1875, William Crookes had designed
new tubes for studying the glow. When he used a
bent tube the most intense green glow appeared on
the part of the tube that was directly opposite the
cathode (at g in sketch (b) on page 591). This sug-
gested that the green glow is produced by something
that comes out of the cathode and travels down the
tube until it hits the glass. Another physicist, Eugen
590
13. PROBING THE ATOM
Substances that glow when 
exposed to light, particularly 
ultraviolet, are called fluorescent.
"Fluorescent lights" are essen-
tially Geissler tubes with an 
inner coating of fluorescent
powder.

Goldstein, was also studying the effects of passing an electric current
through a gas at low pressure. Goldstein coined a term for whatever it was
that appeared to be coming from the cathode, hence the name cathode rays.
But what could they be?
To study the nature of the rays, Crookes did some clever experiments.
He reasoned that if cathode rays could be stopped before they reached the
end of the tube, the intense green glow would disappear. He therefore in-
troduced barriers like the Maltese cross (made of metal). A shadow of the
barrier appeared in the midst of the green glow at the end of the tube. The
cathode seemed to act like a source that radiates a kind of light; the cross
acted like a barrier blocking the light. The shadow, cross, and cathode ap-
peared along one straight line. Therefore, Crookes concluded, cathode rays,
like light rays, travel in straight lines. Next, Crookes moved a magnet near
the tube, and the shadow moved. Thus, he found that magnetic fields de-
flect cathode rays (which does not happen with light).
13.3 CATHODE RAYS
591
−
+
A Crookes tube.
−
+
−
+
−
+
Cathode
Anode
g
FIGURE 13.4
(a) Geissler-Plücker tube; (b) bent Geissler-Plücker tube; (c) Crookes tube with Maltese
cross as barrier.
(a)
(c)
(b)

In the course of many experiments, Crookes found the following prop-
erties of cathode rays:
•
No matter what material the cathode is made of, it produces rays with
the same properties.
•
In the absence of a magnetic field, the rays travel in straight lines per-
pendicular to the surface that emits them.
•
A magnetic field deflects the path of the cathode rays.
•
The rays can produce some chemical reactions similar to the reactions
produced by light. For example, certain silver salts change color when
hit by the rays.
•
In addition, Crookes suspected (but did not succeed in showing) that
electrically charged objects deflect the path of cathode rays.
The cathode rays fascinated physicists at the time. Some thought that the
rays must be a form of light. After all, they have many of the properties of
light: they travel in straight lines and produce chemical changes and fluo-
rescent glows just as light does. According to Maxwell's theory, light con-
sists of electromagnetic waves. So the cathode rays might, for example, be
electromagnetic waves of frequency much higher than that of visible light.
However, while magnetic fields do not bend light, they do bend the path
of cathode rays. Chapter 10 described how magnetic fields exert forces on
currents, that is, on moving electric charges. A magnetic field deflects cath-
ode rays in the same way that it deflects negative charges. Therefore, some
physicists believed that cathode rays consisted of negatively charged particles.
The debate over whether cathode rays are a form of electromagnetic
waves or a stream of charged particles continued for 25 years. Finally, in
592
13. PROBING THE ATOM
FIGURE 13.5
Joseph John Thomson (1856-
1940), one of the greatest British physicists, at-
tended Owens College in Manchester, England,
and then Cambridge University. He worked on
the conduction of electricity through gases, on
the relation between electricity and matter, and
on atomic models. His greatest single contribu-
tion was the discovery of the electron. Thom-
son was the head of the famous Cavendish Lab-
oratory at Cambridge University, where one of
his students was Ernest Rutherford. 

1897, J.J. Thomson, head of the famous Cavendish
Laboratory at Cambridge University, made a series
of experiments that convinced physicists that cath-
ode rays are negatively charged particles.
By then, it was well known that the paths of
charged particles are affected by both magnetic and
electric fields. By assuming that cathode rays were
negatively charged particles, Thomson could predict
what should happen when they passed through such
fields. For example, an electric field of just the right
magnitude and direction should exactly balance the
deflection of a beam of cathode rays by a magnetic
field. As Thomson discovered, the predictions were
verified. Thomson could therefore conclude that cathode
rays were indeed made up of negatively charged particles.
He was then able to calculate, from the experimen-
tal data, the ratio of the charge of a particle to its
mass. This ratio is represented by q/m, where q is the charge and m is the
mass of the particle. Thomson found that the rays coming from cathodes
made of different materials all had the same value of q/m: 1.76  1011 C/kg.
Thus, it was clear that cathode rays must be made of something all ma-
terials have in common. The value of q/m for the cathode-ray particles was
about 1800 times larger than the value of q/m for charged hydrogen atoms
(ions), which had been known to be 9.6  107 C/kg, as measured in chem-
ical electrolysis experiments. It was therefore obvious that either the charge
of the cathode-ray particles is much greater than that of the hydrogen ion,
or the mass of the cathode-ray particles is much less than the mass of the
hydrogen ion.
To decide between the two possibilities, Thomson also measured the
charge q on the negatively charged particles in cathode rays with methods
other than deflection by electric and magnetic fields. His experiments were
not very accurate, but they were good enough to indicate that the magni-
tude of the negative charge of a cathode-ray particle was the same or not
much different from that of the magnitude of the charge of the positive
hydrogen ion in electrolysis. In view of the large value of q/m for the 
cathode-ray particles, Thomson concluded that the mass m of cathode-ray
particles is much less than the mass of hydrogen ions.
In sum, the cathode-ray particles were found to have three important
properties:
1.
The same types of particles were emitted by a wide variety of differ-
ent cathode materials.
13.3 CATHODE RAYS
593
Thomson found that
 1.76  1011 C/kg.
According to Millikan's experi-
ment, the magnitude of q is
1.6  1019 C. Therefore, the
mass of an electron is
m 
 0.91  1030 kg.
(The mass of a hydrogen ion is
1.66  1027 kg. This is approxi-
mately the value of one "atomic
mass unit".)
1.6  1019 C

1.76  1011 C/kg
q
m

2.
They were much smaller in mass than the hydrogen atom, which has
the smallest known mass.
3.
They had the same magnitude of charge as the charge on the hydro-
gen ion.
Thomson therefore concluded that the cathode-ray particles must be a hith-
erto unobserved constituent of all matter. Since it carries electric charge,
the cathode-ray particle was later named the electron. It has a negative charge
of 1.6  1019 C. The magnitude of the electron charge is given the sym-
bol e, where e  1.6  1019 C.
Thomson's finding meant that the atom was not the ultimate limit to the
subdivision of matter. Rather, the electron is part of an atom, and could
perhaps even be a basic building block of all atoms. The electron, whose
existence Thomson had first proved by quantitative experiment, is one of
the fundamental or "elementary" particles of which all matter is made. How
do we know this?
13.4 THE SMALLEST CHARGE
In Section 10.2, you read that an electrified comb can pick up a small piece
of paper. Obviously, the electric force on the paper must exceed the grav-
itational force exerted on the paper by the Earth. This observation indi-
cates that electric forces generally are stronger than gravitational forces.
Using the same principle, the gravitational force on a microscopically small
object (which still contains several billion atoms) can be balanced against
the electrical force on the same object when the object has a net electric
charge of only a single excess charge. This single charge is the electron. It
is one of the basic constituents of all atoms.
The fact that the gravitational force on a small object can be balanced
by the electric force is the basis of a method for actually measuring the
electron's charge. The method was first employed by the American physi-
cist Robert A. Millikan in 1909.
Suppose a small body of mass m, for example, a tiny drop of oil, has a
net negative electric charge of magnitude q. (Millikan used fine droplets of
oil from an atomizer. The droplets became charged as they formed a spray.
The oil was convenient because of the low rate of evaporation of the
droplet.) The negatively charged oil drop is placed in an electric field E di-
rected downward. A force Fel of magnitude qE is now exerted on the drop
in the upward direction. Of course, there is also a downward gravitational
force Fgrav of magnitude mg on the drop. The oil drop will accelerate 
594
13. PROBING THE ATOM

upward or downward, depending on whether the electric force or the grav-
itational force is greater. By adjusting the magnitude of the electric field
strength E (i.e., by changing the source that sets up E), the two forces, one
electric and one gravitational, can be balanced.
What happens when the two forces acting on the drop are balanced? Re-
member that if a zero net force acts on a body, the body can have no ac-
celeration; that is, it would be at rest or continue to move at some constant
velocity. In this case, air resistance is also acting as long as the drop moves
at all and will soon bring the drop or sphere to rest. The drop will then be
in equilibrium. In fact, it will be suspended in mid-air. When this happens,
the magnitude of the electric field strength E which was applied to pro-
duce this condition can be recorded.
Since now the electric force balances the gravitational force, the follow-
ing must hold:
qE  mg.
You can calculate the charge q from this equation if you know the quan-
tities E, m, and g, since
q 
.
Thus, you can find, in the laboratory, what different values of charge q a
very small test object can carry.
When you do this, you will discover a remarkable fact: All possible meas-
urable charges in nature are made up of whole multiples of a smallest charge. This
smallest possible charge is called the magnitude of the charge on one electron.
By repeating the experiment many times with a variety of small charges,
mg

E
13.4 THE SMALLEST CHARGE
595
q
m
Fel = qE
Fgrav = mg
d
Variable
voltage
V
qE
E
mg
FIGURE 13.6
Schematic diagram of Millikan's oil-drop experiment.
(a)
(b)
(c)

you can find the value of the charge on one electron. By convention, the
charge on an electron is represented by the symbol e.
In effect, this is what Millikan did. He obtained the value of e  1.6024 
1019 C for the electron charge, and he found that the sign of the charge
on the electron is negative. Any charge q is therefore given by q  ne where
n is the whole number of individual charges, each of magnitude e. There-
fore, for example, 1 C is the magnitude of the charge on 1/(1.6  1019)
electrons. For most purposes you can use the value e  1.6  1019 C. This
value agrees with the results of many other experiments done since then.
No experiment has yet revealed the existence of a smaller unit of charge
on ordinary matter, such as an oil drop. However, scientists have found that
most elementary particles are in fact composed of smaller entities, known
as quarks, each of which can have a charge of either 2/3e or 1/3e. But
quarks cannot exist in isolation, so the smallest charge that can be observed
on ordinary mater is still the charge of the electron, e.
13.5 THOMSON'S MODEL OF THE ATOM
What is the atom like? By the beginning of the twentieth century, enough
chemical and physical information was available to allow many physicists
to devise models of atoms. It was known that negative particles with iden-
tical properties (electrons) could be obtained from many different sub-
stances and in different ways. This suggested that electrons are parts of all
atoms. Electrons are negatively charged. But samples of an element are or-
dinarily electrically neutral. Therefore, the atoms making up such samples
are also presumably neutral. If so, the presence of negative electrons in an
596
13. PROBING THE ATOM
FIGURE 13.7
The original appara-
tus used by Robert Millikan to 
conduct his oil-drop experiment. 

atom would seem to require the presence of an equal amount of positive
charge.
As mentioned earlier, hydrogen atoms are about 1800 times more mas-
sive than electrons, which have a mass of 9.1  1028 g. Thus electrons make
up only a very small part of the atomic mass in any atom. Consequently,
any model of an atom must take into account the following information:
•
an electrically neutral atom contains equal amounts of positive and neg-
ative charge;
•
the negative charge is associated with only a small part of the mass of
the atom, that carried by the electrons.
In addition, any atomic model should answer at least two questions:
1.
How many electrons are there in an atom?
2.
How are the electrons and the positive charge arranged in an atom?
During the first 10 years of the twentieth century, several atomic models
were proposed, but none was satisfactory. Until 1911, the most popular
model for the atom was one proposed by J.J. Thomson in 1904. Thomson
suggested that an atom consisted of a sphere of positive electricity in which
an equal amount of negative charge was distributed in the form of small
electrons. From studies of the ionization of atoms in chemistry and through
X radiation (discussed in Section 13.8). The amount of positive charge in
each atom was surmised to be equal to the atomic number of the atom Z
(an integer) times the magnitude of the electron charge e, that is, an atom's
positive charge is equal to Ze. In order to render the atom electrically neu-
tral, there were an equal number of negatively charged electrons.
Under these assumptions, Thomson's atom was like a "plum pudding"
of positive electricity, with the negative electrons scattered in it like plums
or raisins. Thus, hydrogen (Z  1) consisted of one electron, charge 1e,
embedded in a sphere of positive charge, 1e. Helium (Z  2) consisted of
two electrons embedded in a sphere of positive charge of 2e, and so on.
13.5 THOMSON'S MODEL OF THE ATOM
597
Z = 1
Z = 2
Z = 3
Z = 4
Z = 5
Z = 6
FIGURE 13.8
Thomson's "plum pudding" model of the atom for the first six elements.

The positive "pudding" was assumed to act on the negative electrons,
holding them in the atom by electric forces only. Thomson did not know
how the positive "pudding" itself was held together, though it should fall
apart by electrical repulsion. He took the radius of the atom to be of the
order of 108 cm, based on information from the kinetic theory of gases
and other considerations. But his incomplete model was unable to account
for either the stability of the atom or for its chemical properties. Much
more experimental information and a radical new concept—the concept of
the energy quantum—was required to construct a much more satisfactory
model of the atom. This concept entered through the use of results from
work on an entirely different set of problems—thermal radiation and the
puzzle of the photoelectric effect—pursued at that time by Max Planck and
Albert Einstein.
13.6 THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
In 1887, the German physicist Heinrich Hertz was testing Maxwell's the-
ory of electromagnetic waves (see Section 12.4). He noticed that a metal-
lic surface can emit electric charges when light of very short wavelength
falls on it. Because light and electricity are both involved, this phenome-
non is called the photoelectric effect.
When the electric charges so produced passed through electric and mag-
netic fields, their paths changed in the same ways as the paths of cathode
rays. It was therefore deduced that the electric charges emitted by the pho-
toelectric effect consist of negatively charged particles. In 1898, J.J. Thom-
son measured the value of the ratio q/m for these particles. Using the same
method that he had used for cathode-ray particles, Thomson got the same
value for the photoelectric particles as he had for the cathode-ray particles.
These experiments (and others) demonstrated that photoelectric particles
had the same properties as electrons. In fact, physicists now consider that
these particles are electrons, although they are often referred to as photo-
electrons, to indicate their origin. Later work showed that all substances
(solids, liquids, and gases) exhibit the photoelectric effect under appropri-
ate conditions. However, it is more convenient to study the effect with
metallic surfaces.
The photoelectric effect has had an important place in the development
of atomic physics because the effect could not be explained in terms of the
ideas of classical physics. New ideas had to be introduced to account for
the experimental results. In particular, the introduction of the revolution-
ary concept of quanta initiated a new branch of physics called quantum 
598
13. PROBING THE ATOM

theory. This theory and the notion of quanta arose, at least in part, because
of the explanation provided for the photoelectric effect.
The basic information for studying the photoelectric effect comes from
two kinds of measurements:
1.
measurements of the photoelectric current (the number of photoelec-
trons emitted per unit time); and
2.
measurements of the kinetic energies of the photoelectrons after they
are emitted.
The photoelectric current can be studied with an apparatus like that
sketched in Figure 13.9(a). Two metal plates, C and A, are sealed inside a
well-evacuated quartz tube. (Quartz glass is transparent to ultraviolet light
as well as to visible light.) The two plates are connected to a source of po-
tential difference (e.g., a high-voltage battery). In the circuit is also an am-
meter, which measures the electric current. As long as light strikes plate C,
as in sketch (b), electrons with a range of kinetic energies are emitted from
13.6 THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
599
+
−
−
+
(d)
C
A
−
+
+
−
−
+
(c)
C
A
−
−
+
+
(b)
C
A
−
−
+
+
(a)
C
A
FIGURE 13.9
Schematic diagram of apparatus for photoelectric experiments.

it. If the potential of plate A is positive relative to plate C, these emitted
photoelectrons will accelerate to plate A. (Some emitted electrons will reach
plate A even if it is not positive relative to C.) The resulting electric cur-
rent is indicated by the ammeter.
The results of the experiment include the following: the stronger (or
more intense) the beam of light of a given color (frequency), the greater
the photoelectric current. Any metal used as plate C shows a photoelectric
effect, but only if the light has a frequency greater than a certain value.
This value of the frequency is called the threshold frequency for that metal.
Different metals have different threshold frequencies. But if the incident
light has a frequency lower than the threshold frequency, no photoelectrons
are emitted, no matter how great the intensity of the light or how long the
light is left on! This is the first set of surprising discoveries.
The kinetic energies of the electrons can be measured in a slightly mod-
ified version of the apparatus, sketched in (c). The battery is reversed so
that plate A now tends to repel the photoelectrons. The voltage can be
changed from zero to a value just large enough to keep any electrons from
reaching plate A, as indicated in (d).
When the voltage across the plates is zero, the meter will indicate a cur-
rent. This reading shows that the photoelectrons, emerging with kinetic
energy from the metallic surface, can reach plate A. As the repelling volt-
age is increased, the photoelectric current decreases. Eventually a certain
voltage is reached at which even the swiftest electrons are repelled and thus
the current becomes zero, as indicated in (d). This voltage, which is called
the stopping voltage, is a measure of the maximum kinetic energy of the emit-
ted photoelectrons (KEmax). Using Vstop to indicate the stopping voltage,
then maximum kinetic energy is given by the relation
KEmax  eVstop,
where e is the magnitude of the electron's charge. The measured maximum
kinetic energy of the emitted electrons was found to be proportional to the
frequency of the incident light.
The above experimental results can be summarized in the following state-
ments. Only the important experimental results are listed here. Their the-
oretical interpretation will be discussed later.
1.
A metal shows a photoelectric effect only if the incident light has a fre-
quency above a certain threshold frequency (symbol f0).
2.
If light of a given frequency does produce a photoelectric effect, the
photoelectric current from the surface is proportional to the intensity
of the light falling on it.
600
13. PROBING THE ATOM

3.
If light of a given frequency releases photoelectrons, the emission of
these electrons is immediate.
4.
The kinetic energies of the emitted electrons display a maximum value,
which is proportional to the frequency of the incident light (above the
threshold frequency).
The measured time interval between the instant the light strikes the
metallic surface and the appearance of electrons is at most 3  109 s and
probably much less. In some experiments, the light intensity used was ex-
tremely low. According to the classical wave theory of light, it should take
several hundred seconds for an electron to accumulate enough energy from
such light to be emitted. But even in these cases, electrons are emitted prac-
tically right after the light strikes the surface.
5.
The maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons increases in direct
proportion to the frequency of the light that causes their emission. The
maximum KE is not dependent on the intensity of the incident light, as
the classical wave theory of light would require.
The way in which the maximum kinetic energy of the electrons varies with
the frequency of the incident light is shown in Figure 13.10. The symbols
( f0)1, ( f0)2, ( f0)3 stand for the different threshold frequencies of three dif-
ferent substances. For each substance, the experimental data points fall on
a straight line. All the lines have the same slope.
What is most astonishing about the experimental results is that there is
a threshold frequency, and that the photoelectrons are emitted if the light
frequencies are just above the threshold frequency, no matter how weak 
the beam of light. But if the light frequencies are just below the threshold
13.6 THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
601
(fo)1
Frequency of incident light
Metal 1
Maximum KE of electrons from metal
(fo)2
(fo)3
Metal 2
Metal 3
FIGURE 13.10
Photoelectric effect: Maxi-
mum kinetic energy of the electrons as a
function of the frequency of the incident
light. Different metals yield lines that are
parallel but have different threshold fre-
quencies.

frequency, no electrons are emitted no matter how great the intensity of
the light beam is.
Statements 1, 3, and 4 above could not be explained on the basis of the
classical electromagnetic theory of light. How could a low-intensity train
of light waves, spread out over a large number of atoms, concentrate, in a
very short time interval, enough energy on one electron to knock the elec-
tron out of the metal?
Furthermore, the classical wave theory could not account for the exis-
tence of a threshold frequency. There seemed to be no reason why a high-
intensity beam of low-frequency radiation should not produce photoelec-
tricity if low-intensity radiation of higher frequency could produce it.
Neither could classical theory explain why the maximum kinetic energy of
the photoelectrons increases directly with the frequency of the light, but is
independent of the intensity. Thus, the photoelectric effect posed an im-
portant challenge that the classical wave theory of light was not able to meet.
13.7 EINSTEIN'S THEORY OF THE
PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
The explanation of the photoelectric effect was the major work cited in the
award to Albert Einstein of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921. Einstein's
explanation, proposed in 1905, played a major role in the development of
atomic physics. He based his theory on a daring hypothesis, for few of the
experimental details were known in 1905. Moreover, the key point of Ein-
stein's explanation contradicted the classical ideas of the time.
Einstein assumed that the energy of light is not distributed evenly over
the whole expanding wave front (as the classical theory assumed). Instead,
the light energy is concentrated in separate "lumps." In addition, the amount
of energy in each of these regions is not just any amount, but a definite
amount of energy that is proportional to the frequency f of the light wave.
The proportionality factor is a constant (symbol h); it is called Planck's 
constant for reasons which will be discussed later. Thus, in this model, the
light energy in a beam of frequency comes in pieces, each of amount
E  hf
where
h  6.6  1034 J/s.
The amount of radiant energy in each piece is called a light quantum (quan-
tum is Latin for quantity), or a quantum of light energy. The quantum of
light energy was later called a photon.
602
13. PROBING THE ATOM

There is no explanation clearer or more direct than Einstein's. A quote
from his first paper (1905) on this subject is given here. Only the notation
is changed, in order to agree with modern practice (including the notation
used in this text):
. . . According to the idea that the incident light consists of quanta
with energy hf, the ejection of cathode rays [photoelectrons] by light
can be understood in the following way. Energy quanta penetrate
the surface layer of the body, and their energy is converted, at least
in part, into kinetic energy of electrons. The simplest picture is that
a light quantum gives up all its energy to a single electron; we shall
assume that this happens. . . . An electron provided with kinetic en-
ergy inside the body may have lost part of its kinetic energy by the
time it reaches the surface. In addition, it is to be assumed that each
electron, in leaving the body, has to do an amount of work W (which
is characteristic of the body). The electrons ejected directly from
the surface and at right angles to it will have the greatest velocities
perpendicular to the surface. The maximum kinetic energy of such
an electron is
KEmax  hf  W.
If the plate C is charged to a positive potential, Vstop, just large
enough to keep the body from losing electric charge, we must have
KEmax  hf  W  eVstop,
where e is the magnitude of the electronic charge. . . . 
If the derived formula is correct, then Vstop, when plotted as 
a function of the frequency of the incident light, should yield a
straight line whose slope should be independent of the nature of
the substance illuminated.
The first equation in the above quotation is usually called Einstein's 
photoelectric equation. Let us compare Einstein's photoelectric equation with
the experimental results, in the order given in the previous section, to test
whether or not his theory accounts for those results:
1.
According to the photoelectric equation, the kinetic energy of the pho-
toelectrons is greater than zero only when the photon energy hf is
greater than the work W, which is the work the electron must do against
the forces of attraction of the material in the cathode C as it leaves the
metal. The energy required to escape the metal is known as the work
13.7 EINSTEIN'S THEORY OF THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
603

function. Therefore, an electron can be emitted only when the frequency
of the incident light is greater than a certain lowest value correspond-
ing to the work required to exit from the metal. In symbols, the min-
imum frequency f0 is defined by the relation hf0  W.
2.
Next, according to Einstein's photon model of light, it is an individual
photon that ejects an electron (if above the threshold frequency of
light). Now, the intensity of the light is proportional to the number of
the photons in the light beam. In addition, the number of photoelec-
trons ejected is proportional to the number of photons incident on the
surface. Therefore, the number of electrons ejected (and with it the
photoelectric current) is proportional to the intensity of the incident
light. (However, not every photon in a light beam strikes an electron,
emitting it from the metal; only about 1 in 50 photons does so.)
3.
In Einstein's model, the light energy is concentrated in a stream of 
light quanta (photons). So no time is needed for the electron to col-
lect light energy. Instead, the quanta transfer their energy immediately
to the photoelectrons, which emerge after the very short time required
for them to escape from the surface.
4.
Finally, the photoelectric equation predicts that the greater the fre-
quency of the incident light, the greater the maximum kinetic energy
of the ejected electrons. According to the photon model, the photon's
energy is directly proportional to the light frequency. The minimum
energy needed to eject an electron is the energy required for the elec-
tron to escape from the metal surface. This explains why light of fre-
quency less than some frequency f0 cannot eject any electrons. The ki-
netic energy of the escaping electron is the difference between the
energy of the absorbed photon and the energy lost by the electron in
escaping the surface.
Testing Einstein's Theory by Experiment
As you can see, Einstein's photoelectric equation agreed qualitatively with
the experimental results. But could it hold up under quantitative experi-
mental testing? In particular:
(1)
Does the maximum kinetic energy of the electrons vary in direct pro-
portion to the light frequency?
(2)
Is the proportionality factor h really the same for all substances?
For 10 years, experimental physicists attempted these quantitative tests.
One experimental difficulty was that the value of W for a metal changes
greatly if there are impurities (e.g., a layer of oxidized metal) on the sur-
604
13. PROBING THE ATOM

face. Finally, in 1916, Robert A. Millikan established that there is indeed a
straight-line relationship between the frequency of the absorbed light and
the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons, as required by Ein-
stein's equation. If KEmax is plotted along the y-axis and f along the x-axis,
then Einstein's equation exhibits the familiar form of the equation for a
straight line
y  mx  b.
In a graph of Einstein's equation, the slope should be equal to h, and the
KE-intercept should be equal to W. This is exactly what Millikan found.
In order to obtain his data, Millikan designed an apparatus in which the
13.7 EINSTEIN'S THEORY OF THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
605
ALBERT EINSTEIN
Albert Einstein (1879-1955) was born in
the city of Ulm, in Germany. Like New-
ton, he showed no particular intellectual
promise as a youngster. He received his
early education in Germany, but at the
age of 15, dissatisfied with the discipline
in school and militarism in the nation, he
left and went to Switzerland. After grad-
uation from the Polytechnic Institute in
Zurich, Einstein (in 1902) found work in
the Swiss Patent Office in Berne. This job
gave Einstein a salary to live on, to get
married, and an opportunity to use his
spare time for working in physics on his
own. In 1905, he published three papers
of immense importance. One dealt with
quantum theory and included his theory
of the photoelectric effect. Another
treated the problem of molecular motions
and sizes, and worked out a mathematical
analysis of the phenomenon of "Brown-
ian motion." Einstein's analysis and the
subsequent experimental work by Jean
Perrin, a French physicist, provided a
strong argument for the molecular mo-
tions assumed in the kinetic theory. Ein-
stein's third 1905 paper provided the the-
ory of special relativity, which revolu-
tionized modern thought about the na-
ture of space and time, and of physical
theory itself.
In 1915, Einstein published a paper on
the theory of general relativity. In it he
provided a new theory of gravitation that
included Newton's theory as a special case.
When Hitler and the Nazis came to
power in Germany in 1933, Einstein went
to the United States and became a mem-
ber of the Institute for Advanced Study at
Princeton. He spent the rest of his work-
ing life seeking a unified theory which
would include gravitation and electro-
magnetism. Shortly before the Germans
launched World War II, Einstein signed a
letter to President Roosevelt, warning of
the war potential of an "atomic bomb," for
which the Germans had all necessary
knowledge and motivation to build. After
World War II, Einstein devoted much of
his time to organizations advocating world
agreements to end the threat of atomic
warfare.

metal photoelectric surface was cut clean while in a vacuum. A knife inside
the evacuated volume was manipulated by an electromagnet outside the
vacuum to make the cuts. This rather intricate arrangement was required
to achieve a pure metal surface.
The straight-line graphs Millikan obtained for different metals all had
the same slope, h, even though the threshold frequencies (related to W )
were different. The value of h could be obtained from Millikan's measure-
ments, and it was the same for each metal surface. Also, it agreed very well
with a value obtained by means of other, independent methods. Much to
Millikan's own surprise (who started out believing in the classical theory of
light), his experiment provided a quantitative verification of Einstein's the-
ory of the photoelectric effect. Thus, it can be said that Einstein's equation
led to two Nobel Prizes: one to Einstein, who derived it theoretically, and
one to Millikan, who verified it experimentally.
The Idea of Energy Quanta
Historically, the first suggestion that the energy in electromagnetic radia-
tion is "quantized" (comes in definite quanta) did not come from the pho-
toelectric effect. Rather, it came from studies of the heat and light radiated
by hot solids. Max Planck, a German physicist, introduced the concept of
quanta of energy (though in a different context) in 1900, 5 years before
Einstein's theory. Thus, the constant h is known as Planck's constant.
606
13. PROBING THE ATOM
FIGURE 13.11
Robert Andrews Millikan (1868-
1953), an American physicist, attended Oberlin
College, where his interest in physics was only
mild. After his graduation, he became more in-
terested in physics, taught at Oberlin while tak-
ing his master's degree, and then obtained his doc-
torate degree from Columbia University in 1895.
After more study in Germany, Millikan went to
the University of Chicago, where he became a
professor of physics in 1910. His work on the de-
termination of the electron's charge took place
from 1906 to 1913. He was awarded the Nobel
Prize in physics in 1923 for this research and for
the very careful experiments which resulted in the
verification of the Einstein photoelectric equa-
tion. In 1921, Millikan moved to what became
known as the California Institute of Technology,
eventually to become its president. 

Planck was trying to explain how the heat (and light) energy radiated by
a hot body is related to the frequency of the radiation. Classical physics
(nineteenth-century thermodynamics and electromagnetism) could not ac-
count for the experimental facts. Planck found that the facts could be in-
terpreted only by assuming that atoms, on radiating, change their energy
not in varying, but in separate, quantized amounts, E. Einstein's theory 
of the photoelectric effect was actually an extension and application of
Planck's quantum theory of thermal radiation. The essential point was that
Einstein postulated the change in the atom's energy E being carried off was
located in a distinct photon of energy E  hf, where f is the frequency of
the light emitted by the atom, rather than being spread continuously over
the light wave.
The experiments and the theory of radiation are much more difficult to
describe than the experiments and theory of the photoelectric effect. By now,
many tests have been made of both Planck's and Einstein's conceptions. In
all cases, Planck's constant h is regarded as one of the universal constants of
nature. It is found to have the same basic position in quantum physics that
Newton's universal constant G has in the physics of gravitation. As Planck
said, it is an absolute constant in the sense that even if extraterrestrials 
13.7 EINSTEIN'S THEORY OF THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
607
FIGURE 13.12
Max Planck (1858-1947), a
German physicist, was the originator of the
quantum theory, one of the two great revolu-
tionary physical theories of the twentieth cen-
tury (along with Einstein's relativity theory).
Planck won the Nobel Prize in 1918 for his
work on quantum theory. He tried for many
years to show that this theory could be un-
derstood in terms of the classical physics of
Newton and Maxwell, but this attempt did not
succeed. Quantum physics is fundamentally
different because of its postulate that energy
in light and matter exists in finite quanta and
is not continuously divisible.

exist on other planets, they would find the same value for h (as indeed they
would find for G, e, c, and all other physical constants of nature).
The Physicists' Dilemma
The photoelectric effect presented physicists with a real dilemma. Accord-
ing to the classical wave theory, light consists of electromagnetic waves ex-
tending continuously throughout space. This theory was highly successful
in explaining optical phenomena (reflection, refraction, polarization, inter-
ference). Light behaves like a wave experimentally, and Maxwell's theory
gives a good account of this wave behavior. But Maxwell's theory could not
account for the photoelectric effect. Einstein's theory, which postulated the
existence of separate quanta of light energy, accounted for the photoelec-
tric effect. But it could not account for other properties of light, such as
interference. The result was that there were two models for light whose
basic concepts seemed to contradict each other. According to one, light is
a wave phenomenon; according to the other, light has particle-like prop-
erties. Each model had its successes and limits. What, if anything, could be
done about the contradictions between the two models? You will see later
that this problem and its treatment occupy a central position in modern
physics.
13.8 X RAYS
In 1895, the German physicist Wilhelm Konrad Röntgen made a discov-
ery that surprised him and all the world. Like the photoelectric effect, it
did not fit with accepted ideas about electromagnetic waves, and eventu-
ally it too required the introduction of quanta for a complete explanation.
The discovery was that of X rays, which were often called "Röntgen" rays,
after their discoverer. The consequences for atomic physics, medicine, and
technology were dramatic and important.
On November 8, 1895, Röntgen was experimenting with the newly
found cathode rays, as were many physicists all over the world. According
to a biographer:
. . . he had covered the all-glass pear-shaped tube [Crookes tube]
with pieces of black cardboard, and had darkened the room in or-
der to test the opacity of the black paper cover. Suddenly, about a
yard from the tube, he saw a weak light that shimmered on a little
bench he knew was nearby. Highly excited, Röntgen lit a match and,
to his great surprise, discovered that the source of the mysterious
light was a little barium platinocyanide screen lying on the bench.
608
13. PROBING THE ATOM

Barium platinocyanide, a mineral, is one of the many chemicals known
to fluoresce (emit visible light when illuminated with ultraviolet light). But
no source of ultraviolet light was present in Röntgen's experiment. Cath-
ode rays had not been observed to travel more than a few centimeters in
air. So, neither ultraviolet light nor the cathode rays themselves could have
caused the fluorescence. Röntgen therefore deduced that the fluorescence
involved rays of a new kind. He named them X rays, since the rays were an
unknown nature.
In an intensive and thorough series of experiments over the next 7 weeks,
he determined the properties of this new radiation. Röntgen reported his
results on December 28, 1895, in a paper whose title (translated) is "On a
New Kind of Rays."
Röntgen's paper described nearly all of the properties of X rays that
are known even now. It described the method of producing the rays and
proved that they originated in the glass wall of the tube, where the cath-
ode rays struck it. Röntgen showed that X rays travel in straight lines
from their place of origin, and that they darken a photographic plate. He
reported in detail the ability of X rays to penetrate various substances,
such as paper, wood, aluminum, platinum, and lead. Their penetrating
power was greater through light materials (paper, wood, flesh) than
through dense materials (platinum, lead, bone). He described and exhib-
13.8 X RAYS
609
FIGURE 13.13 Wilhelm Röntgen 
(1845-1923). 

ited photographs showing "the shadows of bones of the hand, of a set of
weights inside a small box, and of a piece of metal whose inhomogeneity
becomes apparent with X rays." He gave a clear description of the 
shadows cast by the bones of the hand on the fluorescent screen. Rönt-
gen also reported that the X rays were not deflected by a magnetic field.
He also could not show their reflection, refraction, or interference effects
in ordinary optical apparatus.
J.J. Thomson discovered one of the most important properties of X rays
a month or two after the rays themselves had become known. He found
that when the rays pass through a gas, they make it a conductor of elec-
tricity. Thomson attributed this effect to "a kind of electrolysis, the mole-
cule being split up, or nearly split up by the Röntgen rays." The X rays, in
passing through the gas, knock electrons loose from some of the atoms or
molecules of the gas. The atoms or molecules that lose these electrons be-
come positively charged. They are called ions because they resemble the
positive ions in electrolysis, and the gas is said to be ionized. Also, the freed
electrons may attach themselves to previously neutral atoms or molecules,
giving them negative charges.
Röntgen and Thomson found, independently, that electrified bodies lose
their charges when the air around them is ionized by X rays. (It is now easy
610
13. PROBING THE ATOM
FIGURE 13.14
X-ray image of
Frau Röntgen's hand with rings.
© Bettmann/CORBIS.

to see why: the electrified body attracts ions of the opposite charge from
the air.) The rate of discharge depends on the intensity of the rays (hence
the amount of ionization). This property was therefore used—and still is—
as a convenient quantitative means of measuring the intensity of an X ray
beam. As a result, careful quantitative measurements of the properties and
effects of X rays could be made.
Are X Rays Waves or Particles?
One problem that aroused keen interest following the discovery of X rays
concerned the nature of the mysterious rays. Unlike charged particles
(electrons, for example) they were not deflected by magnetic or electric
fields. Therefore, it seemed that they had to be either neutral particles or
electromagnetic waves. It was difficult to choose between these two pos-
sibilities. On the other hand, no neutral particles of atomic size (or smaller)
that had the penetrating power of X rays were then known. The existence
of such particles would be extremely hard to prove, because there was no
way of getting at them. On the other hand, if the X rays were electro-
magnetic waves, they would have to have extremely short wavelengths be-
cause only in this case, according to theory, could they have high pene-
trating power and show no refraction or interference effects with ordinary
optical apparatus.
As discussed in Chapter 8, distinctly wave-like properties become ap-
parent only when waves interact with objects, such as slits in a barrier, that
are smaller than several wavelengths across. The wavelengths hypothesized
for X rays would be on the order of 1010 m (see the diagram of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum in Section 12.5). So a demonstration of their wave
behavior would require a diffraction grating with slits spaced about 1010
m apart. Evidence from kinetic theory and from chemistry indicated that
atoms were about 1010 m in diameter. It was suggested, therefore, that 
X rays might be diffracted measurably by crystals in which the atoms form
orderly layers about 1010 m apart.
13.8 X RAYS
611
Incident
X rays
Reflected
X rays
Atom
Constructive
interference if
path lengths
differ by nλ
FIGURE 13.15
X-ray diffraction patterns
from a metal crystal formed on a photo-
graphic film. The black spots are produced
by constructive interference of X rays scat-
tered from atoms.

Such experiments succeeded in 1912. The layers of atoms did act like
diffraction gratings, and X rays did, indeed, act like electromagnetic radi-
ations of very short wavelength (like ultra-ultraviolet light). These experi-
ments are more complicated to interpret than diffraction of a beam of light
by a single, two-dimensional optical grating. The diffraction effect occurs
in three dimensions instead of two. Therefore, the diffraction patterns are
far more elaborate (see Figure 13.16).
However, in addition to wave properties, X rays were found to have quan-
tum properties, which meant they also exhibited particle-like behavior. For
example, they can cause the emission of electrons from metals. These elec-
trons have greater kinetic energies than those produced by ultraviolet light.
(The ionization of gases by X rays is also an example of the photoelectric
effect. In this case, the electrons are freed from the atoms and molecules
of the gas.) Thus, X rays also require quantum theory for the explanation
of some of their behavior. So, like light, X rays were shown to have both
wave and particle properties.
The Discovery Causes a Sensation
Röntgen's discovery of X rays excited scientists throughout the world. His
experiments were immediately repeated and extended in many laboratories
in Europe and America. Scientific journals during the year 1896 were filled
with letters and articles describing new experiments or confirming the re-
sults of earlier experiments. The passage of electricity through gases had
612
13. PROBING THE ATOM
FIGURE 13.16
X-ray diffraction
pattern from beryllium crystal. 

been a popular topic for study by physicists; this made widespread experi-
mentation much easier during the years after Röntgen's discovery, because
many physics laboratories had cathode-ray tubes and so could produce 
X rays easily.
The spectacular use of these rays in medicine generated intense interest
in X rays. Within 3 months of Röntgen's discovery, X rays were put to prac-
tical use in surgical operations in a hospital in Vienna. The use of this new
aid to surgery spread rapidly. Since Röntgen's time, X rays have revolu-
tionized some phases of medical practice, especially the diagnosis of some
diseases and the treatment of some forms of cancer (because X rays also
can destroy malignant tissue). Extremely important uses of X rays occur as
well in other fields of applied science, both physical and biological. Among
these are the study of the crystal structure of materials; "industrial diagno-
sis," such as the search for possible defects in materials and engineering
structures; the study of what is behind the optically visible surface of old
paintings and sculptures; and many others.
The public reaction to the discovery of X rays was sensational also. Many
people rushed to have their bodies irradiated by the new rays, thinking they
have miraculous properties, while others worried about moral decline if
modesty gave way to "X-ray vision." A Berlin newspaper even published a
full-body X ray of the Kaiser, giving new meaning in retrospect to the old
story of "The Emperor's New Clothes." 
From the apparatus used in Röntgen's original discovery, there emerged
two paths of development in medical technology. One concentrated on 
a fluoroscope, the other focused on improving the radiograph; Thomas
Edison was crucial in both.
It was Edison's familiarity with the Crookes tube, which was very simi-
lar to his 1879 invention of the electric light bulb, that enabled him to make
one of the first improvements to X-ray technology. By constructing a tube
using thinner glass, Edison found that more X rays could escape. Edison
also led the investigation which found that calcium tungstate could pro-
duce a clearer image on the fluorescent screen than the previously used
barium platinocyanide. Edison took this knowledge and applied it to the
manufacture of a "fluoroscope," a device which allowed a person to peer
through a box at a screen coated in calcium tungstate, and see a moving
image of the inside of their, or another person's, body, as it moved beneath
the screen.
A friend of Edison's, Michael Pupin, took this improvement in the flu-
orescent screen and combined it with a photographic plate, which reduced
the patient exposure time for a radiograph from 1 hour to just a few min-
utes, while also increasing the clarity of the picture. This greatly reduced
the danger of damage to tissues.
13.8 X RAYS
613

614
X-RAY APPLICATIONS
Originally, X rays were produced in Rönt-
gen's laboratory when cathode rays (elec-
trons) struck a target (the glass wall of the
tube). Today, X rays usually are produced
by directing a beam of high-energy elec-
trons onto a metal target. As the electrons
are deflected and stopped, X rays of vari-
ous energies are produced. The maximum
energy a single ray can have is the total ki-
netic energy the incident electron gives up
on being stopped. So the greater the volt-
age across which the electron beam is ac-
celerated, the more energetic and pene-
trating are the X rays. 
X rays are used in a wide range of fields.
Computer-aided tomography (CAT) al-
lows doctors to create three-dimensional
images of a patient's body. X rays are also
used in art restoration, revealing structural
defects in sculptures and enabling the as-
sessment of previous restoration efforts of
paintings and frescoes.
FIGURE 13.17
Computed tomography scan of a person's head in which X rays are used. 
FIGURE 13.18
Another application of X
rays. Here, a bronze sculpture by Gian
Lorenzo Bernini is being examined by com-
parison with X-radiograph images (displayed
on screen). Such non-invasive procedures
have become essential tools in the field of
art preservation. 

One of the most problematic aspects of X-ray technology for the first
two decades was the unreliability of the glass tubes, which often cracked
when heated. The high incidence of cracking was eliminated in 1913 when
William Coolidge, while working for General Electric, invented the high-
vacuum, hot-cathode, tungsten-target X-ray tube. As part of his research
into electric-light-bulb filaments, Coolidge found that because tungsten 
vaporized less than any other metals, it could reduce the buildup of gas
residue. Applying this knowledge, Coolidge replaced platinum with tung-
sten in the cathode-ray tube. When these "Coolidge tubes" came on the
market in 1913, they had many benefits over the previous design; they could
produce clearer duplications of previous images, be adjusted much more
accurately, and because of their increased flexibility, they could arrange to
go instantly from high to low penetration.
After World War II the monopoly of X rays as a medical imaging tool
began to be challenged by new technologies that combined computers and
television to help in obtaining an image of those parts of the human body
which X rays had failed to reach. They include CT (computed tomogra-
phy) scanning, MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), PET (positron emis-
sion tomography), and ultrasound.
13.8 X RAYS
615
FIGURE 13.19
Edison examining
his hand under a fluoroscope, ca.
1896. 

Many of the scientific and technological advances, on which these
"daughter technologies" depended, were taking place throughout the first
half of this century. However, it took the invention and subsequent im-
provements in computer technology, before the complex algorithms re-
quired for the imaging techniques involved in CT scanning and MRI could
be calculated. These advanced medical imaging techniques, whose impor-
tance is now established in medical diagnostics, are a world away from the
simple technology that allowed Röntgen to see through his skin in 1895,
still, despite these advances, X rays remain the most commonly used 
imaging tools, largely because of the simplicity, and the size, and the fi-
nancial cost of its "daughter technologies."
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
atomic mass units
periodic table
atomic number
photoelectric effect
cathode
photoelectron
cathode rays
photon
Einstein's photoelectric equation
stopping voltage
electron
Thomson's model of the atom
law of fixed proportions
work function
light quantum
SOME IMPORTANT EQUATIONS
E  hf,
KEmax  hf  W,
KEmax  eVstop.
FURTHER READING
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapter 26.
B.H. Kevles, Naked to the Bone: Medical Imaging in the Twentieth Century. Sloan
Technology Series (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1997).
616
13. PROBING THE ATOM

STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
13.1 The Periodic Table
1.
How did Mendeleev arrange the elements on the periodic table?
2.
Describe some of the common features of different groups of elements.
3.
Which element is element 56? What is its atomic number? atomic mass?
13.2 The Idea of Atomic Structure
1.
How did the periodic table suggest that atoms might have a structure?
2.
What changes with respect to the structure of the atoms would one find as one
progressed through the periodic table?
13.3 Cathode Rays
1.
What was the most convincing evidence to support the fact that cathode rays
were not electromagnetic radiation?
2.
What was the reason given for the ratio q/m for electrons being about 1800
times larger than q/m for hydrogen ions?
3.
What were two main reasons for Thomson's belief that electrons may be "build-
ing blocks" from which all atoms are made?
13.4 The Smallest Charge
1.
How can the small oil drops or plastic spheres used in the Millikan experiment
experience an electric force upward if the electric field is directed downward?
2.
What did the results of the Millikan experiment indicate about the nature of
electric charge?
3.
In Millikan's experiment, what is necessary to keep a charged droplet suspended
in place?
13.5 Thomson's Model of the Atom
1.
Describe Thomson's model of the atom. Give the reasoning behind the inclu-
sion of each component and their arrangement.
2.
What was one problem with this model?
3.
Draw a picture of an atom of oxygen, according to Thomson, and label every-
thing in it.
13.6 The Photoelectric Effect
1.
Light falling on a certain metal surface causes electrons to be emitted. What
happens to the photoelectric current as the intensity of the light is decreased?
2.
What happens as the frequency of the light is decreased?
3.
Which observations could not be explained by the classical wave theory of light?
4.
Sketch a rough diagram of the equipment and circuit used to demonstrate the
main facts of photoelectricity.
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
617

13.7 Einstein's Theory of the Photoelectric Effect
1.
High-frequency light falls on the metal surface of a cathode in a cathode-ray
tube, producing a photocurrent. Use Einstein's theory to describe what hap-
pens in each step of this phenomenon.
2.
Briefly explain how Einstein's theory accounts for each of the observations
listed in Section 13.6.
3.
Describe an experiment that tested Einstein's theory. What was the result?
4.
Einstein's idea of a quantum of light had a definite relation to the wave model
of light. What was it?
5.
Why does the photoelectron freed from the metal surface not have as much
energy as the quantum of light that causes it to be ejected?
6.
What does a stopping voltage of 2.0 V indicate about the photoelectrons
emerging from a metal surface?
7.
Write down Einstein's photoelectric equation and define the meaning of every
symbol in it.
8.
Einstein's equation contains the maximum kinetic energy, KEmax of the photo-
electrons. Under what conditions would the photoelectrons have less than max-
imum kinetic energy?
9.
The success of Einstein's theory posed a dilemma for physicists. What was it?
13.8 X Rays
1.
What processes can produce X rays?
2.
X rays were the first "ionizing" radiation discovered. What does "ionizing"
mean?
3.
What are three properties of X rays that led to the conclusion that X rays were
electromagnetic waves?
4.
What was the experimental and theoretical evidence to support the notion that
X rays had very short wavelengths?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1.
If classical physics was so successful, why did new theories arise?
2.
Evaluate Thomson's "plum-pudding model" as a model of atoms. Was it a good
model in terms of what scientists wanted from a model and what they knew
at the time about the atom? What were its strengths and weaknesses?
3.
A television tube or a computer-monitor tube is often called a CRT, which
stands for "cathode-ray tube." Look up the operation of one of these tubes in
an encyclopedia or on-line information source. What do these tubes have to
do with cathode rays? How do they work?
4.
At light frequencies below the threshold frequency no photoelectrons are emit-
ted. What might happen to the light energy?
5.
Planck's constant h has the value 6.6  1034 J/s. What does this tell us about
the magnitude of the energy carried by a light quantum?
618
13. PROBING THE ATOM

Quantitative
1.
The charge on an electron is 1.6  1019 C. To gain an idea of the small size
of an electron charge consider the following. A current of 1 A flows for 1 s
down a wire. How many electrons enter the wire?
2.
How many joules of energy does one photon of ultraviolet light carry? Assume
its frequency to be 1.5  1015 Hz.
3.
An average photon of visible light has a frequency of about 1  1014 Hz. To
gain an idea of the small size of a quantum of energy, consider the following.
A 100-W light bulb is turned on for 1 s. Only about 5% of the electric en-
ergy input to the tungsten filament is given off as visible light. How many pho-
tons does the bulb emit?
4.
For most metals, the work function W in Einstein's photoelectric equation is
about 1018 J. Light of what frequency will cause photoelectrons to leave the
metal with virtually no kinetic energy? In what region of the spectrum is this
frequency?
5.
Monochromatic light of wavelength 5  107 m falls on a metal cathode 
to produce photoelectrons. The light intensity at the surface of the metal is
102 J/m2 s.
(a) What is the frequency of the light?
(b) What is the energy (in joules) of a single photon of the light?
(c) How many photons fall on 1 m2 in 1 s?
(d) If the diameter of an atom is about 1010 m, how many photons fall on
one atom in 1 s, on the average?
(e) How often would one photon fall on one atom, on the average?
(f) How many photons fall on one atom in 1010 s, on the average?
(g) Suppose the cathode is a square 0.05 m on a side. How many electrons
are released per second, assuming every photon releases a photoelectron?
(In fact, only about 1 in 50 photons does so.) How big a current would
this be in amperes?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
619

This page intentionally left blank 

-
+
14.1
Spectra of Gases
14.2
Regularities in the Hydrogen Spectrum
14.3
Rutherford's Nuclear Model of the Atom
14.4
Nuclear Charge and Size
14.5
Bohr's Theory: The Postulates
14.6
The Size of the Hydrogen Atom
14.7
Other Consequences of the Bohr Model
14.8
Bohr Accounts for the Series Spectra of Hydrogen
14.9
Do Stationary States Really Exist?
14.10 Constructing the Periodic Table
14.11 Evaluating the Bohr Model
14.1 SPECTRA OF GASES
One of the first important clues to understanding atomic structure involved
the study of the emission and absorption of light by the atoms of different
elements. Physicists knew from Maxwell's theory that light is emitted and
absorbed only by accelerating charges. This suggested that the atom might
contain moving charges. Patterns and regularities in the properties of the
light emitted we expected to provide valuable clues about the precise na-
ture of the motions of the moving charges. The results of this study were
so important to the unraveling of atomic structure that we review their de-
velopment here in some detail.
621
The Quantum
Model of 
the Atom
C
H
A
P
T
E
R14
14

Emission Spectra
It has long been known that light is emitted by gases or vapors when they
are excited in any one of several ways:
(1)
by heating the gas to a high temperature, as when a volatile substance
is put into a flame;
(2)
by an electric discharge through gas in the space between the termi-
nals of an electric arc; or
(3)
by a continuous electric current in a gas at low pressure, as in the now
familiar "neon sign."
The Scottish physicist Thomas Melvill made the pioneering experiments
on light emitted by various excited gases in 1752. He put one substance af-
ter another in a flame, "having placed a pasteboard with a circular hole in
it between my eye and the flame . . . , I examined the constitution of these
different lights with a prism." Melvill found that the spectrum of visible
light from a hot gas of a single element was different from the well-known
rainbow-colored spectrum of a glowing solid or liquid. Melvill's spectrum
was not an unbroken stretch of color continuously graded from violet to
red. Rather, it consisted of individual patches, each having the color of 
that part of the spectrum in which it was located. There were dark gaps—
missing colors—between the patches. Later, more general use was made of
a narrow slit through which to pass the light. Now the spectrum of a gas
was seen as a set of bright lines (see Figure 14.1). The bright lines are in
fact colored images of the slit. Such spectra show that light from a gas is a
mixture of only a few definite colors or narrow wavelength regions of light.
These types of spectra are called emission spectra or bright-line spectra, and
their study is known as spectroscopy.
Melvill also noted that the colors and locations of the bright lines were
different when different substances were put into the flame. For example,
with ordinary table salt in the flame, the dominant color was "bright yel-
low" (now known to be characteristic of the element sodium). In fact, the
bright-line spectrum is markedly different for each chemically different gas
because each chemical element emits its own characteristic set of wave-
lengths. In looking at a gaseous source without the aid of a prism or a grat-
ing, the eye combines the separate colors. It perceives the mixture as red-
dish for glowing neon, pale blue for nitrogen, yellow for sodium vapor, and
so on.
Some gases have relatively simple emission spectra. Thus, the most
prominent part of the visible spectrum of sodium vapor is a pair of bright
yellow lines. This is why, for example, the flame in a gas stove turns yel-
low when soup, or any liquid containing salt, boils over. Sodium-vapor
622
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

FIGURE 14.1
(a) Hot solids emit all wavelengths of light, producing a continuous spectrum on the screen
at left. The shorter-wavelength portions of light are refracted more by the prism than are long wave-
lengths. (b) Hot gases emit only certain wavelengths of light, producing a bright line spectrum. If the
slit had a different shape, so would the bright lines on the screen. (c) Cool gases absorb only certain
wavelengths of light, producing a dark line spectrum when "white" light from a hot solid is passed
through the cool gas.
(a)
(c)
(b)

lamps are now used in many places as street lights at night. Some gases or
vapors have very complex spectra. Iron vapor, for example, has some 6000
bright lines in the visible range alone.
In 1823, the British astronomer John Herschel suggested that each gas
could be identified by its unique line spectrum. By the early 1860s, the
physicist Gustav R. Kirchhoff and the chemist Robert W. Bunsen, in Ger-
many, had jointly discovered two new elements (rubidium and cesium) by
noting previously unreported emission lines in the spectrum of the vapor
of a mineral water. This was the first of a series of such discoveries. It started
the development of a technique for speedy chemical analysis of small
amounts of materials by spectrum analysis. The "flame test" you may have
performed in a chemistry class is a simple application of this analysis.
Absorption Spectra
In 1802, the English scientist William Wollaston saw in the spectrum of
sunlight something that had been overlooked before. Wollaston noticed a
set of seven sharp, irregularly spaced dark lines, or spaces, across the con-
tinuous solar spectrum. He did not understand why they were there and
did not investigate further. A dozen years later, the German physicist Joseph
von Fraunhofer, using better instruments, detected many hundreds of such
dark lines. To the most prominent dark lines von
Fraunhofer assigned the letters A, B, C, etc. These
dark lines can be easily seen in the Sun's spectrum
with even quite simple modern spectroscopes. The
letters A, B, C, . . . are still used to identify them.
In the spectra of several other bright stars, von
Fraunhofer found similar dark lines. Many, but not all, of these lines were
in the same positions as those in the solar spectrum. All such spectra are
known as dark-line spectra or absorption spectra.
In 1859, Kirchhoff made some key observations that led to better un-
derstanding of both the dark-line and bright-line spectra of gases. It was
624
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
KH
G
Violet
Blue
Green
Yellow
Orange
Red
F
E
D
C
B
A
FIGURE 14.2
The Fraunhofer dark lines in the visible part of the solar spectrum.
Only a few of the most prominent lines are represented here.
Spectrometer or spectrograph:
A device for measuring the
wavelength of the spectrum and
for recording the spectra (e.g.,
on film).

already known that the two prominent yellow lines in the emission spec-
trum of heated sodium vapor had the same wavelengths as two neighbor-
ing prominent dark lines in the solar spectrum. (The solar spectrum lines
were the ones to which von Fraunhofer had assigned the letter D.) It was
also known that the light emitted by a glowing solid forms a perfectly con-
tinuous spectrum that shows no dark lines. Kirchhoff now experimented
with light from a glowing solid, as shown in Figure 14.1c. The white light
was first passed through cooler sodium vapor and then dispersed by a prism.
The spectrum produced showed the expected rainbow pattern, but it had
two prominent dark lines at the same place in the spectrum as the D lines
of the Sun's spectrum. It was therefore reasonable to conclude that the light
from the Sun, too, was passing through a mass of sodium gas. This was 
the first evidence of the chemical composition of the gas envelope around
the Sun.
Kirchhoff's experiment was repeated with various other relatively cool
gases, placed between a glowing solid and the prism. Each gas produced
its own characteristic set of dark lines. Evidently, each gas in some way 
absorbs light of certain wavelengths from the passing light. In addition,
Kirchhoff showed that the wavelength of each absorption line matches the
wavelength of a bright line in the emission spectrum of the same gas. The
conclusion is that a gas can absorb only light of those wavelengths which, when ex-
cited, it can emit. (Note that not every emission line is represented in the
absorption spectrum. Soon you will see why.)
Each of the various von Fraunhofer lines across the spectra of the Sun
and other stars has now been identified with the action of some gas as tested
14.1 SPECTRA OF GASES
625
Continuous spectrum
(a)
(b)
(c)
Emission spectrum
Absorption spectrum
FIGURE 14.3
Emission, absorption, and continuous
spectra (see Color Plate 5 for emission spectra of selected
elements).

in the laboratory. In this way, the whole chemical composition of the outer
region of the Sun and other stars has been determined. This is really quite
breathtaking from several points of view. First, it is surprising that scien-
tists can learn the chemical composition of immensely distant objects—
something which earlier thinkers had thought to be, almost by definition,
an impossibility. It is even more surprising that chemical materials out there
are, as Newton had earlier assumed, the same as those on Earth. (That this
is true is clearly shown by the fact that even very complex absorption spec-
tra are reproduced exactly in star spectra.) Finally, this result leads to a strik-
ing conclusion: The physical processes that cause light absorption in the atom
must be the same among the distant stars as on Earth.
In these facts you can see a hint of how universal physical laws really are.
Even at the farthest edges of the cosmos from which the Earth receives
light, the laws of physics appear to be the same as for common materials
close at hand in the laboratory! This is just what Galileo and Newton had
intuited when they proposed that there is no difference between terrestrial
and celestial physics.
14.2 REGULARITIES IN THE 
HYDROGEN SPECTRUM
Of all the spectra, the emission spectrum of hydrogen is especially inter-
esting for both historical and theoretical reasons. In the visible and near-
ultraviolet regions, the emission spectrum consists of an apparently sys-
tematic or orderly series of lines (see Figure 14.4). In 1885, Johann Jakob
Balmer (1825-1898), a teacher at a girls' school in Switzerland, who was
interested in number puzzles and numerology, found a simple formula—
an empirical relation—which gave the wavelengths  of the lines known at
the time. The formula is
  b
.
The quantity b is a constant which Balmer determined empirically and
found to be equal to 364.56  109 m; n is a whole number, different for
each line. Specifically, for the equation to yield the observed value for the
respective wavelengths, n must be 3 for the first visible (red) line of the hy-
drogen emission spectrum (named H); n  4 for the second (green) line
(H); n  5 for the third (blue) line (H); and n  6 for the fourth (violet)
n2

n2  22
626
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

line (H). The table below shows excellent agreement (within 0.02%) 
between Balmer's calculations from his empirical formula and previously
measured values.
Wavelength , in nanometers (109 m), for hydrogen emission spectrum.*
Name
From Balmer's
By Ångström's
of line
n
formula
measurement
Difference
H
3
656.208
656.210
0.002
H
4
486.08
486.074
0.006
H
5
434.00
434.01
0.01
H
6
410.13
410.12
0.01
* Data for hydrogen spectrum (Balmer, 1885).
Not until 30 years later did scientists understand why Balmer's empiri-
cal formula worked so well, why the hydrogen atom emitted light whose
wavelengths made such a simple sequence. But this did not keep Balmer
from speculating that there might be other series of unsuspected lines in
14.2 REGULARITIES IN THE HYDROGEN SPECTRUM
627
Hε
UV
IR
Light
Balmer
series
Lyman
series
Paschen
series
Energy (eV)
0
−0.38
−0.54
∞65
4
3
2
−0.85
−1.51
−3.39
1
−13.6
Hδ
Hγ
(a)
(b)
Hβ
Hα
Quantum Number
FIGURE 14.4
(a) The Balmer lines of hydrogen as
they would appear in a photograph made with film
sensitive to some ultraviolet as well as visible light.
The lines get more crowded as they approach the se-
ries limit in the ultraviolet. (b) In Section 14.8, this
scheme will explain the existence of all hydrogen
emission lines.

the hydrogen spectrum. Their wavelengths, he suggested, could be found
by replacing the 22 in his equation with numbers such as 12, 32, 42, and so
on. This suggestion stimulated many scientists to search for such additional
spectral series. The search turned out to be fruitful, as you will see shortly.
In order to use modern notation, we rewrite Balmer's formula in a form
that will be more useful:
 RH
 .
In this equation, which can be derived from the previous one, RH is a con-
stant, equal to 4/b. It is called the Rydberg constant for hydrogen, in honor
of the Swedish spectroscopist J.R. Rydberg. Following Balmer, Rydberg
made great progress in the search for various spectral series. The series of
lines described by Balmer's formula are called the Balmer series. Balmer con-
structed his formula from the known wavelengths of only four lines in the
visible part of the spectrum. The formula could be used to predict that
there should be many more lines in the same series (indeed, infinitely many
such lines, as n takes on values such as n  3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, . . . ∞). More-
over, every one of the lines is correctly predicted by Balmer's formula with
considerable accuracy.
Following Balmer's speculative suggestion of replacing 22 by other num-
bers gives the following possibilities:
 RH
 ,
 RH
 ,
 RH
 ,
and so on. Each of these equations describes a possible series of emission
lines. All these hypothetical series of lines can then be summarized by one
overall formula
 RH
 ,
1

n 2
i
1

n 2
f
1

1
n2
1
42
1

1
n2
1
32
1

1
n2
1
12
1

1
n2
1
22
1

628
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

where nf is a whole number that is fixed for any one series for which wave-
lengths are to be found. (For example, nf  2 for all lines in the Balmer 
series.) The letter ni stands for integers that take on the values nf  1, 
nf  2, nf  3, . . . for the successive individual lines in a given series. (Thus,
for the first two lines of the Balmer series, ni is 3 and 4.) The constant RH
should have the same value for all of these hydrogen series.
So far, this discussion has been merely speculative. No series, no single
line fitting the general formula, need exist, except for the observed Balmer
series, where nf  2. But when physicists began to look for these hypothet-
ical lines with good spectrometers, they found that they do, in fact, exist!
In 1908, F. Paschen in Germany found two hydrogen lines in the 
infrared. Their wavelengths were correctly given by setting nf  3 and 
ni  4 and 5 in the general formula. Many other lines in this "Paschen se-
ries" have since been identified. With improved experimental apparatus and
techniques, new regions of the spectrum could be explored. Thus, other
series gradually were added to the Balmer and Paschen series. In the table
below, the name of each series listed is that of the discoverer.
Series of lines in the hydrogen spectrum.
Name of
Date of
Region of
Values in
series
discovery
spectrum
Balmer equation
Lyman
1906-1914
Ultraviolet
nf  1, ni  2, 3, 4, . . . 
Balmer
1885
Ultraviolet-visible
nf  2, ni  3, 4, 5, . . .
Paschen
1908
Infrared
nf  3, ni  4, 5, 6, . . . 
Brackett
1922
Infrared
nf  4, ni  5, 6, 7, . . . 
Pfund
1924
Infrared
nf  5, ni  6, 7, 8, . . . 
Balmer hoped that his formula for the hydrogen spectra might be a pat-
tern for finding series relationships in the spectra of other gases. This sug-
gestion also bore fruit. Balmer's formula itself did not work directly in de-
scribing spectra of gases other than hydrogen. But it did inspire formulas
of similar mathematical form that successfully described order in portions
of many complex spectra. The Rydberg constant RH also reappeared in such
empirical formulas.
However, no model based on classical mechanics and electromagnetism
could be constructed that would explain the spectra described by these for-
mulas. What you have already learned in Chapter 13 about quantum the-
ory suggests one line of attack. Obviously, the emission and absorption of
light from an atom must correspond to a decrease and an increase of the
14.2 REGULARITIES IN THE HYDROGEN SPECTRUM
629

atom's energy. If atoms of an element emit light of only certain frequen-
cies, then the energy of the atoms must be able to change only by certain
amounts. These changes of energy must involve rearrangement of the parts
of the atom.
14.3 RUTHERFORD'S NUCLEAR MODEL 
OF THE ATOM
As so often, the next step arose from completely unrelated research. Ernest
Rutherford, an outstanding physicist in the Cavendish Laboratory at 
Cambridge, provided a new basis for atomic models during the period
1909-1911. Rutherford was interested in the rays emitted by radioactive
substances, especially  (alpha) rays. As you will see in Chapter 17,  rays
consist of positively charged particles. These particles are positively charged
helium ions with masses about 7500 times greater than the electron mass.
Some radioactive substances emit  particles at very high rates and ener-
gies. Such particles are often used as projectiles in bombarding samples of
elements. The experiments that Rutherford and his colleagues did with 
particles are examples of a highly important kind of experiment in atomic
and nuclear physics: the scattering experiment.
In a scattering experiment, a narrow, parallel beam of "projectiles" (e.g.,
 particles, electrons, X rays) is aimed at a target. The target is usually a
thin foil or film of some material. As the beam strikes the target, some of
the projectiles are deflected, or scattered, from their original direction. The
scattering is the result of the interaction between the particles in the beam
and the atoms of the material. A careful study of the projectiles after scat-
tering can yield information about the projectiles, the atoms, and the in-
teraction between them. If you know the mass, energy, and direction of the
projectiles and see how they are scattered, you can deduce properties of the
atoms that scattered the projectiles. 
Rutherford noticed that when a beam of  particles passed through a
thin metal foil, the beam spread out. This scattering may be thought of as
caused by electrostatic forces between the positively charged  particles and
the charges that make up atoms. Atoms contain both positive and negative
charges. Therefore, an  particle undergoes both repelling and attracting
forces as it passes through matter. The magnitude and direction of these
forces depend on how closely the particle approaches the centers of the
atoms among which it moves. When a particular atomic model is proposed,
the extent of the expected scattering can be calculated and compared with
experiment. For example, the Thomson model of the atom predicted al-
630
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

most no chance that an  particle would be deflected by an angle of more
than a few degrees.
The breakthrough which led to the modern model of the atom followed
a discovery by one of Rutherford's assistants, Hans Geiger. Geiger found
that the number of particles scattered through angles of 10° or more was
much greater than the number predicted by the Thomson model. In fact,
a significant number were scattered through an angle greater than 90°, that
is, many  particles virtually bounced right back from the foil. This result
was entirely unexpected. According to Thomson's model, the atom should
have acted only slightly on the projectile, rather like a cloud in which fine
dust is suspended. Some years later, Rutherford wrote:
. . . I had observed the scattering of -particles, and Dr. Geiger in
my laboratory had examined it in detail. He found, in thin pieces
of heavy metal, that the scattering was usually small, of the order
of one degree. One day Geiger came to me and said, "Don't you
think that young Marsden, whom I am training in radioactive meth-
ods, ought to begin a small research?" Now I had thought that, too,
so I said, "Why not let him see if any -particles can be scattered
through a large angle?" I may tell you in confidence that I did not
believe that they would be, since we knew that the -particle was
a very fast, massive particle, with a great deal of [kinetic] energy, and
you could show that if the scattering was due to the accumualted ef-
fect of a number of small scatterings, the chance of an -particle's
being scattered backward was very small. Then I remember two 
or three days later Geiger coming to me in great excitement and
saying, "We have been able to get some of the -particles coming
backward . . ."
14.3 RUTHERFORD'S NUCLEAR MODEL OF THE ATOM
631
α-particle
source
Metal
foil
FIGURE 14.5
Alpha particle scattering showing deflection by the nuclei of
the metal atoms. In somewhat the same way, you could (in principle) use a
scattering experiment to discover the size and shape of an object hidden in
a cloud or fog by directing a series of projectiles at the unseen object and
tracing their paths back after deflection.
(a)
(b)

It was quite the most incredible event that has ever happened to
me in my life. It was almost as incredible as if you fired a 15-inch
shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and hit you. On
consideration, I realized that this scattering backward must be the
result of a single collision, and when I made calculations I saw that
it was impossible to get anything of that order of magnitude unless
you took a system in which the greater part of the mass of the atom
was concentrated in a minute nucleus. It was then that I had the
idea of an atom with a minute massive centre, carrying a charge.
These experiments and Rutherford's interpretation marked the origin of
the modern concept of the nuclear atom. Look at the experiments and
Rutherford's conclusion more closely. Why must the atom have its mass
and positive charge concentrated in a tiny nucleus at the center about which
the electrons are clustered?
He writes that a possible explanation of the observed scattering is that
the foil contains concentrations of mass and charge, that is, positively
charged nuclei. These nuclei are much more dense than anything in Thom-
son's atoms. An  particle heading directly toward one of them is stopped
and turned back. In the same way, a ball would bounce back from a rock
but not from a cloud of dust particles. The drawing in Figure 14.7 is based
632
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
FIGURE 14.6
Ernest Rutherford (1871-1937)
was born, grew up, and received most of his ed-
ucation in New Zealand. At age 24 he went to
Cambridge, England, to work at the Cavendish
Laboratory under J.J. Thomson. From there he
went to McGill University in Canada, then home
to be married and back to England again, to
Manchester University. At these universities, and
later at the Cavendish Laboratory where he suc-
ceeded J.J. Thomson as director, Rutherford per-
formed important experiments on radioactivity,
the nuclear nature of the atom, and the structure
of the nucleus. Rutherford introduced the con-
cepts "alpha," "beta," and "gamma" rays, "pro-
tons," and "half-life." 

on one of Rutherford's diagrams in his paper of 1911, which laid the foun-
dation for the modern theory of atomic structure. It shows two positively
charged  particles, A and A. The  particle A is heading directly toward
a massive nucleus N. If the nucleus has a positive electric charge, it will re-
pel the positive  particle. Because of this electrical repulsive force, A will
slow to a stop at some distance r from N and then move directly back. A
is an  particle that is not headed directly toward the nucleus N. It is re-
pelled by N along a path which calculation shows must be a hyperbola. The
deflection of A from its original path is indicated by the angle 	.
Rutherford considered the effects on the  particle's path of the impor-
tant variables: the particle's speed, the foil thickness, and the quantity of
charge Q on each nucleus. According to Rutherford's model, most of the
 particles should be scattered through small angles, because the chance of
approaching a very small nucleus nearly head-on is so small. But a signif-
icant number of  particles should be scattered through large angles.
Geiger and Marsden tested these predictions with the apparatus sketched
in Figure 14.8. The lead box B contains a radioactive substance (radon) that
emits  particles. The particles emerging from the small hole in the box
are deflected through various angles 	 in passing through the thin metal
foil F. The number of particles deflected through each angle 	 is found by
letting the particles strike a zinc sulfide screen S. Each  particle that strikes
the screen produces a scintillation (a momentary pinpoint of fluorescence).
These scintillations can be observed and counted by looking through the
14.3 RUTHERFORD'S NUCLEAR MODEL OF THE ATOM
633
A′
A
N
N
φ
r
FIGURE 14.7
Paths of two alpha
particles A and A approaching a nu-
cleus N.

microscope M. The microscope and screen can be moved together along
the arc of a circle. In later experiments, the number of  particles at any
angle 	 was counted more conveniently by a counter invented by Geiger
(see Figure 14.9). The Geiger counter, in its more recent versions, is now
a standard laboratory item.
Geiger and Marsden found that the number of  particles counted de-
pended on the scattering angle, the speed of the particles, and the thick-
ness of the foil. These findings agreed with Rutherford's predictions and
634
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
B
F
M
S
φ
α
FIGURE 14.8
Rutherford's scintillation apparatus was placed in an evacuated
chamber so that the alpha particles would not be slowed down by collisions with
air molecules.
C
W
α
A
High
Voltage
FIGURE 14.9
A Geiger counter that consists of a metal cylinder C containing a
gas and a thin wire A that is insulated from the cylinder. A potential difference
slightly less than that needed to produce a discharge through the gas is main-
tained between the wire (anode A) and cylinder (cathode C). When an alpha par-
ticle enters through the thin mica window (W ), it frees a few electrons from the
gas molecules. The electrons are accelerated toward the anode, freeing more elec-
trons along the way by collisions with gas molecules. The avalanche of electrons
constitutes a sudden surge of current that can be amplified to produce a click in
the headphones or to operate a register

supported a new atomic model, in which most of the mass and all positive
charge occupy a very small region at the center of the atom.
14.4 NUCLEAR CHARGE AND SIZE
Despite the success of Rutherford's model in dealing with -scattering data,
a problem remained. There still was no way to measure independently the
charge Q on the nucleus. However, the scattering experiments had con-
firmed Rutherford's predictions about the effect of the speed of the  par-
ticle and the thickness of the foil on the angle of scattering. As often hap-
pens when part of a theory is confirmed, it is reasonable to proceed
temporarily as if the whole theory were justified; that is, pending further
proof, one could assume that the value of Q needed to explain the observed
scattering data was the correct value of Q for the actual nucleus, as deter-
mined by Coulomb's law and the motion of the  particles. On this basis,
Rutherford compiled scattering data for several different elements, among
them carbon, aluminum, and gold. The following positive nuclear charges
yielded the best agreement with experiments: for carbon, Q  6e; for alu-
minum, Q  13e or 14e; and for gold, Q  78e or 79e, where e is the mag-
nitude of the charge of one electron (e  1.6  1019 C). Similarly, values
were found for other elements.
The magnitude of the positive charge of the nucleus was an important
and welcome piece of information about the atom. The atom as a whole is
of course electrically neutral. So if the nucleus has a positive charge of 6e,
14.4 NUCLEAR CHARGE AND SIZE
635
−
−
−
+
+ +
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 14.10
Sketch of simple atomic structure:
(a) hydrogen, (b) helium.

13e, 14e, etc., the number of negatively charged electrons surrounding the
nucleus must be 6 for carbon, 13 or 14 for aluminum, etc. Thus, for the
first time, scientists had a good idea of just how many electrons an atom
may have.
An even more important fact was soon noticed. For each element, the
value for the nuclear charge, in multiples of e, was close to the atomic num-
ber Z, the place number of that element in the periodic table! The results
of scattering experiments with  particles were not yet precise enough to
make this conclusion with certainty. But the data indicated that each nucleus
has a positive charge Q numerically equal to Ze.
This suggestion made the picture of the nuclear atom much clearer and
simpler. On this basis, the hydrogen atom (Z  1) has one electron outside
the nucleus. A helium atom (Z  2) has in its neutral state two electrons
outside the nucleus. A uranium atom (Z  92) has 92 electrons. Additional
experiments further supported this simple scheme. The experiments
showed that it was possible to produce singly ionized hydrogen atoms, H,
and doubly ionized helium atoms, He, but neither H nor He. Ev-
idently, a hydrogen atom has only one electron to lose, and a helium atom
only two. Unexpectedly, the concept of the nuclear atom thus provided new
insight into the periodic table of the elements. The nuclear concept sug-
gested that the periodic table is really a listing of the elements according to the
number of electrons around the nucleus, or equally well according to the number
of positive units of charge on the nucleus.
These results cleared up some of the difficulties in Mendeleev's periodic
table. For example, the elements tellurium and iodine had been assigned
positions Z  52 and Z  53 on the basis of their chemical properties. This
positioning contradicted the order of their atomic weights. But now Z was
seen to correspond to a fundamental fact about the nucleus. Thus, the re-
versed order of atomic weights was understood to be not a basic fault in
the scheme.
As an important additional result of these scattering experiments,
Rutherford could estimate the size of the nucleus. Suppose an  particle is
moving directly toward a nucleus. Its kinetic energy on approach is trans-
formed into electrical potential energy. It slows down and eventually stops,
like a ball rolling up a hill. The distance of closest approach can be com-
puted from the known original kinetic energy of the  particle and the
charges of  particle and nucleus. The value calculated for the closest ap-
proach is approximately 3  1014 m. If the  particle does not penetrate
the nucleus, this distance must be at least as great as the sum of the radii
of  particles and nucleus; thus, the radius of the nucleus could not be
larger than about 1014 m. But 1014 m is only about 1/1000 of the known
radius of an atom. Furthermore, the total volume of the atom is propor-
tional to the cube of its radius. So it is clear that the atom is mostly empty,
636
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

with the nucleus occupying only one-billionth of the space! This explains how 
particles or electrons can penetrate thousands of layers of atoms in metal
foils or in gases, with only an occasional large deflection backward.
Successful as this model of the nuclear atom was in explaining scatter-
ing phenomena, it raised many new questions: What is the arrangement of
electrons about the nucleus? What keeps the negative electron from falling
into a positive nucleus by electrical attraction? Of what is the nucleus com-
posed? What keeps it from exploding on account of the repulsion of its
positive charges? Rutherford realized the problems raised by these ques-
tions and the failure of his model to answer them. But he rightly said that
one should not expect one model, made on the basis of one set of puzzling
results which it explains well, also to handle all other puzzles. Additional
assumptions were needed to complete the model and answer the additional
questions about the details of atomic structure. The remainder of this chap-
ter will deal with the theory proposed by Niels Bohr, a young Danish physi-
cist who joined Rutherford's group just as the nuclear model was being 
announced.
14.5 BOHR'S THEORY: THE POSTULATES
Assume, as Rutherford did, that an atom consists of a positively charged
nucleus surrounded by a number of negatively charged electrons. What,
then, keeps the electrons from falling into the nucleus, pulled in by the
electric force of attraction? One possible answer is that an atom may be
like a planetary system, with the electrons revolving in orbits around the
nucleus. As you may know (see Section 3.12), a ball whirling on a string or
a planet orbiting the Sun must be subject to an attractive force toward the
center. Otherwise, the ball or planet would fly away on a straight line, ac-
cording to Newton's first Law of Motion. This force toward the center is
often called a centripetal force. For planets, this force arises from the gravi-
tational attraction of the Sun on the planet. For electrons in atoms, Ruther-
ford suggested that, instead of the gravitational force, the electric attrac-
tive force between the nucleus and an electron would supply a centripetal
force. This centripetal force would tend to keep the moving electron in 
orbit.
This idea seems to be a good start toward a theory of atomic structure.
But a serious problem arises concerning the stability of a "planetary" atom.
According to Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism, a charged particle ra-
diates energy when it is accelerated. An electron moving in an orbit around
a nucleus continually changes its direction, hence also its velocity vector.
In other words, it is always being accelerated by the centripetal electric force.
14.5 BOHR'S THEORY: THE POSTULATES
637

638
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
FIGURE 14.11
Niels Bohr (1885-1962): (a) pic-
tured with his wife, Margrethe, on their wedding
day; (b) ca. 1917; (c) in his later years. Bohr was
born in Copenhagen, Denmark, and became a pro-
fessor at the university there. He received the No-
bel Prize in physics in 1922 for his work described
in this chapter. He helped found the new quantum
mechanics, was a leading contributor to theories of
nuclear structure and nuclear fission, and helped
press for peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
(a)
(b)
(c)

The electron, therefore, should lose energy by emitting radiation and thus
being drawn steadily closer to the nucleus. (Somewhat similarly, an artifi-
cial satellite loses energy, because of friction in the upper atmosphere, and
gradually spirals toward the Earth.) Within a very short time, the energy-
radiating electron should actually be pulled into the nucleus. According to
classical physics, mechanics, and electromagnetism, a planetary atom would
not be stable for more than a very small fraction of a second.
The idea of a planetary atom was nevertheless appealing. Physicists con-
tinued to look for a theory that would include a stable planetary structure
and predict separate line spectra for the elements. Niels Bohr, then an un-
known Danish physicist who had just received his doctorate, succeeded in
constructing such a theory in 1912-1913. This theory was called the Bohr
model or quantum model of the atom, because it incorporated the quantum
idea of Einstein and Planck. It was widely recognized as a major victory. Al-
though it had to be modified later to account for many more phenomena,
it showed how to attack atomic problems by using quantum theory. Today,
it seems a rather naive way of thinking about the atom, compared with more
recent quantum-mechanical theories. But in fact, considering what it was
designed to do, Bohr's theory is an impressive example of a successful phys-
ical model. Since Bohr incorporated Rutherford's idea of the nucleus, the
model that Bohr's theory discusses is often called the Rutherford-Bohr
model.
Bohr introduced two bold new postulates specifically to account for the
existence of stable electron orbits and for separate emission spectra for each
element. These postulates may be stated as follows:
1.
Contrary to the predictions of classical physics—which after all had
been tested only for relatively large-scale circumstances—there are
states for an atomic system in which electromagnetic radiation simply
does not occur, despite any acceleration of the charged particles (elec-
trons). These states are called the stationary states of the atom.
2.
Any emission or absorption of radiation, either as visible light or other
electromagnetic radiation, corresponds to a sudden transition of the
charge between two such stationary states. The radiation emitted or
absorbed has a frequency f determined by the relation hf  Ei  Ef. (In
this equation, h is Planck's constant, and Ei and Ef are the energies of
the atom in the initial and final stationary states, respectively.)
Quantum theory had begun with Planck's idea that atoms emit light only
in definite amounts of energy. This concept was extended by Einstein's idea
that light travels only as definite parcels, quanta, of energy. Now it was ex-
tended further by Bohr's idea that atoms exist in a stable condition only in
14.5 BOHR'S THEORY: THE POSTULATES
639

definite, "quantized" energy states. But Bohr also used the quantum con-
cept in deciding which of all the conceivable stationary states were actually
possible. An example of how Bohr did this is given in the next section.
For simplicity, the hydrogen atom, with a single electron revolving
around the nucleus, is used. Following Bohr, we assume that the possible
electron orbits are simply circular. Light is emitted by the atom when it
changes from one state to another (see Figure 14.12). (The details of some
additional assumptions and calculations are worked out in the Student
Guide.) Bohr's result for the possible stable orbit radii rn was rn  a 	 n2,
where a is a constant (h2/42mkqe2) that can be calculated from known phys-
ical values, and n stands for any whole number, 1, 2, 3. . . . 
14.6 THE SIZE OF THE HYDROGEN ATOM
Bohr's result is remarkable. In hydrogen atoms, the possible orbital radii of
the electrons are whole multiples of a constant which can at once be eval-
uated; that is, n2 takes on values of 12, 22, 32, . . . , and all factors to the
640
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
E1 state:
emission:
Ef state:
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 14.12
An electron changing orbital
states with the emission of a photon.

left of n2 are quantities known previously by independent measurement!
Calculating the value (h2/42mkqe2) gives 5.3  1011 m. Therefore, ac-
cording to Bohr's model, the radii of stable electron orbits should be 
rn  5.3  1011 m  n2, that is, 5.3  1011 m when n  1 (first allowed
orbit), 4  5.3  1011 m when n  2 (second allowed orbit), 9  5.3 
1011 m when n  3, etc. In between these values, there are no allowed radii.
In short, the separate allowed electron orbits are spaced around the nu-
cleus in a regular way, with the allowed radii quantized in a regular man-
ner. Emission and absorption of light should therefore correspond to the
transition of the electron from one allowed orbit to another. Emission of
light occurs when the electron "drops" from a higher energy state to a lower
state; absorption of light occurs when the electron "jumps" from a lower-
energy state up to a higher-energy state.
This is just the kind of result hoped for. It tells which radii are possible
and where they lie. But so far, it had all been model building. Do the or-
bits in a real hydrogen atom actually correspond to this model? In his first
paper of 1913, Bohr was able to give at least a partial "yes" as an answer.
It had long been known that the normal "unexcited" hydrogen atom has a
radius of about 5  1011 m (i.e., the size of the atom obtained, for exam-
ple, by interpreting measured characteristics of gases in terms of the ki-
netic theory). This known value of about 5  1011 m corresponds excel-
lently to the prediction from the equation for orbital radius r if n has the
lowest value, namely 1. Now there was a way to understand the size of the
neutral, unexcited hydrogen atom. For every such atom, the size corre-
sponds to the size of the innermost allowed electron orbit.
14.7 OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF 
THE BOHR MODEL
With his two postulates, Bohr could calculate the radius of each permitted
orbit. In addition, he could calculate the total energy of the electron in each
orbit, i.e., the energy of the stationary state.
The results that Bohr obtained may be summarized in two simple for-
mulas. As you saw, the radius of an orbit with quantum number n is given
by the expression
rn  n2r1,
where r1 is the radius of the first orbit (the orbit for n  1) and has the
value 5.3  109 cm or 5.3  1011 m.
14.7 OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF THE BOHR MODEL
641

The energy (the sum of kinetic energy and electric potential energy) of
the electron in the orbit with quantum number n can also be computed
from Bohr's postulates. As pointed out in Chapter 6, it makes no sense to
assign an absolute value to potential energy. In this case, only changes in
energy have physical meaning. Therefore, any convenient zero level can be
chosen. For an electron orbiting in an electric field, the mathematics is par-
ticularly simple if, as a zero level for energy, the state n  ∞is chosen. At
this level, the electron would be infinitely far from the nucleus (and there-
fore free of it). The energy for any other state En is then the difference
from this free state. The possible energy states for the hydrogen atom are
therefore
En  n
1
2E1,
where E1 is the total energy of the atom when the electron is in the first
orbit (n  1). E1 is the lowest energy possible for an electron in a hydro-
gen atom. Its value is 13.6 eV (the negative value means only that the
energy is 13.6 eV less than the free state value E). This is called the ground
state. In that state, the electron is most tightly "bound" to the nucleus. The
value of E2, the first "excited state" above the ground state, is, according
to the above equation,
E2  2
1
2  (13.6 eV)  3.4 eV.
This state is only 3.4 eV less than in the free state.
According to the formula for rn, the first stationary orbit, defined by 
n  1, has the smallest radius. Higher values of n correspond to orbits that
have larger radii. The higher orbits are spaced further and further apart,
and the force field of the nucleus falls off even more rapidly. So the work
required to move out to the next larger orbit actually becomes smaller and
smaller. Also, the jumps in energy from one level of allowed energy E to
the next become smaller and smaller.
14.8 BOHR ACCOUNTS FOR THE SERIES
SPECTRA OF HYDROGEN
The most spectacular success of Bohr's model was that it could be used to
explain all emission (and absorption) lines in the hydrogen spectrum; that
is, Bohr could use his model to derive, and so to explain, the Balmer for-
mula for the series spectra of hydrogen!
642
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

n = ∞
n = 5
n = 4
n = 3
n = 2
n = 1
λ = 1216A
λ = 1026A
λ = 973A
λ = 950A
Series limit
λ = 912A
Lyman
series
Hα Hβ
Balmer
series
Paschen
series
Brackett
series
Energy
0
−0.87
−1.36
−2.42
−5.43
−21.76
Pfund
series
1019J
n = 1
n = 2
Lyman series
(ultraviolet)
Paschen series
(infrared)
Brackett
series
Pfund
series
Balmer series
Hα
Hβ
Hγ
Hδ
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
n = 6
FIGURE 14.13
(a) A schematic diagram of transitions between stationary states of electrons in hydro-
gen atom, giving rise to five of the series of emission spectra lines. (b) Energy-level diagram for the hy-
drogen atom. Possible transitions between energy states are shown for the first few levels (from n  2
to n  3 to n  2 or n  1, etc.). The dotted arrow for each series indicates the series limit, a transi-
tion from the state where the electron is completely free from the nucleus.
(a)
(b)

By Bohr's second postulate, the radiation emitted or absorbed in a tran-
sition in an atom should have a frequency determined by
hf  E1  E2.
If nf is the quantum number of the final state and ni is the quantum num-
ber of the initial state, then according to the result for En:
Ef 
E1
and
Ei 
E1.
The frequency of radiation emitted or absorbed when the atom goes from
the initial state to the final state is therefore determined by the equation
hf  
 
or
hf  E1
 .
In order to deal with wavelength  (as in Balmer's formula) rather than fre-
quency, we use the relationship between frequency and wavelength given
in Chapter 8. The frequency of a line in the spectrum is equal to the speed
of the light wave divided by its wavelength: f  c/. Substituting c/ for f
in the last equation and then dividing both sides by the constant hc (Planck's
constant times the speed of light), gives

1
  E
hc
1

 .
According to Bohr's model, then, this equation gives the wavelength  of
the radiation emitted or absorbed when a hydrogen atom changes from one
stationary state with quantum number ni to another with nf.
How does this prediction from Bohr's model compare with the long-
established empirical Balmer formula for the Balmer series? This, of course,
is the crucial question. The Balmer formula, given in Section 14.2, in mod-
ern terms is

1
  RH
2
1
2  n
1
2.
You can see at once that the equation for the wavelength  of emitted (or
absorbed) light derived from the Bohr model is exactly the same as Balmer's
formula,  if nf  2 and RH  E1/hc.
1

n 2
f
1

n 2
i
1

n 2
f
1

n 2
i
E1

n 2
f
E1

n 2
i
1

n 2
i
1

n 2
f
644
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

The Rydberg constant RH was long known from spectroscopic meas-
urements to have the value of 1.097  107 m1. Now it could be compared
with the value for E1/hc. (Remember that E1 is negative, so E1 is posi-
tive.) Remarkably, there was fine agreement. RH, previously regarded as just
an experimentally determined constant, was now shown to be a number
that could be calculated from known fundamental constants of nature,
namely, the mass and charge of the electron, Planck's constant, and the
speed of light.
More important, you can now see the meaning, in physical terms, of the
old empirical formula for the lines (H, H, . . . ) in the Balmer series. All
the lines in the Balmer series simply correspond to transitions from vari-
ous initial states (various values of ni larger than 2) to the same final state,
for which nf  2. Thus, photons having the frequency or wavelength of the
line H are emitted when electrons in a gas of hydrogen atoms "jump" from
the state n  3 to the state n  2, as shown in the diagrams in Figure 14.14.
The H line corresponds to "jumps" from n  4 to n  2, and so forth.
When Bohr proposed his theory in 1913, emission lines in only the
Balmer and Paschen series for hydrogen were known definitely. Balmer had
suggested, and the Bohr model agreed, that additional series should exist.
Further experiments revealed the Lyman series in the ultraviolet portion
of the spectrum (1904-1914), the Brackett series (1922), and the Pfund se-
ries (1924), both of the latter series being in the infrared region of the spec-
trum. In each series, the measured frequencies of every one of the lines
were found to be those predicted by Bohr's theory, and (equally important)
no lines existed that were not given by the theory. Similarly, Bohr's model
could explain the general formula that Balmer guessed might apply for all
spectral lines of hydrogen. As described in empirical terms in Section 14.2,
the lines of the Lyman series correspond to transitions from various initial
states to the final state nf  1; the lines of the Paschen series correspond
to transitions from various initial states to the final state nf  3; and so on,
as indicated by the equation on page 644 from Bohr's model:

1
  E
hc
1

 
or

1
  RH
 .
The general scheme of possible transitions among the first six orbits is
shown in Figure 14.14a. Thus, the theory not only related known infor-
mation about the hydrogen spectrum, but also predicted correctly the wave-
lengths of previously unknown series of lines in the spectrum. Moreover,
it provided a reasonable physical model; Balmer's general formula had pro-
vided no physical reason for the empirical relationship among the lines of
each series.
1

n 2
i
1

n 2
f
1

n 2
f
1

n 2
i
14.8 BOHR ACCOUNTS FOR THE SERIES SPECTRA OF HYDROGEN
645

The schematic diagram shown on page 643 is useful as an aid for the
imagination. But it has the danger of being too specific. For instance, it
may lead one to think of the emission of radiation as actual "jumps" of elec-
trons between orbits. In Chapter 15 you will see why it is impossible to de-
tect an electron moving in such orbits. A second way of presenting the re-
sults of Bohr's theory yields the same facts but does not adhere as closely
to a picture of orbits. This scheme is shown in Figure 14.13b. It focuses
not on orbits but on the corresponding possible energy states. These en-
ergy states are all given by the formula En  1/n2  E1. In terms of this
mathematical model, the atom is normally unexcited, with an energy E1 about
13.6 eV (or 22  1019 J).
Absorption of energy can place the atoms in an excited state, with a cor-
respondingly higher energy. The excited atom is then ready to emit light,
646
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
4.0 eV
Mercury Atom
+
+
4.0 eV
Electron
0.1 eV
Mercury Atom
5.0 eV
Electron
1.1 eV
Mercury Atom
6.0 eV
Electron
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 14.14
Diagrams of an atom of mercury
undergoing impacts by electrons of energies of 
4.0 eV, 5.0 eV, 6.0 eV.

with a consequent reduction in energy. The energy absorbed or emitted al-
ways shifts the total energy of the atom to one of the values specified by
the formula for En. Thus, the hydrogen atom may also be represented, not
by orbits, but by means of an energy-level diagram.
14.9 DO STATIONARY STATES REALLY EXIST?
The success of Bohr's theory in accounting for the spectrum of hydrogen
left this question: Could experiments show directly that atoms do have only cer-
tain, separate energy states? In other words, are there really gaps between the
energies that an atom can have? A famous experiment in 1914, by the Ger-
man physicists James Franck and Gustav Hertz (a nephew of Heinrich
Hertz), showed that these separate energy states do indeed exist.
Franck and Hertz bombarded atoms with electrons from an "electron
gun," a hot wire that emitted electrons which were then accelerated through
a hole leading into an evacuated region where they were aimed at a target.
(A similar type of electron gun is used today in TV tubes and computer
monitors.) Franck and Hertz were able to measure the energy lost by the
electrons in collisions with the target atoms. They could also determine
the energy gained by the atoms in these collisions.
In their first experiment, Franck and Hertz bombarded mercury vapor
contained in a chamber at very low pressure. The procedure was equiva-
lent to measuring the kinetic energy of electrons on leaving the electron
gun, and again after they had passed through the mercury vapor. The only
way electrons could lose energy was in collisions with the mercury atoms.
Franck and Hertz found that when the kinetic energy of the electrons leav-
ing the gun was small (up to several electron volts), the electrons still had
almost exactly the same energy after passage through the mercury vapor as
they had on leaving the gun. This result could be explained in the follow-
ing way. A mercury atom is several hundred thousand times more massive
than an electron. When it has low kinetic energy, the electron just bounces
off a mercury atom, much as a golf ball thrown at a bowling ball would
bounce off. A collision of this kind is called an "elastic" collision (discussed
in Chapter 6). In an elastic collision, the mercury atom (bowling ball) takes
up only a negligible part of the kinetic energy of the electron (golf ball),
so that the electron loses practically none of its kinetic energy.
But when the kinetic energy of the electrons was raised to 5 eV, the ex-
perimental results changed dramatically. When an electron collided with a
mercury atom, the electron lost almost exactly 4.9 eV of energy. When the
energy was increased to 6.0 eV, the electron still lost just 4.9 eV of energy
14.9 DO STATIONARY STATES REALLY EXIST?
647

in collision, being left with 1.1 eV of energy. These
results indicated that a mercury atom cannot accept
less than 4.9 eV of energy. Furthermore, when the
mercury atom is offered somewhat more energy, for
example, 5 eV or 6 eV, it still accepts only 4.9 eV.
The accepted amount of energy cannot go into ki-
netic energy of the mercury because the atom is so
much more massive than the electron. Therefore,
Franck and Hertz concluded that the 4.9 eV is added
to the internal energy of the mercury atom; that is,
the mercury atom enters a stationary state with en-
emy 4.9 eV greater than that of the lowest energy
state, with no allowed energy level in between.
What happens to this extra 4.9 eV of internal energy? According to the
Bohr model, this amount of energy should be emitted as electromagnetic
radiation when the atom returns to its lowest state. Franck and Hertz looked
for this radiation, and they found it! They observed that the mercury va-
por, after having been bombarded with electrons, emitted light at a wave-
length of 253.5 nm. This wavelength was known to exist in the emission
spectrum of hot mercury vapor. The wavelength corresponds to a frequency
f for which the photon's energy, hf, is just 4.9 eV (as you can calculate).
This result showed that mercury atoms had indeed gained (and then radi-
ated away) 4.9 eV of energy in collisions with electrons.
Later experiments showed that mercury atoms bombarded by electrons
could also gain other sharply defined amounts of energy, for example, 
6.7 eV and 10.4 eV. In each case, the subsequently emitted radiation cor-
responded to known lines in the emission spectrum of mercury. In each
case, similar results were obtained: the electrons always lost energy, and the
atoms always gained energy, both only in sharply defined amounts. Each
type of atom studied was found to have separate energy states. The amounts
of energy gained by the atoms in collisions with electrons always corre-
sponded to the energy of photons in known spectrum lines. Thus, this di-
rect experiment confirmed the existence of separate stationary states of
atoms as predicted by Bohr's theory of atomic spectra. This result provided
strong evidence of the validity of the Bohr theory.
14.10 CONSTRUCTING THE PERIODIC TABLE
In the Bohr model, atoms of the different elements differ in the charge and
mass of their nuclei and in the number and arrangement of the electrons.
Bohr, along with the German physicist Arnold Sommerfeld, came to pic-
648
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
Physicists now know two ways of
"exciting" an atom: by absorp-
tion and by collision. In absorp-
tion, an atom absorbs a photon
with just the right energy to
cause a transition from the low-
est energy level to a higher one.
Collision may involve collision
with an electron from an elec-
tron gun or collisions among ag-
itated atoms (as in a heated en-
closure or a discharge tube).

ture the electronic orbits, not only as circular but also as elliptical orbits,
and not as a series of concentric rings in one plane, but as patterns in three
dimensions.
How does the Bohr model of atoms help to explain chemical properties?
Recall that the elements hydrogen (atomic number Z  1) and lithium 
(Z  3) are somewhat alike chemically. (Refer to the periodic table on the
color plate in this book.) Both have valences of 1. Both enter into com-
pounds of similar types, for example, hydrogen chloride (HCl) and lithium
chloride (LiCl). There are also some similarities in their spectra. All this
suggests that the lithium atom resembles the hydrogen atom in some im-
portant respects. Bohr speculated that two of the three electrons of the
lithium atom are relatively close to the nucleus, in orbits resembling those
of the helium atom (Z  2), forming, as one may call it, a "shell" around
the nucleus. But the third electron is in a circular or elliptical orbit outside
the inner system. Since this inner system consists of a nucleus of charge
3e and two electrons each of the charge e, its net charge is e. Thus,
the lithium atom may be roughly pictured as having a central core of charge
e. Around this core one electron revolves, somewhat as for a hydrogen
atom. This similar physical structure, then, is the reason for the similar
chemical behavior.
Referring to the periodic table, you will see that helium (Z  2) is a
chemically inert noble gas. These properties indicate that the helium atom
is highly stable, having both of its electrons closely bound to the nucleus.
It seems sensible, then, to regard both electrons as moving in the same in-
nermost "shell" group or on orbits around the nucleus when the atom is un-
excited. Moreover, because the helium atom is so stable and chemically in-
ert, we may reasonably assume that this shell cannot hold more than two
electrons. This shell is called the K-shell. The single electron of hydrogen
is also said to be in the K-shell when the atom is unexcited. Lithium has
two electrons in the K-shell, filling it to capacity; the third electron starts
a new shell, called the L-shell. This single outlying and loosely bound elec-
tron is the reason why lithium combines so readily with oxygen, chlorine,
and many other elements.
Sodium (Z  11) is the next element in the periodic table that has chem-
ical properties similar to those of hydrogen and lithium. This similarity
suggests that the sodium atom is also hydrogen-like in having a central core
about which one electron revolves. Moreover, just as lithium follows he-
lium in the periodic table, sodium follows the noble gas neon (Z  10). You
may assume that two of neon's 10 electrons are in the first (K) shell, while
the remaining eight electrons are in the second (L) shell. Because of the
chemical inertness and stability of neon, we may further assume that these
eight electrons fill the L-shell to capacity. For sodium, then, the eleventh
electron must be in a third shell, called the M-shell.
14.10 CONSTRUCTING THE PERIODIC TABLE
649

650
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
LASERS
An atom in an excited state gives off en-
ergy by emitting a photon, a quantum of
electromagnetic radiation, according to
Bohr's second postulate. Although Bohr's
specific model of the atom has been vastly
extended and incorporated into models
based on a different approach (see Chap-
ter 15), this postulate is still valid.
As you have seen, atoms can acquire in-
ternal energy, that is, be brought to an ex-
cited state, in many ways. In the Franck-
Hertz experiment, inelastic collisions pro-
vided the energy; in a cool gas displaying
a dark-line spectrum, it is the absorption
of photons; in a spark or discharge tube, it
is collisions between electrons and atoms.
There are other mechanisms as well.
Once an atom has acquired internal en-
ergy, it can also get rid of it in several ways.
An atom can give up energy in inelastic
collisions, or (as discussed above) it can
emit energy as electromagnetic radiation.
There are many different kinds of inelas-
tic collisions; which one an atom under-
goes depends as much on its surroundings
as on the atom itself.
There are also two different ways an
atom can emit radiation. Spontaneous ra-
diation is the kind considered elsewhere in
this chapter. At some random (unpre-
dictable) moment, the previously excited
atom emits a photon (of frequency 
) and
changes its state to one of lower energy
(by an amount E). If, however, there 
are other photons of the appropriate fre-
quency ( f  E/h) in the vicinity, the
atom may be stimulated to emit its energy.
The radiation emitted is at exactly the
same frequency, polarization, and phase as
the stimulating radiation. That is, it is ex-
actly in step with the existing radiation. In
the wave model of light, you can think of
the emission simply increasing the ampli-
tude of the oscillations of the existing elec-
tromagnetic field within which the emit-
ting atom finds itself.
Stimulated emission behaves very
much like the classical emission of radia-
tion discussed in Chapter 12. A collection
of atoms stimulating one another to emit
radiation behaves much like an antenna.
You can think of the electrons in the dif-
ferent atoms as simply vibrating in step
just as they do in an ordinary radio an-
tenna, although much, much faster.
Usually atoms emit their energy sponta-
neously long before another photon comes
along to stimulate them. Most light sources
therefore emit incoherent light, that is, light
made up of many different contributions,
differing slightly in frequency, out of step
with each other, and randomly polarized.
Usually, most of the atoms in a group
are in the ground state. Light that illumi-
nates the group is more likely to be ab-
sorbed than to stimulate any emission,
since it is more likely to encounter an
atom in the ground state than in the ap-
propriate excited state. But suppose con-
ditions are arranged so that more atoms
are in one of the excited states than are in
the ground state. (Such a group of atoms
is said to be inverted.) In that case, light
of the appropriate frequency is more likely
to stimulate emission than to be absorbed.
Then an interesting phenomenon takes
over. Stimulated emission becomes more
probable the more light there is around.
The stimulated emission from some atoms
therefore leads to a chain reaction, as more
and more atoms give up some of their in-
ternal energy to the energy of the radia-
tion. The incident light pulse has been
amplified. Such an arrangement is called

14.10 CONSTRUCTING THE PERIODIC TABLE
651
a laser (light amplification by stimulated
emission of radiation).
Physicists and engineers have developed
many tricks for producing "inverted"
groups of atoms, on which laser operation
depends. Exactly what the tricks are is not
important for the action of the laser itself,
although without them the laser would be
impossible. Sometimes it is possible to
maintain the inversion even while the laser
is working; that is, it is possible to supply
enough energy by the mechanisms that ex-
cite the atoms (inelastic collisions with other
kinds of atoms, for example) to compensate
for the energy emitted as radiation. These
lasers can therefore operate continuously.
There are two reasons laser light is very
desirable for certain applications. First, it
can be extreme intense; some lasers can
emit millions of joules in minute fractions
of a second, as all their atoms emit their
stored energy at once. Second, it is coher-
ent; the light waves are all in step with each
other. Incoherent light waves are some-
what like the waves crisscrossing the sur-
face of a pond in a gale. But coherent waves
are like those in a ripple tank, or at a beach
where tall breakers arrive rhythmically.
The high intensity of some lasers can
be used for applications in which a large
amount of energy must be focused on a
small spot. Such lasers are used in indus-
tries for cutting and welding delicate parts.
In medicine, they are used, for example,
to reattach the retina (essentially by sear-
ing a very small spot) in the eye.
The coherence of lasers is used in ap-
plications that require a stable light source
emitting light of a precisely given fre-
quency and polarization in one precise di-
rection. Surveyors can use lasers to lay out
straight lines, since the coherent beam
spreads out very little with distance. Tele-
phone companies can use them to carry
signals in the same way they now use 
radio and microwaves.
FIGURE 14.15
NOVA laser at
Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory. The five tubes are
lasers focused on a single point.

652
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM
Passing on to potassium (Z  19), the next alkali metal in the periodic
table, you may again picture an inner core and a single electron outside it.
The core consists of a nucleus with charge 19e. There are two, eight, and
eight electrons occupying the K-, L-, and M-shells, respectively. The nine-
teenth electron revolves around the core in a fourth shell, called the 
N-shell. The atom of the noble gas argon, with Z  18, comes just before
potassium in the periodic table. Argon again represents a tight and stable
electron pattern, with two in the K-shell, eight in the L-shell, and eight in
the M-shell.
These qualitative considerations lead to a consistent picture of electrons
distributed in groups, or shells, around the nucleus. The arrangement of
electrons in the noble gases may be considered particularly stable. For each
new alkali metal in Group IA of the periodic table, a new shell is started.
Each alkali metal atom has a single electron around a core that resembles
the pattern for the preceding noble gas. You may expect this outlying elec-
tron to be easily "loosened" by the action of neighboring atoms, and this
agrees with the facts. The elements lithium, sodium, and potassium are al-
kali metals. In compounds or in solution (as in electrolysis), they may be
considered to be in the form of ions such as Li, Na, and K. Each ion
lacks one electron and so has one positive net charge e. In the neutral
atoms of these elements, the outer electron is relatively free to move about.
This property has been used as the basis of a theory of electrical conduc-
tivity. According to this theory, a good conductor has many "free" electrons
that can form a current under appropriate conditions. A poor conductor
has relatively few "free" electrons. The alkali metals are all good conduc-
tors. Elements whose electron shells are all filled are very poor conductors;
they have no "free" electrons. In Chapter 10, you saw how electrical con-
duction takes place in metals. It is because metals have many "free" elec-
trons that they are conductors. We will return to this in Chapter 16.
In Group II of the periodic table, you would expect those elements that
follow immediately after the alkali metals to have atoms with two outlying
electrons. For example, beryllium (Z  4) should have two electrons in the
K-shell, thus filling it, and two in the L-shell. If the atoms of all these el-
ements have two outlying electrons, they should be chemically similar, as
indeed they are. Thus, calcium and magnesium, which belong to this group,
should easily form ions such as Ca and Mg, each with a positive net
charge of 2e. This is also found to be true.
As a final example, consider those elements that immediately precede the
noble gases in the periodic table. For example, fluorine atoms (Z  9)
should have two electrons filling the K-shell but only seven electrons in
the L-shell, one less than enough to fill it. If a fluorine atom captures an
additional electron, it should become an F ion with one negative net

14.10 CONSTRUCTING THE PERIODIC TABLE
653
charge. The L-shell would then be filled, as it is for neutral neon (Z  10),
and you would expect the F ion to be relatively stable. This prediction
agrees with observation. Indeed, all the elements immediately preceding
the inert gases tend to form stable, singly charged negative ions in solu-
tion. In the solid state, you would expect these elements to lack free elec-
trons. In fact, all of them are poor conductors of electricity.
As indicated in Figure 14.16, based on an illustration from Bohr's work
in 1922, the seven main shells, K, L, M, . . . , Q, divide naturally into or-
bits or subshells. The shells fill with electrons so that the total energy of
the atom is minimized. The periodicity results from the completion of the
subshells. 
Bohr's table, still useful, was the result of physical theory and offered a
fundamental physical basis for understanding chemistry. For example, it
showed how the structure of the periodic table follows from the shell struc-
ture of atoms. This was another triumph of the Bohr theory.
Period
I
Period
II
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
Ne
Period
III
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
A
1
2
H
He
Period
IV
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
K
Ca
Sc
Ti
V
Cr
Mn
Fe
Co
Ni
Cu
Zn
Ga
Ge
As
Se
Br
Kr
Period
V
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
Rb
Sr
Y
Zr
Nb
Mo
Ma
Ru
Rh
Pd
Ag
Cd
In
Sn
Sb
Te
I
Xe
87
88
89
90
91
92
--
Ra
Ac
Th
Pa
U
Period
VI
Period
VII
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
Cs
Ba
La
Ce
Pr
Nd
Il
Sa
Eu
Gd
Tb
Dy
Ho
Er
Tu
Yb
Lu
Hf
Ta
W
Re
Os
Ir
Pt
Au
Hg
Tl
Pb
Bi
Po
--
Nt
FIGURE 14.16
Bohr's periodic table of the elements (1921). Some of the element names and symbols
have since been changed. Masurium (43) had been falsely identified at the time. The place is taken by
technetium (43).

14.11 EVALUATING THE BOHR MODEL
In March 1913, Bohr wrote to his mentor Rutherford, enclosing a draft of
his first paper on the quantum theory of atomic constitution. Rutherford
replied in a letter, the first part of which is quoted here:
Dear Dr. Bohr:
I have received your paper and read it with great interest, but I
want to look it over again carefully when I have more leisure. Your
ideas as to the mode of origin of spectra in hydrogen are very in-
genious and seem to work out well; but the mixture of Planck's ideas
with the old mechanics make it very difficult to form a physical idea
of what is the basis of it. There appears to me one grave difficulty
in your hypothesis, which I have no doubt you fully realize, namely,
how does an electron decide what frequency it is going to vibrate
at when it passes from one stationary state to the other? It seems
to me that you would have to assume that the electron knows be-
forehand where it is going to stop. . . . 
Every Model and Every Theory Has Its Limits
The Bohr theory achieved great successes in the years between 1913 and
1924. But it also contained unanswered questions and unresolved problems,
as Rutherford so keenly observed. As time progressed, further problems
arose for which the theory proved inadequate.
Bohr's theory accounted very well for the spectra of atoms with a single
electron in the outermost shell. However, serious differences between the-
ory and experiment appeared in the spectra of atoms with two or more
electrons in the outermost shell. Experiments also revealed that when a
sample of an element is placed in an electric or magnetic field, its emission
spectrum shows additional lines. For example, in a magnetic field each line
is split into several lines. The Bohr theory could not account, in a quanti-
tative way, for some of the observed splittings. Furthermore, the theory
supplied no method for predicting the relative brightness (intensity) of spec-
tral lines. These relative intensities depend on the probabilities with which
atoms in a sample undergo transitions among the stationary states—high
probabilities resulting in more intense lines. Physicists wanted to be able
to calculate the probability of a transition from one stationary state to an-
other. They could not make such calculations with the Bohr theory.
By the early 1920s it was clear that the Bohr theory, despite its remark-
able successes, was limited. To form a theory that would solve more prob-
654
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

lems, Bohr's theory would have to be revised or replaced—incidentally, a
reminder that a main purpose of science today is always to prepare the
ground for better science tomorrow. But the successes of Bohr's theory did
show that a better theory of atomic structure would still have to account
for the existence of stationary states, which are separate, distinct atomic en-
ergy levels. Therefore, such a theory would still have to be based on quan-
tum concepts—a reminder that new theories tend to evolve by incorporat-
ing what was good in old ones, rather than by a revolutionary overthrow
of the old theory.
Besides the inability to predict certain properties of atoms at all, the Bohr
theory had two additional shortcomings. First, it predicted some results
that did not agree with the experiment (such as incorrect spectra for ele-
ments with two or three electrons in the outermost electron shells). Sec-
ond, it predicted results that could not be tested in any known way (such
as the details of electron orbits). Although orbits were easy to draw on pa-
per, they could not be observed directly. Nor could they be related to any
observable properties of atoms. Planetary theory has very different signif-
icance when applied to a planet in an observable orbit than when applied
to an electron in an atom. The precise position of a planet is important,
especially in experiments such as photographing an eclipse, or a portion of
the surface of Mars from a satellite. But the moment-to-moment position
of an electron in its orbit has no such meaning because it has no relation
to any experiment physicists have been able to devise. It thus became evi-
dent that the Bohr theory led to some questions that could not be answered 
experimentally.
In the early 1920s, physicists, especially Bohr himself, began to work se-
riously on revising the basic ideas of the theory. One fact that stood out
was, as Rutherford had pointed out, that the theory started with a mixture
of classical and quantum ideas. An atom was assumed to act according to
the laws of classical physics up to the point where these laws did not work.
Beyond this point, quantum ideas were introduced. The picture of the atom
that emerged was an inconsistent mixture. It combined ideas from classi-
cal physics with concepts for which there was no place in classical physics.
The orbits of the electrons were determined by the classical, Newtonian
laws of motion, much like the orbits of planets around the Sun. But of the
many theoretical orbits, only a small portion were regarded as possible.
Even these few orbits were selected by rules for which there was no room
in classical mechanics. Again, the frequency calculated for the orbital rev-
olution of electrons was quite different from the frequency of light emit-
ted or absorbed when the electron moved from or to this orbit. Also, the
decision that the number n could never be zero seemed arbitrary but it was
necessary to prevent the model from collapsing by letting the electron fall
14.11 EVALUATING THE BOHR MODEL
655

on the nucleus. It became evident that a better theory of atomic structure
would need a more consistent foundation in quantum concepts.
The contribution of Bohr's theory may be summarized as follows. It pro-
vided some excellent answers to the questions raised about atomic struc-
ture in Chapter 13. Although the theory turned out to be inadequate, it
drew attention to how quantum concepts can be used. It indicated the path
that a new theory would have to take. A new theory would have to supply
the right answers that the Bohr theory gave, but it would also have to sup-
ply the right answers for the problems the Bohr theory could not solve.
One of the most fascinating aspects of Bohr's work was the proof that phys-
ical and chemical properties of matter can be traced back to the funda-
mental role of integers (quantum numbers such as n  1, 2, 3, . . .). As Bohr
said, "The solution of one of the boldest dreams of natural science is to
build up an understanding of the regularities of nature upon the consider-
ation of pure number." You can catch here an echo of the hope of Pythago-
ras and Plato, of Kepler and Galileo.
Since the 1920s, a successful new theory of atomic structure has been
developed and generally accepted by physicists. It is part of quantum me-
chanics, so called because it is a new mechanics built directly on quantum
concepts. It goes far beyond understanding atomic structure. In fact, it is
the basis of the modern conception of events on a submicroscopic scale.
Some aspects of this theory will be discussed in the next chapter. Signifi-
cantly, Bohr himself was again a leading contributor.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
absorption spectra
nuclear model
Balmer series
nucleus
Bohr model
quantum mechanics
electron shells
spectroscopy
emission spectra
stationary states
ground state
SOME IMPORTANT EQUATIONS

1
  RH
2
1
2  n
1
2,
n  3, 4, 5, 6, . . . 
656
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM


1
  RH
 ,
rn  a 	 n2,
En 
n
1
2E1.
FURTHER READING
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapter 28.
C.H. Townes, How the Laser Happened: Adventures of a Scientist (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1999).
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
14.1 Spectral of Gases
1.
How is the emission spectrum of an element related to its absorption 
spectrum?
2.
What can you conclude about a source if its light gives a bright-line spectrum?
3.
What can you conclude about a source if its light gives a dark-line spectrum?
4.
What evidence is there that the physics and chemistry of materials at great dis-
tances from Earth are the same as those of matter close at hand? What does
this fact say about the structure of the Universe?
5.
An unknown gas is contained in a glass tube. Give two ways in which it could
be identified using spectroscopy.
14.2 Regularities in the Hydrogen Spectrum
1.
What is the Balmer series? How is it summarized by Balmer's formula?
2.
What evidence did Balmer have that there were other series of lines in the hy-
drogen spectrum, with terms such as 32, 42, etc., instead of 22?
3.
How are the other series summarized by the extension of Balmer's formula?
4.
Often discoveries result from grand theories (like Newton's) or from a good
intuitive grasp of phenomena (like Faraday's). What led Balmer to his relation
for hydrogen spectra?
5.
From the Balmer formula in the last form given, is there any upper limit to
the wavelengths of light emitted by the hydrogen atom?
1

n 2
i
1

n 2
f
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
657

14.3 Rutherford's Nuclear Model of the Atom
1.
Describe Rutherford's experiment and its "incredible" result. What did Ruther-
ford conclude from this experiment?
2.
Why was Rutherford as surprised with this result as he would have been if a
15-in shell fired at a piece of tissue paper "came back and hit you"?
3.
Why are  particles scattered by atoms? Why is the angle of scattering mostly
small but sometimes large?
4.
What was the basic difference between Rutherford's and Thomson's models of
the atom?
14.4 Nuclear Charge and Size
1.
What does the "atomic number" of an element refer to, according to the
Rutherford model of the atom?
2.
What is the greatest positive charge that an ion of lithium (the next heaviest
element after helium) could have?
3.
How did the scattering of  rays help Rutherford estimate the size of the nucleus?
4.
How big is the nucleus? How does this compare with the size of the atom?
What does this say about the interior of the atom?
5.
How does one find by experiment the size of the nucleus?
14.5 Bohr's Theory: The Postulates
1.
State Bohr's two quantum postulates in your own words.
2.
In what ways do these postulates contradict Newton's mechanics and Maxwell's
electromagnetic theory?
3.
What was the main evidence to support the fact that an atom could exist only
in certain energy states?
4.
How did Bohr deal with the idea that as long as an electron is steadily orbit-
ing a nucleus, it does not radiate electromagnetic energy?
14.6 The Size of the Hydrogen Atom
1.
According to Bohr, why do all unexcited hydrogen atoms have the same size?
2.
Why does the hydrogen atom have just the size it has?
14.7 Other Consequences of the Bohr Model
1.
What happens to the electron in the hydrogen atom as n goes to infinity?
2.
How is the ground state defined?
3.
What happens to the radii of the Bohr orbits as n increases?
4.
What happens to the stationary-state energies as n increases?
5.
Why do the energies of the stationary states have negative values?
14.8 Bohr Accounts for the Series Spectra of Hydrogen
1.
In general terms, how did Bohr account for Balmer's formula?
2.
Balmer had predicted accurately that there might be other spectral series of
hydrogen 30 years before Bohr did. Why is Bohr's prediction considered more
significant?
658
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

3.
How does Bohr's model account for absorption spectra?
4.
In Section 14.1 you saw that an absorption spectrum does not contain all the
lines of the corresponding emission spectrum. Based on the Bohr model, why
is this so?
5.
Why is it correct to say that the hydrogen atom can have an infinity of emis-
sion lines?
14.9 Do Stationary States Really Exist?
1.
Briefly describe the Franck-Hertz experiment and the conclusion Franck and
Hertz obtained in answering the question in the title of this section.
2.
How much kinetic energy will an electron have after a collision with a mer-
cury atom if its kinetic energy before collision is:
(a) 4.0 eV?
(b) 5.0 eV?
(c) 7.0 eV?
14.10 Constructing the Periodic Table
1.
Describe in your own words what happens to the structure of the atoms of dif-
ferent elements as you progress through the periodic table.
2.
Draw a sketch of the atoms in the first two rows of the periodic table and la-
bel everything in your picture. Include the nucleus, its charge, and the various
electron shells.
3.
Why do the next heavier elements after the noble gases easily become posi-
tively charged?
4.
Why do the elements in the next to last column of the periodic table easily
become negatively charged?
5.
What is special about the noble-gas elements?
6.
Why are there only two elements in Period I, eight in Period II, eight in 
Period III, etc.?
14.11 Evaluating the Bohr Theory
1.
Evaluate Bohr's theory of the atom. Was it a good theory? What were some
of its advantages? What were some of its problems?
2.
Why did some physicists begin looking for a quantum mechanics?
3.
How did they expect this theory to differ from Bohr's theory?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1.
(a) Suggest experiments to show which of the Fraunhofer lines in the spec-
trum of sunlight result from absorption in the Sun's atmosphere rather than
from absorption by gases in the Earth's atmosphere.
(b) How might one decide, from spectroscopic observations, whether the Moon
and the planets shine by their own light or by reflected light from the Sun?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
659

2.
Theoretically, how many series of lines are there in the emission spectrum of
hydrogen? In all these series, how many lines are in the visible region?
3.
As indicated in the figure on page 643, the lines in one of hydrogen's spectral
series are bunched closely at one end. Does the formula

1
  RH
 
suggest that such bunching will occur?
4.
Physicists generally suppose that the atom and the nucleus are each spherical.
They assume that the diameter of the atom is of the order of 1010 m and that
the diameter of the nucleus is of the order of 1014 m.
(a) What are the evidences that these are reasonable suppositions?
(b) What is the ratio of the diameter of the nucleus to that of the atom?
5.
Make an energy-level diagram to represent the results of the Franck-Hertz 
experiment.
6.
Many substances emit visible radiation when illuminated with ultraviolet light.
This phenomenon is an example of fluorescence. Stokes, a British physicist of
the nineteenth century, found that in fluorescence, the wavelength of the emit-
ted light usually was the same or longer than the illuminating light. How would
you account for this phenomenon on the basis of the Bohr theory?
Sometimes in fluorescence the wavelength of the emitted light is shorter
than the illuminating light. What may cause this?
7.
Use the periodic table to predict the electron structure of element 19. Why
does it have chemical properties similar to those of elements 1, 3, and 11?
8.
Write an essay on the successes and failures of the Bohr model of atoms. Can
it be called a good model? a simple model? a beautiful model?
Quantitative
1.
What would be the radius of a hydrogen atom if its electron is orbiting in state:
n  2? n  5? n  10? Do you see a pattern in these results?
2.
The constant R in the Balmer formula has the value 1.1  107 m. What are
the wavelengths of the first two Balmer lines? What are the wavelengths of
the lines for n  10 and n  20? Do you see a pattern to these results? Where
does each of these lines lie in the electromagnetic spectrum?
3.
The "Lyman series" for hydrogen involves a "jump" of the electron to the state
n  1. What are the wavelengths of the first two lines of the Lyman series?
Why is the word "jump" only to be taken as a metaphor?
4.
The nucleus of a hydrogen atom has a radius of about 1.5  1015 m. Imag-
ine the atom magnified so that the nucleus has a radius about the size of a
grain of dust, or 0.1 mm. What would be the size of the corresponding hy-
drogen atom in the ground state? Attempt to construct a scale model of the
radius of such a "hydrogen atom" on a long sidewalk or in a stadium.
1
ni
2
1
nf
2
660
14. THE QUANTUM MODEL OF THE ATOM

-
+
15.1 The Quantum
15.2 The Particle-Like Behavior of Light
15.3 The Wave-Like Behavior of Particles
15.4 Constructing Quantum Mechanics
15.5 The Uncertainty Principle
15.6 Origins and a Consequence of the Uncertainty Principle
15.7 The Probability Interpretation
15.8 The Complementarity Principle
15.9 Some Reactions
15.1 THE QUANTUM
The discovery of the quantum of energy in the early years of the twenti-
eth century provided an explanation of the photoelectric effect and it en-
abled the success of Bohr's quantum model of the atom. This model and
the other successes of that time contributed to what is known as "quantum
theory."
Nevertheless, the existence of the energy quantum, whether in light or
in atoms, posed a serious problem for physics, since it was incompatible
with both Newton's mechanics and Maxwell's electromagnetic wave theory.
In these theories energy is always continuous and infinitely divisible. But
these "classical" theories were constructed on the basis of events occurring
in the visible, human-scale world, ranging from planets to microscopic ob-
jects. Perhaps, then, we should not be surprised that nature might behave
differently when we enter into regions far removed from everyday experi-
ence, such as the interior of atoms or the sub-microscopic structure of
minute quantities of light. And when we are surprised, it only impresses
upon us even more how intricate and exquisite nature really is.
661
Quantum
Mechanics
C
H
A
P
T
E
R15
15

By the mid-1920s scientists realized that the quantum theory was inad-
equate and that a new theory was needed to encompass the quantum world
at the subatomic level, a new quantum mechanics in which the quantum is
built into the foundations of physics from the beginning. An important clue
to the new mechanics came from the further study of particles and waves.
15.2 THE PARTICLE-LIKE BEHAVIOR OF LIGHT
Einstein's hypothesis of light quanta created a dilemma for physicists. While
Einstein's work indicated that light behaves like particles in such experi-
ments as the photoelectric effect, light clearly behaved like waves in Young's
important double-slit experiment. As you may recall from Chapter 8, when
a beam of light shines on two narrow slits near each other, the light emerg-
ing from the slits interferes and forms on a screen the alternating bright
and dark bands that are characteristic of the interference of waves. Parti-
cles cannot form this pattern. Moreover, Maxwell's electromagnetic theory
accounted for electromagnetic radiation as a wave phenomenon, and this
theory was supported by Young's experiment and many other experiments.
On the other hand, Einstein's account of the photoelectric effects showed
that light behaved as if it consisted of particle-like light quanta—later called
"photons." Each photon has energy E  hf, where h is Planck's constant and
f is the frequency of the light. Einstein himself pointed out that, since pho-
tons carry energy, this energy, while the photon moves at the speed of light,
is equivalent to a certain amount of mass, according to his famous formula
E  mc2.
The amount of mass is just
m 
.
Here c is the speed of light.
If a photon has energy, and the energy is equivalent to an amount of
mass, does it also have momentum? The photoelectric effect did not tell
anything about the momentum of a photon.
The magnitude of the momentum p of a body is defined as the product
of its mass m and speed v in the same direction; p  mv. (See Chapter 5.)
Replacing m with its energy equivalent E/c2 gives
p 
.
Ev

c2
E

c2
662
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS

Note that this equation is an expression for momentum p but that it con-
tains no direct reference to mass. Now suppose this same equation is ap-
plied to the momentum of a photon of energy E. Since a photon moves at
the speed of light, v would be replaced by the speed of light c to give
p 

.
Remember, E  hf for a light quantum. If you substitute this expression for
E in p  E/c, you get the expression
p 
.
Using the wave relation that the speed equals the frequency times the wave-
length, c  f , you can express the momentum of a photon as
p  
h
.
hf
c
E
c
Ec

c2
15.2 THE PARTICLE-LIKE BEHAVIOR OF LIGHT
663
FIGURE 15.1
Arthur H. Compton
(1892-1962). 

Does it make sense to define the momentum of a photon in this way? It would,
if the definition helps in understanding experimental results. The first suc-
cessful use of this definition was in the analysis of a now-famous phenom-
enon discovered by Arthur H. Compton, the Compton effect, which we de-
scribe below.
Consider a beam of light (or X rays) striking the atoms in a target, such
as a thin sheet of metal. According to classical electromagnetic theory, the
light will be scattered in various directions, but its frequency will not
change. The absorption of light of a certain frequency by an atom may be
followed by reemission of light of a different frequency. But if the light
wave is simply scattered, then according to classical theory the frequency
should not change.
According to quantum theory, however, light is made up of photons. Ac-
cording to relativity theory, photons have momentum. Therefore, Comp-
ton reasoned, in a collision between a photon and an atom, the law of con-
servation of momentum should apply. According to this law (Chapter 5),
when a body of small mass collides with a massive object at rest, it simply
bounces back or glances off. It experiences very little loss in speed and so
very little change in energy. But if the masses of the two colliding objects
are not very different, a significant amount of energy can be transferred in
the collision. Compton calculated how much energy a photon should lose
in a collision with an atom, if the photon's momentum is h/. He concluded
that the change in energy is too small to observe if a photon simply bounces
off an entire atom. But if a photon strikes an electron, which has a small
mass, the photon should transfer a significant amount of energy to the 
electron.
In 1923, Compton was able to show that X rays did in fact behave like
particles with momentum p  h/ when they collided with electrons.
Compton measured the wavelength (or frequency) of the incident and the
scattered X rays and thus was able to determine the X ray photon's change
in momentum. By measuring separately the momentum of the scattered
electron, he was able to verify that p  h/, using the law of conservation
of momentum. For this work, Compton received the Nobel Prize in 1927.
Thus, Compton's experiment showed that a photon can be regarded as
a particle with a definite momentum as well as energy. It also showed that
collisions between photons and electrons obey the laws of conservation of
momentum and energy.
As noted in Section 13.5, in the discussion of the photoelectric effect,
light has particle-like properties. The momentum expression and the
Compton effect gave additional evidence for this fact. To be sure, photons
are not like ordinary particles, if only because photons do not exist at speeds
other than that of light. (There can be no resting photons and, therefore,
no rest mass for photons.) But in other ways, as in their scattering behav-
664
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS

ior, photons do act much like particles of matter. For example, they have
momentum as well as energy. Yet they also act like waves, having frequency
and wavelength. In other words, electromagnetic radiation in some exper-
iments exhibits behavior similar to what is thought of as particle behavior,
and in other experiments, its behavior is similar to what is thought of as
wave behavior. This pattern of behavior is often referred to as the wave-
particle dualism of radiation. Is a photon a wave or a particle? The only an-
swer, Bohr pointed out, is that it can act like either, depending on what is
being done with it.
15.3 THE WAVE-LIKE BEHAVIOR OF PARTICLES
In 1923, the French physicist Louis de Broglie suggested that the wave-
particle dualism that applies to electromagnetic radiation might also apply
to electrons and other atomic particles. Perhaps, he said, the wave-particle
dualism is a fundamental property of all quantum processes. If so, particles
that were always thought of as material particles can, in some circumstances,
act like waves. De Broglie sought an expression for the wavelength that
might be associated with the wave-like behavior of an electron. He found
such an expression by means of a simple argument.
The momentum of a photon of wavelength  is p  h/. De Broglie
thought that this relation might also apply to electrons with the momen-
15.3 THE WAVE-LIKE BEHAVIOR OF PARTICLES
665
(a)
(b)
v
(c)
f
hf′
f′
c
P
hf
c
FIGURE 15.2
Compton's experiment: (a) X ray of frequency f
approaches an electron; (b) X ray is scattered, leaving at lower
frequency f , and electron recoils at velocity v; (c) the momen-
tum before "collision" (hf/c) is equal to the vector sum of the
momentum of both the scattered photon and the recoiling elec-
tron.

tum p  mv. He therefore boldly suggested that the wavelength of an elec-
tron is
 
,
where m is the electron's mass and v its speed.
What does it mean to say that an electron has a wavelength equal to Planck's
constant divided by its momentum? As before, if this statement is to have any
physical meaning, it must be possible to test it by some kind of experiment.
Some wave property of the electron must be measured. The first such prop-
erty to be measured was diffraction.
The relationship   h/mv indicates that the wavelengths associated with
electrons will be very short, even for fairly slow electrons. An electron ac-
celerated across a potential difference of only 100 V would have a wave-
length of only 1010 m. So small a wavelength would not give measurable
diffraction effects on encountering even a microscopically small object (say,
105 m).
h

mv
666
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS
LOUIS VICTOR DE BROGLIE
Prince Louis Victor de Broglie (1892-
1987), whose ancestors served the French
kings as far back as the time of Louis XIV,
was educated at the Sorbonne in Paris. He
proposed the idea of wave properties of
electrons in his doctoral thesis.
FIGURE 15.3

By 1920, it was well known that crystals have a regular lattice structure.
The distance between rows of planes of atoms in a crystal is about 1010
m. After de Broglie proposed that electrons have wave properties, several
physicists suggested that the existence of electron waves might be shown
by using crystals as diffraction gratings. Experiments begun in 1923 by 
C.J. Davisson and L.H. Germer in the United States yielded diffraction
patterns similar to those obtained earlier for X rays (Section 13.7). See 
Figure 15.4.
The Davisson-Germer experiment showed two things. First, electrons
do have wave properties, otherwise they could not display the diffraction
pattern of waves. One may say that an electron moves along the path taken
by the de Broglie wave that is associated with the electron. Second, elec-
tron wavelengths are correctly given by de Broglie's relation,   h/mv.
These results were confirmed in 1927 when G.P. Thomson, the son of 
J.J. Thomson, directed an electron beam through thin gold foil. Thomson
found a pattern like the one shown here. It resembles diffraction patterns
produced by light beams going through thin slices of materials. By 1930,
diffraction from crystals had been used to demonstrate the wave-like be-
havior even of helium atoms and hydrogen molecules. (It can be said that
15.3 THE WAVE-LIKE BEHAVIOR OF PARTICLES
667
FIGURE 15.4
Diffraction pat-
tern produced by directing a
beam of electrons through poly-
crystalline aluminum (that is,
many small crystals of aluminum
oriented at random). With a sim-
ilar pattern using gold foil, G.P.
Thomson 
demonstrated 
the
wave properties of electrons (28
years after their particle proper-
ties were first demonstrated by
his father, J.J. Thomson). 

J.J. Thomson discovered the electron particle, and his son showed it to be
a wave as well.)
The experiments confirming de Broglie's hypothesis showed that the
wave-particle dualism is a general property not only of radiation but also
of matter. Scientists now customarily refer to electrons and photons as "par-
ticles" while recognizing that both have properties of waves as well.
Electron Waves and Atomic Structure
Bohr had postulated that the quantity mvr, which is called the "angular mo-
mentum" of the orbiting electron in the hydrogen atom, where r is the ra-
dius of the electron's orbit, m is the electrons mass, and v is its linear speed,
can have only certain, quantized values. These quantized values help to de-
fine the stationary states. De Broglie's relation,   h/mv, has an interest-
ing yet simple application that supports this postulate and sheds light on
the existence of stationary states. Bohr assumed that mvr can have only the
values
mvr 
,
where, as before, n  1, 2, 3, . . . .
Now, suppose that an electron wave is somehow spread over an orbit of
radius r so that, in some sense, it "occupies" the entire orbit. Can standing
waves be set up as indicated, for example, in Figure 15.6? If so, the cir-
cumference (2r) of the orbit must be equal in length to a whole number
(n) of wavelengths, that is, to n. The mathematical expression for this con-
dition of "fit" is
2r  n.
nh

2
668
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS
after 100 electrons
after 3000 electrons
after 70,000 electrons
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 15.5
Various numbers of electrons passed through two slits to reach a screen forming an in-
terference characteristic of waves.

Replacing  by h/mv according to de Broglie's relation gives
2r 
or
mvr 
.
This is exactly equivalent to Bohr's quantization condition! The de Broglie
relation for electron waves, and the idea that electrons have orbits that al-
low standing waves, allows us to derive the quantization of the electron or-
bits that Bohr had to assume.
The result obtained so far indicated that one could picture the electron
in the hydrogen atom in two ways: as a particle moving in an orbit with a
certain quantized value of mvr, or as a standing de Broglie-type wave oc-
cupying a certain region around the nucleus.
15.4 CONSTRUCTING QUANTUM MECHANICS
By the mid-1920s it was clear that "things" (electrons, atoms, molecules)
long regarded as particles also show wave properties. This fact is the basis
for the currently accepted theory of atomic structure. This theory, quan-
tum mechanics, was introduced in 1925. Its foundations were developed very
nh

2
nh

mv
15.4 CONSTRUCTING QUANTUM MECHANICS
669
r
"fit":
λ
"no fit":
r
λ
FIGURE 15.6
Only certain wavelengths will "fit" around a circle to form a stand-
ing wave.
(a)
(b)

rapidly during the next few years, primarily by Born, Heisenberg,
Schrödinger, Bohr, Jordan, and Dirac. At first, the theory appeared in two
different mathematical forms, proposed independently by Werner Heisen-
berg and Erwin Schrödinger. Heisenberg provided the basis for quantum
mechanics emphasizing the particle aspect of quantum objects, while
Schrödinger emphasized the wave aspect. Since Schrödinger's form of the
theory is closer to the ideas of de Broglie (discussed in the previous sec-
tion), it is often referred to as wave mechanics. Eventually Schrödinger
proved that in fact these two forms of quantum mechanics are equivalent,
that is, different ways of expressing the same relationships. Schrödinger's
formulation is now predominant, although the symbols used in his equa-
tions are now interpreted differently from Schrödinger's original usage, as
discussed presently.
Schrödinger sought to express the dual wave-particle nature of matter
mathematically. Maxwell had formulated the electromagnetic theory of
light in terms of a wave equation. Physicists were familiar with this theory
and its applications. Schrödinger reasoned that the de Broglie waves asso-
ciated with electrons could be described in a way analogous to the classi-
670
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS
FIGURE 15.7 Erwin Schrödinger (1887-1961)
was born in Austria. He developed wave me-
chanics in 1926 and then fled from Germany
in 1933 when Hitler and the Nazis came to
power. From 1940 to 1956, he was professor
of physics at the Dublin Institute for Advanced
Studies. 

cal waves of light. Thus, there should be a wave equation that holds for
matter waves, just as there is a wave equation for electromagnetic waves.
This mathematical part of wave mechanics cannot be discussed adequately
without using advanced mathematics, but the physical ideas involved re-
quire only a little mathematics and are essential to understanding modern
physics. Therefore, the rest of this chapter will discuss some of the physi-
cal ideas of the theory so as to indicate that they are indeed reasonable.
Some of the results of the theory and some of the significance of these re-
sults are also considered.
Schrödinger successfully derived an equation for the matter waves (de
Broglie waves) that are associated with moving electrons. This equation,
which has been named after him, defines the wave properties of electrons
and also predicts particle-like behavior. The Schrödinger equation for an
electron bound in an atom has a solution only when a constant in the equa-
tion has the whole-number values 1, 2, 3. . . . These numbers correspond
to different energies. Thus, the Schrödinger equation predicts that only
certain electron energies are possible in an atom. In the hydrogen atom,
15.4 CONSTRUCTING QUANTUM MECHANICS
671
FIGURE 15.8 P.A.M. Dirac (1902-1984),
an English physicist, was one of the de-
velopers of modern quantum mechanics.
In 1932, at the age of 30, Dirac was ap-
pointed Lucasian Professor of Mathe-
matics at Cambridge University, the post
held by Newton. Dirac is pictured here
with Werner Heisenberg and Erwin
Schrödinger while in Stockholm in 1933
on the occasion of the award of the 
Nobel Prize. 

for example, the single electron can be in only those states for which the
energy of the electron has the numerical values
En 
,
with n having only whole-number values. But these are just the energy val-
ues that are found experimentally, and just the ones given by the earlier
Bohr theory! In addition, these states correspond to the picture of stand-
ing electron waves in the various stationary, as discussed in the previous
section.
In Schrödinger's theory, these results follow directly from the mathe-
matical formulation of the wave and particle nature of the electron. Bohr
had to assume the existence of these stationary states at the start and make
no assumptions about the allowable orbits. In Schrödinger's theory, how-
ever, the stationary states and their energies are derived from the theory.
The new theory yields all the results of Bohr's theory, with none of the
Bohr theory's inconsistent hypotheses. The new theory also accounts for
certain experimental information for which Bohr's theory failed to account.
For instance, it allows one to compute the intensity of a spectral line, which
is understood as the probability of an electron changing from one energy
state to another.
After the unification of Schrödinger wave mechanics with Heisenberg's
formulation, quantum mechanics still contained the Schrödinger equation,
but it not longer provided a physical model or visualizable picture of the
atom. The planetary model of the atom has been
given up and has not been replaced by another sim-
ple picture. There is now a highly successful math-
ematical model for the atom, but no easily visualized
physical model. The concepts used to build quantum
mechanics are more abstract than those of the Bohr
theory. But the mathematical theory of quantum me-
chanics is much more powerful than the Bohr the-
ory in predicting and explaining phenomena. Many
problems that were previously unsolvable were rap-
idly solved with quantum mechanics (see the table
on p. 673). Physicists have learned that the world of atoms, electrons, and
photons cannot be thought of in the same mechanical terms as the world
of everyday experience. Instead, the study of atoms presents some fasci-
nating new concepts, such as those discussed below. What has been lost in
easy visualizability is made up for by an increase in fundamental under-
standing about nature at the most fundamental level.
k222me2

n2h2
672
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS
What does it mean to "visualize"
or "picture" something? One an-
swer is that it means relating an
abstract idea to something that
you are familiar with from every-
day life; for example, a particle is
like a baseball or a marble. But
why should there be anything
from everyday life that is exactly
like an electron or an atom?

The following table shows the rapid pace of development in accounting
for some previously unsolvable problems and inexplicable phenomena fol-
lowing the formulation of quantum mechanics in 1926.
1926
Quantum mechanics of hydrogen atom
W. Pauli
1926
Quantum mechanics of helium atom
W. Heisenberg
1926
Hydrogen molecule
W. Heisenberg
1926
Effect of magnetic fields on spectral lines
W. Heisenberg and P. Jordan
(Zeeman effect)
1927
Molecules in general
M. Born and J.R. Oppenheimer
1928
Magnetism (ferromagnetism)
W. Heisenberg
1928
Electron theory of metals
F. Bloch
1928
Relativistic quantum theory of electrons
P.A.M. Dirac
15.5 THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
Up to this point, it has been assumed that any physical property of an ob-
ject can be measured as accurately as necessary. To reach any desired de-
gree of accuracy would require only a sufficiently precise instrument. Wave
mechanics showed, however, that even in thought experiments with ideal
instruments there are limits to the accuracy of measurements that can be
achieved.
For example, think how you would go about measuring the positions and
velocity of a car moving slowly along a driveway. You could mark the po-
sition of the front end of the car at a given instant by making a scratch on
the ground. At the same time, you could start a stopwatch. Then you could
run to the end of the driveway, where you have previously placed another
mark. At the instant when the front of the car reaches this point, you stop
the watch. You then measure the distance between the marks and get the
average speed of the car by dividing the distance traveled by the time
elapsed. Since you know the direction of the car's motion, you know the
average velocity. Thus, you know that at the moment the car reached the
second mark it was at a certain distance from its starting point and had
traveled at a certain average velocity. By going to smaller and smaller in-
tervals, you could also get the instantaneous velocity at any point along 
its path.
How did you get the needed information? You located the car by sun-
light that was bounced off the front end into your eyes. The light permit-
ted you to see when the car reached a mark on the ground. To get the av-
erage speed, you had to locate twice where the front end was.
15.5 THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
673

But suppose that you had decided to use reflected radio waves instead of
visible light. At 1000 kHz, a typical value for radio signals, the wavelength
is 300 m. This wavelength is very much greater than the dimensions of the
car. Thus, it would be impossible to locate the position of the car with any
accuracy. The wave would reflect from the car ("scatter" is a better term)
in all directions. It would also sweep around any human-sized device you
may wish to use to detect the wave direction. The wavelength has to be
comparable with or smaller than the dimensions of the object before the
object can be located well.
Radar uses wavelengths from about 0.1 cm to about 3 cm, so a radar ap-
paratus could be used instead of sunlight. But even radar would leave un-
certainties as large as several centimeters in the two measurements of po-
sition. The wavelength of visible light is less than 106 m. For visible light,
then, you could design instruments that would locate the position of the
car to an accuracy of a few thousandths of a millimeter.
Now think of an electron moving along an evacuated tube. You will try
to measure the position and speed of the electron. But you must change
your method of measurement. The electron is so small that you cannot lo-
cate its position by using ordinary visible light. (The wavelength of visible
light, small as it is, is still at least 104 times greater than the diameter of 
an atom.)
674
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS
FIGURE 15.9
Werner Heisenberg
(1901-1976), a German physicist,
was one of the developers of mod-
ern quantum mechanics (at the age
of 23). He was the first to state the
uncertainty principle. After the dis-
covery of the neutron in 1932, he
proposed the proton-neutron the-
ory of nuclear structure. 

You are attempting to locate the electron within a tiny region, say the
size of an atom, about 1010 m across. So you need a light beam whose
wavelength is about 1010 m or smaller. But a photon of such a short wave-
length  (and high frequency f ) has very great momentum (h/) and en-
ergy (hf ). Recalling Compton's work (Section 15.2), you know that such a
photon will give the electron a strong kick when it is scattered by the elec-
tron. As a result, the velocity of the electron will be greatly changed, into
a new and unknown direction. (This is a new problem, one you did not
even think about when measuring the position of the car!) Therefore, when
you receive the scattered photon, you can deduce from its direction where
the electron once was; in this sense you can "locate" the electron. But in the
process you have changed the velocity, hence the momentum, of the elec-
tron (in both magnitude and direction). In short, the more accurately you
locate the electron by using photons of shorter wavelength, the less accu-
rately you can know its momentum. You could try to disturb the electron
less by using less energetic photons. But because light exists in quanta of
energy hf, a lower-energy photon will have a longer wavelength. This would
create greater uncertainty about the electron's position! In other words:
It is impossible to measure both the position and the momentum
of a subatomic particle, in the same instant to unlimited accuracy.
The more accurate is the measurement of the momentum, the less
accurate is the measurement of the position in that instant, and vice
versa.
This conclusion is expressed in the uncertainty principle, first stated by
Werner Heisenberg in 1927. The uncertainty principle can be expressed
quantitatively in two simple mathematical expressions, known as uncertainty
relations, which, as indicated by the above example, are necessary conclu-
sions drawn from experimental facts about measurements involving quan-
tum objects.
In this example, let x represent the uncertainty in the measurement of
the position of the object, and let px be the uncertainty in the measure-
ment of the momentum of the object in the x direction at the same instant.
Heisenberg's principle says that the product of these two uncertainties must
be equal to, or greater than, Planck's constant divided by 4:
x 	 px 
.
There are similar relations for the momenta in the y and z directions 
and the uncertainties in the measurements of the position along the y and
z coordinates.
h

4
15.5 THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
675

This uncertainty relation says that if we use a short-wavelength photon in
an attempt to measure the position of an electron to very high accuracy, so
that x is very small, then the uncertainty in the momentum measurement
p must be at least h/4x. This means that as x gets smaller, p has to
get larger. Again one can see this also from the Compton effect; the electron
would bounce away faster the shorter the wavelength (the higher the energy)
of the measuring photon. In fact, if we measure the position so accurately
that there is no uncertainty at all in the position, then x would be zero. But
to do this we would have been forced to use a photon whose wavelength 
 was zero! Such a photon has infinite energy! In that case, the uncertainty
in the momentum of the electron would be infinite, or undefined.
On the other hand, if we allowed the uncertainty in the position mea-
surement to become very large, then the uncertainty in the momentum
measurement would become very small, since the photon would have long
wavelength (low momentum). If x became so large that it was infinite, or
undefined, then p would become zero. We could measure the momentum
in that instant with absolute precision. But we cannot measure both the po-
sition and the momentum to absolute precision at the same time. Instead,
the uncertainty relation forces us into a trade-off. When the precision of
one variable goes up, the other must go down, and vice versa.
Similar considerations result in a second uncertainty relation involving
the variables time and energy. Let t represent the uncertainty in the mea-
surement of time, and E the uncertainty in the measurement of the en-
ergy of a quantum object at the same instant. Heisenberg's uncertainty prin-
ciple expresses the uncertainty relation for these two uncertainties
t 	 E 
.
Similarly to the above relationship, this relationship states:
It is impossible to measure both the time and the energy of a quan-
tum object in the same instant to unlimited accuracy. The more ac-
curate is the measurement of the energy, the less accurate is the
measurement of the time in that instant, and vice versa.
15.6 ORIGINS AND A CONSEQUENCE OF 
THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
The uncertainty principle and the two resulting uncertainty relations hold
for any object—even our earlier experiment on the car. But the limitations
imposed by the uncertainty principle have no practical consequence for
h

4
676
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS

such massive objects as cars or baseballs moving at everyday speeds. This
is because the amounts of uncertainty involved are too small to be noticed.
It is only on the atomic scale that the limitations become evident and 
important.
Whose Fault Is It?
It is important to understand that the uncertainties mandated by the un-
certainty principle are not the fault of the experimenter or of the instru-
ments we use. We can never build instruments to get around the recipro-
cal uncertainties in measurements imposed by the uncertainty relations.
This is because Heisenberg's uncertainty relations are a direct consequence
of quantum mechanics and the wave-particle duality, and they will remain
valid as long as quantum mechanics remains an acceptable theory. In fact,
the uncertainty relations may be even more fundamental than quantum me-
chanics, for these relations seem to be connected with the very existence
of the quantum itself. You have seen the role that Planck's constant h has
played in defining the light quantum and in accounting for the stationary
states in the Bohr atom. In addition, the constant h appears in both of the
basic equations for the energy and the momentum of a photon, E  hf and
p  h/, and in many other quantum equations as well. It also appears in
the two uncertainty relations. If h were 0, the quantum of energy would 
be zero, so there would be no light quanta, only continuous waves. The
momentum of a photon would also be zero, and the uncertainty relations
would read
x 	 px  0,
t 	 E  0.
In this case there would be no reciprocal uncertainties in position and mo-
mentum, time and energy. We could measure simultaneously the wave and
particle features of quantum objects without any problem. But Planck's con-
stant is not zero (although it is very small), the quantum does exist, we are
faced with the wave-particle duality, quantum mechanics is still an accepted
theory, and nature is so arranged as to limit the precision of our measure-
ments of fundamental quantities at the most fundamental level.
The Sizes of Atoms
On the atomic scale one of the main uses made of the uncertainty princi-
ple is in general arguments in atomic theory rather than in particular nu-
merical problems. For instance, the uncertainty principle helps to answer
15.6 ORIGINS AND A CONSEQUENCE OF THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
677

a long-standing fundamental question: Why do atoms have the sizes that
they do? As you saw previously (Chapter 14), atoms are actually made up
mostly of empty space. At the center of each atom is a very tiny nucleus,
which carries all of the positive charge and nearly all of the mass of the
atom. Surrounding the nucleus are a number of electrons, equal to the pos-
itive charge of the nucleus. The electrons are arranged on various quan-
tum orbits. The lowest one is called the "ground state." But even the or-
bit of the ground state is still far away from the nucleus. In most atoms,
the radius of the ground state is about 108 cm, while the radius of the nu-
cleus is only about 1012 cm. This means that a nucleus occupies only a
tiny fraction of the space inside an atom; the rest is empty (except for a few
point-sized electrons.)
As you saw with Rutherford's model, the atom should collapse into the
nucleus, because the electrons should radiate away their energy and spiral
inward. Bohr attempted to account for why this does not happen by pos-
tulating the existence of stationary quantum states, while quantum me-
chanics associated such states with standing waves, the ground state having
the smallest standing electron wave in that orbit. But it is the uncertainty
principle that explains why we can't have any lower states, and why the neg-
ative electrons cannot exist within or on the positive nucleus. A simple ap-
plication of the uncertainty relation for position and momentum (see Quan-
titative Discovery Question 3) shows that if an electron is confined to a
space of 108 cm, the size of an average atom in centimeters, then the un-
certainty in its speed is less than the speed of light. But if it is confined to
a much smaller space, or even down to the size of the nucleus, the uncer-
tainty in its speed would exceed the speed of light, which is 3  1010 cm/s.
As you know from relativity theory, no material particle may exceed the
speed of light. So the space inside the atom between the nucleus and the
first quantum state must be left empty.
Why Aren't Atoms Any Larger?
To increase the size of an atom, we would have to bring electrons into much
higher quantum states. Aside from requiring the input of a lot of energy,
the higher states are not evenly spaced but become farther and farther apart.
Thus, the likelihood increases greatly that the electrons in these higher
states can escape the atom and become free, so such an atom would not
exist for long, which means that in practice most atoms one can study are
about 108 cm in size. You will see in the next chapter that the fact that
atoms do have a size of about 108 cm helps to account for many of the
properties of matter that we see around us.
678
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS

15.7 THE PROBABILITY INTERPRETATION
The wave-particle dualism is also a fundamental aspect of quantum me-
chanics. In order to explore this dualism further, it is necessary to review
some ideas of probability. In some situations, no single event can be pre-
dicted with certainty. But it may still be possible to predict the statistical
probabilities of certain events. For example, on a holiday weekend during
which perhaps 25 million cars are on the road in the United States, statis-
ticians, basing themselves on past experience, predict that about 400 peo-
ple will be killed in car accidents. It is of course not known which cars in
which of the 50 states will be involved in the accidents. But the average be-
havior is still quite accurately predictable.
Along somewhat similar lines, physicists think about the behavior of pho-
tons and material particles. As you have seen, there are basic limitations on
the ability to describe the behavior of an individual particle. But the laws
of physics often make it possible to describe the behavior of large collec-
tions of particles with good accuracy (as was the case in the kinetic theory
of gasses, Chapter 7). Schrödinger's equation for the waves associated with
quantum particles gives the probabilities for finding the particles at a given
place and a given time; it does not give the precise behavior of an individ-
ual particle.
In order to see how quantum probability works, consider the situation
of a star being photographed through a telescope. As you have already seen,
for example, in the case of waves striking a barrier in which there is a sin-
gle opening about the size of the wavelength (see Chapter 8), the image
formed on a screen behind the opening is not a precise point. Rather, it is
a diffraction pattern, a central spot with a series of progressively fainter cir-
cular rings.
The image of a star on the photographic film in a telescope would be a
similar pattern. Imagine now that you wish to photograph a very faint star.
If the energy in light rays were not quantized, it would spread continuously
over ever-expanding wave fronts. Thus, you would expect the image of a
very faint star to be exactly the same as that of a much brighter star, ex-
cept that the intensity of light would be less over the whole pattern. How-
ever, the energy of light is quantized; it exists in separate quanta, "photons,"
of a definite energy, which obey Schrödinger's equation. A photon striking
a photographic emulsion produces a chemical change in the film at a sin-
gle location, not all over the image area. That location, however, is not pre-
dictable in advance. All that we can predict is the probability that the pho-
ton might arrive at that location.
If the star is very remote, only a few photons per second may arrive at
15.7 THE PROBABILITY INTERPRETATION
679

the film. The effect on the film after a very short period of exposure would
be something like the pattern in Figure 15.10(a). As the exposure contin-
ues, the effect on the film would begin to look like (b). Finally, after many
photons have arrived from the star, a pattern like (c) would be produced,
just like the image produced by a much brighter star with a much shorter
exposure. (Compare with Figure 15.5.)
For huge numbers of particle-like photons, the overall distribution they
form is very well described by the distribution expected on the basis of the
wave intensity of light. For small numbers of quanta, the wave intensity is
not very useful for predicting where the photons will go. One might ex-
pect them to go mostly to the "high-intensity" parts of the image, but one
cannot predict exactly where for an individual photon. These facts fit to-
gether beautifully if you consider the wave intensity at a location to indi-
cate the probability of a photon going there!
A similar connection can be made for de Broglie waves and particles of
matter. For this purpose, rather than considering a diffraction pattern
formed by an electron beam, consider an electron wave that is confined to
a particular region in space. An example is the de Broglie wave associated
with the electron in a hydrogen atom, which is spread out all over the atom.
Another example is the de Broglie wave of an electron in a good conduc-
tor of electricity. The wave's amplitude at some location represents the
probability of the electron being there, if a measurement of the electron's
location were to be performed.
According to quantum mechanics, the hydrogen atom does not consist
of a localized negative particle (an electron) moving around a nucleus as
in the Bohr model. Indeed, the theory does not provide any fixed, easily
680
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS
(a)
(c)
(b)
FIGURE 15.10
These sketches represent successive stages of a greatly enlarged
image of a distant star on a photographic plate showing the impacts of individual
photons.

visualizable picture of the hydrogen atom. A description of the probabil-
ity distribution is the closest thing to a picture that quantum mechanics 
provides. 
As discussed in Chapter 7 in connection with kinetic theory and disor-
der, it is easy to predict the average behavior of very large numbers of par-
ticles, even though nothing is known about the behavior of any single one
of them. Unlike kinetic theory, however, the use of probabilities in quan-
tum mechanics is not for convenience, but seems to be an intrinsic neces-
sity. There is no other way to deal with quantum mechanics. The theory
is not really concerned with the position of any individual electron in any
individual atom, but rather gives a mathematical representation that can be
used to predict interactions with particles, fields, and radiation. For exam-
ple, it can be used to calculate the probability that hydrogen will emit light
of a particular wavelength. The intensity and wavelength of light emitted
by a large number of hydrogen atoms can then be compared with these
calculations. Comparisons such as these have shown that the theory agrees
with experiment.
In most cases, atomic physics deals with the average behavior of many
atomic particles. The laws governing this average behavior are those of
quantum mechanics. The waves can be considered waves whose amplitudes
are a measure of probability. The information (concerning the probability
with which a particle will reach some position at a given time) travels
through space in probability waves. These waves can interfere with each
other in exactly the same way that water waves do. For example, think of
a beam of electrons passing through two slits. In such an experiment one
can consider the electrons to be waves, and one can compute their inter-
ference pattern. The interference pattern is actually a probability pattern
that provides the probabilities that individual electrons will arrive at dif-
ferent locations behind the slits. Large constructive interference at a loca-
tion indicates high probability that electrons will arrive there; large de-
structive wave interference indicates low or vanishing probability. We
cannot say where an individual electron will end up after passing through
the slits; all we can know, according to quantum mechanics, is the proba-
bility of landing at each location. However, after the passage of many elec-
trons, the statistical buildup of particle-like electrons will provide the fa-
miliar interference pattern that we expect to see for waves. As Max Born,
the primary founder of the probability interpretation, wrote in 1926:
The motion of particles conforms to the laws of probability, but
the probability itself is propagated in accordance with the law of
causality.
15.7 THE PROBABILITY INTERPRETATION
681

15.8 THE COMPLEMENTARITY PRINCIPLE
Quantum mechanics was founded upon the existence of the wave-particle
dualism of light and matter, and the enormous success of quantum me-
chanics, including the probability interpretation, seems to reinforce the im-
portance of this dualism. But how can a particle be thought of as "really"
having wave properties? And how can a wave be thought of as "really" hav-
ing particle properties? One could build a consistent quantum mechanics
upon the idea that a light beam or an electron can be described simulta-
neously by the incompatible wave and particle concepts.
In 1927, Niels Bohr realized that the word "simultaneously" provided
the key to a consistent account. He realized that our models, or pictures,
of matter and light are based upon their behavior in various experiments
in our laboratories. In some experiments, such as the photoelectric effect
or the Compton effect, light behaves as if it consists of particles; in other
experiments, such as the double-slit experiment, light behaves as if it con-
sists of waves. Similarly, in experiments such as J.J. Thomson's cathode-ray
studies, electrons behave as if they are particles; in other experiments, such
as his son's diffraction studies, electrons behave as if they are waves. But
light and electrons never behave simultaneously as if they consist of both
particles and waves. In each specific experiment they behave either as par-
ticles or as waves, but never as both.
This suggested to Bohr that the particle and wave descriptions of light
and of matter are both necessary even though they are logically incompat-
ible with each other. They must be regarded as being "complementary" to
each other—that is, like two different sides of the same coin. This led Bohr
to formulate what is called the Principle of Complementarity:
The wave and particle models are both required for a complete de-
scription of matter and of electromagnetic radiation. Since these
two models are mutually exclusive, they cannot be used simultane-
ously. Each experiment, or the experimenter who designs the ex-
periment, selects one or the other description as the proper de-
scription for that experiment.
Bohr showed that this principle is a fundamental consequence of quan-
tum mechanics. He handled the wave-particle duality, not by resolving it
in favor of either waves or particles, but by absorbing it into the founda-
tions of quantum physics. Like the Bohr atom, it was another bold initia-
tive toward the formulation of a new theory, even though this required con-
tradictions with classical physics.
682
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS

It is important to understand what the complementarity principle really
means. By accepting the wave-particle duality as a fact of nature, Bohr was
saying that light and electrons (or other objects) encompass potentially the
properties of both particles and waves—until they are observed, at which
point they behave as if they are either one or the other, depending upon
the experiment and the experimenter's choice. This was a profound state-
ment, for it meant that what we observe in our experiments is not the way
nature "really is" when we are not observing it. In fact, nature does not fa-
vor any specific model when we are not observing it; rather, it is a mixture
of the many possibilities that it could be until we finally do observe it! By
setting up an experiment, we select the model that nature will exhibit, and
we decide how photons and electrons and protons and even baseballs (if
they move fast enough) are going to behave—either as particles or as waves.
In other words, according to Bohr, the experimenter becomes part of the ex-
periment! In so doing, the experimenter interacts with nature, so that we
can never observe all aspects of nature "as she really is" by herself. In fact,
that phrase, while so appealing, has no operational meaning. Instead, we
should say we can know only the part of nature that is revealed by our ex-
periments. (This is no invitation to mysticism. After all, we know even about
a good friend only through a patchwork of repeated encounters and dis-
15.8 THE COMPLEMENTARITY PRINCIPLE
683
FIGURE 15.11
Max Born (1882-
1969) was born in Germany but left
for England in 1933 when Hitler
and the Nazis came to power. Born
was largely responsible for intro-
ducing the statistical interpretation
of wave mechanics. 

cussions, in many different circumstances.) The consequence of this fact,
for events at the quantum level, said Bohr, is the uncertainty principle,
which places a quantitative limitation upon what we can learn about nature
in any given interaction; and the consequence of this limitation is that we
must accept the probability interpretation of individual quantum processes.
For this reason, the uncertainty principle is often also called the principle
of indeterminacy. There is no way of getting around these limitations, ac-
cording to Bohr, as long as quantum mechanics remains a valid theory.
Such ideas, of course, are totally at odds with how we usually think of
nature. We usually think of nature as existing completely independently of
us and possessing a definite reality and behavior even when we are not ob-
serving it. For instance, you assume that the world outside of the place
where you are now sitting still exists pretty much as it was when you last
observed it. Certainly this is the way nature always behaves in our every-
day experience, and this view is a fundamental assumption of classical
physics. It even has a philosophical name; it is called "realism," and for phe-
nomena and objects in the range of ordinary experience is perfectly ap-
propriate. But, as Bohr so often emphasized, we have to be prepared to ex-
pect that the quantum world will not be anything like the everyday world
in which we live. Max Born, one of the founders of quantum mechanics,
has written:
The ultimate origin of the difficulty lies in the fact (or philosoph-
ical principle) that we are compelled to use the words of common
language when we wish to describe a phenomenon, not by logical
or mathematical analysis, but by a picture appealing to the imagi-
nation. Common language has grown by everyday experience and
can never surpass these limits. Classical physics has restricted itself
to the use of concepts of this kind; by analyzing visible motions it
has developed two ways of representing them by elementary pro-
cesses: moving particles and waves. There is no other way of giv-
ing a pictorial description of motions—we have to apply it even in
the region of atomic processes, where classical physics breaks down.
Bohr's complementarity principle, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle,
and Born's probability interpretation together form a logically consistent
interpretation of the meaning of quantum mechanics. Since this interpre-
tation was developed largely in Bohr's institute at the University of Copen-
hagen, it has been called the Copenhagen Interpretation of quantum me-
chanics. The results of this interpretation have profound scientific and
philosophical consequences that have been studied and debated to this day.
684
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS

15.9 SOME REACTIONS
The idea that the solution of Schrödinger's equation is a wave that repre-
sents, not a physical wave, but the probability of finding the associated par-
ticle in some specific condition of motion has had great success. In fact,
every experiment devised so far to test this interpretation has confirmed
these results. Yet many scientists still find it hard to accept the idea that it
is impossible to know exactly what any one particle is doing. The most
prominent of such disbelievers was Einstein. In a letter to his friend and
colleague Max Born, written in 1926, he remarked:
The quantum mechanics is very imposing. But an inner voice tells
me that it is still not the final truth. The theory yields much, but
it hardly brings us nearer to the secret of the Old One. In any case,
I am convinced that He does not play dice.
15.9 SOME REACTIONS
685
FIGURE 15.12
Photograph of participants in the Fifth Solvay Congress, Brussels, 1927, a
veritable "Who's Who" of physics in the first half of the twentieth century. Back row, from
left: Auguste Piccard, E. Henriot, Paul Ehrenfest, E. Herzen, T. de Donder, Erwin
Schrödinger, E. Verschaffelt, Wolfgang Pauli, Werner Heisenberg, Ralph Fowler, Leon Bril-
louin. Middle row, from left: Peter Debye, Martin Knudsen, William L. Bragg, H.A.
Kramers, Paul Dirac, Arthur Holly Compton, Louis de Broglie, Max Born, Niels Bohr.
Front row, from left: Irving Langmuir, Max Planck, Marie Curie, H.A. Lorentz, Albert Ein-
stein, Paul Langevin, Charles Guye, Charles Wilson, Owen Richardson. 

Thus, Einstein agreed with the usefulness and success of quantum me-
chanics, but he refused to accept probability-based laws as the final level
of explanation in physics. The remark about not believing that God played
dice (an expression he used many times later) expressed Einstein's faith that
more basic, deterministic laws are yet to be found. By this he meant that
if all the conditions of an isolated system are known and the laws describ-
ing the interactions are known, then it should be possible to predict pre-
cisely, according to "strict causality," what will happen next, without any
need for probability.
Some scientists agreed with Einstein, but all scientists do agree that, as
a theory, quantum mechanics does work in practice. It gives the right an-
swers to many questions in physics; it unifies ideas and occurrences that
were once unconnected; it has produced many new experiments and new
concepts; and it has opened the door to many technological advances, from
transistors, microprocessors, and superconductors, to lasers and the latest
medical-imaging techniques.
On the other hand, there is still vigorous argument about the basic sig-
nificance of quantum mechanics. It yields probability functions, not precise
trajectories. Some scientists see in this aspect of the theory an important in-
dication of the nature of the world. For other scientists, the same fact indi-
cates that quantum mechanics is still incomplete. Some in this second group
are trying to develop a more fundamental, nonstatistical theory. For such a
theory, the present quantum mechanics is only a special case. As in other
fields of physics, the greatest discoveries here may be those yet to be made.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
complementarity
probability interpretation
Compton effect
quantum mechanics
Copenhagen interpretation
Schrödinger equation
de Broglie wave
uncertainty principle
double-slit experiment
wave mechanics
photon
wave-particle dualism
SOME IMPORTANT EQUATIONS
E  hf,
m 
,
E

c2
686
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS

p 
,
 
,
x 	 x  h/4,
t 	 E  h/4.
FURTHER READING
D. Cassidy, Uncertainty: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg (New York: 
Freeman, 1992).
R. Crease et al., The Second Generation: Makers of the Revolution in Twentieth 
Century Physics (Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1986).
R.P. Feynman, Six Easy Pieces (Reading, MA: Perseus, 1995), Chapter 6.
R.P. Feynman, QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter (Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press, 1985).
B. Greene, The Elegant Universe: Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and the Quest for
the Ultimate Theory (New York: Norton, 1999).
J. Gribbon, In Search of Schrödinger's Cat, Quantum Physics, and Reality (New York:
Bantam, 1984).
R.M. Hazen with M. Singer, Why Aren't Black Holes Black? The Unanswered Ques-
tions at the Frontiers of Science (New York: Anchor/Doubleday, 1997).
A. Hobson, Physics: Concepts and Connections, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River: Pren-
tice Hall, 1999), Chapters 13, 14, 18.
G. Holton, The Roots of Complementarity. In: Thematic Origins of Scientific
Thought: Kepler to Einstein (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988),
pp. 99-145.
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapter 29.
G. Kane, The Particle Garden: Our Universe as Understood by a Particle Physicist (Read-
ing, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995).
H. Kragh, Quantum Generations: A History of Physics in the Twentieth Century (Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999).
L. Lederman with D. Teresi, The God Particle (New York: Dell, 1993).
D. Lindley, Where Does the Weirdness Go? Why Quantum Mechanics Is Strange, But
Not As Strange As You Might Think (New York: Basic, 1996).
D. Schramm and L. Lederman, From Quarks to the Cosmos: Tools of Discovery (New
York: Freeman, 1989).
S. Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory (New York: Pantheon, 1992).
h

mv
h

FURTHER READING
687

D. Wick, The Infamous Boundary: Seven Decades of Heresy in Quantum Physics (New
York: Springer-Verlag, 1996).
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
15.1 The Quantum
1.
Why did the existence of the quantum of energy pose a major problem for
physicists?
15.2 The Particle-Like Behavior of Light
1.
Why was momentum conservation not considered in the discussion of the
photoelectric effect?
2.
How does the momentum of a photon depend on the frequency of the light?
3.
How could you figure out how much mass a photon carries?
4.
Write down the steps leading the expression for the momentum, p  h/.
5.
What did Compton do, and what did the experiment prove?
6.
What is the best answer to the question "Is the photon a particle or a wave?"
15.3 The Wave-Like Behavior of Particles
1.
How did de Broglie obtain the relation   h/mv for electrons?
2.
Why were crystals used to get diffraction patterns of electrons?
3.
How can electron waves be used to explain the origin of the stationary states
that Bohr assumed in his theory?
4.
What two pictures of the atom were possible as a result of the discovery of
electron waves?
5.
How would you obtain the wavelength of a moving electron?
6.
In what way is nature symmetric in the wave-particle duality?
15.4 Constructing Quantum Mechanics
1.
The set of energy states of hydrogen could be derived from Bohr's postulate
that mvr  nh/2. In what respect was the derivation from Schrödinger's equa-
tion better?
2.
Quantum (or wave) mechanics has had great success. What is its drawback for
those trained to think in terms of physical models?
15.5 The Uncertainty Principle
1.
What is the "uncertainty" of a measurement?
2.
If photons used in finding the momentum of an electron disturb the electron
too much, why cannot the observation be improved by using less energetic
photons?
688
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS

3.
If the wavelength of light used to locate a particle is too long, why cannot the
location be found more precisely by using light of shorter wavelength?
4.
If you measured the position of an electron with very small uncertainty, what
consequence would this have for the measurement of its momentum? Explain.
5.
What effect does the greater-than-or-equal-to sign, , have on the relation-
ship between the two uncertainties?
15.6 Origins and a Consequence of the Uncertainty Principle
1.
Whose fault is it that we can't get rid of the uncertainty in our measurements?
2.
Why can't atoms have much larger sizes?
3.
Why can't electrons exist inside the nucleus?
15.7 The Probability Interpretation
1.
In wave terms, the bright lines of a diffraction pattern are regions where
there is a high field intensity produced by constructive interference. What
does the probability interpretation say about the bright lines of a diffraction
pattern?
2.
Quantum mechanics can predict only probabilities for the behavior of any one
particle. How, then, can it predict many phenomena, for example, half-lives
and diffraction patterns, with great certainty?
3.
Individual photons are sent onto the double-slits of Young's experiment. They
hit the photographic plate in random fashion as quantum mechanics requires.
If that is the case, then how is the wave interference pattern formed?
4.
Explain in your own words what Born is saying in the quotation.
5.
How does the probability interpretation in quantum mechanics differ from the
probability interpretation of entropy in the kinetic theory of gases?
6.
How can nature be fundamentally random yet at the same time we can pre-
dict with great accuracy the interference pattern that is formed in Young's 
experiment?
15.8 The Complementarity Principle
1.
What did Bohr realize when he examined experiments on particles and waves?
2.
What does the word "complementary" mean?
3.
State the principle of complementarity in your own words.
4.
How does the experimenter become part of the experiment?
5.
How does this contradict the idea of "realism"?
6.
How did Bohr regard the strange behavior of the quantum world?
7.
Why can't we know nature as it really is, according to quantum mechanics?
15.9 Some Reactions
1.
What was Einstein's objection to the probability interpretation?
2.
What did Einstein mean when he said God does not play dice?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
689

DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1. What would happen to the wave-particle dualism if Planck's constant h  0?
What would happen to the uncertainty principle if Planck's constant h  0?
2. Why can't we measure both the position and the time simultaneously with
absolutely no uncertainty?
3. How do you think it was possible for Einstein to be a primary founder of
quantum theory, yet object to quantum mechanics?
4. Review some of the new ideas and concepts in this chapter. Which ones do
you find to be the most startling, and the most disturbing. Evaluate why you
find them to be startling and disturbing.
5. Niels Bohr thought the complementarity principle applies also to events in
our lives—for example, that one loves one's child and yet has to punish him
or her for bad behavior. Can you think of other examples where a "comple-
mentarity principle" may apply to ordinary life?
6. What explanation would you offer for the fact that the wave aspect of light
was shown to be valid before the particle aspect was demonstrated?
7. Suppose that the only way you could obtain information about the world was
by throwing rubber balls at the objects around you and measuring their speeds
and directions of rebound. What kind of objects would you be unable to learn
about? How does this question relate to this chapter?
8. Some writers have claimed that the uncertainty principle proves that there is
free will. Do you think this extrapolation from atomic phenomena to the world
of living beings is valid?
9. A physicist has written:
It is enough that quantum mechanics predicts the average value of ob-
servable quantities correctly. It is not really essential that the mathemati-
cal symbols and processes correspond to some intelligible physical picture
of the atomic world.
Do you regard such a statement as acceptable? Give your reasons.
10. Previous chapters have discussed the behavior of large-scale "classical parti-
cles" (e.g., tennis balls) and "classical waves" (e.g., sound waves). Such parti-
cles and waves in most cases can be described without any use of ideas such
as the quantum of energy or the de Broglie matter wave. Does this mean that
there is one sort of physics ("classical physics") for the phenomena of the
large-scale world and quite a different physics ("quantum physics") for the
phenomena of the atomic world? Or does it mean that quantum physics re-
ally applies to all phenomena but is no different from classical physics when
applied to large-scale particles and waves? What arguments or examples would
you use to defend your answer?
11. Some writers have declared that the impossibility of finding classical causal-
ity at the level of quantum objects proves "science cannot really know nature."
Some also claim that it coincides with aspects of Eastern religions. What would
be your responses?
690
15. QUANTUM MECHANICS

Quantitative
1.
Most professional pitchers can throw a baseball at 100 mi/hr (62 km/hr). What
would be the de Broglie wavelength of a ball of mass 147 g at that speed?
Could this wavelength be detected by crystal diffraction?
2.
What is your de Broglie wavelength when you walk at a brisk pace of 4 mi/hr?
Why have you not experienced the wave side of yourself?
3.
(a) Once it was thought that  rays from the nucleus are electrons that were
originally present inside the nucleus. According to the uncertainty princi-
ple, what would be the approximate range of speeds (uncertainty of speed)
of an electron confined to a nucleus of size 1014 m? The rest mass of an
electron is about 9.1  1031 kg; assume it is not subject to relativistic mass
increase. How does the result of your calculation compare with the speed
of light? What does this tell about the old idea of the presence of electrons
in the nucleus?
(b) What would be the approximate uncertainty in the speed of an electron
confined to the first Bohr orbit of a hydrogen atom, where r  5.29 
109 cm?
(c) According to the uncertainty principle, what would be the approximate
speed of a proton confined to a nucleus of size 1014 m? Neglect relativistic
effects. (The rest mass of a proton is about 1.6  1027 kg.) How does this
compare with the speed of light?
(d) On the basis of your results, why can a proton exist in the nucleus if an
electron cannot?
4.
An electron is fired from an "electron gun" in the CRT of a computer moni-
tor. The electron is aimed at a blue-fluorescent subpixel on the screen of 106
m in width. What is the minimum uncertainty in the electron's momentum in
the horizontal direction along the screen?
5.
Calculate the momentum of a photon of wavelength 400  109 m. How fast
would an electron have to move in order to have the same momentum? What
would be the wavelength of an electron moving at that speed?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
691

This page intentionally left blank 

16.1
The Success of Quantum Mechanics
16.2
Forming a Solid
16.3
Quantum Solids
16.4
Conducting Electrons
16.5
Banding Together
16.6
Superconductors
16.7
Semiconductors
16.8
Introducing Impurities
16.9
Semiconductor Devices
16.10 Transistors
16.11 Some Applications of Transistors
16.1 THE SUCCESS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS
The triumph of quantum mechanics during the 1920s opened the door to
a new understanding of a wide range of phenomena involving the most fun-
damental properties of matter and radiation, the fundamental constituents
of the Universe. The new physics also enabled an amazing variety of tech-
nological applications that are continuing to transform our lives—from
lasers and microchip transistors to new medical imaging devices, and a host
of new materials. Combined with relativity theory, quantum mechanics is
the foundation for understanding the interactions of radiation and matter,
the behavior of elementary particles at extremely high energies, and many
of the stellar phenomena observed in cosmology. Soon after the formula-
tion of quantum mechanics, scientists successfully applied the new theory
to a new understanding of the nucleus of the atom that is still used today.
This is discussed in Chapters 17 and 18. During the same period, scien-
tists also utilized quantum mechanics to gain a new understanding of the
structure and behavior of matter, including, in particular, the thermal and
electrical properties of solids. These are the focus of the current chapter.
693
Solids Matter
C
H
A
P
T
E
R16
16
-
+

16.2 FORMING A SOLID
It was well known that matter appears in one of three states, or phases—
solid, liquid, and gas or vapor. According to the kinetic-molecular theory
(Chapter 7), one factor distinguishing each of these states is the amount of
energy distributed among the molecules making up the material. In the
gaseous state, the molecules have the most energy and in the solid state the
least. Transitions from one state to another can be achieved by adding or
extracting energy in the form of heat, as is readily observed. But that can't
be the whole story; as we shall examine below, at each transition from one
state to another, the heat content seems to disappear (if going to states of
higher temperature) or to appear without a loss of energy elsewhere (if 
going to states of lower temperature)! The temperature of the material does
not change at all. We need to include an additional concept, the concept
of entropy, which gives an idea of the level of disorder. Much of the basic
understanding of phase transitions and the formation of solids was devel-
oped around 1900, but a complete understanding required quantum me-
chanics over the subsequent decades, and some aspects of these compli-
cated processes are still under investigation.
In order to view the basic process leading to the formation of a solid, we
look at the behavior of water, which can also easily be observed in your
laboratory. We start with liquid water, which we will cool down by ex-
tracting heat. As the water cools, the amount of decline in its temperature,
T, is related to the amount of heat extracted, Q, by the expression (Chap-
ter 6):
Q  mc T,
where m is the mass of the water and c is the specific heat of liquid water,
which in this case is 1 calorie of heat per gram and per degrees centigrade.
As we continue to cool the water, we reach a temperature at which the
liquid undergoes a phase change from liquid into solid. All liquids eventu-
ally freeze into solids, but they do so at very different temperatures. Wa-
ter at atmospheric temperature will begin to freeze at 0°C (273 K), but liq-
uid helium does not freeze until it reaches 4 K, very near to absolute zero.
At this point we observe the effect noted earlier—as we extract heat, the
liquid continues to freeze into ice, but the temperature stays the same. The
heat extracted seems to have been "hidden" in the liquid and to be associ-
ated with the formation of the solid, ice. This "hidden" heat is called the
latent heat of fusion, named for the linking of the molecules together into a
694
16. SOLIDS MATTER

solid. (This has nothing to do with nuclear fusion.) For water, it is about
80 calories of heat per gram of water.
What is this latent heat and what does it have to do with the freezing of a 
liquid into a solid? Since the cooling process involves the extraction of en-
ergy from the material, the molecules begin to arrange themselves into a
state of minimum energy. This is achieved as the molecules group together
into an arrangement that is as orderly and as structured as possible. From
the earlier discussion about entropy, you know that the state of minimum
energy will have the highest order, which means that it has the lowest en-
tropy. The change in the entropy, S, is defined as the change in the heat
content per unit of absolute temperature (see Chapter 6):
S 
.
So, the latent heat that is extracted from the water as it freezes, Q, is di-
rectly associated with the decreasing entropy of the water molecules as they
form the ordered structure of solid ice. Of course, if heat is pumped back
into the system, the entropy will start to increase as the molecules begin
to vibrate faster and faster. They may eventually break their solid bonds.
This is observed as melting. Again the temperature remains constant as the
solid is melting under the input of heat energy. During this process, the
incoming heat energy becomes latent once again, since the temperature
does not change, but the entropy increases and the orderly arrangement
within the solid breaks down, forming a pool of water where once we had
an orderly ice cube.
As a solid is formed from a liquid, the type of orderly arrangement that
it creates depends upon the types of molecules and the nature of the elec-
trical attraction between the molecules. The lowest entropy states would
involve the largest number of bonds possible between the molecules. This
Q

T
16.2 FORMING A SOLID
695
Heat
Ice
Liquid
Vapor
T (°C)
0
100
FIGURE 16.1 Three phases of water and its
transitions as heat is added.

occurs in the formation of crystals, which involve beautifully ordered ar-
rays of billions and billions of molecules. In these arrays a basic crystal
structure involving only a small number of molecules is repeated many
times over, like grouted tiles on a floor, or a wallpaper pattern. Water, salt,
and many metals form such crystalline structures. Many metal alloys, which
involve a mixture of different metals, form what are called "polycrystalline"
("many crystal") solids. Examples include metal door knobs, tableware, and
automotive parts.
However, not all solids involve crystalline bonding. There are three other
important types of bonding (as well as some exotic types). These include
quasi-crystalline, amorphous, and composite bonding. The types of molecules
involved and even the way in which the solid was formed determine the
type of structure formed. If the cooling from liquid occurs too quickly, the
molecules which might normally form a perfect crystal do not have time
to arrange themselves into a low-entropy crystal structure. They literally
tend to be frozen into place while in the liquid state. In this case there is
only local, short-range order and no long-range repetitive array. This struc-
ture is called amorphous. Some solids are naturally amorphous, even when
frozen slowly. These include rubber, glass, and plastics. Carbon in the form
of coal is amorphous, but in the form of graphite or diamond it is highly
crystalline.
Quasi-crystalline solids were first discovered only in 1983. The mole-
cules are arranged into a very orderly three-dimensional pattern, but the
pattern does not repeat itself throughout the crystal as it does in a truly
crystalline structure.
Finally, there are the composite solids, which involve the bonding together
of different materials with different structures. Examples here include wood,
cement, and fiberglass, as well as such biological materials as bone, flesh,
696
16. SOLIDS MATTER
Water
(a)
Ice
(b)
FIGURE 16.2
Schematic drawing of water molecules as liquid and solid.

and muscle. Research in recent years to develop materials that can act as
biological "spare parts" has undergone a revolution because of the discov-
ery of composite solids.
16.3 QUANTUM SOLIDS
One of the first recognized successes of the early quantum theory arose, not
from the study of radiation, but from the theory of solids. Once again 
Albert Einstein was at the forefront. After presenting the hypothesis of light
quanta in 1905, which explained the photoelectric effect (Section 13.5), Ein-
stein showed in 1906 that Planck's earlier results on the distribution of en-
ergy in electromagnetic radiation could be derived using two assumptions.
The first, already familiar from his 1905 work, was that light is composed
of light quanta; the second was that the light quanta are emitted and ab-
sorbed by oscillating charges within matter that are vibrating only with cer-
tain quantized energies. This means that light is emitted by oscillating
charges within matter, as might be expected from Maxwell's theory, but the
energies both of the emitted light and of the oscillators are restricted to cer-
tain quantized values, which contradicted classical theory. The oscillators
behaved like charges attached to springs, oscillating back and forth with cer-
tain frequencies corresponding to certain allowed quantum energies.
In 1904, the German physicist Paul Drude had proposed a model of a
crystalline solid in which the atoms are arranged in a lattice such that each
atom is bound to its neighboring atoms by bonds that can act like little 
oscillator springs. Drude showed, using classical physics, that the three-
dimensional oscillation of the lattice atoms can account for the observed ab-
sorption of infrared radiation by some solids, if the atoms are assumed to
be ionized. A similar oscillation of the electrons, attached to the atoms or
ions, accounted for the observed absorption of ultraviolet radiation in solids.
In 1907 Einstein applied the quantum hypothesis to Drude's classical os-
cillators. Even before Drude's model, Einstein had been wondering as early
as 1901 whether the internal kinetic energy of solids and liquids might be
regarded as the energy of "electric resonators." One outstanding puzzle at
that time involved the behavior of the specific heat, C, of solids as the tem-
perature decreased. Normally the specific heat is assumed to be constant
in the relationship between the transfer of heat and the change in temper-
ature of a substance
Q  mc T.
Applying classical physics to Drude's oscillator model of the atoms in a
lattice confirmed that the specific heat C should be a constant for solids at
16.3 QUANTUM SOLIDS
697

all temperatures. However, when Einstein applied the quantum hypothe-
sis to the oscillators in Drude's model, he obtained an expression for the
specific heat indicating that the value of the specific heat should change
with temperature. While remaining constant at room temperature and
slightly below, the specific heat would drop precipitously to zero at the tem-
perature declined to zero, as shown in Figure 16.3. Conversely, as the tem-
perature increased from 0 K, Einstein's value for the specific heat of a crys-
talline substance as a function of its temperature should approach the
constant value at room temperature.
Einstein's predictions for the behavior of the specific heat of solids as a
function of temperature were based on an application of the quantum hy-
698
16. SOLIDS MATTER
FIGURE 16.3
Drude's model of a crystalline solid.
FIGURE 16.4
Einstein's graph of specific heat versus tem-
perature from his 1907 paper applying the quantum hy-
pothesis to Drude's classical oscillators. 

pothesis to a model of a crystalline solid in which the lattice atoms behave
as three-dimensional oscillators vibrating with quantized energies. The
physicists Walther Nernst and Frederick A. Lindemann, working in a low-
temperature laboratory in Berlin, astonished their colleagues with a com-
plete confirmation of Einstein's prediction for the way the specific heat of
a crystalline solid changed with temperature. It was the first confirmation
of the quantum hypothesis outside of the field of radiation, and it clearly
indicated that crystalline solids could be treated as an array of oscillating
lattice atoms subject to requirements of quantum theory and, later, quan-
tum mechanics. This model has served as the basic model of a crystalline
solid ever since. As Nernst and Lindemann wrote, "That the observations
in their totality provide a brilliant confirmation of the quantum theory of
Planck and Einstein is obvious."
16.4 CONDUCTING ELECTRONS
You have seen in previous chapters how research on electricity and the be-
havior of electric currents enabled the enormous growth and spread of the
electric age in which we live today. Electrical energy is now the dominant
form of energy consumption in industrialized countries and is an essential
element in the operation of many of the devices we use every day. For
decades, one of the most poorly understood yet most practical properties
of a piece of solid matter was its ability, or lack of ability, to conduct elec-
tricity. Why do some materials conduct electricity, while others act as in-
sulators, and still others (such as semiconductors) act as one or the other
depending upon the conditions? How can an understanding of such prop-
erties be put to even greater practical use?
You recall from Section 10.7 that the German physicist Georg Ohm dis-
covered an empirical law, known as Ohm's law, relating the current in a
material and the voltage applied to the material
V  IR.
Here V is the potential difference, I is the current, and R is the resistance
of the material. The resistance is normally constant for each material, but
there is a different resistance for different materials. As the resistance of a
material increases, its conductivity goes down, so the amount of current
that it conducts must also decrease, according to Ohm's law:
I 
.
V
R
16.4 CONDUCTING ELECTRONS
699

Of course, if the resistance of a material is so large that it approaches in-
finitely, then V/R becomes zero, so I  0. This means that no current flows
through the material. Such a material is called an insulator. An insulator al-
lows virtually no current to get through. On the other hand, if R ever hap-
pened to reach zero, the current would become infinite, or undefined, for
even the tiniest voltage. This is what happens in a superconductor.
Even without a voltage source, a current in a loop made of a supercon-
ductor, once started, will continue in principle undisturbed virtually for-
ever. The first superconductor was discovered in 1911 by Kammerlingh
Onnes in Amsterdam while studying the conductivity of mercury at ex-
tremely low temperatures. During the late 1980s, one superconductor
maintained a current without loss for nearly 3 years. A normal conductor
would lose its current within a small fraction of a second without the help
of an external voltage. Even with an applied external voltage, you know
that a wire of normal resistance carrying a current begins to warm up, in-
dicating that electrical energy is being converted into heat energy in the
wire. Wires can become so hot that they glow and emit light; this is put to
good use in incandescent light bulbs and in electrical heating elements.
This behavior is similar to the conversion of kinetic energy into heat en-
ergy due to friction, as when a book slides across a tabletop and comes to
rest. It seems that perhaps the current in a non-superconducting wire en-
counters a type of friction as it moves down the wire, which explains why
the wire gets hot. This suggests that in an insulator there is so much in-
ternal friction that it does not allow any current to flow, while supercon-
ductors have no friction at all, allowing currents to flow indefinitely with-
out any noticeable loss of energy.
Can we utilize the basic oscillator model of a solid to account for Ohm's
law and the related electrical observations just described? Soon after Thom-
son's discovery of the electron, Drude in 1900 and H.A. Lorentz in 1909
developed the first electron model of conductivity in a conducting mate-
rial. In their model, the solid material is assumed to consist of metal atoms
arranged in a crystal structure, which is able to vibrate. However, electrons
are the crucial element in understanding conductivity. Conducting metals
such as copper and silver have one valence electron that is easily detached.
So Drude and Lorentz assumed that these valence electrons provide the
conduction current when a voltage is applied. Their model is called the
classical free-electron model, because it involved only classical physics (no
quantum theory) and because the electrons were considered to be little balls
of charged matter that are completely free to wander about within the ma-
terial. They were not subject to repulsive forces from other electrons or to
attractions to the metal ions. Only a "boundary force" around the edge of
the metal acted on the electrons, preventing them from escaping into space.
700
16. SOLIDS MATTER

In many respects the electrons in the Drude-Lorentz free-electron model
form a type of ideal gas, an "electron gas" inside the metal. Despite the
presence of the lattice atoms, the electrons are assumed to move about ran-
domly, like molecules in the kinetic theory of gases, until an electric field
is applied. Since the electrons are charged, at the instant the external field
is applied they start to move in the direction of the electric force on them,
but as they move they do undergo inelastic collisions with the vibrations
of the crystal lattice, as well as collisions with impurities in the material and
with imperfections in the lattice. All of these work together to slow the
electrons' advance and to reduce their kinetic energy. This slowing appears
as a type of friction, which we surmised above, and the amount of "fric-
tion" is defined as the resistance. The lost kinetic energy appears as heat.
The more inelastic collisions the electrons experience as they traverse the
conductor, the more the resistance they encounter; on the macroscopic scale
this is expressed as Ohm's law.
Of course, if the material is made up of atoms that have no valence elec-
trons (which can be shared), such as glass, wood, or plastic, there can be
no conduction of electrons, and thus no current when a voltage is applied.
The material is an insulator.
The Drude-Lorentz free-electron model accounted quite well for Ohm's
law, but it could not account for some of the thermal properties of the 
metals, besides the specific heat, such as the dependence of the resistance
upon the temperature. Moreover, with the advent of quantum mechanics it
was obvious that a quantum mechanical understanding of conductivity was
required, since atoms and electrons obey the laws of quantum mechanics.
16.4 CONDUCTING ELECTRONS
701
−
+
e−
FIGURE 16.5
Schematic representation of an electron path through a con-
ductor (containing vacancies, impurity atoms, and a grain boundary) under
the influence of an electric field.

16.5 BANDING TOGETHER*
In 1928, just two years after the formulation of quantum mechanics, the
German physicist Arnold Sommerfeld modified the classical free-electron
model by treating the electrons according to quantum mechanics. But the
new theory still contained the unrealistic assumption that the electrons do
not interact with the charged lattice icons except to collide with them. As
before, Sommerfeld also considered the electrons to be little charged par-
ticles of matter.
Beginning in the same year, Felix Bloch, an assistant to Werner Heisen-
berg in Leipzig, began to make more realistic assumptions in an attempt
to formulate a more complete quantum mechanics of electrical conductiv-
ity. First, because he wanted to assign a definite momentum and energy to
each of the electrons, but not a definite position or a time interval, he chose
the wave side of the wave-particle duality. He assumed that the electrons
behave, not like particles, but like infinitely extended de Broglie waves. As
a result, Bloch did not treat electrons inside metals as a "gas" of particles,
but rather as periodic waves extending throughout the periodic crystal lat-
tice. This, it later turned out, helped to explain how electricity can begin
to flow in a wire the instant a wire is plugged into a wall socket. If the elec-
trons are viewed as balls of matter, it would take a small amount of time
for the current to begin flowing at the rate specified by Ohm's law.
Bloch made a second assumption. He assumed that the positive metal
ions, which are arranged in an infinite, periodic array (that is, in a perfect
crystal), each exerts an attractive electric force on the negative electrons.
This attractive force formed in visual terms a potential energy that looked
like a type of "potential well." The wells of neighboring ions then over-
lapped so that together they formed a periodic arrangement that gave the
electron waves a very bumpy ride down the wire.
Bloch then solved the Schrödinger equation for the energies that these
types of de Broglie waves (wave functions) could possess while moving in
this type of periodic potential. He discovered that the allowed energies of
the electrons in the material are joined together into bands of quantum
states, just as there are certain quantum stationary states within each atom
in which the electrons are allowed to exist. Between the bands, as between
the quantum states, there is a range of energies in which electrons are for-
bidden to exist. The bands in the material are actually created by the join-
702
16. SOLIDS MATTER
* The remainder of this chapter contains material that is somewhat more advanced than that in the
previous sections. Your instructor will inform you how much, if any, of this material is included in the
course work or in individual assignments. You may find some of it of interest for independent study.

ing together of the quantum states of the individual atoms. In fact, if there
are a total of N identical atoms in the material, then there are N quantum
states within each band. According to a rule in quantum mechanics (the
Pauli exclusion principle), only two electrons are allowed to occupy any
one quantum energy state of a single atom, and this is allowed only be-
cause the two electrons spin on their axes in opposite directions.
As extended and refined by Bloch and others during the 1930s, Bloch's
theory, known as the band theory of metals, accounts very well for the con-
ducting behavior of materials. When atoms are joined together into a crys-
tal, each of the individual quantum states of the atoms joins with the cor-
responding states in other (identical) atoms in the crystal to form the various
energy bands within the material. The electrons in the atoms then fill up
the available states within each band. For instance, if there are N atoms in
a material, there are N states in a single band and up to 2N electrons 
in each band (since two electrons can occupy one energy state if they spin
in opposite directions).
The interesting physics occurs at the top of the filled bands. When an
external electric field (voltage) is applied to the material, an electron can
respond to the field only if it can move up to a slightly higher quantum
state, since it would have slightly more energy in responding to the field.
16.5 BANDING TOGETHER
703
−
1010 m
Potential
"well"
Electron
Atom
FIGURE 16.6
An electron moving through a region of po-
tential wells.
Band
2p
2s
E
1s
2N
2N
2N
FIGURE 16.7
Expected occupation of the energy
bands in a crystal of N atoms with 6N electrons. 2N
electrons go into each band, filling the first two but
leaving the third band partly empty.

This is possible only if there are some nearby free states to which the elec-
tron can jump. This is the case for conducting metals, such as copper and
silver, since as their electrons fill in the available states, the highest band is
only partially filled. The electrons in this band, which is called the conduc-
tion band, are then free to be conducted (actually, propagated as waves) down
the wire, since there are empty quantum states nearby in their energy band.
But the electrons in the filled lower bands are not able to move, since there
are no free states nearby.
On the other hand, if the filling of the states within the bands stops ex-
actly at the top of a band, then the electrons cannot respond normally to
an electric field by moving down the wire, since there is an energy gap pre-
venting them from reaching a quantum state in which they can move freely.
Such a material would then be an insulator. An example is diamond, in
which the highest filled quantum state also fills out an energy band. This
band is called the valence band, since it is occupied by the outer valence
electrons of the atoms. The energy gap to the next band, which is empty,
704
16. SOLIDS MATTER
Filled
band
Insulator
Gap
Conduction
band
Conductor
Semiconductor
Narrow
gap
FIGURE 16.8
Bands for insulator, conductor, and semiconductor.
1s
4N states, no electrons
4N states, 4N electrons
2N states, 2N electrons
Hybrid 2s 2p
Hybrid 2s 2p
Band
Eg ≈ 6 eV
FIGURE 16.9
Actual occupation of the energy bands in a di-
amond crystal with N atoms (6N electrons). The two lower
bands are full and separated by an energy gap Eg from the
higher hybrid 2s2p band, which has no electrons.

is about 6 eV, so the electrons in diamond cannot normally reach the con-
duction band and diamond is therefore a good insulator.
16.6 SUPERCONDUCTORS
The band theory of metals has been subjected to experimental tests many
times and is now the accepted theory of the behavior of conductors and in-
sulators. But it has to be modified when it comes to superconductivity. We
noted earlier that electrical resistance is due to collisions of the electrons
(whether treated as particles or waves) with impurities, imperfections, and
especially the lattice vibrations of the metal crystal. The lattice vibrations
of the solid will decrease as the temperature falls, because the entropy, which
represents disorder, also decreases. Therefore the resistance should also de-
crease. This is what is observed, and it is well explained by quantum band
theory. But at very low temperatures something strange happens: the re-
sistance of some materials suddenly drops to zero at a certain temperature.
As noted before, these materials become super-
conductors, meaning they can conduct currents with-
out resistance or loss of electric energy. The tem-
perature at which superconductivity occurs is called 
the critical temperature. It ranges from 0.015 K for tungsten to as high as
160 K for certain ceramics.
You can imagine some of the possible advantages of electrical wires hav-
ing zero resistance. It is like motion without friction. Among the many ac-
tual and potential applications are electric power transmission lines with-
out power loss, faster computers, and super-strong electromagnets. The
latter are used today in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) devices, high-
energy particle accelerators, and high-speed levitation trains (often called
"mag-lev" for magnetic levitation). Since the boiling temperature of liquid
nitrogen, which is plentiful and relatively easy to produce, is 77 K, super-
conductors with transition temperatures higher than 77 K can be kept suf-
16.6 SUPERCONDUCTORS
705
Good conductors usually cannot
become superconductors.
T
Tc
0
R
Super-
conducting
Normal
state
FIGURE 16.10
Transition of resistance (R) to super-
conductivity at the critical temperature Tc.

ficiently cold by keeping them immersed in liquid nitrogen. However, such
materials are brittle, and the superconductivity can be easily destroyed by
stray magnetic fields. Researchers today are working to overcome these
problems and to create superconducting materials with transition temper-
atures even closer to room temperature (20°C, or 293 K).
The development of superconducting devices was greatly stimulated af-
ter the acceptance of the basic theory of superconductivity proposed in 1957
by John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and Robert Schrieffer. The authors of the
BCS theory, as it is known, received the Nobel Prize for their work in 1972.
Their theory is highly technical but the basic idea is that the electron waves
in the superconducting state no longer act independently, as in Bloch's
model. Instead, they are paired together at the critical temperature so that
their wave functions act as one unit as they interact with the crystal lattice.
Moreover, all of the electron pairs move together in one collective motion,
so that if any single electron is scattered by the lattice it is pulled back into
the flow by its partner, and if any pair of electrons is somehow scattered
off track, it is pulled back into the collective flow by all of the other pairs.
Since there is no scattering or inelastic collisions, there is no resistance,
and the material becomes a superconductor.
706
16. SOLIDS MATTER
FIGURE 16.11
Japanese Mag-Lev train driven by superconducting electromagnets. 

Although the BCS theory accounted well in general for certain crys-
talline solids, further refinements are required today for other materials,
such as ceramics, and for the more detailed behavior of superconductors.
16.7 SEMICONDUCTORS
The most prevalent use today of semiconductors is forming them into tran-
sistors, the basic electronic building blocks of all "solid-state electronics"
and computer microchips. Semiconductors are the most important mate-
rials in the burgeoning revolution in computers and other electronic de-
vices today. Such applications also arose, beginning in the 1930s, from the
quantum mechanics of the band structure of solids.
The most common semiconductors are made of silicon or germanium,
elements 14 and 32 on the periodic table. It was known that they form very
stable crystal structures that should be insulators but are in fact weak con-
ductors of electricity. For both of these elements, it was found that the
numbers of electrons are just enough to fill up to the top of an energy band
in each case. This is why they should be insulators, and, in fact, at near ab-
solute zero, 0 K, they are insulators (not superconductors).
At very low temperature, the lattice vibrations in silicon and germanium
are minimal, and the electrons at the top of the valence band are not able
to obtain enough energy from the lattice vibrations to enable them to jump
the energy gap to the next band and become conducting. However, the gap
to the next band is very small, only 0.7 eV for germanium and only 1.1 eV
for silicon. Because these gaps are so small, at temperatures somewhat above
absolute zero the electrons can pick up enough energy from the vibrations
of the crystal lattice to jump the gap and land in the empty conduction
band. So at room temperature these metals, which by their structure should
be insulators, are actually weak conductors.
As failed insulators and poor conductors, silicon and germanium were
not much use in electronics until the 1950s when advances were made in
16.7 SEMICONDUCTORS
707
Ge
0.7 eV
Si
1.1 eV
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 16.12 Energy bands of germanium
(Ge) and silicon (Si).

the controlled introduction of certain impurities into the lattice structure
(see Section 16.8 below). But the real use of these two plentiful metals took
off during the 1980s with the introduction of mass-production methods for
super-thin, microscopically structured layers of silicon and (to a lesser ex-
tent) germanium crystals, which, when properly arranged (as also discussed
below) can act as transistors. Today, wafer-thin layers of silicon, when made
into micro-transistors through the introduction of impurities and broken
up into "chips," are the basis of the trillion-dollar-per-year electronics and
computer industries, and there is as yet no end in sight to the revolution
they have unleashed. And it all depends on the narrow energy gaps in these
crystals.
Since germanium and silicon are so sensitive to impurities, their large-
scale use as semiconductors did not occur until methods were developed
for producing ultra-pure graphite for nuclear reactors and ultra-pure ger-
manium for electronic circuits during World War II. Pure germanium was
also used at first in photoelectric cells. A photon from the outside can strike
an electron in the valence band of germanium (and later silicon), provid-
ing the electron with enough energy to reach the conduction band in a type
of internal photoelectric effect. For this to occur, the energy of the pho-
ton must be at least 0.7 eV for germanium and 1.1 eV for silicon. From
the relationship for the energy of a photon, E  hf, these energies corre-
spond to photons possessing frequencies in the infrared range of electro-
magnetic waves. Any waves (or photons) with frequencies in the infrared
or higher range, which includes visible light, will cause electrons to jump
into the conduction band and form a current. This is one reason these crys-
tals are known as semiconductors, since they are good conductors only when
the band gap can be overcome.
This type of light-induced conductivity can be used in a photoelectric cell,
or photocell for short—a cell that produces electricity when light shines on
it. You can imagine some of the many possible applications of a photocell.
It can be used, for instance, for motion detectors. A light beam shining on
a photocell in a circuit will generate a steady current. If somebody walks
through the beam, this will interrupt the current, which could either set
off an alarm or open an automatic door for the person to exit or enter. Au-
tomatic controls on night lights use the same principle. Since photocells
708
16. SOLIDS MATTER
Gap
Photon
Filled
-
-
+
FIGURE 16.13
The photoelectric effect of an
electron in a semiconductor jumping into the con-
duction band with a potential difference across the
material.

are sensitive even to infrared rays, as long as there is sufficient daylight the
cell will produce a current. When the sun goes down, the current stops,
which signals a circuit to switch on the lights.
16.8
INTRODUCING IMPURITIES
The most extensive use of semiconductors, such as silicon or germanium,
including their use as transistors, arises from their behavior when, after be-
ing sufficiently purified of atoms other than the basic element (e.g., silicon
or germanium), very small amounts of special impurities are carefully in-
troduced. While the methods for first purifying then adding small amounts
of impurities to germanium became available after World War II, research
on the purification and controlled introduction of impurities for silicon did
not succeed until the late 1950s. Since silicon is more abundant than ger-
manium and other semiconductors, it soon replaced germanium as the pre-
ferred semiconductor.
Germanium (element 32) and silicon (element 14) each have four va-
lence electrons, which fill up the valence band when these metals form a
crystal. Element 33, arsenic, has five valence electrons, as does element 15,
phosphorus. If a very small amount of arsenic is added to germanium as
the germanium crystal is formed, the arsenic atoms will substitute for a ger-
manium atom in the lattice. The same happens when a small amount of
phosphorus is added to silicon. The small amounts are carefully controlled
in the production process and are only about 0.0001% of the total atoms.
This process is calling doping, and the impurities are called dopants.
When the corresponding dopant is introduced into the germanium or
silicon lattice, four of its valence electrons are bonded to the other atoms
in the lattice, leaving the fifth valence electron without a bond. These ex-
tra valence electrons from the dopants are so lightly attached to their atoms
that they easily absorb vibration energy and jump into the conduction band
16.8 INTRODUCING IMPURITIES
709
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Negative
charge cloud
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
P+
FIGURE 16.14
Two-dimensional repre-
sentation of a silicon lattice in which a
phosphorus atom substitutes a regular lat-
tice atom, and thus introduces a negative
charge cloud about the phosphorus atom.
Each electron pair between two silicon
atoms constitutes a covalent bond.

of the semiconductor. At room temperature they are all in the conduction
band, which means that the doped semiconductor now acts like a full con-
ductor. Since the negative electrons donated by the impurities enable the
material to conduct, these types of semiconductors are called n-type semi-
conductors.
A similar situation occurs when the semiconductors are doped with im-
purities one space lower on the periodic table, that is when silicon (14) is
doped with element 13, aluminum, and germanium (32) is doped with el-
ement 31, gallium. The dopants have only three valence electrons. So, when
they are bound into the silicon or germanium lattice, they leave a space in
the valence band indicating that they are able to accept an electron from a
neighboring silicon or germanium atom. This space is called a hole. The
hole behaves similarly to an air bubble in a glass of soft drink or beer. When
an external electric field is turned on, electrons from the neighboring atoms,
which normally cannot move anywhere, can now move over one atom in
filling up the hole. But then this leaves a hole in the neighboring atom,
which can be filled up by its neighbor, and so on. Similarly, the upward
motion of the air bubble in a glass of beer actually involves the downward
flow of beer into the space occupied by the bubble, which appears to the
eye to be moving upward. In the semiconductor, if the field moves the elec-
trons to the left in the diagram, the hole appears to migrate to the right.
By moving to the right, it is behaving like a positive charge, even though
it is just a space. Nevertheless, because of the motion of negative charge to
the left, the physical effect is the same as if positive charges were flowing
to the right in the valence band, below the conduction band, where previ-
ously no charges could flow at all. Once again, the very careful introduc-
tion of small amounts of impurities has turned the semiconductor into a
full conductor. Since the conducting charges appear to be positive, this is
known as a p-type semiconductor.
These doped semiconductors could be used like any other conductor,
but that is hardly worthwhile, since we can produce full conductors much
more easily and cheaply, for example, copper wires. Instead, it was recog-
nized during and after WWII that the really useful applications of these
types of semiconductors is when they are placed physically next to each
other inside electronic devices.
16.9 SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
Let's take a p-type semiconductor with a very clean surface and place it
right next to the clean surface of a n-type semiconductor. This type of de-
vice is called an n-p junction diode, or simply a diode. What happens? Scien-
710
16. SOLIDS MATTER

tists realized that the electrons in the conduction band of the n-type semi-
conductor are able to move across the boundary between the two semi-
conductors, and fall into the holes in the lower energy valence band of the
p-type semiconductor. The electrons and holes begin to disappear. But as
the electrons disappear in the n-type, the positive charges of the impuri-
ties are no longer balanced by the negative conducting electrons, so the n-
type becomes positively charged. The opposite happens in the p-type semi-
conductor. As the holes disappear, the impurities are left holding an extra
electron, which causes the p-side to become negatively charged. The re-
sult of all this is that after a very short time a net electric field is set up be-
tween the n-type and p-type semiconductors which stops the process of
mutual destruction by keeping the electrons on the n-type side separated
from the holes on the p-type side, with a "depletion layer" in the middle.
Now, if a potential difference, such as one caused by a small battery, is
placed across the device from the p-type side to the n-type side, the equi-
librium may or may not be disturbed, depending upon how the potential
is placed. If the positive wire is placed on the n-type material and the neg-
16.9 SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
711
Barrier
region
(a) No bias
(b) Reverse bias
(c) Forward bias
p
n
p
I
Essentially no current flows
n
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
−
−
+ + +
+
−
+
−
−
−
+ +
−
−
−
+ + +
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
p
I
Current flows
n
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
−
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
FIGURE 16.15
An n-p diode with (a) no
bias; (b) reverse bias; and (c) forward bias.

ative wire on the p-type material, as in Figure 16.15(b) the separation of
the electrons and holes is reinforced. So no current will flow. But, if the
wires are reversed, so that the positive wire is placed on the p-type mate-
rial and the negative wire on the n-type side, the negative electrons on the
n-type side will be pushed toward the boundary, and the same for the pos-
itive holes on the p-type side. If the external potential is greater than the
internal potential of these two, a current will flow in the device.
The current will be enhanced if now a photon arrives from the outside
and pushes an electron from the n-type material into the conduction band.
The n-p diode can then be used as an even more powerful photocell than
a simple semiconductor alone. Perhaps the most common use of this type
of photocell is in the generation of electricity from solar energy. This can
be done for small-scale devices, such as pocket-
calculators, or for larger scale energy needs, such as
the energy for an entire building. Such photocells
are often known as photovoltaic cells. The Interna-
tional Space Station and other satellites near the
earth's orbit depend for their energy needs upon
huge "wings" of photovoltaic cells, unfurled to catch the radiation from the
sun. Research continues on how to make even greater use of photocon-
ductivity from the sun's rays to produce electrical energy for our needs on
a large scale.
712
16. SOLIDS MATTER
Deep-space satellites use energy
from isotope decay, since they
are too far from the sun for 
solar panels to be of much use.
FIGURE 16.16
Artist's conception of
International Space Station with its
"wings" of photovoltaic cells. 

A photocell working in reverse is also useful. If a conduction electron in
an n-p diode happens to fall into a hole, it will emit the excess energy as a
photon, much as an electron would do in an atom as it jumps to a lower
quantum state. If the diode is designed to emit light in the visible range
for display purposes, it is called a light-emitting diode, or LED for short.
These LED lights, which are usually red, green, or orange, can be found
on most electronic devices, usually to indicate that the device is on or that
the circuit is functioning. They can be also used in large-scale devices, such
as computer monitors, where they consume less energy and exhibit less dis-
tortion than do traditional CRT monitors.
One of the biggest uses of n-p diodes is in circuits where we want the
current to flow in one direction only, but not in the opposite direction.
This is used, for instance, in logic circuits for computers, in which an an-
swer of "true" or "false," or "yes" or "no," or 0 or 1 can be decided by
whether or not the current is allowed to flow through the device. A device
that allows a current to flow in one direction only can also be used to con-
vert an alternating current (AC), for instance the current from a wall socket,
into direct current (DC) for use in small electronics devices. Commercial
electric current in the United States alternates in a wave-like pattern at a
rate or frequency of 60 cycles per second (60 Hz). This is shown in Fig-
ure 16.17a. If we hook up a closed circuit that includes the AC wall socket,
a device for measuring the current (an ammeter), and an n-p semiconduc-
tor, the current in the wire will go in only one direction, which occurs only
when the voltage is positive on the p-type side and negative on the n-type
side. This conversion of AC to DC current is called rectification, and de-
vices that rectify are naturally called rectifiers. These are useful for devices
that accept only DC current.
You can see from Figure 16.17b that the voltage produced by the n-p
junction diode is positive only, but it is constantly changing over each hump
16.9 SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
713
Alternating current
Time
+V
0
−V
Rectified current
Forward
Forward
Time
+V
0
−V
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 16.17
Graphs of AC and rectified
voltages resulting in AC and DC currents.

and hits zero for a long interval. These effects can be reduced by sending
the current through additional electronic devices, known as filters, that help
to smooth out the voltage to a constant value, producing a steady direct
current that can then be fed into a DC electronic device—an electronic
game, a calculator, a laptop computer, etc.
These properties of semiconductors become even more interesting
when we add a third semiconductor to our junction diode. This forms a
transistor.
16.10 TRANSISTORS
The properties of n-type and p-type semiconductors described above were
well known by the end of World War II, during which considerable re-
search was devoted to electronics and the invention of radar. In 1947 three
researchers at Bell Laboratories in New Jersey took the idea of the n-p
junction diode a step further. William Shockley, Walter Brattain, and John
Bardeen (who, alone of the three, later went on to work on the theory of
superconductivity), placed two germanium diodes back to back—an n-p
diode next to a p-n diode, each sharing the p-type semiconductor. They
found that the device could be made to contact electricity or to resist, that
is, to block, the flow of electricity, depending upon the charge applied to
the middle layer of p-type semiconductor. Such a device is therefore called
a transistor, since it transmits or resists current depending upon the charge
provided to the middle layer. The type of transistor just described is called
a n-p-n bipolar transistor. A p-n-p bipolar transistor is also viable. (There is
also a different type of transistor construction, known as the "field effect
transistor," which works on the same general principle.)
By the early 1960s, as silicon-based transistors had become smaller, more
reliable, and cheaper to make, they began replacing the bulkier and more
expensive vacuum tubes previously used for such purposes as amplifying
voltages, for instance in stereo sound systems, TVs, and radios, and as
switching and logic devices in computers. Shockley, Bardeen, and Brattain
received the Nobel Prize in 1956 for an invention that would soon launch
the revolution in computer electronics—the transistor. Shockley, based at
Stanford University, went on to lay the foundations for the development
of Silicon Valley industries in the vicinity of the university. Many of the
companies there, including Intel, were founded by people who had origi-
nally worked with Shockley.
The revolution in computer electronics was hastened when the need for
miniaturized electronic components for space-age missiles helped lead to
714
16. SOLIDS MATTER

the development of the integrated circuit. In 1958 Jack Kilby of Texas In-
struments developed the idea of integrating transistors and related circuitry
on a single silicon chip. A year later, Robert Noyce and Jean Noerni of
Fairchild Semiconductor Corporation put the idea into practice by devel-
oping the method for integrating the separate elements onto the chip. In
1970 reduction in the size of integrated circuits was introduced with the
first microprocessor, and in 1971 the newly formed Intel Corporation in-
troduced the first integrated microprocessor circuit. Continued advances
in microprocessor design and manufacturing techniques enabled the mass
production of microprocessors for personal computers, cell phones, auto-
mobiles, industrial robots, and even toasters and "talking" dolls. By the
early 2000s Intel and its competitors could place as many as 42 million mi-
croscopic transistors on a single silicon chip, two centimeters square.
Figure 16.19(a) shows a schematic diagram of an n-p-n bipolar transis-
tor with a voltage placed across it. Figure 16.19(b) shows how such a de-
vice is actually constructed by "chip makers" such as Intel and Advanced
Micro Devices. A thin layer of n-type silicon is placed over a thin "chip"
(crystal) of very lightly doped p-type silicon. The p-type silicon, which is
sandwiched between the n-type pieces, is called the "base." Being very thin
and only lightly doped, most of its electrons, which will move through it
from left to right, will not be captured by the holes, yet they will still pro-
vide an internal field to prevent any flow when there is no external field.
The entire chip must also be very thin in order to allow the electronic cir-
16.10 TRANSISTORS
715
FIGURE 16.18
Close-up of a portion of a semiconductor chip. 

cuitry to function as rapidly as possible. Using a photographic emulsion, a
microscopic circuit pattern is placed on the surface layer of the n-type sil-
icon such that the n-type surface layer is stripped away at certain places
when an acid solution is applied to the surface. This exposes the p-type sil-
icon underneath, so that the electrical connections can be made to form
the n-p-n transistor.
What does the transistor actually do, and how does it do it? Think of Figure
16.19(a) as representing two n-p diodes back to back. Remember that if a
negative or zero charged wire is placed on the p-type silicon and a positive
charged wire is placed on the n-type side, no charge will flow. However, if
a positive wire is placed on the base (p-type) and a negative wire on the left
n-type silicon, charges will flow from the n-type silicon into the base. If the
base is very thin and only lightly doped, the charges will make it through
the base into the n-type silicon on the right. Here the situation is reversed.
The p-type stays positive, but an even higher voltage positive wire is at-
tached to the end of the right-hand n-type silicon. The purpose of this is
to keep the electrons moving from left to right. In addition to the conduc-
tion electrons that are already in the right-hand n-type silicon, new elec-
trons are arriving from the n-type and p-type silicon on the left. The amount
of flow can be controlled by the positive voltage at the base. The net effect
is to amplify (increase) the current from left to right.
716
16. SOLIDS MATTER
(b)
n
p
n
(a)
p
B
E
n
C
Output
Input
n
+
+
−
+
−
−
−
−
FIGURE 16.19
Schematic representation of an n-p-n bipolar transistor (see text).
The dark areas in (b) are the contact pads.

16.11 SOME APPLICATIONS OF TRANSISTORS
Amplifying Voltage
If we place a large resistor in a circuit containing a transistor, as in Figure
16.19(a), we can amplify the incoming voltage, since according to Ohm's
law voltage is equal to current times resistance. So a current crossing a small
resistance corresponds to a small voltage. But if the same current is made
to cross a much larger resistance, it will yield a much larger voltage, that is,
the small input voltage will be amplified to yield a large output voltage.
For example, the amplified voltage can correspond to a portion of a dig-
ital sound wave, in which the analog wave has been approximated by a se-
ries of single voltages. This small portion of the wave (one bit) can be rep-
resented by a tiny voltage received at the transistor base from a photocell
that is stimulated by a laser beam that picked up the signal from a music
compact disc (CD). The amplified voltage from the transistor can then be
sent to a speaker set, which turns the signal into a vibration that is emit-
ted by the speakers as a pressure wave that your ears detect and your brain
interprets as—let's say—the beautiful strains of Beethoven's Symphonie 
Pastorale!
DRAM
As a logic device, a transistor can act like a diode in allowing current to
pass or in preventing current flow, depending upon the voltage at the base.
By combining p-n-p and n-p-n transistors together, along with diodes, var-
ious logic systems and "gates" can be created. One of the most useful 
16.11 SOME APPLICATIONS OF TRANSISTORS
717
Word line
Capacitor with
charge
+
+
Base
Bit line
Transistor
Ground


FIGURE 16.20
Schematic represen-
tation of a DRAM cell.

applications of this is in the creation of "dynamic random access memory"
(DRAM) in computers, devices that store data that can be accessed at will
in random order. As is well known, information is stored digitally in com-
puters, that is, it is stored in the form of strings of binary numbers made
up of just 1s and 0s. Each binary number (whether it is 1 or 0) is called a
"bit." (Eight bits make a "byte.") For instance, the binary number 10101010,
which has eight bits (making one byte), is equivalent in the decimal system
to the number 170. If you happen to type the number 170 onto a spread
sheet and save it, the computer will first convert the decimal number 170
to the binary number 10101010. It will then assign each of the eight bits
to a single cell within dynamic random access memory. Each bit will cor-
respond to the charge on a charge device known as a capacitor, which, in
principle, is just two plates held next to each other. If the bit is 1, the ca-
pacitor will receive a small charge. If the number is 0, it receives no charge.
One of these cells is shown in Figure 16.20 with the number 1 on it (plus
charge on the capacitor).
Now you ask the computer to retrieve the number 170 from memory.
Here's what happens. Your request is sent to the "word line" as a positive
voltage, which is then applied to the base of the transistor in each circuit
on that line. Since the base is now positive, the charge on the capacitor can
flow through the transistor and up through the "bit line" to the processor
which detects the current and identifies the number in that cell as a 1. Of
course, if there is no charge stored in the capacitor to begin with, there
will be no current on the bit line, and that bit will be identified as 0. 
Figure 16.21 shows what the cells for all eight bits would look like for the
decimal number 170. This diagram represents only one byte of memory.
Many personal computers today now come with hundreds of "megabytes"
(MB), or even gigabytes of memory, miniaturized on microprocessor mem-
ory modules. For example, 128 million bytes of memory, or 8  128  106
bits, are 1024  106, or about one billion cells like Figure 16.21! It is aston-
718
16. SOLIDS MATTER
Word line
+
1
0
+
1
0
+
1
0
+
1
0




FIGURE 16.21
One byte of DRAM showing the decimal number 170 as the binary number 10101010.
The 1 is indicated by the charge on the capacitor. 0 is indicated by no charge on the capacitor.

ishing how far this technology has come in only a few decades since the
invention of the transistor in 1947. Where will we be in another 50, or
even another 10 years?
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
amorphous solids
diode
phase
band theory
dopant
photocell
bit
doping
photovoltaic cell
byte
hole
quasi-crystalline solids
classical free-electron 
insulator
rectifier
model
latent heat of fusion
semiconductor
composite solids
LED
superconductor
conduction band
n-type semiconductor
transistor
critical temperature
p-type semiconductor
valence band
crystalline solids
FURTHER READING
I. Amato, Stuff: the Materials the World is Made Of (New York: Avon, 1997).
P. Ball, Made to Measure: New Materials for the 21st Century (Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press, 1997).
M. Campbell-Kelly and W. Aspray, Computer: A History of the Information Machine.
Sloan Technology Series (New York: Basic Books, 1997).
G. Holton, H. Chang, and E. Jurkowitz, How a Scientific Discovery Is Made: A
Case History [High-Temperature Superconductivity], American Scientist, 84
(1996), 364-375.
R.E. Hummel, Understanding Materials Science: History, Properties, Applications
(New York: Springer-Verlag, 1998).
M. Riordan and L. Hoddeson, Crystal Fire: The Birth of the Information Age (New
York: Norton, 1997).
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
16.1 The Success of Quantum Mechanics
1.
Describe some of the successes of quantum mechanics.
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
719

16.2 Forming a Solid
1.
What happens to the temperature of a material at a phase transition, and why?
2.
A container of cold water is placed in a refrigerator. The refrigerator is con-
stantly running but the reading on a thermometer in the water remains un-
changed. What do you conclude is happening to the water?
3.
What exactly happens when a liquid freezes into a solid?
4.
Why would the lowest entropy state for a solid involve the largest number of
possible bonds?
5.
What is the most prominent characteristic of a crystal structure?
6.
Describe the other three main types of solid bonding.
16.3 Quantum Solids
1.
What did Einstein first show about the charges in solids?
2.
Describe Drude's oscillator model of solids.
3.
In what ways did Einstein's model go beyond Drude's?
4.
What did Einstein predict in 1907 from his model?
5.
Was his prediction confirmed, and why was it so significant?
16.4 Conducting Electrons
1.
Using Ohm's law, describe how insulators and conductors differ from each
other.
2.
Describe the classical free-electron model of a solid.
3.
How did the classical model account for conductivity and Ohm's law?
4.
Evaluate the classical model as a theory.
16.5 Banding Together
1.
How did Sommerfeld modify the classical free-electron model of solids?
2.
What assumptions did Bloch make in constructing a quantum model of metals?
3.
What did Bloch discover when he solved Schrödinger's equation?
4.
Describe the band theory of metals. How are the bands formed?
5.
What is the difference between an insulator and an conductor, according to
the band theory?
16.6 Superconductors
1.
What is superconductivity, and where does it occur?
2.
Scientists are now trying to obtain superconducting materials as close as pos-
sible to room temperature. What would be some of the advantages to this?
3.
Briefly, what is the BCS theory of superconductivity?
16.7 Semiconductors
1.
What is a semiconductor?
2.
According to the band theory, why are semiconductors "failed insulators and
poor conductors"?
3.
How might semiconductors be used as photodetectors?
720
16. SOLIDS MATTER

16.8 Introducing Impurities
1.
How is an n-type semiconductor formed?
2.
What is it that conducts in an n-type semiconductor?
3.
How is a p-type semiconductor formed?
4.
What is a "hole," and why is considered to be positive if it is really just an
empty orbit on an ion?
16.9 Semiconductor Devices
1.
What is an n-p junction diode?
2.
How does an n-p junction diode reach equilibrium?
3.
How does a photovoltaic cell work?
4.
How does a LED light work?
5.
How might a diode be used as a rectifier?
16.10 Transistors
1.
How is a transistor made from semiconductors?
2.
What is an integrated circuit?
3.
How are millions of microscopic transistors placed on a single silicon chip?
4.
What does a transistor actually do and how does it do it?
16.11 Some Applications of Transistors
1.
How might a transistor be used as an amplifier?
2.
How might a transistor be used to store information in a computer?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1. How do the free-electron theory and the band theory each account for the
existence of insulators?
2. Heat is added to a melting ice cube until the cube has completely melted. The
heat that goes into the cube is called the "latent heat of fusion," the word 
latent meaning "hidden." Where is the heat hidden?
3. Why is it that the temperature of a melting ice cube and its melted water stay
at 0°C until all of the ice has melted?
4. Why can't some materials remain in the liquid state all the way down to 
absolute zero?
5. Why is it that some elements, such as mercury, are liquid at room temperature?
6. Whenever you plug an appliance into a wall socket the current flows instantly.
Should it not take some time for the electrons to begin to flow down the wire?
7. Why did Bloch decide to view the electrons as waves rather than as particles?
8. According to the band theory, how do an insulator, a conductor, and a semi-
conductor differ from each other?
9. What are some of the applications of semiconductors?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
721

10. Why do impurities have to be added to semiconductors to make them into
conductors?
Quantitative
1.
Translate the binary number 100 into a decimal number.
2.
Translate the decimal number 100 into the binary system. 
3.
What would a memory circuit look like that is storing the decimal number 100
in binary form?
722
16. SOLIDS MATTER

-
+
17.1
Questions about the Nucleus
17.2
Becquerel's Discovery
17.3
The Curies Discover Other Radioactive Elements
17.4
Identifying the Rays
17.5
The Charge and Mass of the Rays
17.6
Rutherford's "Mousetrap"
17.7
Radioactive Transformations
17.8
Radioactive Decay Series
17.9
Decay Rate and Half-Life
17.10 The Concept of Isotopes
17.11 Transformation Rules
17.12 Summary of Notation for Nuclides and Nuclear Reactions
17.13 Some Useful Applications of Radioactivity
17.1 QUESTIONS ABOUT THE NUCLEUS
We saw in Chapter 14 that studies of the atom indicated that the atom con-
sists of a very small, positively charged nucleus surrounded by negatively
charged electrons. Experiments on the scattering of  particles revealed
that the nucleus has dimensions of the order of 1014 m. Since the diam-
eter of an atom is of the order of 1010 m, the nucleus takes up only a
minute fraction of the volume of an atom. The nucleus, however, contains
nearly all of the mass of the atom, as was also shown by the scattering 
experiments.
The existence of the atomic nucleus (named by analogy with the nucleus
of a living cell) and its properties raised many questions similar to those
raised about the atom. Is the nucleus itself made up of still smaller units?
If so, what are these units, and how are they arranged in the nucleus? What
723
Probing the
Nucleus
C
H
A
P
T
E
R17
17

methods can be used to get answers to these questions? What experimen-
tal evidence can be used as a guide?
The study of the properties and structure of atoms needed new physi-
cal methods. The methods that could be used to study the properties of
bodies of ordinary size, that is, those with dimensions of the order of cen-
timeters or meters, could not yield information about the structure of
atoms. It is reasonable to expect that it is still more difficult to get infor-
mation about what goes on inside the nucleus, which is such a small part
of the atom. New kinds of experimental data must be obtained. New the-
ories must be devised to help correlate and explain the data. In these re-
spects, the study of the nucleus is still another step on the long road from
the very large to the very small, along which we have been traveling in this
course, following the historical development of physical science.
17.2 BECQUEREL'S DISCOVERY
One of the first and most important clues to an understanding of the nu-
cleus occurred with the discovery of the phenomenon later known as radio-
activity in early 1896 by the French physicist Henri Becquerel. It was an-
724
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS
FIGURE 
17.1
Henri 
Becquerel
(1852-1908) received the 1903 No-
bel Prize in physics together with
Pierre and Marie Curie (for the dis-
covery of natural radioactivity). 

other of those "accidents" that illustrate how the trained and prepared mind
is able to respond to an unexpected observation.
Only 2 months before, in November 1895, Röntgen had discovered 
X rays. In doing so, he had unwittingly set the stage for the discovery of
radioactivity. Röntgen had found that X rays came from the glowing spot
on a glass tube where a beam of cathode rays (high-speed electrons) was
hitting (see Section 13.7). When the cathode-ray beam was turned off, the
spot of light on the face of the glass tube disappeared; the X rays coming
from that spot also stopped.
The emission of light by the glass tube when it is excited by the 
cathode-ray beam is an example of the phenomenon called fluorescence,
which was well known before Röntgen's work. A considerable amount of
research had been done on fluorescence during the latter part of the nine-
teenth century. A substance is said to be fluorescent if it immediately emits
visible light when struck by:
(1)
visible light of shorter wavelength;
(2)
invisible radiations, such as ultraviolet light; or
(3)
the beam of electrons that make up cathode rays.
Fluorescence stops when the exciting light is turned off. (The term phos-
phorescence is generally applied to a related phenomenon, the emission of
visible light that continues after the exciting light is turned off.)
Röntgen's observation that the X rays came from the spot that also
showed fluorescence raised his suspicion that there was a close connection
between X rays and fluorescence. Becquerel was fortunate in having the
necessary materials and training to study this problem. In addition, he was
the son and grandson of physicists who had made important contributions
to the field of fluorescence and phosphorescence. In his Paris laboratory,
Becquerel had devised an instrument for examining materials in complete
darkness a small fraction of a second after they had been exposed to a bril-
liant light. The question occurred to Becquerel: When bodies are made to
fluoresce (or phosphoresce) in the visible region with sufficient intensity,
do they also emit X rays in addition to the light rays? He tested a number
of substances by exposing them to sunlight; his method of checking whether
they also emitted invisible X rays followed Röntgen's idea: Is a well-wrapped
photographic plate exposed when near the source of such invisible rays?
One of the samples Becquerel used happened to be a salt of the metal ura-
nium, a sample of potassium-uranyl sulfate. In his words:
I wrapped a . . . photographic plate . . . with two sheets of thick
black paper, so thick that the plate did not become clouded by ex-
17.2 BECQUEREL'S DISCOVERY
725

posure to the sun for a whole day. I placed on the paper a crust of
the phosphorescent substance, and exposed the whole thing to the
sun for several hours. When I developed the photographic plate I
saw the silhouette of the phosphorescent substance in black on the
negative. If I placed between the phosphorescent substance and the
paper a coin or a metallic screen pierced with an open-work de-
sign, the image of these objects appeared on the negative. The same
experiment can be tried with a thin sheet of glass placed between
the phosphorescent substance and the paper, which excludes the
possibility of a chemical action resulting from vapors which might
emanate from the substance when heated by the sun's rays.
We may therefore conclude from these experiments that the
phosphorescent substance in question emits radiations which pen-
etrate paper that is opaque to light. . . . 
In his published paper, Becquerel was careful to conclude from his ex-
periment only that "penetrating radiations" were emitted from the phos-
phorescent substance. He did not write that the substance emitted X rays
while it phosphoresced, because he had not fully verified that the radia-
tions were X rays—though the radiations were transmitted through the
black paper, just as X rays are—or that they were actually related to the
phosphorescence (though he strongly suspected that they were). Before 
he could investigate these possibilities, he made this discovery:
. . . among the preceding experiments some had been made ready
on Wednesday the 26th and Thursday the 27th of February [1896];
and as on those days the sun only showed itself intermittently, I
kept my arrangements all prepared and put back the holders in the
dark in the drawer of the case, and left in place the crusts of ura-
nium salt. Since the sun did not show itself again for several days,
I developed the photographic plates on the 1st of March, expect-
ing to find the images very feeble. On the contrary, the silhouettes
appeared with great intensity. I at once thought that the action
might be able to go on in the dark. . . . 
Further experiments verified this surprising thought. Even when the ura-
nium compound was not being excited by sunlight to phosphoresce, it 
continually emitted something that could penetrate black paper and other
substances opaque to light, such as thin plates of aluminum or copper. Bec-
querel found that all the compounds of uranium, many of which were not
phosphorescent at all, and metallic uranium itself had the same property.
The amount of action on the photographic plate did not depend on what
726
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

the particular compound of uranium was, but only on the amount of ura-
nium present in it!
Becquerel also found that the persistent radiation from a sample of ura-
nium did not appear to change, either in intensity or character, with the
passing of time during days, weeks, and months. Nor was a change in the
activity observed when the sample of uranium or of one of its compounds
was exposed to ultraviolet light, infrared light, or X rays. Moreover, the in-
tensity of the uranium radiation (or "Becquerel rays," as they came to be
known) was the same at room temperature (20°C), at 200°C, and at the
temperature at which oxygen and nitrogen (air) liquefy, about 190°C.
Thus, these rays seemed unaffected by physical (and chemical) changes of the source.
Becquerel also showed that the radiations from uranium produced ion-
ization in the surrounding air. They could discharge a positively or nega-
tively charged body such as an electroscope. So the uranium rays resemble
X rays in two important respects: their penetrating power and their ion-
ization power. Both kinds of rays were invisible to the unaided eye, but
both affected photographic plates. Still, X rays and Becquerel rays differed
17.2 BECQUEREL'S DISCOVERY
727
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 17.2
The ionizing effect of the Becquerel
rays could be demonstrated with a charged electro-
scope. When a sample of uranium is held near the
electroscope leaves, the rays cause gas molecules in
the air to ionize—that is, to become electrically
charged. Ions, with a charge opposite to that on the
leaves, drift to the leaves and neutralize their charge.
The time taken for the leaves to fall is a measure of
the rate of ionization of the gas and, therefore, of
the activity of the uranium source.

in at least two important ways: Compared to X rays, these newly discov-
ered rays from uranium needed no cathode-ray tube or even light to start
them, and they could not be turned off. Becquerel showed that even after
a period of 3 years a given piece of uranium and its compounds continued
to emit radiations spontaneously.
The years 1896 and 1897 were years of great excitement in physics, to
a large extent because of the interest in the recently discovered X rays and
in cathode rays (electrons). It quickly became evident that X rays could be
used in medicine, and they were the subject of much research. In compar-
ison, the properties of the Becquerel rays were less spectacular, and little
work was done on them in the period from the end of May 1896 until the
end of 1897. In any case, it seemed that somehow Becquerel rays were spe-
cial cases of X-ray emission. Even Becquerel himself turned to other work.
But attention began to be attracted by the fact that the invisible rays from
the uranium and its compounds appeared spontaneously.
Two questions were asked. First, what was the source of the energy cre-
ating the uranium rays and making it possible for them to penetrate opaque
substances? Second, did any other of the 70 or more elements known then
have properties similar to those of uranium? The first question was not an-
swered for some time, although it was considered seriously. The second
question was answered early in 1898 by the Curies, who, by doing so,
opened a whole new field of research in physical science.
17.3 THE CURIES DISCOVER OTHER
RADIOACTIVE ELEMENTS
One of Becquerel's colleagues in Paris was the physicist Pierre Curie, 
who had recently married a Polish-born physicist, Marja Sklodowska, who
became Marie Curie. Marie Curie undertook a systematic study of the 
Becquerel rays and looked for other elements and minerals that might emit
them. Using a sensitive type of electrometer that her husband had recently
invented, she measured the small electric current produced when the rays
ionized the air. She assumed this current is proportional to the intensity of
the rays (and it actually is). With this new technique, Curie could give a
numerical value to the ionizing effect produced by the rays. These values
were reproducible within a few percent from one experiment to the next
with the same sample.
One of Marie Curie's first results was the discovery that the element tho-
rium (Th) and its compounds emitted radiations with properties similar to
those of the uranium rays. (The same finding was made independently in
Germany by Gerhardt C. Schmidt, at about the same time.) The fact that
728
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

thorium emits rays like those of uranium was of great importance; it showed
that the mysterious rays were not a property peculiar just to one element.
The discovery spurred the search for still other elements that might emit
similar rays. The fact that uranium and thorium were the elements with
the greatest known atomic masses indicated that the very heavy elements
might have special properties different from those of the lighter elements.
The evident importance of the problems raised by the discovery of the
uranium and thorium rays led Pierre Curie to lay aside his researches in
other fields of physics and to join his wife to work on these new problems.
They began a herculean task. First, they found that the intensity of the
emission from any thorium compound was directly proportional to the 
fraction by weight of the metallic element thorium present. (Recall that 
Becquerel had found a similar result for uranium compounds.) Moreover,
the amount of radiation was independent of the physical conditions or the
chemical combination of the active elements. These results led the Curies
to the conclusion that the emission of the rays depended only on the pres-
ence of atoms of either of the two elements—uranium or thorium. Atoms
of other elements that were present were simply inactive or absorbed some
of the radiation.
These ideas were especially important because they helped the Curies
interpret their later experiments. For example, in their studies of the radi-
ation from minerals they examined pitchblende, an ore containing about 80%
uranium oxide (U3O8). They found that the emission from pitchblende, as
measured by its effect in ionizing air, was about four or five times as great
as that to be expected from the amount of uranium in the ore. The other
elements known at the time to be associated with uranium in pitchblende,
such as bismuth and barium, had been shown to be not active, or as Marie
Curie now called it, not "radioactive." If emission of rays is an atomic phe-
nomenon, the unexpected activity of pitchblende could be explained only
by the presence of another, hitherto undiscovered, element in pitchblende,
an element more active than uranium itself.
To explore this hypothesis, the Curies applied chemical separation pro-
cesses to a large quantity of pitchblende to try to isolate this hypothetical
active substance. After each separation process, the products were tested,
the inactive part discarded, and the active part analyzed further. Finally, the
Curies obtained a highly active product that presumably consisted mainly
of the unknown element. In a note titled "On a New Radioactive Substance
Contained in Pitchblende," which they submitted to the French Academy
of Sciences in July of 1898, they reported:
By carrying on these different operations . . . finally we obtained 
a substance whose activity is about 400 times greater than that of
uranium. . . . 
17.3 THE CURIES DISCOVER OTHER RADIOACTIVE ELEMENTS
729

730
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS
MARIE AND PIERRE CURIE
Pierre Curie (1859-1906) studied at the
Sorbonne in Paris. In 1878, he became an
assistant teacher in the physical laboratory
there, and some years later, professor of
physics. He was well known for his re-
search on crystals and magnetism. Pierre
and Marie Sklodowska were married in
1895 (she was 28 years old). After their
marriage, Marie chose radioactivity for her
doctoral research. In 1898, Pierre joined
his wife in this work. Their collaboration
was so successful that in 1903 they were
awarded the Nobel Prize in physics, which
they shared with Becquerel. Pierre Curie
was run over and killed by a horse-drawn
vehicle in 1906. Marie Curie was ap-
pointed to a professorship at the Sorbonne,
the first woman there to have this post.
In 1911, Marie Curie was awarded the
Nobel Prize in chemistry for the discov-
ery of the two new elements, radium and
polonium. She was the first person to win
two Nobel Prizes in science. The rest of
her career was spent in the supervision of
the Paris Institute of Radium, a center for
research on radioactivity and the use of ra-
dium in the treatment of cancer. During
her visit to the U.S., a group of women
FIGURE 17.3
(a) Marie Curie. (b) Marie and Pierre Curie on a bicycling holiday. (Continued)
(a)
(b)

17.3 THE CURIES DISCOVER OTHER RADIOACTIVE ELEMENTS
731
We believe, therefore, that the substance which we removed from
pitchblende contains a metal which has not yet been known, simi-
lar to bismuth in its chemical properties. If the existence of this new
metal is confirmed, we propose to call it polonium, after the name
of the native country of one of use.
Six months after the discovery of polonium, the Curies chemically sep-
arated another substance from pitchblende. They found the emission from
it so intense as to indicate they had found yet another new element, even
more radioactive than polonium! This substance had an activity per unit
mass nine hundred times that of uranium and was chemically entirely dif-
ferent from uranium, thorium, or polonium. Spectroscopic analysis of this
substance revealed spectral lines characteristic of the inactive element bar-
ium, but also a line in the ultraviolet region that did not seem to belong
to any known element. The Curies reported their belief that the substance,
"although for the most part consisting of barium, contains in addition a
new element which produced radioactivity and, furthermore, is very near
presented her with the precious gifts of 
1 gram of radium.
Marie Curie died in 1934 of leukemia,
a form of cancer of the leukocyte-forming
cells of the body, probably caused by over-
exposure to the radiations from radio-
active substances during her research over
more than three decades.
FIGURE 17.3
(Continued) (c) Marie and Pierre Curie in their laboratory; (d) Marie and Pierre
Curie with their daughter, Irène, who later also received a Nobel Prize. 
(c)
(d)

barium in its chemical properties." For this new element, so extraordinarily
radioactive, they proposed the name radium.
The next step in making the evidence for the newly discovered elements
more convincing was to determine their properties, especially their atomic
masses. The Curies had made it clear that they had not yet isolated either
polonium or radium in pure metallic form, or even yet obtained a pure
sample of a compound of either element. From the substance containing
the strongly radioactive substance that they called radium, they had sepa-
rated a part consisting of barium chloride mixed with a presumably very
small quantity of radium chloride. Additional separations by chemical
means yielded an increasing proportion of radium chloride. The difficulty
of this task is indicated by the Curies' remark that radium "is very near bar-
ium in its chemical properties," for it is very difficult to separate elements
whose chemical properties are similar. Moreover, to obtain their highly ra-
dioactive substances in usable amounts, they had to start with a very large
amount of pitchblende.
With an initial 100-kg shipment of pitchblende (from which the ura-
nium salt had been removed to be used in the manufacture of glass) the
Curies went to work in an abandoned woodshed at the School of Physics
where Pierre Curie taught. Having failed to obtain financial support, the
Curies made their preparations without technical help in this "laboratory."
Marie Curie wrote later:
I came to treat as many as twenty kilograms of matter at a time,
which had the effect of filling the shed with great jars full of pre-
cipitates and liquids. It was killing work to carry the receivers, to
pour off the liquids and to stir, for hours at a stretch, the boiling
material in a smelting basin.
From the mixture of radium chloride and barium chloride they produced,
only the average atomic mass of the barium and radium could be computed.
At first an average value of 146 u was obtained, as compared to 137 u for
the atomic mass of barium. After many additional purifications that in-
creased the proportion of radium chloride, the average value for atomic
mass rose to 174 u. (The unit u is the standard unit used today for the
atomic mass, the hydrogen atom having an atomic mass of about 1 u.) Con-
tinuing the tedious purification process for 4 years, during which she treated
several tons of pitchblende residue, Marie Curie was
able to report, in July 1902, that she had isolated 
0.1 g of radium chloride, so pure that spectroscopic
examination showed no evidence of any remaining
barium. She calculated the atomic mass of radium
732
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS
The present yield of radium
from 1 ton of high-grade ura-
nium ore is about 0.2 g.

to be 225 u (the present-day value is 226.03 u). The activity of radium is
more than a million times that of the same mass of uranium.
17.4
IDENTIFYING THE RAYS
Once the extraordinary properties of radium became known, they excited
interest both inside and outside the scientific world, and the number of
people studying radioactivity increased rapidly. The main question that at-
tracted attention was: What are the mysterious radiations emitted by ra-
dioactive bodies?
In 1899, Ernest Rutherford, whose later development of the theory of
the nuclear atom was discussed in Chapter 14, started to seek answers to
this question. Rutherford found that a sample of uranium emits at least two
distinct kinds of rays: one that is very readily absorbed, which he called for
convenience  rays (alpha rays), and the other more penetrating, which he
called  rays (beta rays). In 1900, the French physicist P. Villard observed
that the emission from radium contained rays much more penetrating than
even the  rays; this type of emission was given the name  (gamma) rays.
The penetrating power of the three types of rays, as known at the time, is
compared in the table below, first published by Rutherford in 1903.
Thickness of Aluminum Required to Reduce the 
Radiation Intensity to One-half Its Initial Value
Radiation type
Thickness of aluminum

0.0005 cm

0.05 cm

8 cm
Thus, the "Becquerel rays" were more complex than had been thought
even before the nature of , , and  rays was ascertained. Of the three
kinds of rays, the  rays are the most strongly ionizing and the  rays the
least. The power of penetration is inversely proportional to the power of
ionization. This is to be expected; the penetrating power of the  rays from
uranium is low because they expend their energy very rapidly in causing in-
tense ionization. Alpha () rays can be stopped—that is, almost all are ab-
sorbed—by about 0.0005 cm of aluminum, by a sheet of ordinary writing
paper, or by a few centimeters of air. Beta () rays are completely stopped
only after traveling many meters in air, or 0.05 cm in aluminum. Gamma
() rays can pass through many centimeters of aluminum or lead, or through
a meter of concrete, before being almost completely absorbed. One conse-
17.4 IDENTIFYING THE RAYS
733

quence of these properties of the rays is that heavy and expensive shielding
is sometimes needed in the study or use of radiations in accelerator and nu-
clear reactors, to protect people from the harmful effects of the rays. The
rays ionize and, consequently, break down molecules in living cells, causing
radiation "burns," fatal injuries to cells, damage that can lead to the growth
of cancer cells, and dangerous mutations in the structure of the DNA mol-
ecules. In some cases, these "radiation shields" are as much as 3 m thick,
but they are effective, protecting workers at reactor stations and accelera-
tor research facilities.
17.5 THE CHARGE AND MASS OF THE RAYS
Another method used to study the rays emitted in radioactivity was to di-
rect them through a magnetic field to see if they were deflected or devi-
ated from their initial directions by the action of the field. This method
came to provide one of the most widely used tools for the study of atomic
and nuclear events. It is based on the now familiar fact that a force acts on
a charged particle when it moves across a magnetic field. As was discussed
in Section 10.11, this force always acts at right angles to the direction of
motion of the charged particle. The particle experiences a continual de-
flection and, if sent into a uniform field at right angles, it moves along the
arc of a circle.
This property had been used in the 1890s by J.J. Thomson in his stud-
ies of cathode rays. He showed that these rays consist of very small nega-
tively charged particles, or electrons (Chapter 13). Becquerel, the Curies,
and others found that the , , and  rays behaved differently from one
another in a magnetic field. The behavior of the rays is illustrated in Fig-
ure 17.4.
Suppose that some radioactive material, such as a sample of uranium, is
placed at the end of a narrow hole in a lead block and that a narrow beam
consisting of , , and  rays escapes from the opening. If the beam en-
ters a strong, uniform magnetic field (as in the last two drawings), the three
types of rays will go along paths separated from one another. The  rays
continue in a straight line without any deviation. The  rays will be de-
flected to one side, moving in circular arcs of differing radii. The  rays
will be deflected slightly to the other side, moving in a circular arc of large
radius; they are rapidly absorbed in the air.
The direction of the deflection of the  rays in such a magnetic field is
the same as that observed earlier in Thomson's studies of the properties of
cathode rays. It was concluded, therefore, that the  rays, like cathode rays,
734
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

17.5 THE CHARGE AND MASS OF THE RAYS
735
α, β, γ
α
α
β
β
γ
γ
β
α, γ
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
FIGURE 17.4
(a) Alpha, beta, and gamma
rays are separated from a sample of radio-
active material by their passage through a
magnetic field; (b) no magnetic field present;
(c) weak magnetic field; (d) stronger mag-
netic field; (e) very strong magnetic field.

consist of negatively charged particles. (The Curies confirmed the negative
charge on the  particles in 1900; they caused the beam of the particles to
enter an electroscope that became negatively charged.) Since the direction
of the deflection of the  rays was opposite that of the  rays, it was con-
cluded that the  rays consist of positively charged particles. Since the  rays
were not deflected at all, it was concluded that they are neutral, that is,
they have no electric charge. Electromagnetic radiation is neutral, as are
particles that carry equal amounts of positive and negative charge. No con-
clusion could be drawn from this type of experiment as to whether the 
rays are, or are not, particles.
The deflection of a charged particle in electric and magnetic fields de-
pends on both its charge and its mass. Therefore, the ratio of charge (q) to
mass (mq) for  particles can be calculated from measured deflections in
fields of known intensity. Becquerel, investigating  particles in 1900, used
a procedure that was essentially the same as that used by J.J. Thomson in
1897 to obtain a reliable value for the ratio of charge to mass for the par-
ticles in cathode rays. At that time, the fact that a consistent single value
of e/me had been found established quantitatively the existence of the elec-
tron (see Section 13.3). (Here e is the electron's charge, and me is its mass.)
By sending  rays through electric and magnetic fields, Becquerel was able
to calculate the speed of the  particles. He obtained a value of q/mq for 
particles which was close to that found by Thomson for the electron. This
permitted the deduction that the  particles are electrons. (However, they
should not be thought of as existing in the nucleus until emitted. Rather,
they are generated during the emission.)
The nature of the  radiation was more difficult to establish. It was nec-
essary to use a very strong magnetic field to produce measurable deflec-
tions of  rays. The value of q/mq found for  particles (4.8  107 C/kg)
was about 4000 times smaller than q/mq for  particles. The reason for the
small q/mq value could be a small value of q or a large value of m. Other
evidence available at the time indicated that magnitude of the charge q for
an  particle was not likely to be smaller than that for a  particle. It was
therefore concluded that mass m would have to be much larger for the 
particle than for the  particle.
The value of q/mq given above for  particles is just one-half that of q/mq
found earlier for a hydrogen ion. The value would be explained in a rea-
sonable way if the  particle were like a hydrogen molecule minus one elec-
tron (H2), or if it were a helium atom (whose mass was known to be about
four times that of a hydrogen atom) without its two electrons (He). Other
possibilities might have been entertained. In fact, however, the right iden-
tification turned out to be that of  particles with He. The  particle was
736
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

found to be the same as a helium nucleus and, therefore, has a mass of about
four atomic mass units. The clever experiment described in the following
section provided the final proof.
17.6 RUTHERFORD'S "MOUSETRAP"
The gas helium was first discovered to exist on the Sun through spectro-
scopic analysis of the Sun's radiation (Section 14.1). Later, it was discov-
ered that helium gas can be found on the Earth, imprisoned in radioactive
minerals. In addition, William Ramsey and Frederick Soddy, working in
the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge, had discovered, in 1903, that he-
lium is given off from a radioactive compound, radium bromide. This led
Rutherford, also in Cambridge, to advance the hypothesis that the  par-
ticle is a double ionized helium atom (He), that is, a helium atom mi-
nus its two electrons, or, as we would now say, the nucleus of a helium
atom. In a series of experiments conducted from 1906 to 1909, Rutherford
succeeded in proving the correctness of his hypothesis in several different
ways. The last and most convincing of these experiments was made in 1909,
with T.D. Royds, by constructing what James Jeans later called "a sort of
mousetrap for  particles."
The experiment used the radioactive element radon (Rn). Pierre Curie
and André Debierne had discovered radon in 1901. They had found that
a radioactive gas is given off from radium. A small amount of the gas col-
lected in this way was found to be a strong  emitter. They showed the gas
to be a new element, which they called "radium emanation," later called
"radon." Ramsey and Soddy then found that when radon is stored in a
closed vessel, helium gas always appears in the vessel also. Thus, helium is
given off not only by radium but also by radon.
Rutherford and Royds put a small amount of radon in a fine glass tube
with a wall only 0.01 mm thick. This wall was thin enough so that  par-
ticles could pass through it, but radon itself could not. The tube was sealed
into a thick-walled, outer glass tube that had an electric discharge section
at the top (Figure 17.5). They pumped the air out of the outer tube and
allowed the apparatus to stand for about a week. During this time, while 
particles from the radon passed through the thin walls of the inner tube, a
gas was found gradually to collect in the previously evacuated space. Then
they pumped mercury in at the bottom of the apparatus to compress the
very small quantity of gas and confine it in the discharge tube. When a po-
tential difference was applied to the electrodes of the discharge tube, an
17.6 RUTHERFORD'S "MOUSETRAP"
737

electric discharge was produced in the gas. They examined the resulting
light with a spectroscope, and they found that the spectral lines were char-
acteristic of the element helium. (In a separate control experiment, helium
gas itself was put in the inner, thin-walled tube and did not leak through
the wall of the inner tube.)
Now it was clear to Rutherford how to interpret his results. He could
safely conclude that the helium gas that collected in the outer glass tube
was formed from  particles that had passed into the outer tube and picked
up some electrons to form helium atoms. Rutherford's result implied con-
clusions more important than just the identity of  particles. Apparently,
an atom of an element (radon) can spontaneously emit a fragment (an 
 particle) that is the nucleus of another element (helium)! This was a star-
tling idea, but only the beginning of more startling things to come.
738
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS
Discharge tube
Thin walled
glass tube
to vacuum pump
& mercury supply
Mercury
FIGURE 17.5
Rutherford's "mousetrap" for identifying particles.
(a)
(b)
(c)

17.7 RADIOACTIVE TRANSFORMATIONS
The emission of  and  particles raised difficult questions with respect to
existing ideas of matter and its structure. The rapid development of chem-
istry in the nineteenth century had made the atomic-molecular theory of
matter highly convincing. According to this theory, a pure element con-
sists of identical atoms, which are indestructible and unchangeable. But if
a radioactive atom emits as substantial a fragment as an  particle, which
was shown to be an ionized helium atom, can the radioactive atom remain
unchanged? That did not seem plausible. Rather, it seemed that there must
be a transformation in which the radioactive atom is changed to an atom
of a different chemical element.
If an atom emits an  particle, a significant part of its mass—four atomic
mass units—will be carried away by the  particle. What about the atoms
that emit  particles? The  particle, which was shown to be an electron,
is far less massive than the  particle. However, its mass is not zero; so a
radioactive atom must also undergo some change when it emits a  parti-
cle. It was again difficult to escape the conclusion that radioactive atoms
are, in fact, subject to division into two parts of markedly unequal mass, a
conclusion contrary to the old, basic concept that the atom is indivisible.
Another fundamental question arose in connection with the energy car-
ried by the rays emitted by radioactive substances. As early as 1903, Ruther-
ford and Soddy, and Pierre Curie and a young coworker, A. Laborde, noted
that a sample of radium kept itself at a higher temperature than its sur-
roundings merely by absorbing some of the energy of the  particles emit-
ted by atoms inside the sample. Curie and Laborde found that 1 g of 
radium can produce about 0.1 kcal of heat per hour. A sample of radium
thus can continue to release energy year after year, and evidently for a very
long time.
The continuing release of such a quantity of heat could not be explained
by treating radioactivity as an ordinary chemical reaction. It was clear that
radioactivity did not involve chemical changes in the usual sense. Energy
was emitted by samples of pure elements; energy emission by compounds
containing radioactive elements did not depend on the type of molecule in
which the radioactive element was present. The origin of the production
of heat had to be sought in some deep changes within the atoms of radio-
active elements, rather than in chemical reactions among atoms.
Rutherford and Soddy proposed a bold theory of radioactive transfor-
mation to explain the nature of these changes. They suggested that when
a radioactive atom emits an  or a  particle, it really breaks into two
parts: the  or  particle that is emitted, and a heavy, leftover part that
17.7 RADIOACTIVE TRANSFORMATIONS
739

is physically and chemically different from the "parent" atom. There was
a good deal of evidence for the last part of the assumption. For example,
the formation of radon gas from radium was known, as mentioned ear-
lier. When the atomic mass of radon was determined, it turned out to be
smaller than that of radium by just four atomic mass units, the mass of
an  particle.
The idea of radioactive transformation can be represented by an "equa-
tion" similar to the kind used to represent chemical reactions. For exam-
ple, using the symbols Ra and Rn to represent atoms of radium and radon,
and He to represent an  particle after it has picked up two electrons to
form a helium atom, the transformation of radium into radon can be ex-
pressed as
Ra  Rn  He.
The process can be described as the transformation—also called a "disin-
tegration," "decay," or "transmutation"—of radium into radon, with the
emission of an  particle.
Many decay processes, in addition to the example just cited, had been
found and studied by the Curies, by Rutherford and his coworkers, and by
others, and these processes fitted easily into the kind of scheme proposed
by Rutherford and Soddy (who received Nobel Prizes in chemistry for their
work). For example, radon is radioactive also, emitting another  particle
and thereby decaying into an atom of an element that was called "radium
A" at the time. Radium A was later shown to be polonium (Po):
Rn  Po  He.
Polonium is also a radioactive solid. In fact, the original "parent" radium
atoms undergo a series or chain of transformations into generation after
generation of new, radioactive, so-called daughter elements, ending finally
with a daughter element that is nonradioactive or, in other words, stable.
17.8 RADIOACTIVE DECAY SERIES
The decay of radium and its daughters was found eventually to lead to a
stable end product that was identified by its chemical behavior as lead. The
chain beginning with radium has 10 members, some emitting  particles
and others emitting  particles. Some  rays are emitted during the decay
series, but  rays do not appear alone; the are emitted only together with
an  particle or a  particle.
740
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

Rutherford and Soddy suggested that, since radium is always found in
uranium ores, such as pitchblende, which the Curies had analyzed, radium
itself may be a member of a series starting with uranium as the ancestor of
all the members. Research showed that this is indeed the case. Each ura-
nium atom may in time give rise to successive daughter atoms, radium be-
ing the sixth generation and stable lead being the fifteenth.
The table shows all the members of the so-called uranium-radium series.
The meaning of some of the symbols will be discussed in later sections.
The number following the name of an element, as in uranium-238, indi-
cates the atomic mass in atomic mass units. Notice that there are heavier
and lighter varieties of the element, such as uranium-238 and uranium-235,
polonium-218, 214, and 210. (More will be said about these varieties in
Section 17.10.) Two other naturally occurring radioactive series have been
found; one starts with thorium-232 and the other with uranium-235.
Uranium-Radium Decay Series
Substance
Decay mode
Half-life
Uranium-238
, 
4.51  109 yr
Thorium-234
, 
24.1 days
Protactinium-234
, 
1.18 min
Uranium-234
, 
2.48  105 yr
Thorium-230
, 
8.0  104 yr
Radium-226
, 
1620 yr
Radon-222
, 
3.82 days
Polonium-218

3.05 min
Lead-214
, 
26.8 min
Bismuth-214
, , 
19.7 min
Polonium-214

1.64  104 s
Lead-210
, 
21.4 yr
Bismuth-210
, 
5.0 days
Polonium-210
, 
138.4 days
Lead-206
stable
stable
Each member of the series differs physically and chemically from its im-
mediate parent above or daughter below; it should therefore be possible to
separate the different members in any radioactive sample. This is by no
means impossible to do, but the separation problem
is made difficult by the fact that the different radio-
active species decay at different rates, some very
slowly, some rapidly, others at intermediate rates.
These rates and their meaning will be discussed in
the next section, but the fact that the rates differ
gives rise to important effects that can now be discussed.
17.8 RADIOACTIVE DECAY SERIES
741
Two other naturally occurring ra-
dioactive series have been found;
one starts with thorium-232 and
the other with uranium-235.

Growth of Daughter Elements
An interesting effect is provided by that portion of the uranium-radium se-
ries that starts with the substance called polonium-218. A pure sample of
polonium-218 may be collected by exposing a piece of ordinary material,
such as a thin foil of aluminum, to the gas radon. Some of the radon atoms
decay into polonium-218 atoms, which then stick to the surface of the foil.
The graph in Figure 17.6 shows what becomes of the polonium-218. Polo-
nium-218 (218Po) decays into lead-214 (214Pb), which decays into bismuth-
214 (214Bi), which decays into polonium-214 (214Po), then lead-210 (210Pb),
then bismuth-210 (210Bi), etc. If the original sample contains 1,000,000
atoms of 218Po when it is formed, after 20 min it will contain about 
10,000 218Po atoms, about 660,0000 214Pb atoms, about 240,000 214Bi
atoms, and about 90,000 210Pb atoms. The number of 214Po atoms is neg-
ligibly small because most of the 214Po changes into 210Pb in a small frac-
tion of a second.
A sample of pure, freshly separated radium (226Ra) would also change in
composition in a complicated way, but much more slowly. Eventually it
would consist of a mixture of some remaining radium-226, plus radon-222,
polonium-218, lead-214, and all the rest of the members of the chain down
to, and including, stable "radium G" (lead-206).
742
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS
Time (minutes)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
40
20
Number of nuclei (fraction of initial Po218)
60
80
100
120
140
218Po 
214Pb
214Bi
210Pb
FIGURE 17.6
Graph of decay of polonium-218 with build-up of its daughter
elements over time.

Similarly, a sample of pure uranium may contain, after a time, 14 other
elements of which 13 (all but the last, stable portion) contribute to the ra-
dioactive emission, each in its own way. In all such cases, a complicated
mixture of elements results. After starting as a pure  emitter, a sample
eventually emits many  particles,  particles, and  rays, apparently con-
tinuously and simultaneously.
It is evident that the separation of the different members of a radioactive
chain from one another would be difficult, especially if some members of
the chain decay rapidly. The determination of the chemical nature and the
radioactive properties of each member required great experimental inge-
nuity. One successful method depended on the skillful chemical purifica-
tion of a particular radioactive substance, as the Curies had done with ra-
dium and polonium. For example, suppose that a sample has been obtained
from which all the radioactive atoms except those of radium-226 have been
removed. The sample immediately starts to give off radon gas. The latter
can be drawn off and its properties examined before it becomes seriously
contaminated by the distintegration of many of its atoms into polonium-
218. If this is done, it is found that radon decays (through several trans-
formations) into lead much more quickly than radium decays into radon.
17.9 DECAY RATE AND HALF-LIFE
In the last section, we noted that of 1,000,000 218Po atoms present in a
freshly prepared sample of that radioactive substance, only about 10,000
would remain after 20 min, the rest having decayed into atoms of 214Pb
and its daughter products. It would take only 3 min following the prepa-
ration of the pure sample of 218Po for 50% of the atoms originally present
in the sample to have decayed. In the case of radium (226Ra), it would take
1620 years for half of the radium atoms in a freshly prepared sample of ra-
dium to be transformed into radon atoms.
These two examples illustrate the experimental fact that samples of ra-
dioactive elements show great difference in their rates of decay. These dif-
ferent rates are the result of averages of many individual, different decay
events going on at random in a sample. Looking at one atom of any radio-
active element, one never can tell when it will decay; some may decay as
soon as they are produced, while others may never decay. Still, it has been
found experimentally that for a large group of atoms of one kind, the frac-
tion of these atoms that decay per second is unchangeable and always the same
for any large group of atoms of that kind. This fraction is almost com-
pletely independent of all physical and chemical conditions, such as tem-
17.9 DECAY RATE AND HALF-LIFE
743

perature, pressure, and form of chemical combination. These remarkable
properties of radioactivity deserve special attention, and the meaning of the
italicized statement above now will be discussed in detail because it is ba-
sic to an understanding of radioactivity.
Say, for example, that 1/1000 of the atoms in a freshly prepared pure
sample decay during the first second. Then you would expect that 1/1000
of the remaining atoms will decay during the next second. But also, 1/1000
of the atoms remaining after 10 s will decay during the eleventh second,
and so on. In fact, during any subsequent second of time, 1/1000 of the
atoms remaining at the beginning of that second will decay, at least until
the number of remaining atoms becomes so small that predictions become
very uncertain.
Since the fraction of the atoms that decay per unit time is a constant for
each element, the number of atoms that decay per unit time will decrease
in proportion to the diminishing number of atoms that have not yet
changed. Consequently, if the percentage of surviving, unchanged atoms is
plotted as a function of time, a curve like the one in the sketch is obtained.
The number of atoms in a sample that decays per unit time is termed the
activity of the sample. Thus, the graph also represents the way in which the
measured activity of a sample would decrease with time.
The curve that shows the number of atoms that have not decayed as a
function of time approaches the time axis asymptotically; that is, the num-
ber of survivors becomes small, but only approaches zero. This is another
way of saying that a definite "lifetime" in which all of the original atoms
for a sample will have decayed cannot be assigned.
However, it is possible to specify the time required for any particular
fraction of a sample to decay, one-half, one-third, or 37%, for instance. For
convenience in making comparisons, the fraction one-half has been cho-
sen. Rutherford called the time required for the decay of one-half of the
original atoms of a pure sample the half-life (symbol T1/2). Each kind of ra-
dioactive atom has a unique half-life, and thus the half-life of an element
can be used to identify a radioactive element. As the table on p. 741 shows,
a wide variety of half-lives have been found.
For 238U, the parent of the uranium series, the half-life is 4.5 billion
years. This means that after 4.5  109 yr, half of the 238U atoms will have
decayed. For 214Po, the half-life is of the order of 104 s; that is, in only
1/10,000 of a second, half of an original sample of 214Po atoms will have
decayed. If pure samples of each, containing the same number of atoms,
were available, the initial activity (atoms decaying per second) of 214Po
would be very strong and that of 238U very feeble. If left for even 1 min,
though, the polonium would have decayed so thoroughly and, therefore,
the number of its surviving atoms would be so small, that at this point the
744
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

activity due to polonium would now be less than the activity of the ura-
nium atoms. Perhaps some radioactive elements, present in great quanti-
ties long ago, decayed so rapidly that no measurable traces are now left.
On the other hand, many radioactive elements decay so slowly that during
any ordinary experimentation time the counting rates that indicate decay
seem to remain constant. (That is why Becquerel did not notice any change
in the activity of his uranium salt samples.)
The principal advantage of the concept of a half-life lies in the experi-
mental result implied in the graph: For any element of half-life T1/2, no
matter how old a sample is, on average half of the atoms will still have sur-
vived after an additional time interval T1/2. Thus, the half-life is not to be
thought of as an abbreviation for "half a life." If one-half the original atoms
remain unchanged after a time T1/2, one-fourth, 1⁄2  1⁄2, will remain after
two consecutive half-life intervals 2T1/2, one-eighth after 3T1/2, and so on.
Note how different the situation is for a population of, say, human beings
instead of radioactive atoms. In a group of N0 babies, half the number may
17.9 DECAY RATE AND HALF-LIFE
745
0
T1/2
25%
50%
100%
0
2T1/2
Fraction of original sample remaining unchanged
3T1/2
4T1/2
5T1/2
6T1/2
7T1/2
8T1/2
Time
FIGURE 17.7
Graph of radioactive decay of a
sample with successive half lives.

survive to their 70th birthday; of these N0/2 senior citizens, none is likely
to celebrate a 140th birthday. But of N0 radioactive atoms with a half-life
of 70 years, on average N0/4 will have remained intact after 140 yr, N0/8
after 210 yr, etc. To put it differently, the statistical probability of survival for
atoms is unchanged by the age they have already reached. In humans, of course,
the probability of survival (say, for another year) depends strongly on age,
and so the concept "half-life" is not usable in this case.
We have been considering the behavior not of individual atoms, but of
a very large number of them. As discussed in connection with the behav-
ior of gases in Chapter 7, this method allows us to use laws of statistics to
describe the average behavior of the group. If a hundred thousand people
were to flip coins simultaneously just once, you could predict with good
accuracy that about one-half of them would get heads. But you could not
accurately predict that one particular person in this crowd would obtain
heads on a single flip. If the total number of coins tossed is small (10), the
observed count is likely to differ considerably from the prediction of 50%
heads. From experiments in radioactivity, you can predict that a certain
fraction of a relatively large number of atoms in a sample will survive in
any given time interval (e.g., one-half will survive to reach the age T1/2),
but not whether a particular atom will be among the survivors. As the sam-
ple of survivors decreases in size owing to disintegrations, predictions be-
come less precise. Eventually, when only a few unchanged atoms are left,
you could no longer make useful predictions at all. In short, the disinte-
gration law is a statistical law and is thus applicable only to large popula-
tions of the radioactive atoms. Moreover, it makes no assumptions as to
why the atoms disintegrate.
In the discussion of the kinetic theory of matter, you saw that it is a hope-
less and meaningless task to try to describe the motions of each individual
molecule, but you could calculate the average pressure of a gas containing
a very large number of molecules. Similarly, in dealing with radioactivity,
the inability to specify when each of the tremendous number of atoms in
a normal sample will disintegrate makes a statistical treatment necessary
and useful.
17.10 THE CONCEPT OF ISOTOPES
The discovery that there are three radioactive series, each containing ap-
parently new substances, created a serious problem. In 1910, there were
still some empty spaces in the periodic table of the elements, but not enough
spaces for the many new substances. The periodic table represents an
746
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

arrangement of the elements according to their chemical properties, and,
if it could not include the radioactive elements, it would have to be revised,
perhaps in some drastic and fundamental way.
The clue to the solution of the puzzle lay in the observation that some
of the newly found materials that were members of a radioactive series have
chemical properties identical to those of well-known elements, although
some of their physical properties are different. For example, what was then
called Uranium II, the "great-granddaughter" of Uranium I, was found to
have the same chemical properties as Uranium I itself. When both were
mixed together, the two could not be separated by chemical means. No
chemist has detected, by chemical analysis, any difference between these
two substances. But the two substances, now known as uranium-238 and
uranium-234, do differ from each other in certain physical properties. As
the table on p. 741 shows, uranium-238 and -234 have quite different ra-
dioactive half-lives: 4.5  109 yr and 2.5  105 yr, respectively. The mass
of a uranium-234 atom must be smaller than that of a uranium-238 atom
by the mass of one  particle and two  particles.
Another pair of radioactive substances, called then radium B and radium
G, were found to have the same chemical properties as lead; when mixed
with lead they could not be separated from it by chemical means. These
substances are now known as lead-214 and lead-206, respectively. Lead-
214 is radioactive, and lead-206 is stable. The decay series on p. 741 indi-
cates that the atoms must differ from each other in mass by the mass of
two  particles and four  particles. There are many other examples of such
physical differences among two or more radioactive substances with the
same chemical behavior.
Soddy suggested a solution that threw a flood of light on the nature of
matter and on the relationship of the elements in the periodic table. He
proposed that a chemical element could be regarded as a pure substance
only in the sense that all of its atoms have the same chemical properties;
that is, a chemical element may in fact be a mixture of atoms having differ-
ent radioactive behavior and different atomic masses, but all having the
same chemical properties. This idea meant that one of the basic postulates
of Dalton's atomic theory would have to be changed, namely, the postulate
that the atoms of a pure element are alike in all respects. According to
Soddy, it is only in chemical properties that the atoms of a given element
are identical. The several physically different species of atoms making up
a particular element occupy the same place in the periodic table, that is,
have the same atomic number Z. Because of this, Soddy called them 
isotopes of the element, from the Greek words isos and topos, meaning same
and place—the same place in the periodic table. Thus, uranium-238 (238U)
and uranium-234 (234U) are isotopes of uranium (92U); lead-214 (214Pb) and
17.10 THE CONCEPT OF ISOTOPES
747

lead-206 (206Pb) are isotopes of lead (82Pb). They are chemically the same;
they occupy the same place on the periodic table and have the same atomic
number Z, given by the subscript. But they are physically different, because
they have different atomic masses A, given by the superscript in atomic
mass units.
With this idea in mind, the many species of radioactive atoms in the
three radioactive series were soon shown by chemical analysis to be iso-
topes of one or another of the last 11 naturally occurring elements in the
periodic table, from lead (Z  82) to uranium (Z  92). For example, the
2nd and 5th members of the uranium series (see the table on p. 741) were
shown to be isotopes of thorium, with Z  90; the 8th, 11th, and 14th
members turned out to be isotopes of polonium (Z  84). The old names
and symbols given to the members of radioactive series upon their discov-
ery were therefore rewritten to represent both the chemical similarity and
physical difference among isotopes. The present names for uranium X1 and
ionium, for example, are thorium-234 and thorium-230 (as shown in the
table, p. 741).
748
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS
FIGURE 17.8
Frederick Soddy (1877-1956), 
an English chemist, studied at Oxford and went
to Canada in 1899 to work under Rutherford 
at McGill University in Montreal. There he
worked out his explanation of radioactive decay.
Soddy returned to England in 1902 to work with
William Ramsay, the discoverer of the rare gases
argon, neon, krypton, and xenon. Ramsay and
Soddy showed, in 1903, that helium was con-
tinuously produced by naturally radioactive sub-
stances. In 1921, Soddy was awarded the Nobel
Prize in chemistry for his discovery of isotopes.
He was a professor of chemistry at Oxford from
1919 to 1936. 

A modern "shorthand" form for symbolizing any species of atom, called
a nuclide, is also given in the same table—for example, 234
90Th and 230
90Th for
two of the isotopes of thorium. The subscript (90 in both cases for tho-
rium) is the atomic number Z, the place number in the periodic table; the
superscript (234 or 230) is the mass number A, the approximate atomic
mass in atomic mass units.
Note that, when writing the symbol for a nucleus, the atomic mass is al-
ways given as a whole number (such as U-238); but the atomic mass of an
element as given in the periodic table (see color plate 6) is in most cases a
decimal fraction (such as Uranium, 238.03). This is because the atomic mass
given in the periodic table refers to the relative mass of the element in its
natural state, which is a mixture of the various naturally occurring isotopes
of the element. The atomic mass of the natural element is then an average
of the atomic masses of the individual isotopes, weighted according to their
abundance in relation to the other isotopes. For example, natural hydro-
gen has 1.0080 atomic mass units. It is a mixture of the abundant isotope
1
1H and the much less abundant isotopes 2
1H and 3
1H. (However, the masses
of these atoms are not exactly 2.0000 u and 3.0000 u, respectively, because
of the mass of the electron orbiting the nucleus in the neutral atom.)
17.11 TRANSFORMATION RULES
Two questions then arose: How do changes in chemical nature come about
as an atom undergoes radioactive decay? More specifically, what determines
whether the atomic number Z increases or decreases in a given radioactive
transformation?
In 1913, Soddy in England and A. Fajans in Germany answered these ques-
tions independently. They each proposed two rules that systematized all the
relevant observations for natural radioactivity. They are called the transfor-
mation rules of radioactivity. By 1913 Rutherford's nuclear model of the atom
was generally accepted. Using this model, one could consider a radioactive
atom to have an unstable nucleus that emits an  or a  particle (sometimes
with emission of a  ray). Every nucleus has a positive charge given by Ze,
where Z is the atomic number and e is the magnitude of the charge of an
electron. The nucleus is surrounded by Z electrons that make the atom as a
whole electrically neutral and determine the chemical behavior of the atom.
As discussed above, an  particle has an atomic mass of about four units and
a positive charge of two units, 2e. A  particle has a negative charge of one
unit, e, and very little mass compared to an  particle.
17.11 TRANSFORMATION RULES
749

With this information in mind, the transformation rules may now be
stated as follows:
1.
When a nucleus emits an  particle, the mass of the atom decreases by
four atomic mass units, and the atomic number Z of the nucleus de-
creases by two units; the resulting atom belongs to an element two
spaces back in the periodic table (see color plates).
2.
When a nucleus emits a  particle, the mass of the atom is changed
very little, but the atomic number Z increases by one unit; the result-
ing atom belongs to an element one place forward in the periodic table.
(We will discuss, in Section 18.10, how this behavior can be used to
produce nonnaturally occurring elements beyond uranium, that is, so-
called transuranium elements.)
3.
When only a  ray is emitted, there is no change in the number cor-
responding to the atomic mass, and none in the atomic number.
The table of the uranium-radium series (p. 741) shows how these rules
apply to that series, at least as far as the atomic number is concerned.
These rules, applied to the Rutherford-Bohr model of the atom, help to
explain why a change in chemical nature occurs as a result of  or  emis-
sion. Emission of an  particle takes two positive charges from the nucleus
and four atomic mass units from the atom. An example is the following:
218
84Po  214
82Pb  .
The resulting new atom (82Pb) with its less positive nucleus can hold in its
outer shells two fewer electrons than before, so two excess electrons drift
away. The chemical behavior of atoms is controlled by the number of elec-
trons; therefore, the new atom acts chemically like an atom of an element
with an atomic number two units less than that of the parent atom.
On the other hand, in the case of  emission, the nucleus, and with it
the whole atom, becomes more positively charged, by one unit. An exam-
ple is the following:
234
90Th  234
91Pa  .
The number of electrons that the atom can hold around the nucleus has
increased by one. After it has picked up an extra electron to become neu-
tral again, the atom acts chemically as an atom with an atomic number one
unit greater than that of the atom before the radioactive change occurred.
By using the transformation rules, Soddy and Fajans were able to de-
termine the place in the periodic table for every one of the substances (or
750
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

nuclides) in the radioactive series; no revision of the existing periodic table
was needed. Many of the nuclides between Z  82 (lead) and Z  92 (ura-
nium) are now known to contain several isotopes each. These results were
expected from the hypothesis of the existence of isotopes, but direct, in-
dependent evidence was also sought and obtained in 1914.
17.12 SUMMARY OF NOTATION FOR NUCLIDES
AND NUCLEAR REACTIONS
We summarize and recapitulate some of the above ideas and notations. (See
the next section for some applications.) Because of the existence of isotopes,
it is no longer possible to designate an atomic species only by means of 
the atomic number Z. To distinguish among the isotopes of an element some
new symbols were introduced. One is the mass number, A, defined as the
whole number closest to the measured atomic mass. For example, the lighter
and heavier isotopes of neon are characterized by the pairs of values: 
Z  10, A  20, and Z  10, A  22. (An element that consists of a single
isotope can, of course, also be characterized by its Z and A values.)
These values of Z and A are determined by the properties of the atomic
nucleus. According to the Rutherford-Bohr model of the atom, the atomic
number Z is the magnitude of the positive charge of the nucleus in ele-
mentary charge units. The mass number A is very nearly equal to (but a bit
less than) the atomic mass of the atom, because the total mass of the elec-
trons around the nucleus is very small compared to the mass of the nucleus.
The term nuclide is used to denote an atomic species characterized by
particular values of Z and A. An isotope is then one of a group of two or
more nuclides, each having the same atomic number Z but different mass
numbers A. A radioactive atomic species is called a radioactive nuclide, or
radionuclide for short. A nuclide is usually denoted by the chemical symbol
with a subscript at the lower left giving the atomic number and a super-
script at the upper left giving the mass number. Thus, in the symbol A
ZX
for a certain nuclide, Z stands for the atomic number, A stands for the mass
number, and X stands for the chemical symbol. For example, 9
4Be is the nu-
clide beryllium with atomic number 4 and mass number 9; the symbols
20
10Ne and 22
10Ne represent the neon isotopes discussed above. Since the Z
value is the same for all the isotopes of a given element, it is often omit-
ted, except when needed for balancing equations (as you will shortly see).
Thus, you can write 20Ne for 20
10Ne, or 238U for 238
92U.
The introduction of the mass number and the symbol for a nuclide makes
it possible to represent radioactive nuclides in an easy and consistent way.
17.12 SUMMARY OF NOTATION FOR NUCLIDES AND NUCLEAR REACTIONS
751

In addition, radioactive decay can be expressed by a simple "equation" rep-
resenting the changes that occur in the decay process. For example, the
first step in the uranium-radium series, namely, the decay of uranium-238
into thorium-234, may be written
238
92U  234
90Th  4
2He.
The symbol 4
2He stands for the helium nucleus ( particle); the other two
symbols represent the initial and final atomic nuclei, each with the appro-
priate charge and mass number. The arrow stands for "decays into." The
"equation" represents a nuclear reaction and is analogous to an equation for
a chemical reaction. The atomic numbers on the two sides of the equation
752
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS
50
Z
100
Number of Protons
N = Z
Number of Neutrons
50
150
A-Z
100
FIGURE 17.10
A chart of the
known nuclides. Each black
square represents a stable natu-
ral nuclide. Each open square
represents a known, unstable
nuclide, with only a small num-
ber of these found naturally (the
rest being artificial). Note that
all isotopes of a given element
are found in a vertical column
centered 
on 
the 
element's
atomic number, Z. As we will
see in the next chapter, the Z
number is the number of pro-
tons in the nucleus, and the dif-
ference between the atomic
mass and the atomic number is
the number of neutrons.

must balance because the electric charge of the nucleus must be conserved:
In the example above, 92  90  2. Also, the mass numbers must balance
because of conservation of mass: 238  234  4.
For another example, in the table of the uranium-radium series, 234
90Th
(thorium-234) decays by  emission, becoming 234
91Pa (protactinium-234).
Since a  particle (electron) has charge e and has an extremely small mass,
the symbol 1
0e is used for it. This -decay process may then be represented
by the equation
234
90Th  234
91Pa  1
0e  0
0
.
(The 0
0
 0 is another particle, a so-called antineutrino, given off in  de-
cay. It will be discussed in Chapter 18.)
17.13 SOME USEFUL APPLICATIONS 
OF RADIOACTIVITY
The dangers of exposure to radioactivity were noted briefly in Section 17.4.
The "fall-out" of radioactive dust and elements from testing of nuclear
weapons on or above ground during the 1950s was so harmful to the pub-
lic that an international treaty to stop such testing was made. For example,
strontium-90 is a radioactive isotope that is produced in fission reactions
that can be transported into the upper atmosphere by above-ground nu-
clear explosions. The element strontium is just below calcium on the pe-
riodic table. When strontium-90 falls to the ground as fall-out from nu-
clear testing, it is ingested by cows eating grass and can replace calcium in
the formation of milk, thus getting into the food chain where it can dam-
age the internal organs of children and adults who drink the milk.
These processes of radiation damage to biological organisms are the sub-
ject of considerable research today, and they have important applications in
agriculture, medicine, and other areas. One important area of research in-
volves the study to find out, for example, how radiation produces genetic
changes. Since it has been discovered that many of the key chemical pro-
cesses in cells are organized by single chains of molecules, including DNA,
it is clear that a single particle of radiation can, by breaking a chemical bond
in such a chain, cause a permanent and perhaps disastrous change in the cell.
The metabolism of plants and animals is being studied with the aid of ex-
tremely small amounts of radioactive nuclides called isotopic tracers. A radio-
active isotope, for example, 14C, acts chemically (and therefore physiologi-
cally) like a stable isotope (12C). Thus, by following a radioactive tracer with
detectors, the behavior of a chemical material can be followed as it goes
17.13 SOME USEFUL APPLICATIONS OF RADIOACTIVITY
753

through various metabolic processes. The role of micronutrients (elements
that are essential, in extremely small amounts, for the well-being of plants
and animals) can be studied in this way. Agricultural experiments with fer-
tilizers containing radioactive isotopes have shown at what point in the
growth of a plant the fertilizer is essential. In chemistry, radioactive isotopes
help in the determination of the details of chemical reactions and of the
structure of complex molecules, such as proteins, vitamins, and enzymes.
Perhaps the most rewarding uses of radioisotopes have been in medical
research, diagnosis, and therapy. For example, tracers can help to deter-
mine the rate of flow of blood through the heart and to the limbs, thus aid-
ing in the diagnosis of abnormal conditions. Intense doses of radiation can
do serious damage to all living cells, but diseased cells are often more eas-
ily damaged than normal cells. Radiation can therefore be used to treat
some diseases, for example, destroying cancerous tumors. Some parts of the
body take up particular elements preferentially. For example, the thyroid
gland absorbs iodine easily. Specially prepared radioisotopes of such ele-
ments can be administered to the victims of certain diseases, thus supply-
ing desired radiation right at the site of the disease. This method has been
used in the treatment of cancer of the thyroid gland, blood diseases, and
brain tumors and in the diagnosis of thyroid, liver, and kidney ailments. To
destroy a malignancy in a prostate gland, "seeds" containing radioactive
materials may be inserted into it.
Some Typical Isotope Applications
Isotope
Half-life
Important uses
3
1H
11 yr
Used as a tag in organic substances.
14
6C
5730 yr
Used as a tag in studying the synthesis of
many organic substances. When 14
6C is
incorporated in food material, its presence
can be traced in the metabolic products.
24
11Na
15 hr
Useful in a wide variety of biochemical
investigations because of its solubility and
chemical properties.
32
15P
14 days
For the study of bone metabolism, the
treatment of blood diseases and the
diagnosis of tumors.
35
16S
87 days
Has numerous chemical and industrial
applications.
60
27Co
5.3 yr
Because of its intense  emission, may be
used as a low-cost substitute for radium in
radiography and therapy.
131
53I
8 days
For the study of thyroid metabolism and the
treatment of thyroid diseases.
754
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

One of the most well-known applications of radioactivity is in the de-
termination of the age of organic and other materials. The rare isotope of
carbon known as carbon-14 is often used for this purpose. This isotope has
a half-life of 5730 years. The more abundant isotope of carbon is carbon-
12, which is stable. All living things contain the element carbon, and they
all absorb carbon from their environment while they are alive. Most of the
carbon is in stable form, but a known fraction of it is in the form of 
carbon-14. When the living thing, such as a muscle or tree, dies, it ceases
to absorb any new carbon, while the carbon-14 in its cells undergoes ra-
dioactive decay. As time advances, the amount of carbon-14 in the dead
tree, or a piece of wood from the tree, decreases owing to its radioactive
decay. By comparing the amount of carbon-14 remaining to the amount
that is normally found in living trees of that species, scientists can deter-
mine its approximate age by referring to the half-life. For instance, if 
only one-half the original amount of carbon-14 remains, then the tree is
about 5730 yr old. 
This was the method used to determine the age of the so-called "Ice
Man" in Europe, a prehistoric man who was found after having been frozen
for centuries in the ice of a glacier in the Alps. The glacier eventually
melted, revealing the dead man's body. Scientists determined that the
amount of carbon-14 remaining in his body and in the objects found with
him was a little more than half of what it would be if he were alive. Thus
they placed the time of his death at about 5000 yr ago; it is the oldest pre-
served human body ever found.
Radioactive carbon-14 has been used with great success to date once-
living materials, but it is limited to time spans in the thousands of years.
This is because the more half-lives that pass by, the fewer the number of
carbon-14 atoms that remain. So the statistical error increases greatly. For
much longer time scales, on the order of millions or even billions of years,
scientists have turned to the uranium-radium decay series itself. You will
notice that the ultimate "ancestor" of this series, uranium-238, has a half-
life of about 4.5 billion years. This is also the approximate age of the Earth,
so there is still about one-half of the uranium left on Earth compared to
the amount there was at Earth's formation some 4.5 billion years ago. (Much
of the original uranium may have contributed to the warming of the Earth
in the early years, and in fact the total radioactive amount in the Earth has
kept it from being much less cold than it otherwise would have been after
its formation.) Enough time has passed for the entire uranium-radium se-
ries to have become active and so build up a substantial amount of the end
product, the stable lead isotope, lead-206. However, lead-208 is the more
common isotope of lead, while lead-206 arises only from the uranium-
radium decay series. So the amounts of uranium-238 and lead-206 present
17.13 SOME USEFUL APPLICATIONS OF RADIOACTIVITY
755

in ancient rocks in which prehistoric creatures, such as dinosaurs, are found
can be used to determine the approximate age of the rocks, hence the ap-
proximate age of the dinosaur fossils found in them.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
accelerator
isotope
activity
isotopic tracers
alpha rays
nuclide
beta rays
phosphorescence
carbon dating
radioactive transformation
daughter element
radioactivity
fluorescence
radionuclide
gamma rays
uranium-radium series
half-life
SOME FURTHER READINGS
E. Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography, V. Sheean, transl. (New York: Da Capo Press,
1986).
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure (Piscataway, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 2001), Chapter 27.
S. Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York: Perseus Press, 1996).
T. Trenn, The Self-Splitting Atom: The History of the Rutherford-Soddy Collaboration
(London: Taylor and Francis, 1977).
Web Site
Marie Curie: http://www.aip.org/history/curie/contents.htm.
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
17.1 Questions about the Nucleus
1.
Why was it difficult to learn about the interior structure of the nucleus?
2.
What tools were needed to understand the nucleus?
17.2 Becquerel's Discovery
1.
Why was Becquerel experimenting with a uranium compound? Describe his
experiment.
756
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

2.
How did uranium compounds have to be treated in order to emit the 
"Becquerel rays"?
3.
What were the properties of the "Becquerel rays"?
4.
In what ways were their properties similar to those of X rays?
5.
Why couldn't the "Becquerel rays" be X rays?
17.3 The Curies Discover Other Radioactive Elements
1.
How is the radioactive emission of an element affected by being combined into
different chemical compounds?
2.
Why did the Curies suspect the existence of another radioactive material in
uranium ore, in addition to uranium itself?
3.
What was the main difficulty in producing a pure sample of the element 
radium?
4.
Why did the Curies conclude that radioactivity is related to the presence of
atoms of uranium or thorium in a sample?
5.
Make a list of at least a dozen of the elements mentioned in this section, then
find them on the periodic table.
17.4 Identifying the Rays
1.
List , , and  rays in order of penetrating ability.
2.
Why is penetrating power inversely related to ionizing power?
3.
Why is shielding required when doing research on radioactive materials?
4.
What damage can radioactivity cause to living tissue?
17.5 The Charge and Mass of the Rays
1.
What was the evidence to support the theory that  particles are electrons?
2.
What observation led to the suggestion that  particles are much more mas-
sive than  particles?
3.
What evidence led to the tentative conclusion that  particles are helium 
nuclei?
4.
What evidence was available to identify the  rays? Why was it inconclusive?
17.6 Rutherford's "Mousetrap"
1.
What hypothesis were Rutherford and Royds investigating?
2.
Briefly describe their experiment.
3.
How did Rutherford determine that the gas that appeared in the tube was 
helium?
17.7 Radioactive Transformations
1.
Why was radioactive decay believed not to be an ordinary chemical reaction?
2.
What was Rutherford's and Soddy's bold theory of radioactive transformation?
Why was it considered bold at the time?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
757

3.
Give an example of a radioactive transformation. Why is it contrary to the
ideas of nineteenth-century chemistry?
17.8 Radioactive Decay Series
1.
Give at least three reasons for the difficulty of separating decay products.
2.
If you start with a sample made entirely of pure uranium-238 atoms, what
emission is observed at the start? How will the emission change as time
goes on?
3.
Look back at the discoveries the Curies made in their study of pitchblende
(Section 17.3). How would you account for what they found?
4.
What else might the Curies have discovered in pitchblende?
5.
Why is it difficult to separate the decay products of uranium?
17.9 Decay Rate and Half-Life
1.
Why can one not specify the "lifetime" of a sample of radioactive atoms? of a
single radioactive atom?
2.
A laboratory starts with a certain amount of a radioactive substance. What frac-
tion of the substance will be left unchanged after a period equal to four times
its half-life?
3.
Another group in the laboratory has a different amount of the same radioactive
substance. What fraction of their original amount will be left unchanged after
a period equal to four times its half-life?
4.
If, after many half-lives, only two atoms of a radioactive substance remain, what
will happen during an additional period equal to one half-life of the substance?
5.
How does the concept of statistical probability of survival for atoms differ from
that for the survival of humans?
17.10 The Concept of Isotopes
1.
Why was it not necessary, after all, to expand the periodic table to fit in the
newly discovered radioactive substances?
2.
The symbol for the carbon-12 nuclide is 12
6C. What is the approximate atomic
mass of carbon-12 in atomic mass units? What is its position in the list of 
elements?
3.
On the periodic table the atomic mass of the element carbon is given as 12.011.
Why is this mass different from the atomic mass of the carbon-12 nuclide?
What does this number say about the other nuclides of carbon?
17.11 Transformation Rules
1.
By how many units does the mass of an atom change during  decay? during
 decay?
2.
By how many units does the charge of a nucleus change during  decay? dur-
ing  decay?
758
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

3.
The following , , and  decays occur. Using the transformation rules, de-
termine the daughter nuclide in each case:
234
92U  ?    ,
210
82Pb  ?    .
17.12 Summary of Notation for Nuclides and Nuclear Reactions
1.
Write the complete symbol for the nuclide with atomic mass 194 and atomic
number 78. Of which element is it an isotope?
2.
Complete the following equation for  decay by replacing the question mark
(?). Tell what law or rule you relied on. (X and Y are two different unspecified
elements.)
A
ZX  4
2He  Z2
?Y
3.
In the same way, complete the following equation for  decay by replacing the
question mark (?):
A
ZX  1
0e  A?Y  0
0
.
17.13 Some Useful Applications of Radioactivity
1.
Scientists have discovered the remains of an extinct mammal. They measured
the amount of carbon-14 remaining in its bone structure and found that it is
only one-fourth the amount in the bones of similar living creatures. How old
did they estimate the mammal's remains to be?
2.
Why can't the carbon-dating method be used to date the ages of dinosaur 
fossils?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
1. Radon gas is known to build up in the basements of some homes. Since radon
is a strong -emitter, it can cause damage to living tissue. It may be one cause
of lung cancer. What types of locations would be likely to have such a prob-
lem? From the table of half-lives in the uranium-radium decay series, what
would you recommend might be done about this?
2. Suppose that after the Curies had isolated polonium and radium in uranium
ore (pitchblende), they had found another radioactive substance. What steps
might they take to identify whether it is a new element or a previously known
element?
3. In researching the properties of an element, a scientist observes emissions
from the element. How could he/she determine if these emissions are from
the nucleus or from the electron region of the atom?
4. After performing the research in answer to Question 3 the scientist deter-
mines that the emissions are coming from the nucleus. How might he/she
identify these emissions?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
759

5. Why does the uranium-radium decay series start with the element with the
highest atomic number and end at the element with the lowest atomic num-
ber of the series?
6. Soddy's proposal of the existence of isotopes meant that for some elements
not all the atoms are identical. Explain why this proposal does not require
that the atoms of a given element show differences in chemical behavior.
7. A scientist is researching a series of radioactive decays and obtains an un-
known element. Explain how he/she could determine whether the element is
a new element and should be given a new place in the periodic table, or is
simply an isotope of an already known element.
8. Refer to the table showing the uranium-radium decay series. Look at the par-
ent and daughter nuclei of each of the three types of decays—alpha, beta, and
gamma. Write down in your own words the general rules about what hap-
pens to the atomic mass and atomic number in each type of decay.
9. A scientist has a lump of pure lead-214 in a container. He determines that the
lump contains 6.02  1023 atoms. The half-life is 26.8 min. After 26.8 min,
approximately how many atoms of lead-214 are left? Why is this only ap-
proximate?
10. At the National Bureau of Standards, in 1932, 3.8 l of liquid hydrogen was
evaporated slowly until only about 1 g remained. This residue allowed the
first experimental check on the existence of the "heavy" hydrogen isotope 2H.
(a) With the help of the kinetic theory of matter, explain why the evapora-
tion should leave in the residue an increased concentration of the isotope
of greater atomic mass.
(b) Why should the evaporation method be especially effective with hydrogen?
11. Supply the missing data indicated by these transformation equations:
(a)
212
?Pb  212Bi  ?.
(b) 212
?Bi  ?  1
0e.
(c) ?  208Pb  4
2He.
12. For each part below, select the most appropriate radiation(s): , , or :
(a) most penetrating radiation;
(b) most easily absorbed by aluminum foil;
(c) most strongly ionizing radiation;
(d) may require thick "radiation shields" for protection;
(e) cannot be deflected by a magnet;
(f) largest radius of curvature when traveling across a magnetic field;
(g) highest q/m value;
(h) important in the Rutherford-Royd "mousetrap" experiment;
(i) involved in the transmutation of radium to radon;
(j) involved in the transmutation of bismuth-210 to polonium-210.
13. A Geiger counter shows that the rate of emission of  particles from an ini-
tially pure sample of a radioactive element decreases to one-half the initial
rate in 25 hr.
(a) What fraction of the original number of radioactive atoms is still un-
changed at that time?
760
17. PROBING THE NUCLEUS

(b) What fraction of the original number will have disintegrated in a total of
50 hr?
(c) What assumptions have you made in giving these answers? How might
you check them?
Quantitative
1.
A scientist has obtained 100 g of bismuth-210, which has a half-life of 5.0
days. Bismuth-210 decays into polonium-210, which has a half-life of 138.4
days. Bismuth-210 decays into lead-206, which is stable. The scientist leaves
the bismuth in its container for 140 days. After that time:
(a) approximately how much bismuth-210 is left?
(b) how much polonium-210 is present?
(c) how much lead-206 is present?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
761


-
+
18.1
The Problem of Nuclear Structure
18.2
The Proton-Electron Hypothesis
18.3
The Discovery of Artificial Transmutation
18.4
The Discovery of the Neutron
18.5
The Proton-Neutron Model
18.6
The Neutrino
18.7
The Need for Particle Accelerators
18.8
The Energy of Nuclear Binding
18.9
Nuclear Binding Energy and Stability
18.10 Nuclear Fission: Discovery
18.11 Controlling Chain Reactions
18.12 Nuclear Power Plants
18.13 Nuclear Weapons
18.14 Nuclear Fusion
18.1 THE PROBLEM OF NUCLEAR STRUCTURE
The discoveries of radioactivity and isotopes were extraordinary advances.
And as usual, they also raised new questions about the structure of atoms,
questions that involved the atomic nucleus. We saw in Chapter 17 that the
transformation rules of radioactivity could be understood in terms of the
Rutherford-Bohr model of the atom. But that model said nothing about
the nucleus other than that it is small, has charge and mass, and may emit
an  or a  particle. This implies that the nucleus has a structure that
changes when a radioactive process occurs. The question arose: Can a the-
ory or model of the atomic nucleus be developed that will explain the facts
of radioactivity and the existence of isotopes?
763
The Nucleus and
Its Applications
C
H
A
P
T
E
R18
18

The answer to this question makes up much of nuclear physics. The prob-
lem of nuclear structure can be broken down into two questions:
(1)
What are the building blocks of which the nucleus is made?
(2)
How are the nuclear building blocks put together?
The attempt to solve the problem of nuclear structure, although still
a frontier activity in physics today, has already led to many basic discov-
eries and to large-scale practical applications. It has also had important
social and political consequences, stretching far beyond physics into the
life of society in general, as this text has frequently noted in its earlier
chapters.
18.2 THE PROTON-ELECTRON HYPOTHESIS
The emission of  and  particles by radioactive nuclei suggested that a
model of the nucleus might be constructed by starting with  and  parti-
cles as building blocks. Such a model would make it easy to see, for exam-
ple, how a number of  particles could be emitted, in succession, in a radio-
active series. But not all nuclei are radioactive, nor do all nuclei have masses
that are multiples of the -particle mass. For example, the nucleus of an
atom of the lightest element, hydrogen, with an atomic mass of one unit
(two units in the case of the heavy isotope), is too light to contain an  par-
ticle; so is the light isotope of helium, 3
2He.
A positively charged particle with mass of one unit would seem to be
more satisfactory as a nuclear building block. Such a particle does indeed
exist: the nucleus of the common isotope of hydrogen, 1
1H. This particle
has been named the proton, from the Greek word protos for "first." Fol-
lowing the Rutherford-Bohr theory of atomic structure, the hydrogen atom
thus consists of a proton with a single electron revolving around it.
In the preceding chapter we discussed the experimental result that the
atomic masses of the nuclides are very close to whole numbers; hence, the
nuclides are written in symbols with whole-number values for A. This re-
sult, together with the properties of the proton (e.g., its single positive
charge) made it appear possible that all atomic nuclei are made up of pro-
tons. Could a nucleus of mass number A consist of A protons? If this were
the case, the charge of the nucleus would be A units, but, except for hy-
drogen, the nuclear charge Z is found to be always less than A, usually less
than 1⁄2A. To get around this difficulty, it was assumed early that in addi-
tion to the protons, atomic nuclei contain just enough electrons to cancel
764
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS

the positive charge of the extra protons; that is, they were supposed to con-
tain A  Z electrons. After all, nuclei emitted electrons in  decay, so, it
appeared, electrons must exist within the nucleus. These electrons would
contribute only a small amount to the mass of the nucleus, but together
with the protons they would make the net charge equal to Z units, as 
required.
It seemed plausible to consider the atom as consisting of a nucleus made
up of A protons and A  Z electrons, with Z additional electrons outside
the nucleus to make the entire atom electrically neutral. For example, an
atom of 16
8O would have a nucleus with 16 protons and 8 electrons, with 8
additional electrons outside the nucleus. This model of the nucleus is known
as the proton-electron hypothesis of nuclear composition.
The proton-electron hypothesis seemed to be consistent with the emis-
sion of  and  particles by atoms of radioactive substances. Since it was
assumed that the nucleus contained electrons, explanation of  decay was
no problem. When the nucleus is in an appropriate state, it may simply
eject one of its electrons. It also seemed reasonable that an  particle could
be formed, in the nucleus, by the combination of four protons and two
electrons. (An  particle might exist, already formed in the nucleus, or it
might be formed at the instant of emission.)
The proton-electron hypothesis is similar to an earlier idea suggested
by the English physician William Prout in 1815. On the basis of the small
number of atomic masses then known, Prout proposed that all atomic
masses are multiples of the atomic mass of hydrogen and that therefore all
the elements might be built up of hydrogen. Prout's hypothesis was dis-
carded when, later in the nineteenth century, the atomic masses of some
elements were found to be fractional, in particular, those of chlorine (35.46
units) and copper (63.54 units). With the discovery of isotopes, however,
it was realized that the fractional atomic masses of chlorine and copper, like
that of neon, arise because these elements are mixtures of isotopes, with
each separate isotope having an atomic mass close to a whole number.
Although the proton-electron hypothesis was satisfactory in some re-
spects, it led to serious difficulties and had to be given up. One of the most
serious difficulties arose from Heisenberg's uncertainty principle in quan-
tum mechanics. As we noted (Section 15.6), the confinement of an elec-
tron to a space as small as the nucleus would result in the circumstance that
at times the electron's speed would be greater than the speed of light, which
is not possible according to special relativity theory.
How could scientists account for the circumstance that electrons cannot
be confined within the nucleus, yet they emerge from the nucleus in  de-
cay. As he recalled later, Heisenberg and his assistants were contemplating
this problem one day while sitting in a café across from a building hous-
18.2 THE PROTON-ELECTRON HYPOTHESIS
765

ing a swimming pool. Heisenberg suggested a possible approach to the
problem. "You see people going into the building fully dressed," he said.
"And you see them coming out fully dressed. But does that mean that they
also swim fully dressed?" In short, you see electrons coming out of the nu-
cleus, and occasionally being captured by the nucleus, but that does not
mean that they remain electrons while in the nucleus. Perhaps the elec-
trons are created in the process of emission from the nucleus.
18.3 THE DISCOVERY OF 
ARTIFICIAL TRANSMUTATION
A path that led to a better understanding of nuclear composition was
opened, almost by accident, in 1919. In that year, Rutherford found that
when nitrogen gas was bombarded with  particles from bismuth-214, swift
particles were produced that could travel farther in the gas than did the 
particles themselves. When these particles struck a scintillation screen, they
produced flashes of light fainter than those produced by  particles, about
the intensity that would be expected for positive hydrogen ions (protons).
Measurements of the effect of a magnetic field on the paths of the parti-
cles suggested that they were indeed protons. With the skepticism charac-
terizing all good scientific research, Rutherford ruled out, by means of care-
ful experiments, the possibility that the protons came from hydrogen
present as an impurity in the nitrogen.
Since the nitrogen atoms in the gas were the only possible source of pro-
tons, Rutherford concluded that an  particle, in colliding with a nitrogen
nucleus, can occasionally knock a small particle (a proton) out of the ni-
trogen nucleus. In other words, Rutherford deduced that an  particle can
cause the artificial disintegration of a nitrogen nucleus, with one of the prod-
ucts of the disintegration being a proton. But this process does not happen
easily. The experimental results showed that only one proton was produced
for about one million  particles passing through the gas.
Between 1921 and 1924, Rutherford and his coworker James Chadwick
extended the work on nitrogen to other elements and found evidence for
the artificial disintegration of all the light elements, from boron to potas-
sium, with the exception of carbon and oxygen. (These elements were later
shown also to undergo artificial disintegration.)
The next step was to determine the nature of the nuclear process lead-
ing to the emission of the proton. Two hypotheses were suggested for this
process:
(a)
The nucleus of the bombarded atom loses a proton, "chipped off" as
the result of a collision with a swift  particle.
766
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS

(b)
The  particle is captured by the nucleus of the atom it hits, forming
a new nucleus that, a moment later, emits a proton.
It was possible to distinguish experimentally between these two possible
cases by using a device called a "cloud chamber," which reveals the path or
track of an individual charged particle. The cloud chamber was invented
by C.T.R. Wilson and perfected by him over a period of years. In 1911, it
became an important scientific instrument for studying the behavior of sub-
atomic particles (see Figure 18.1). If hypothesis (a) holds, the chipped-off
proton should create four tracks in a photograph of a disintegration event:
the track of an  particle before the collision, the track of the same  par-
ticle after collision, and the tracks of both the proton and the recoiling 
nucleus after collision.
In case (b), on the other hand, the  particle should disappear in the col-
lision, and only three tracks would be seen: that of the  particle before
collision and those of the proton and recoil nucleus after the collision.
The choice between the two possibilities was settled in 1925 when P.M.S.
Blackett studied the tracks produced when particles passed through nitro-
gen gas in a cloud chamber. He found, as shown in the photograph in Fig-
ure 18.2, that the only tracks in which artificial disintegration could be seen
were those of the incident  particle, a proton, and the recoil nucleus. The
absence of a track corresponding to the presence of an  particle after the
collision proved that the  particle disappeared completely and that case
(b) is the correct interpretation of artificial disintegration: The  particle is
captured by the nucleus of the atom it hits, forming a new nucleus which there-
upon emits a proton.
The process in which an  particle is absorbed by a nitrogen nucleus
and a proton is emitted may be represented by an "equation" that is anal-
ogous to the representation used in Chapter 17 to describe radioactive 
18.3 THE DISCOVERY OF ARTIFICIAL TRANSMUTATION
767
FIGURE 18.1
Cutaway drawing of the Wilson
cloud chamber. When the piston is moved down
rapidly, the gas in the cylinder cools and becomes
supersaturated with water vapor. The water va-
por will condense on the ions created along the
path of a high-energy charged particle, thereby
making the track. For his invention of the cloud
chamber, C.T.R. Wilson (1869-1959) of Scot-
land shared the 1927 Nobel Prize in physics with
Arthur H. Compton.

decay. The equation expresses the fact that the total mass number is the
same before and after the collision (i.e., there is conservation of mass num-
ber) and the fact that the total charge is the same before and after the col-
lision (there is conservation of charge). The atomic number, the mass num-
ber, and the nuclear charge are known for the target nucleus 14
7N, for the
incident  particle 4
2He, and for the proton 1
1H. The product nucleus will
therefore have the atomic number 7  2  1  8, which is the atomic num-
ber for oxygen, and will have the mass number 14  4  1  17. There-
fore, the product nucleus must be 17
8O, an isotope of oxygen. The disinte-
gration process may therefore be represented by the nuclear reaction
4
2He  14
7N  17
8O  1
1H.
This reaction shows that a transmutation of an atom of one chemical ele-
ment into an atom of another chemical element has taken place. The trans-
mutation did not occur spontaneously, as it does in the case of natural ra-
dioactivity; it was produced by exposing target atoms (nuclei) to projectiles
emitted from a radioactive nuclide. It was an artificial transmutation. In the
paper in which he reported this first artificially produced nuclear reaction,
Rutherford said:
The results as a whole suggest that, if  particles—or similar 
projectiles—of still greater energy were available for experiment,
we might expect to break down the nuclear structure of many of
the lighter atoms.
(This call for greater energies of "projectiles" was soon answered by the
construction of accelerators, see Section 18.7.)
768
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.2 Alpha-particle tracks from
a source at left, in a cloud chamber filled
with nitrogen gas. At the right, one al-
pha particle has hit a nitrogen nucleus;
a proton is deflected upward towards the
left, and the resulting oxygen nucleus
recoils downward to the right.

The further study of reactions involving light nuclei led (as you will see
in the next section) to the discovery of a new particle, and to a better the-
ory of the constitution of the nucleus. Many types of reactions have been
observed with nuclei of all masses, from the lightest to the heaviest, and
the possibilities indicated by Rutherford have been realized to an extent far
beyond what he could have imagined in 1919.
18.4 THE DISCOVERY OF THE NEUTRON
In 1920, Rutherford suggested that a proton inside the nucleus might have
an electron tied to it so closely as to form a neutral particle. Rutherford
even suggested the name neutron for this hypothetical particle (since it
would be neutral in charge). Physicists looked for neutrons, but the search
presented at least two difficulties:
(1)
They could find no naturally occurring neutron-emitting materials.
(2)
The methods used for detecting atomic particles all depended on ef-
fects of the electric charge of the particles and so could not be applied
directly to neutral particles. Until 1932, the search for neutrons was
unsuccessful.
The proof of the existence of neutrons came in 1932 as the climax of a
series of experiments on nuclear reactions made by physicists in different
countries. The discovery of the neutron is a good example of how physi-
cists operate, how they think about problems, and arrive at solutions. It is
an excellent "case history" in experimental science. Working in Germany
in 1930, W.G. Bothe and H. Becker found that when samples of boron or
of beryllium were bombarded with  particles, they emitted radiations that
appeared to be of the same kind as  rays, at least insofar as the rays had
no electric charge. Beryllium gave a particularly marked effect of this kind.
18.4 THE DISCOVERY OF THE NEUTRON
769
?
?
Be
p
Be
Paraffin
α
α
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 18.3
(a) Alpha particles hitting beryllium with
the emission of unknown neutral rays. (b) When paraf-
fin is placed behind the beryllium, protons are ejected.

Observations by physicists in Germany, France, and Great Britain showed
that the induced radiation from the beryllium penetrated farther (through
lead, for example) than any  radiation found up to that time. Its interac-
tions with matter showed that it carried energies of about 10 MeV, "MeV"
standing for "million electron-volts." (This electron-volt as a unit of en-
ergy is discussed in Section 10.6.) The radiation was thus much more en-
ergetic than the  rays (i.e., high-energy photons) previously observed and,
as a result, aroused much interest.
Among those who investigated this radiation were the French physicists
Frédéric Joliot and his wife Irène Curie, a daughter of the discoverers of
radium. They studied the absorption of the radiation in paraffin, a mate-
rial rich in hydrogen. In the course of their experiments, Joliot and Curie
found that the radiation from beryllium, when it fell on paraffin, ejected
large numbers of hydrogen nuclei (protons) from the paraffin. The ener-
gies of these protons were found to be about 5 MeV. Using the principles
of conservation of momentum and energy, they calculated the energy a 
 ray would need if it were to transfer 5 MeV to a proton in a collision.
The result was about 50 MeV, a value much greater than the 10 MeV that
had been measured for the radiation. In addition, the number of protons
770
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.4
Irène Curie and Frédéric Joliot in
their laboratory. Curie and Joliot were married in
1926 and shared the Nobel Prize for chemistry in
1935. 

produced was found to be much greater than that predicted on the as-
sumption that the radiation consisted of  rays.
These discrepancies (between the results of two sets of experiments and
between theory and experiment) left physicists in a dilemma. Either they
could conclude that the conservation principles of momentum and of en-
ergy did not apply to the collisions between the radiation and the protons
in the paraffin, or they could seek another hypothesis about the nature of
the radiation. Now, if there is any one thing physicists do not want to do
it is to give up the principles of conservation of momentum and of energy.
These principles are so basic to scientific thought and have proven so use-
ful for so long and in a vast range of different cases that physicists tried
very hard to find an alternative to giving them up.
The English physicist James Chadwick found similarly perplexing results
for recoiling nuclei from several other light elements, including helium,
lithium, carbon, nitrogen, and argon. In 1932, Chadwick proposed a suc-
cessful alternative hypothesis about the nature of the radiation. Chadwick's
first published report of his hypothesis is reproduced in the Student Guide.
In a later, more complex paper, "The Existence of a Neutron," he wrote:
If we suppose that the radiation is not a quantum radiation [ ray],
but consists of particles of mass very nearly equal to that of the 
proton, all the difficulties connected with the collisions disappear,
both with regard to their frequency and to the energy transfers to
different masses. In order to explain the great penetrating power of
the radiation, we must further assume that the particle has no net
charge. We must suppose it to consist of a proton and electron in
close combination, the "neutron" discussed by Rutherford [as a
speculation] in his Bakerian Lecture of 1920.
Thus, according to Chadwick's hypothesis, when an element such as
beryllium is bombarded with  particles, a nuclear reaction can take place
that produces neutrons
4
2He  9
4Be  12
6C  1
0n.
Here, the symbol 1
0n represents the neutron postulated by Chadwick, with
zero charge and mass number equal to 1. Such neutrons, because they have
no electric charge, could penetrate bricks of a material as dense as lead
without giving up their energy. When neutrons go through paraffin, there
would occasionally be head-on collisions with hydrogen nuclei (protons).
The recoiling protons could then be observed because of the ionization
they produce. Thus, Chadwick's chargeless particle hypothesis could 
18.4 THE DISCOVERY OF THE NEUTRON
771

account in a qualitative way for the observed effects of the mysteriously
penetrating radiation.
Chadwick's estimate that the particle's mass must be nearly equal to the
mass of a proton was made by applying the laws of conservation of mo-
mentum and energy to the case of perfectly elastic collisions, that is, sim-
ply applying the laws that worked well for the case of interacting billiard
balls and other objects treated in "classical" physics. In a perfectly elastic
head-on collision between two bodies, as you saw in Chapter 5, almost all
of the kinetic energy of the initially moving body will be transferred to the
initially stationary body only if the bodies have approximately equal masses.
In collisions that are more glancing, i.e., not precisely head-on, less kinetic
energy will be transferred. Therefore, on average, a kinetic energy of about
5 MeV for the recoiling protons would be about right for collisions pro-
duced by neutrons with energies about 10 MeV, if the neutron and proton
masses were approximately equal.
Chadwick was able to make a more precise calculation of the neutron's
mass by applying the conservation laws to data on collisions with nuclei of
different masses; the details of the derivation are shown in the Student Guide.
772
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.5 James Chadwick (1891-
1974) received the Nobel Prize in
physics in 1935 for his discovery of the
neutron. 

Chadwick found the mass of the neutron to be 1.16 u. (The best methods
now available for determining the neutron mass give 1.008665 u, based on
a scale where 12C is defined to have a mass of 12 u exactly). The difficul-
ties of measuring the kinetic energies of the recoiling nuclei made this only
an approximate value, but it was good enough to show that the neutron has
a mass very close to that of the proton; thus, Chadwick's hypothesis did in-
deed offer a satisfactory solution to the problem of the "radiation" emitted
when beryllium or boron was bombarded with particles.
Much research has been done since on the properties of neutrons and
on the interactions between neutrons and atoms. An entire branch of study
called neutron physics has arisen. Neutron physics deals with the production
of neutrons, their detection, and their interaction with atomic nuclei and
with matter in bulk. This research has led, among other things, to the dis-
covery of nuclear fission, to be discussed below.
18.5 THE PROTON-NEUTRON MODEL
The discovery of the neutron, with an atomic mass close to one unit and
with no electric charge, confirmed Rutherford's suggestion that the atomic
nucleus is made up of protons and neutrons. This hypothesis was soon used
as the basis of a detailed theory of the nucleus by Heisenberg in 1932. His
work represented another triumph of quantum mechanics.
According to the proton-neutron model that arose from the new theory,
the nucleus of an atom having atomic number Z and mass number A con-
sists of Z protons and A-Z neutrons. The nuclei of the isotopes of a given
element differ only in the number of neutrons they contain. Thus, the nu-
cleus of the hydrogen isotope of mass number 1 contains one proton; the
nucleus of the hydrogen isotope of mass number 2 contains one proton and
one neutron. (That nucleus is called a deuteron.) The nucleus of the neon
isotope 20Ne contains 10 protons and 10 neutrons, while that of 22Ne con-
tains 10 protons and 12 neutrons. The atomic number Z identified with
the charge on the nucleus, is the number of protons in the nucleus. The
mass number A is the total number of protons and neutrons. The term 
18.5 THE PROTON-NEUTRON MODEL
773
p
n
Be
Paraffin
α
FIGURE 18.6
Experimental setup for alpha
particle/beryllium collision producing neu-
trons that collide with protons in paraffin
(compare with Figure 18.3).

nucleons refers to both kinds of nuclear particles. So atomic mass number A
turns out to be simply the number of nucleons in the nucleus!
According to the proton-neutron model, one proton alone forms the
common isotope of hydrogen, 1
1H. One proton and one neutron yield 2
1H,
called a deuteron, and the resulting atom is called deuterium. When two
deuterium atoms combine with oxygen, they form "heavy water." The atom
formed from the rare isotope 3
1H is called tritium, a radioactive substance.
Is the proton-neutron hypothesis for the structure of nuclei fully con-
sistent with the facts of radioactivity, such as  and  emission and the
transformation rules? If two protons and two neutrons could combine, the
resulting particle would have Z  2 and A  4, just the properties of the 
particle. The emission of two protons and two neutrons (in the combined
form of an  particle) would be consistent with the first transformation rule
of radioactivity. (The  particle might exist as such in the nucleus, or it
might be formed at the instant of emission; the latter possibility is now
considered more likely.)
The neutron-proton hypothesis raised a new question: if the nucleus
consists of protons and neutrons, where could a  particle come from in 
 decay? This question is more difficult to answer than that of the origin
of an  particle. The second transformation rule of radioactivity provides
a clue: When a nucleus emits a  particle, its charge Z increases by one
unit while its mass number A remains unchanged. This would happen if a
neutron were to change into a proton and a  particle.
This idea was not a return to the proton-electron hypothesis discussed
earlier. Physicists had already come to the conclusion that electrons are not
present in the nucleus, so  decay was not considered to be a simple sep-
aration of a proton and electron; it would have to be a transformation of a
774
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
α particle
2
4He
p
p
n
n
2
3He
p
p
n
3
1H
2
1H
p n
n
n
Deuteron
p
Proton
1
1H
p
Tritium
nucleus
FIGURE 18.7
Neutron-proton models of
isotopes of hydrogen and helium.

neutron that created a proton and electron. However, there were additional
experimental data that raised difficulties for such a simple transformation
idea.
18.6 THE NEUTRINO
The description of  decay in terms of the transformation of a neutron in
the nucleus is part of one of the most fascinating stories in modern physics:
the prediction and eventual discovery of the particles called the neutrino
and the antineutrino.
Quantitative studies of the energy relations in  decay during the 1920s
and 1930s raised a difficult and serious question. Methods were devised for
determining the energy change in a nucleus during  decay. According to
the principle of conservation of energy, the energy lost by the nucleus
should be equal to the energy carried off by the  particle; but the mea-
sured kinetic energies of the  particles had a whole range of measured val-
ues, all smaller than the amount of energy lost by the nucleus. Some of the
energy lost by the nucleus seemed to have disappeared. Measurements made
on a large number of  emitters indicated that on the average about two-
thirds of the energy lost by the -decaying nuclei seemed to disappear. At-
tempts to find the missing energy failed. For example, some physicists
thought that the missing energy might be carried off by  rays; but no such
 rays could be detected experimentally. The principle of conservation of
energy seemed to be violated in  decay. Similar discrepancies were found
in measurements of the momentum of the emitted electron and the re-
coiling nucleus.
As in the case of the experiments that led to the discovery of the neutron,
physicists tried very hard to find an alternative to accepting a failure of the
principles of conservation of energy and momentum. These and related con-
siderations led the Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli to suggest that another,
hitherto unnoticed, particle is emitted in  decay along with the electron,
and that this particle carries off the missing energy and momentum. This
hypothetical particle could have no electric charge, because the positive
charge of the proton and the negative charge of the  particle together are
equal to the zero charge of the original neutron. The mass-energy balance
in the decay of the neutron indicated that the rest mass of the hypothetical
particle should be very small, much smaller than the mass of an electron and
possibly even zero. The combination of zero electric charge and zero or
nearly zero mass would make the particle extremely hard to detect.
18.6 THE NEUTRINO
775

The Italian physicist Enrico Fermi called the suggested particle the neu-
trino ("little neutral one" in Italian). Fermi constructed a theory of  de-
cay based on Pauli's suggestion, in which a neutron decays into a proton,
an electron, and a neutrino, here represented by the Greek letter nu (
):
1
0n  1
1p  0
1e  
.
This theory has been successful in describing the known facts of  decay.
From 1934 on, while the difficult hunt for its experimental verification was
still in progress, the neutrino was accepted as a "real" particle for two rea-
sons, both theoretical: It saved the principle of con-
servation of energy in  decay, and it could be used
successfully both to describe the result of experi-
ments in  decay and to predict the results of new
experiments.
Many unsuccessful attempts were made to detect
neutrinos over a period of 25 years. Finally, in 1956,
neutrinos were detected in an experiment using the
776
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.8
Neutrinos were
first detected in this tank. Re-
actions provoked by neutrinos
from a nuclear reactor cause
flashes of light in the liquid
with which the tank is filled.
The flashes are detected by the
photoelectric tubes that stud
the tank wall. This work was
done by two American physi-
cists, Clyde Cowan and Fred-
erick Reines (pictured here at a
nuclear power plant in South
Carolina). 
It is now known that a free neu-
tron, that is, a neutron separated
from an atom, sooner or later
decays into a proton, an electron,
and a neutrino. (The half-life of
a beam of free neutrons has been
measured to be 12 min.)

extremely large flow of neutrinos that comes out of
a nuclear reactor. The detection of neutrinos is an
indirect process that involves detecting the products
of a reaction provoked by a neutrino. The reaction
used was a reverse  decay, the production of a pro-
ton from a neutron. Because the proper meeting of
a proton, an electron, and a neutrino at the same
place and same time is an exceedingly unlikely
event—neutrinos can go right through the entire
Earth without change—and the resulting neutron
difficult to detect, "catching" the neutrinos required
a very elaborate and sensitive trap. Again, the faith of physicists in the prin-
ciple of conservation of energy was justified.
18.7 THE NEED FOR PARTICLE ACCELERATORS
Up to 1932, the study of nuclear reactions was limited by the kind of pro-
jectile that could be used to bombard nuclei. Only  particles from the nat-
urally radioactive nuclides could bring about reactions. Progress was lim-
ited because  particles could be obtained only in beams of low intensity
and with fairly low kinetic energies. These relatively low-energy particles
could produce transmutations only in light elements. When heavier ele-
ments are bombarded with  particles, the repulsive electric force exerted
by the greater charge of the heavy nucleus on an  particle makes it diffi-
cult for the  particle to reach the nucleus. The probability of a nuclear
reaction taking place becomes very small or zero. Because the interest in
nuclear reactions was great, physicists in many countries sought methods
of increasing the energy of charged particles to be used as projectiles.
There were advantages to be gained in working with particles like the
proton or the deuteron (the nucleus of the deuterium or heavy hydrogen
atom) that have only one positive charge. Having only a single charge, these
particles would experience smaller repulsive electric forces than would 
particles in the neighborhood of a nucleus, and thus would be more suc-
cessful in getting close enough to produce transmutations, even of heavy
(and therefore high-charge) target nuclei. Protons or deuterons could be
obtained from positive-ray tubes, but their energies were rather low. Some
device was needed to accelerate these particles to higher energies, as
Rutherford was among the first to say. Such devices might also offer other
advantages. The speed (and energy) of the bombarding particles could be
controlled by the experimenter, and very intense projectile beams might 
18.7 THE NEED FOR PARTICLE ACCELERATORS
777
There is one more complication.
It is now known that there are
several kinds of neutrinos. The
one involved in  decay (as dis-
cussed so far) is now referred to
as an antineutrino and is denoted
by the symbol 
. The transfor-
mation of a neutron during 
emission is now written
1
0n  1
1p  0
1e  
.

be obtained. It would then be possible to find how nuclear reactions de-
pend on the energy of the bombarding particles.
Since 1930 scientists and engineers have invented and developed many
devices for accelerating charged particles. In each case, the particles used
(electrons, protons, deuterons,  particles, or heavy ions) are accelerated
by an electric field. In some cases, a magnetic field is used to control the
path of particles, that is, to steer them. The simplest type has a single high-
voltage step of about ten million volts, thus increasing electron or proton
energies to 10 MeV.
Another type of accelerator has a long series of low-voltage steps applied
as the particle travels in a straight line. Some of these machines produce
electron energies up to 20 GeV (1 GeV  109 eV, GeV standing for "giga
electron-volts"). A third general type uses magnetic fields to hold the par-
ticles in a circular path, returning them over and over to the same low-
voltage accelerating fields. The first machine of this type was the cyclotron
(see Figure 18.9). Some of these accelerators produce 7 GeV electrons or
778
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.9
M.S. Livingston (left) and Ernest O. Lawrence (right) are shown standing
beside the magnet for one of the earliest cyclotrons. Lawrence and Livingston invented the
cyclotron in 1931, thereby initiating the development of high-energy physics in the United
States. 

18.7 THE NEED FOR PARTICLE ACCELERATORS
779
ACCELERATORS
Research into the nature of matter has dis-
closed the structure of the atom and the
atomic nucleus. Much current research is
focused on the particles that make up the
nucleus. Matter responds to four different
types of force: (1) the strong force, (2) the
electromagnetic force, (3) the weak force,
and (4) the gravitational force. By observ-
ing how particles react when influenced by
some of these forces, scientists have dis-
covered the existence of many new and
seemingly bizarre particles, using particle
accelerators of increasingly higher energy.
Probing the nature of matter is an inter-
national endeavor. For example, at Fermi-
lab (Illinois) during 2001, there were over
2500 users of the accelerators, including
1368 foreign nationals from 25 countries.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 18.10
(a) The tunnel of the main ac-
celerator at Fermilab; (b) participants in one of
the many teams working at Fermilab; (c) aerial
photograph of the Fermilab facility in Illinois. 

500 GeV protons. Accelerators producing in excess of 2000 GeV (2 TeV)
are being planned at CERN, the European accelerator near Geneva,
Switzerland. Accelerators have become basic tools for research in nuclear
and high-energy physics. Accelerators are also used in the production of
radioactive isotopes and as radiation sources, both for medical and for in-
dustrial purposes.
One of the most powerful accelerators currently in use is a 1000 TeV
particle accelerator now in operation at the National Accelerator Labora-
tory (Fermilab) in Batavia, Illinois. Such "machines" are among the most
complex and grandiose structures ever built. Indeed, they are monuments
to human imagination and ingenuity, the ability to reason and to collabo-
rate in groups—some as many as 500 persons—on peaceful projects that
further the understanding of nature. Basically, the "machines" are tools to
help physicists find out as much as they can about the structure of nuclear
particles and the forces holding them together.
With the discovery of the neutron in 1932, it was then believed that
three "elementary" particles act as the building blocks of matter: the pro-
ton, the neutron, and the electron. The existence of new particles found
later, such as neutrinos and antineutrinos, has been mentioned. As high-
energy accelerators became available, additional "elementary" particles
were discovered, one after another. These particles are grouped into "fam-
ilies" according to their properties. Most of these particles exist only briefly;
typical lifetimes are of the order of 108 s or less. A whole new field, high-
energy physics, has evolved, and the aim of the high-energy physicist of to-
day is to discern the order and structure behind the large number of "ele-
mentary" particles that have been discovered.
How do physicists detect these particles? A number of methods by which
physicists can observe and measure radioactive emissions have already been
mentioned. They include the electroscope and the electrometer employed
since the early days of radioactivity, the Geiger counter, and the Wilson
cloud chamber. In addition, various types of ionization chambers, scintil-
lation counters, photographic emulsions, semiconductor devices, spark
chambers, and bubble chambers are also in use.
18.8 THE ENERGY OF NUCLEAR BINDING
The concepts of atomic and nuclear structure—than an atom consists of a
nucleus surrounded by electrons and that the nucleus is made up of pro-
tons and neutrons—led to a fundamental question: Is the mass of a neutral
atom equal to the sum of the masses of the protons, neutrons, and electrons that
make up the neutral atom?
780
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS

This question can be answered precisely because the masses of the pro-
ton, the neutron, and the electron are known, as are the masses of nearly
all the atomic species. A survey of the known atomic masses has shown that,
for each kind of atom, the atomic mass is always less than the sum of the
masses of the constituent particles when measured in their free states. The
simplest atom containing at least one proton, one neutron, and one elec-
tron is deuterium, 21H. In this case, the masses (in atomic mass units, or
u) of the constituents of a deuterium nucleus, called a deuteron, are
rest mass of one proton  1.007276 u,
rest mass of one neutron  1.008665 u,
total rest mass of particles in free state  2.01594 u,
rest mass of deuteron  2.01355 u,
difference (m)  0.00239 u.
Although the difference in rest mass, m, may appear small, it corre-
sponds to a significant energy difference, because of the factor c2 in the re-
lation E  mc2, where c is the speed of light (about 3  108 m/s). The dif-
ference, m, in mass, which is called the mass defect,
corresponds to a difference in the amount of energy
E before and after the formation of the nucleus ac-
cording to the relationship from relativity theory:
E  mc2. A convenient conversion factor from
atomic mass (expressed in atomic mass units) to 
energy (expressed in million electron volts) is 
1 u  931 MeV. If therefore we consider the for-
mation of a deuterium nucleus from the combina-
tion of a proton and a neutron, then an amount of
mass 0.00239 u will be "lost" in the process. This
mass defect means that an amount of energy equal
to (0.00239 u)  (931 MeV/u)  2.23 MeV has to
be radiated away from this system of combining par-
ticles before they settle down as a deuterium nucleus.
(In addition, a tiny bit more of energy must also be
lost, as a photon, when an electron is bound to an orbital path around this
nucleus in forming a deuterium atom.)
The expected energy loss calculated from the difference in rest mass can
be compared with the result of a direct experiment. When hydrogen is
bombarded with neutrons, a neutron can be captured in the reaction
1
0n  1
1H  2
1H  .
18.8 THE ENERGY OF NUCLEAR BINDING
781
The energy equivalent of 1
atomic mass unit:
1 u  1.66  1027 kg,
E  mc2
 (1.66  1027 kg)
 (3  108 m/s)
 14.9  1011 J.
But 1 MeV  1.60  1012 J:
E 
 931 MeV.
14.9  1011 J

1.6  1013 J/MeV

This reaction produces no particle fragments having large kinetic energy,
so the mass of 0.00239 u by which 2
1H is lighter than 1
0n  1
1H must be car-
ried away by the  ray. The energy of the  ray has been determined ex-
perimentally and found to be 2.23 MeV, just as predicted! This confirms
that on forming a nucleus, the constituents give up energy, generally as a
gamma ray, corresponding to the amount of mass difference.
The inverse reaction, in which a deuteron is bombarded with  rays, has
also been studied
  2
1H  1
1H  1
0n.
When the energy of the  rays is less than 2.23 MeV, this reaction cannot
occur. But if  rays of energy 2.23 MeV or greater are used, the reaction
can occur; some photons are absorbed, and separate protons and neutrons
can be detected.
To summarize: Following the "capture" of a neutron by the nucleus 1
1H,
energy is liberated in the form of a  ray. This energy (2.23 MeV) is called
the binding energy of the deuteron. It can be thought of as the energy re-
leased when a proton and neutron bind together to form a nucleus. To get
the inverse reaction (when 2
1H is bombarded with  rays), energy must be
absorbed. So you can think of the binding energy as also the amount of
energy needed to break the nucleus up into its constituent nuclear particles.
The concept and observation of binding energy apply, of course, not only
to the example just given but to all situations in which simple parts are
bound together by some force to form a complex system. For example, the
Earth is held in orbit around the Sun and would need to be given a cer-
tain additional amount of kinetic energy to escape from the Sun, to which
it is now bound by their mutual gravitational attraction. In a hydrogen
atom, the electron needs 13 eV before it can escape from the nucleus that
782
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
Two protons
and two neutrons,
all separate
Helium
nucleus
FIGURE 18.11
A case where the whole seems not to be
equal to the sum of its parts. Two protons and two neu-
trons, measured separately, are distinctly more massive
than a helium nucleus, which consists of the same parti-
cles that are bound together. The particles lose some en-
ergy (mass) in binding together to form a nucleus.

binds it by an electric attraction. Conversely, when a bare 1
1H nucleus cap-
tures an electron and becomes a stable, ordinary neutral atom of hydrogen,
the system must give up an amount of energy equal to 13.6 eV by radia-
tion, exactly the observed energy of the photon emitted in this process of
electron capture. However, only the nuclear binding energies are relatively
large enough to represent measurable mass differences.
18.9 NUCLEAR BINDING 
ENERGY AND STABILITY
The calculation of the nuclear binding energy made for the deuteron can
be extended to all other nuclear species, and such calculations have been
performed. Figure 18.12 shows in graphic form how the total nuclear bind-
18.9 NUCLEAR BINDING ENERGY AND STABILITY
783
Mass number (A)
0
50
500
1000
1500
0
100
Average binding energy of nucleus (MeV)
150
200
FIGURE 18.12
Nuclear binding energy as a function of
the mass number—i.e., the number of particles in the
nucleus.

ing energy for stable nuclides increases with increasing atomic mass, as
more particles are added to form the nucleus. The term nucleons refers to
both protons and neutrons; therefore, the binding energy of the nucleus
increases with the number of nucleons. But, as you see, the result is not a
straight line. Such experimental data have important implications.
The implications can be seen more clearly if the average binding energy
per nucleon is calculated. In the case of the carbon-12 example, the total
binding energy is 92.1 MeV. Since there are 12 nucleons inside the nucleus
(six protons and six neutrons), the average binding energy per nucleon is
92.1 MeV/12, or 7.68 MeV. In the graph in Figure 18.13, the experimen-
tally obtained values of the average binding energy per nucleon (in MeV)
are plotted against the number of nucleons in the nucleus (mass number,
A). Notice the unusually high position (above the curve) of the data point
near 7.1 MeV, compared to its neighbors in the periodic table. The point
is for 4He. The relatively high value of the binding energy of this nucleus
indicates its unusually great stability.
The significance of the graph lies in its striking shape. The binding en-
ergy per nucleon starts with a low value for the deuterium nucleus (the first
point) and then increases rapidly. Some nuclei in the early part of the curve,
for example, 4He, 12C, and 16O, have exceptionally high values as compared
with their neighbors. This indicates that more energy would have to be
supplied to remove a nucleon from one of these nuclei than from one of
784
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
Mass number (A)
0
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
40
Binding energy per nucleon (MeV)
60
80
100
120
140
160
180 200 220
240
FIGURE 18.13
The average binding energy per nucleon for stable nuclei
as a function of the number of particles in the nucleus.

their neighbors. (Remember: High binding energy per nucleon means a great
deal of energy is needed to take the nucleus apart into its constituent 
nucleons. In a sense "binding energy" might have been better called "un-
binding energy.")
The high binding energy per nucleon of 4He compared with deuterium
would mean that if two deuterium nuclei were joined together to form a
4He nucleus, there would be a large amount of excess energy available,
which would be emitted to the environment. This excess energy is the
source of the enormous energies made available in fusion, or thermonuclear,
reactions, discussed below.
Since they do have such high binding energies, you would expect 4He,
12C, and 16O to be exceptionally stable. There is evidence in favor of this
conclusion, for example, the fact that the four particles making up the 
4He nucleus are emitted as a single unit, the  particle, in radioactivity.
The experimentally obtained curve of binding energy per nucleon has a
broad maximum, extending from approximately A  50 to A  90. Then
it drops off for the heavy elements. Thus, 63
29Cu near the maximum is found
to have a binding energy per nucleon of about 8.75 MeV, while 235
92U, near
the high-A end of the curve, has a value of 7.61 MeV. This indicates that
as more nucleons are added to the heavier nuclei, the binding energy per
nucleon decreases. It follows that the nuclei in the neighborhood of the
maximum of the curve, like those of copper, should be more difficult to
break up than heavier nuclei, such as radium and uranium. It also follows
that when uranium and other high-A nuclei somehow are made to break
up, their fragments are smaller nuclei which possess higher binding energy
per nucleon. In such a case there is again excess energy due to the differ-
ence in energy between the starting nucleus and its fragments, which is
emitted to the environment in the form of kinetic energy of the fragments
and gamma radiation. This historically significant process, which involves
the splitting of the heaviest nuclei into lighter nuclei, is known as nuclear
fission. The excess energies available during fission are the source of the
enormous energies released in nuclear fission reactions.
The shape of the average binding energy curve, which drops off at both
ends, indicates, therefore, that there are two general reaction processes by
which one can hope to release energy from nuclei:
(1)
combining light nuclei into a more massive nucleus, known as nuclear
fusion; or
(2)
splitting up heavy nuclei into nuclei of medium mass, which is called
nuclear fission.
In either process, the resulting products would have greater average bind-
ing energy per nucleon, so energy would be released in the process. Both
18.9 NUCLEAR BINDING ENERGY AND STABILITY
785

fusion and fission have been shown to occur, and the technology of fission
has been simplified and exploited in many countries. Fission reactions can
be made to take place slowly (as in a nuclear power plant) or very rapidly
(as in a nuclear explosion).
The idea of binding energy should now make it clear why atomic masses,
when precisely measured, are not exactly whole-number multiples of the
mass of a hydrogen atom, even though nuclei are just collections of iden-
tical protons and neutrons. When those particles combined to make a nu-
cleus, their total rest mass was reduced by an amount corresponding to the
binding energy, and the average binding energy varies from nuclide to 
nuclide, as shown in Figure 18.13.
We now take a closer look at fission and fusion.
18.10 NUCLEAR FISSION: DISCOVERY
The discovery of nuclear fission is an example of an unexpected result with
great practical and social implications, yet originally it was obtained dur-
ing the course of research carried on for reasons having nothing to do with
the possible uses society would make of the discovery. It is also an excel-
lent example of the combined use of physical and chemical methods in nu-
clear research, and of the effectiveness of teamwork.
When Joliot and Curie showed that some products of neutron-induced
nuclear reactions are radioactive, Fermi and his colleagues in Rome, Italy,
undertook a systematic study of nuclear reactions induced by neutrons. One
of the purposes of this research was to produce new nuclides. As a result,
many new radioactive nuclides were made and their half-lives determined.
One nuclear reaction used successfully in this study was the capture of a
neutron followed at once by the emission of a  ray. For example, when
aluminum is bombarded with neutrons, the following reaction occurs:
1
0n  27
13Al  28
13Al  .
Aluminum-28 is radioactive, with a half-life of 2.3 min, decaying by  emis-
sion into silicon
28
13Al  28
14Si  1
0e  
.
As a result of these two reactions, a nuclide (28
14Si) is produced with values
of Z and A each greater by one unit than those of the initial nucleus. Fermi
thought that if neutrons bombarded uranium, the atomic species having
786
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS

the largest value of Z then known, an entirely new element might be formed
by the  decay of the heavier uranium isotope
1
0n  238
92U  239
92U  .
239
92U  239
93(?)  1
0e  
,
He also speculated that the new nuclide denoted by 239
93(?) in turn might
also undergo  decay, producing a second element beyond uranium
239
93(?)  239
94(??)  
.
In this way, two new elements might be produced, one with Z  93, one
with Z  94. If these reactions could really be made to occur, the result
would be the artificial production of an element, or elements, not previ-
ously known to exist: transuranium elements.
Fermi found in 1934 that the bombardment of uranium with neutrons
actually produced new radioactive elements in the target, as shown by the
emission of rays and a decay activity that revealed new, relatively short half-
lives. The new elements were at first assumed to be the hypothesized
transuranium elements.
Fermi's results aroused much interest, and in the next 5 years a number
of workers experimented with the neutron bombardment of uranium. Many
18.10 NUCLEAR FISSION: DISCOVERY
787
FIGURE 18.14
Enrico Fermi (1901-1955).
Born in Rome, Italy, Fermi received the No-
bel Prize for Physics in 1938 for his work on
bombarding nuclei with the neutrons. Fermi
fled Italy in 1938 and moved to the United
States, where he continued work on nuclear
structure and participated in the Manhattan
Project. The equation Fermi wrote is incor-
rect. It is reported that after Fermi wrote 
the equation he turned to the audience to ac-
knowledge the error when this picture was
taken. He then erased it.

different radioactive half-lives were found for the radiation from the tar-
get, but attempts to identify these half-lives with particular elements led to
great confusion. The methods used were similar to those used in the study
of the natural radioactive elements (Section 17.7). But the difficulty of iden-
tification was even greater because a radioactive nuclide formed in a nu-
clear reaction is usually present in the target area only in an extremely small
amount, possibly as little as 1012 g; special techniques to separate these
small quantities had to be developed.
The reason for the confusion was found late in 1938 when Otto Hahn
and Fritz Strassmann, two German chemists, showed definitely that one of
the supposed transuranium elements had the chemical properties of an iso-
tope of barium (139
56Ba), with a half-life of 86 min. Another nuclide result-
ing from the neutron bombardment of uranium was identified as lanthanum
(140
57La), with a half-life of 40 hr.
The production of the nuclides 139
56Ba and 140
57La from uranium, a nuclide
with the atomic number 92 and an atomic mass of nearly 240, required an
unknown kind of nuclear reaction, one in which the heavy nucleus is split
almost in half. Nothing like it had been known to exist before. However,
these two nuclides could not be the two halves, since the sum of their atomic
numbers and masses exceeded those of uranium. Perhaps barium and lan-
788
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.15
Lise Meitner and
Otto Hahn. Meitner, born in Aus-
tria, joined Hahn in 1908 in a re-
search collaboration that lasted 30
years. In 1938, Meitner was forced
to leave Germany by the Nazi
regime. She was in Sweden when
she published (along with her
nephew, Otto Frisch) the first re-
port recognizing and describing the
existence of nuclear fission. 

thanum were each only one of the two products of two different splittings
of uranium. If such splitting processes really occurred, it should also be
possible to find "the other half" of each splitting, that is, to find two other
nuclides with masses between 90 and 100 and atomic numbers of about 35.
Indeed, Hahn and Strassmann were able to find in the target material a ra-
dioactive isotope of strontium (Z  38) and one of yttrium (Z  39) which
fulfilled these conditions, as well as isotopes of krypton (Z  36) and xenon
(Z  54). It was clear from the chemical evidence that the uranium nucleus,
when bombarded with neutrons, can indeed split into two nuclei of inter-
mediate atomic mass.
Although Hahn and Strassmann showed that isotopes of intermediate
mass did appear, they hesitated to state the conclusion that the uranium
nucleus could indeed be split, since such an idea was so startingly new. In
their historic report, dated January 9, 1939, they said:
On the basis of these briefly presented experiments, we must, as
chemists, really rename the previously offered scheme and set the
symbols Ba, La, Ce in place of Ra, Ac, Th. As nuclear chemists with
close ties to physics, we cannot decide to make a step so contrary
to all existing experience of nuclear physics. After all, a series of
strange coincidences may, perhaps, have led to these results.
The step which Hahn and Strassmann, as chemists, could not bring them-
selves to take was understood to be necessary by two Austrian physicists,
Lise Meitner and her nephew, Otto R. Frisch, on January 16, 1939, both
then in Sweden as forced exiles from Germany. They suggested that the
incident neutron provoked a disintegration of the uranium nucleus into
"two nuclei of roughly equal size," a process they called nuclear fission by
analogy to the biological division, or fission, of a living cell into two parts.
18.10 NUCLEAR FISSION: DISCOVERY
789
n
FIGURE 18.16
Schematic diagram representing ura-
nium fission.

On the basis of comparing the low average binding energy per nucleon of
uranium with the higher average binding energy per nucleon of the prod-
ucts, they predicted that the fragments would have high kinetic energy re-
sulting from the excess energy emitted in the fission process. This was soon
verified experimentally.
Shortly afterward, it was found that transuranium elements may, after
all, also be formed when uranium is bombarded with neutrons. In other
words, the capture of a neutron by uranium sometimes leads to fission and
sometimes leads to  decay. The  decay results in the formation of iso-
topes of elements of atomic number 93 and 94, later named neptunium and
plutonium (after the two planets in the solar system beyond Uranus). The
presence of both types of reaction, fission and neutron capture followed by
 decay, had been responsible for the earlier difficulty and confusion in the
analysis of the effects of neutrons on the uranium target. Now, the inter-
pretation of the experiments opened two new fields of scientific endeavor:
the physics and chemistry of the transuranium elements, and the study of
nuclear fission.
The discovery of nuclear fission caused research on it all over the world,
and much new information was obtained within a short time. It was found
that the uranium nucleus, after capturing a neutron, can split in fact into
any one of more than 40 different pairs of fragments. Radiochemical anal-
ysis showed that nuclides resulting from fission have atomic numbers be-
tween 30 and 63 and mass numbers between 72 and 158.
Yet nuclides of medium mass are not the only fission products. In a find-
ing that turned out to have extraordinary importance, neutrons also were dis-
covered to result from fission; the average number of neutrons emitted is
usually between two and three per fissioned nucleus. The following reaction
indicates only one of the many ways in which a uranium nucleus can split.
1
0n  235
92U  141
56Ba  92
36Kr  31
0n.
790
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.17
Otto R. Frisch (1904-1979). 

141
56Ba and 92
36Kr are not "natural" nuclides and are not stable; they are radio-
active and decay by  emission. For example, 141
56Ba can decay into 141
59Pr by
successive emission of three  particles, as shown by the following scheme
(the numbers in parentheses in are the half-lives): 
Similarly, 92
36Kr is transformed into 92
40Zr by four successive  decays.
It has been found that only certain nuclides can undergo fission. For
those that can, the probability that a nucleus will split when bombarded
depends on the energy of the neutrons used in the bombardment. The nu-
clides 235
92U and 239
94Pu can undergo fission when bombarded with neutrons
of any energy, even 0.01 eV or less. On the other hand, 238U and 232Th un-
dergo fission only when bombarded with neutrons having kinetic energies
of 1 MeV or more. (As noted previously, 239Pu, which is highly fissionable,
is produced by the capture of a neutron by 238U and the subsequent emis-
sion of two  particles.)
The energy released in the fission of a heavy nucleus is about 200 MeV.
This value can be calculated either by comparing atomic rest masses of re-
actants and products or from the average binding energy curve of the graph
in the previous section. The energy release in fission per atom is more than
a million times larger than in chemical reactions, and more than 20 times
larger than in the more common nuclear reactions, where it is usually less
than 10 MeV.
There was one more important result that became obvious to researchers
everywhere: Under appropriate conditions the neutrons released in fission
can, in turn, cause fission in neighboring uranium atoms, and thereby a
process known as a chain reaction can develop in a sample of uranium. The
combination of the large energy release in fission and the possibility of a
chain reaction is the basis of the large-scale use of nuclear energy.
18.11 CONTROLLING CHAIN REACTIONS
For a chain reaction in a sample of uranium to continue at an even rate,
there must be a favorable balance between the net production of neutrons
by fissions and the loss of neutrons due to the following three processes:
(18 min)
56Ba141
57La141
−1eo
(3.6 hr)
58Ce141
−1eo
(32 days)
59Pr141
−1eo
(a)
(b)
(c)
18.11 CONTROLLING CHAIN REACTIONS
791

1.
capture of neutrons by uranium without fission resulting;
2.
capture of neutrons by other materials in the sample (such as rods of
boron or cadmium) or in the structure containing the sample;
3.
escape of neutrons from the sample without being captured.
If too many neutrons escape from or are absorbed in the structure or as-
sembly (called a reactor), there will not be enough to sustain the chain re-
action. If too few neutrons escape or are absorbed, the reaction will con-
tinue to build up more and more. The design of nuclear reactors as energy
sources involves finding proper sizes, shapes, and materials to maintain or
control a balance between neutron production and neutron loss.
Since the nucleus occupies only a tiny fraction of an atom's volume, the
chance of a neutron colliding with a uranium nucleus is small, and a neu-
tron can go past the nuclei of billions of uranium (or other) atoms while
moving a few centimeters. If the reactor assembly is small, a significant per-
centage of the fission neutrons can escape from the assembly without caus-
792
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
n
n
n
U.
235
U.
238
One to three
neutrons from
fission process
Stray neutron
Fission fragment
A neutron
sometimes lost
Changes to plutonium
U.
235
U.
235
Original fission
Fission fragment
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
U.
235
One to three
neutrons again
One new fission
Two new
fissions
Fission fragment
Fission
fragment
Fission
fragment
Fission fragments
n
FIGURE 18.18
This diagram indicates what happens in a chain
reaction resulting from the fission of uranium-235 atoms (not
shown are other emissions, such as alpha, beta, and gamma rays).

ing further fissions. The "leakage" of neutrons can be so large that a chain
reaction cannot be sustained. The number of neutrons produced is propor-
tional to the volume, but the number of neutrons that escape is proportional
to the surface area. As the linear size L of the assembly is increased, the vol-
ume and area increase in proportion to L3 and L2, respectively, so that neu-
tron production increases with size more rapidly than neutron escape does.
For a given combination of materials (uranium and other structural ma-
terials that may be needed), there is a size of the reactor, called the critical
size, for which the net production of neutrons by fission is just equal to the
loss of neutrons by nonfission capture and escape. If the size of the reac-
tor assembly is smaller than this critical size, a chain reaction cannot be
sustained. The design of a reactor of reasonable dimensions, with given
materials, which will correspond to critical size, is an important part of re-
search in the field of nuclear engineering.
Another important consideration in the design of nuclear reactors is the
fact that the fission is much more probable when 235U is bombarded with
slow neutrons than when it is bombarded with fast neutrons. The neutrons
released in fission generally come out at very high speeds, having kinetic
energies from about 0.01 MeV to nearly 20 MeV, with an average kinetic
energy of about 2 MeV. The fast neutrons can be slowed down in the re-
actor by the addition of material (called "moderator") to which the neu-
trons can lose energy in collisions. The material should be relatively low
in atomic mass so that the neutrons will transfer a significant fraction of
their energy in collisions; but the material should not also capture and ab-
sorb many neutrons, thus taking them out of the reaction. Pure carbon in
the form of graphite and also water and beryllium meet these requirements.
As moderators, they slow down, or moderate, the
newly produced neutrons to lower speeds at which
the probability of causing additional fission is high.
Although nuclear reactors can be built in which the
fissions are induced by fast neutrons, it has been eas-
ier to build reactors with materials in which the fis-
sions are induced by slow neutrons.
Hydrogen atoms in water are very effective in slowing down neutrons
because the mass of a hydrogen nucleus (a single proton) is nearly the same
as that of a neutron and because the number of hydrogen atoms per unit
volume is high. A neutron can lose a large fraction of its energy in a col-
lision with a hydrogen nucleus. Only about 20 collisions are needed, on av-
erage, to slow down the fast neutron to energies under 1 eV. However, neu-
trons can also be captured by the hydrogen nucleus in the reaction
1
0n  1
1H  2
1H  .
18.11 CONTROLLING CHAIN REACTIONS
793
Although nuclear reactors can be
built in which the fissions are in-
duced by fast neutrons, it has
been easier to build reactors with
materials in which the fissions
are induced by slow neutrons.

The probability of this reaction occurring instead of an elastic collision is
high enough so that it has been found impossible to achieve a chain reac-
tion with natural uranium and ordinary water. But the absorption of a neu-
tron by a deuterium nucleus ( 2
1H), such as the nucleus of the heavy isotope
of hydrogen, found in so-called heavy water, has an extremely small prob-
ability. Neutrons do not lose as much energy per collision with 2H nuclei,
but this disadvantage is compensated for by the much lower absorption
rate. Therefore, a chain reaction can be achieved easily with natural ura-
nium and heavy water. Reactors, with natural uranium as the fuel and heavy
water as the moderator, have been built in the United States, Canada,
France, Sweden, Norway, and other countries, and were attempted to be
built by German scientists during World War II.
794
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.19 Lise Meitner (1878-1968). 

The contrast between the nuclear properties of hydrogen 1
1H and deu-
terium ( 2
1H or 2
1D) has important implications for the development of nu-
clear reactors. Heavy water is expensive to produce, but when it is used
with natural uranium (mostly 238U), a chain reaction can be achieved effi-
ciently. Although the uranium isotope 238U normally absorbs neutrons
rather than fissioning, the heavy water slows the neutrons below the en-
ergy at which they will be captured by the plentiful 238U nuclei. A slow
neutron will simply bounce off the 238U nuclei it encounters until it is even-
tually absorbed by a rare 235U nucleus, causing the nucleus to fission.
Ordinary water can be used as moderator in a uranium reactor if ura-
nium enriched in the isotope 235U is used instead of natural uranium. Many
reactors "fueled" with enriched uranium and moderated with ordinary wa-
ter have been built in the United States. Such reactors are called light-
water reactors. In fact, this general reactor type is the preferred design for
the commercial production of energy (electricity), since it is less expensive
18.11 CONTROLLING CHAIN REACTIONS
795
FIGURE 18.20
The Chicago pile No.
1 used by Enrico Fermi and his associ-
ates when they first achieved a self-sus-
taining nuclear reaction on December
2, 1942. Alternate layers of graphite,
containing uranium metal and/or ura-
nium oxide, were separated by layers of
pure solid graphite blocks. Graphite
was used as a moderator to slow down
neutrons in order to increase the like-
lihood of fission. Courtesy of Argonne
National Laboratory.

to build and less likely to yield as by-products fissionable materials that
could be used for nuclear weapons.
Carbon in the form of ultra-pure graphite has been used as a modera-
tor in many reactors, including the earliest ones. Its atoms being more mas-
sive, it is not as good at slowing down fast neutrons as are light water and
heavy water; about 120 collisions with carbon atoms are needed to slow
down a fast neutron with an initial energy of 2 MeV to the desired energy
of about 0.025 eV; in heavy water only about 25 collisions are needed. But
although carbon in the form of pure graphite is not the best moderator and
absorbs some neutrons, it does permit a chain reaction to occur when lumps
of natural uranium (cylindrical rods containing uranium pellets, for exam-
ple) are arranged in a large mass of graphite. The determination of just
how this could be done was one of the main problems that had to be solved
before the world's first chain reaction was achieved in December 1942 by
a team working under Enrico Fermi at the University of Chicago. (It was
a crucial experiment because until its success it was by no means certain
that a chain reaction was really possible in practice.) Many graphite-
moderated reactors are now in operation throughout the world. Their chief
purpose will be discussed in the next section.
The control of a nuclear reactor is relatively simple. Lest fission is oc-
curring too frequently, a few control rods are inserted into the reactor. The
rods consist of a material (such as cadmium or boron) that absorbs slow
neutrons, thereby reducing the number of neutrons in the reactor. Removal
of the control rods will allow the rate of fission in the reactor to increase.
The sketch (Figure 18.21) illustrates the basic reactions that occur in a nu-
clear reactor in which uranium is the fissionable material.
796
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
Moderator
Absorber
Fuel
FIGURE 18.21
Schematic diagram of three types of functions fulfilled
by parts of a nuclear reactor.

18.12 NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS
Nuclear reactors are useful for energy production because of the large
amount of kinetic energy that the moderator in a reactor obtains from the
fission neutrons in inelastic collisions. The fission neutrons are slowed by
the moderator and return to the uranium to find more 235U nuclei in which
to induce fission. The kinetic energy lost by the fission neutrons as they
are slowed by the moderator is gained by the molecules of the moderator
and appears as heat. The heat generated can—and must—be pumped away
from the reactor core by cool water which is thereby made to boil. The re-
sulting steam can then be used to turn a turbine connected to the coils of
an electric generator, thus producing electricity.
The main difference between a nuclear power plant and a fossil-fuel
power plant is that heat produced by nuclear fission replaces heat produced
by chemical reactions in the burning of fossil fuel. In both instances the
heat is used to generate steam, as in steam-engine technology, to perform
the useful work needed. In both instances the work is used, not to drive an
engine directly, but to generate electricity.
The advantages of nuclear-powered production of electricity in a well-
shielded and well-run reactor are obvious. The reaction produces no green-
house gas emissions or other polluting gases. A nuclear reactor does not
require the burning of fossil fuels, which are approaching depletion, and
18.12 NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS
797
Reactor
vessel
Fuel rods
in core
Containment shell
Pump
Condenser
Cooling water
Electric
generator
Pump
Control
rods
Pressurizer
Steam
turbine
Cooling liquid
Water
FIGURE 18.22
Schematic diagram of nuclear power plant. Heat from nuclear fis-
sion is used to boil water. The steam is used to turn a turbine which rotates coils
in a magnetic field to generate electricity.

the dependence on the importation of expensive foreign fuel reserves is di-
minished. Nevertheless, the world supply of uranium is not unlimited, and
reactors do require the disposal of long-lived radioactive waste, as well as
the safe disposal of the heated water and all equipment and clothing ex-
posed to radiation.
The ever-increasing use of electrical energy is an important aspect of
modern life. As discussed in Chapter 11, every possible source of energy
that might be used to meet the increasing demand for electricity is at pre-
sent problematic.
The development of nuclear power in the United States was slower to
develop than was expected at the end of World War II. But during the
1960s nuclear electric power became economically competitive with hydro-
electricity and electricity from fossil fuels. By the beginning of 1978, 65
nuclear reactors were operating with over 47 million kilowatts capacity,
about 9% of the nation's total electric power production.
However, the picture changed dramatically during the 1980s as the re-
sult of the public's increasing concern for safety, especially in the wake of
the accidents at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl. More recently, the pos-
798
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.23
Reactor Number One at Great Britain's first nuclear power station at Calder
Hall (opened in 1956). The large towers are cooling towers. The reactor is in the large
building.

sibility that terrorists might crash an airplane into a nuclear reactor, with
potentially devastating consequences, has underscored public concern about
reactor safety. Plants under construction near densely populated areas where
rapid evacuation is impossible, have been discontinued. At the same time,
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission imposed stricter safety provisions dur-
ing the 1990s on the operation of the plants and the disposal of radioactive
waste. With the drop in the price of imported oil at the time, the opera-
tion of a nuclear power plant was no longer economically competitive with
a power plant using imported fossil fuel. As a result, no new nuclear power
plants have been built in the United States since the 1980s, and those still
in operation may well be phased out in the years ahead.
Fusion energy, which has been the subject of intense, sophisticated re-
search, is nevertheless still not a technical reality, but probably remains the
main hope for an eventual large-scale solution to our rapidly increasing en-
ergy needs.
18.13 NUCLEAR WEAPONS
The large-scale use of nuclear energy in chain reactions was accomplished
in the United States between 1939 and 1945. The work was done under
the pressure of World War II, as a result of the cooperative efforts in which
government agencies brought together large numbers of scientists and en-
gineers. The workers in the United States included Americans, Britons, and
European refugees from fascist-controlled countries. They hoped to obtain
a nuclear weapon—if one could be made—before the Germans, who were
known to be working on one, and in fact had started earlier. Many of the
scientists hoped that the very existence of such a weapon would make fu-
ture wars unlikely. A number of others petitioned that the Government
would not use such a weapon on civilian targets, but only as a demonstra-
tion on uninhabited areas.
In a so-called atomic bomb (more properly a nuclear fission bomb), an ex-
tensive chain reaction occurs throughout the material in a few millionths
of a second, thereby resulting in the explosive release of an enormous
amount of energy. This reaction differs from the controlled nuclear reac-
tor, in which the operating conditions are so arranged that the energy from
fission is released at a much slower and essentially constant rate. In the con-
trolled reactor, the fissionable material is mixed with other materials in such
a way that, on average, only one of the neutrons emitted in fission causes
the fission of another nucleus. In this way, the chain reaction just sustains
itself. In a nuclear bomb, on the other hand, the fissionable material is not
18.13 NUCLEAR WEAPONS
799

mixed with a moderator, and the device is designed so that nearly all of the
neutrons emitted in each fission can cause fissions in other nuclei.
Nuclear reactors were first used during World War II in the United
States to produce raw materials for one kind of nuclear bomb, namely to
manufacture highly fissionable plutonium, 239
94Pu, from the uranium isotope
238U through  decay. Such reactors are called breeder reactors. These re-
actors are designed in such a way that some of the neutrons from the fis-
sion of 235U are slowed down sufficiently not to cause fission in 238U atoms.
(In natural uranium, only about 0.75% of the atoms are 235U.) Instead, the
neutrons are absorbed by 238U nuclei to form 239Pu through the sequence
of -decay reactions described in Section 18.10. Some "nonnuclear" na-
tions using nuclear reactors for generating electricity may have obtained
weapons-grade plutonium from their reactors in this way. The United
800
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
n
n
n
n
Neutron
Fission
products
200 MeV
Neutrons
U-238
nucleus
U-235
nucleus
U-239
nucleus
e−
Beta
particle
e−
Beta
particle
Np-239
nucleus
Pu-239
nucleus
FIGURE 18.24
The "pile reactions" to
produce plutonium-239.

States and other nations have been negotiating with these nations to pro-
vide more up-to-date light-water reactors containing less 238U, along with
other economic aid, in exchange for dismantling their old heavy-water re-
actors that can produce plutonium.
239Pu behaves in many ways like 235U. Both materials can sustain a rapid,
uncontrolled chain reaction. Both isotopes were used to power the first nu-
clear weapons used in August 1945 in order to end World War II at Pres-
ident Truman's decision—a war, unleashed against the Allies, and that had
already cost many millions of lives and devastated much of Europe and
Japan. A single nuclear bomb, using pure 235U, was dropped to destroy the
city of Hiroshima, Japan, on August 6, 1945. Another bomb, using 239Pu,
destroyed the city of Nagasaki 3 days later. The war ended officially on
September 2, 1945.
Since the end of World War II in 1945, other countries besides the
United States have made nuclear weapons, including the United Kingdom,
Russia (the former Soviet Union), France, India, Pakistan, and China. The
enormous death-dealing capability of these weapons, and the ever-larger
numbers of nuclear bombs of many varieties that have been accumulating
18.13 NUCLEAR WEAPONS
801
FIGURE 18.25
Robert Oppen-
heimer (1904-1967). 

all over the globe, have made more dangerous the tensions existing through-
out the world, and have emphasized critically the need for the peaceful set-
tlement of international disputes.
Tensions between Western nations and the Soviet Union and its allies
reached a frightening level during the depths of the so-called Cold War,
especially during the 1950s and early 1960s. As nuclear weapons became
ever more powerful, the potential for destruction became ever more im-
mediate with the development of intercontinental ballistic missiles
(ICBMs). By the late 1950s, an ICBM launched by one nation and carry-
ing a nuclear bomb could in principle reach any point on the globe in less
than an hour. There was no defense against such an attack. Even defend-
ing missiles sent to intercept an attacking missile that was moving at thou-
sands of kilometers per hour could be overwhelmed by "multiple reentry
warheads" and by decoys, emitted by the single attacking missile.
Without the possibility of defense, the United States prepared the pop-
ulation for possible nuclear war, and both sides instituted a policy known
appropriately by the acronym MAD, for "mutually assured destruction."
Any nuclear attack by one side in the Cold War would result in "massive
retaliation" by the other side—the launching of every available nuclear
weapon against the attacking nation, resulting in the likely total destruc-
802
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.26
Maj. Gen. Leslie R. Groves
(r), Chief of the Manhattan Engineering
District where the first nuclear bomb was
developed, and J. Robert Oppenheimer, Di-
rector of Los Alamos Atomic Bomb Project
and Physicist at California Technological In-
stitute, view the base of the steel tower on
which the first atomic bomb hung when
tested near Alamogordo, New Mexico in
July, 1945. The intense heat of the bomb
melted the tower and seared the surround-
ing sands into jade green, glass-like cinders. 

tion of both sides, perhaps even most of the population of the entire world.
The prospects for such a scenario became frighteningly more likely during
the Missile Crisis in 1962, when the Soviet Union placed long-ranged 
nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba. When the United States blockaded ("quar-
antined") Cuba from Soviet ships, traditionally an act of war, the world held
its breath as Soviet ships carrying more nuclear weapons approached Cuba.
Finally, the ships turned back, averting a possible nuclear war, and the world
breathed a sigh of relief.
Since then the world's nuclear powers became more realistic in their
search for a way to control nuclear weapons. But the fears of the public re-
mained, as reflected in such classic films as Dr. Strangelove and Fail-Safe.
However, efforts to attempt a defense against incoming nuclear missiles
have continued. One such attempt, originating during the 1980s, has in-
volved the design of high-powered lasers, controlled by fast computers,
which would target and destroy an incoming enemy missile. This technol-
ogy, officially called the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) but popularly
known as "star wars" (after the well-known films of the same name) and its
more recent successors, have so far proved unsuccessful. Moreover, weapons
of mass destruction could well be deployed by ships or trucks, therefore
not vulnerable to a defense relying only upon missiles.
From the very beginning, scientists have been prominently involved in
activities to alert their government and fellow citizens to the moral and
practical problems raised by the nuclear arms race. One of their earliest
successes involved international limits on nuclear testing. In order to de-
velop ever more powerful and efficient weapons, test explosions are often
18.13 NUCLEAR WEAPONS
803
FIGURE 18.27
Energy released from nuclear fission: the first underwater test of an atomic
bomb at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific Ocean in July 1946.

required, and most of these were performed above ground in remote areas
during the 1950s. As noted previously, in the explosion of a nuclear bomb,
large amounts of radioactive fission products are scattered. These materi-
als can be blown by winds from one part of the world to another and car-
ried down from the atmosphere by rain or snow. This is known as fallout.
Partly as the result of public petitions and protests organized by 
scientists—spearheaded by the chemist Linus Pauling, who received the
Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts—the United States, Soviet Union, and
most other nations agreed in 1963 to a moratorium on further above-
ground testing. This greatly reduced the amount of radioactive pollution
in the atmosphere. Testing continued, however, below ground. Further in-
ternational treaties have placed further curbs on nuclear testing, but they
have not yet eliminated all testing, despite the end of the Cold War. The
United States and other nations rely increasingly on computer simulations
to maintain their arsenals, but some nations have insisted on the right to
continue underground testing.
Since the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet Union,
tensions have diminished, but the dangers of the use of nuclear weapons
remain high. There are fears that some of the weapons in the large arse-
nal of nuclear weapons stored in the former Soviet Union may find their
way into the hands of bellicose nations or terrorist organizations. Devel-
oping nations are slowly obtaining the ability to produce nuclear weapons,
and nations such as India and Pakistan, which have been long-time ene-
mies, have both tested nuclear weapons and long-range missiles capable of
delivering them.
Finally, the Cold-War weapons production has left the enormous prob-
lems and high costs of radioactive waste cleanup at weapons production fa-
cilities and the disposal of huge amounts of weapons-grade plutonium. Plu-
tonium is extremely poisonous, and it is relatively long-lived, having a
half-life of 24,000 years. Although most advanced nuclear weapons are now
powered by fusion reactions involving hydrogen (see below), they are trig-
gered by plutonium-based fission reactions. Disposing of the many tons of
highly fissionable, long-lived plutonium, while keeping it out of the hands
of terrorists and nonnuclear nations, is a major challenge for both sides of
the former Cold War.
As in the past, the decisions by politicians and industrial leaders that will
be necessary in the future development and uses of controlled and uncon-
trolled nuclear energy cannot be made on the basis of physics alone. Sci-
entists can help to illuminate alternatives on which essentially political de-
cisions can be based, and there are several dozen organizations founded by
scientists in the U.S.A. alone that have been and are continuing to educate
and advise. But science should not be used by itself to choose among the
804
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS

alternatives. Responsible scientific opinion should be supplemented by po-
litical insight and a broad humanistic view of society.
18.14 NUCLEAR FUSION
A fusion reaction involves the joining together of two light nuclei into a
heavier nucleus. The reaction results in higher binding energies per nu-
cleon when light nuclei are combined. As a consequence, a large amount
of energy is released.
Fusion reactions have been produced in the laboratory by bombarding
appropriate light target materials with, for example, high-energy deuterons
from a particle accelerator. In these reactions, nuclei result that are heav-
ier than the nuclei of either the "projectiles" or the targets; there are usu-
ally also additional particles released, as well as energy. Some typical ex-
amples of fusion reactions, together with the energy liberated in each
reaction, are
2
1H  2
1He  3
1H  1
1H  4 MeV,
2
1H  2
1He  3
2He  1
0n  3.2 MeV,
2
1H  3
1He  4
2He  1
0n  17.6 MeV,
2
1H  3
2He  4
2He  1
1H  18.3 MeV.
In the first of the above equations, the heavier product nucleus is an iso-
tope of hydrogen, called tritium, with mass number A  3. It has been found
in small traces in nature, is radioactive with a half-life of about 12 years,
and decays by  emission into 3
2He, an isotope of helium. When a target
containing tritium is bombarded with deuterons, 4
2He can be formed, as in
the third equation above, liberating 17.6 MeV of energy. Of this energy,
14.1 MeV appears as kinetic energy of the neutron and 3.5 MeV as kinetic
energy of the product nucleus.
Although the energy liberated in a single fusion is less than that in a sin-
gle fission, the energy released per unit mass is much greater. The mass of
about 50 helium atoms is approximately equal to the mass of one uranium
atom; 50  17.6 MeV  1040 MeV, compared to 200 MeV for a typical
fission.
The fusion of tritium and deuterium offers the possibility of providing
large sources of energy, for example, in electric power plants. Deuterium
occurs in water with an abundance of about one part in seven thousand 
18.14 NUCLEAR FUSION
805

hydrogen atoms and can be separated from the lighter isotope. Four liters
of water contain about 0.13 g of deuterium, which can now be separated
at a cost of about 8 cents. If this small amount of deuterium could be made
to react under appropriate conditions with tritium (perhaps produced by
the reaction discussed above), the energy output would be equivalent to
that from about 1140 l of gasoline. The total amount of deuterium in the
oceans is estimated to be about 1017 kg, and its energy content would be
about 1020 kW-yr. If deuterium and tritium could be used to produce en-
ergy, they would provide an enormous source of energy.
There are, of course, some difficult problems to be solved before fusion
reactions are likely to be useful as steady sources of energy. The nuclei
which react in the fusion processes are positively charged and repel one an-
806
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.28
National Ignition facility. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Cali-
fornia.

other because of the repulsive electric force. The nuclei must, therefore,
be made to collide with a high relative speed to overcome the repulsive
force tending to keep them apart. The nuclear force, which holds neutrons
and protons together in the nucleus, is much stronger than the electric
force—and it is often called the strong force—but it has a very short range.
Its effect extends only about 1014 m, about the size of a nucleus. The fus-
ing nuclei must therefore approach within this range in order for the at-
tractive nuclear force to overcome electric repulsion. The nuclei must also
be confined in a region where they can undergo many collisions without
escaping, or being absorbed by the walls bounding the region, or losing
energy by collisions with too many "cooler" (less energetic) molecules.
There must be enough collisions per unit time so that fusion can occur at
a rate that will yield more energy than that needed to cause the collisions.
The combination of these requirements means that the nuclei must be con-
tained at a temperature of the order of 100 million degrees.
At the temperature required for fusion, the atoms have been stripped of
their electrons, and the resulting nuclei and separated electrons are said to
form a plasma. A plasma is an ionized gas in which positively and negatively
charged particles move about freely. No wall made of ordinary material can
18.14 NUCLEAR FUSION
807
FIGURE 18.29
Maintenance workers inside the vacuum chamber of the Tokamak Fusion
Test Reactor, Princeton. 

contain a hot plasma at 108K (the wall would be vaporized instantly!). But
the charged particles of a plasma can, in theory, be contained in an appro-
priately designed magnetic field. The first problem to be solved, therefore,
is to contain the plasma of deuterium and tritium nuclei in a magnetic field,
while accelerating the nuclei by means of an electric field to the required
kinetic energy (or temperature). The behavior of the charged particles in
a plasma is complicated; there are many kinds of instabilities that make the
plasma difficult to contain properly and long enough. These problems of
the release of energy to form a controlled and sustained fusion reaction have
not yet been solved on a practical scale, but research on them is being car-
ried on in many countries. Significant advances have been made during the
last few years in containment of the plasma and in reaching high temper-
atures using intense, focused laser beams. There are still difficult techno-
logical problems to be overcome, and it may be a generation before elec-
tric power will be produced by fusion at costs that will compete with
electricity from fossil fuels. Although the effort and expenses are great, the
possible payoff in terms of future power resources is enormous. Fusion-
supplied energy, without the dangerous by-products of fission, and in prin-
808
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 
18.30
Subramanyan Chandrasekhar
(1910-1995) made major contributions to fields
ranging from magnetohydrodynamics to relativ-
ity to black hole theory. For his theoretical work
on the physical processes of importance to the
structure and evolution of stars he was awarded
the Nobel Prize for physics in 1983.

ciple inexhaustible and cheap, can herald a vast change in human civiliza-
tion, worldwide.
Fusion Reactions in Stars
Fusion reactions are actually quite common in nature, although not on
Earth. They are the source of power generated by the Sun and all the many
billions of stars throughout the Universe. In a sense, one can say that fu-
sion energy is nature's primary energy source. On the scale of stars, con-
finement of the plasma is accomplished by gravitational attraction.
One of the most fascinating aspects of nuclear physics is the study of fu-
sion reactions in different types of stars. The Sun is an example. In the Sun,
the fusion process results in the production of a helium nucleus from four
protons. The net results of the reactions can be written as
4 1
1H  4
2He  21
0e  26 MeV,
where 1
0e is an "anti-electron," also known as a positron. The reaction does
not take place in a single step but can proceed through different sets of re-
actions whose net results are summarized in the above equation. In each
case, the overall amount of energy released is 26 MeV.
The fusion of four protons into a helium nucleus is the main source of
the energy of the Sun. Chemical reactions cannot provide energy at large
enough rates (or for long enough duration!) to account for energy pro-
18.14 NUCLEAR FUSION
809
FIGURE 18.31
An X-ray photograph of
the Sun. Nuclear fusion is the source of
energy in our Sun and powers billions
of stars throughout the Universe. 

duction in the Sun, but nuclear fusion reactions can. Hydrogen and helium
together make up about 99% of the Sun's mass, with approximately twice
as much H as He. Fortunately, there is enough hydrogen to supply the
Sun's energy for several billion years to come.
By which of the several possible sets of reactions does the transforma-
tion of hydrogen into helium take place? The direct process of four pro-
tons colliding to form a helium nucleus has been ruled out because the
probability for such a reaction under solar conditions is too low. It may
happen, but not often enough for the amount of energy released. A more
likely set of reactions is as follows: When the temperature is about 107 K,
the kinetic energies are large enough to overcome the electric repulsion
between protons, and fusion of two protons (1
1H) takes place. The nuclear
reaction results in a deuteron ( 2
1H), a positron (1
0e), and a neutrino. As soon
as the deuteron is formed, it reacts with another proton, resulting in 
helium-3 ( 3
2He) and a  ray. The helium-3 nuclei fuse with each other,
forming  particles and two protons. In each of these reactions, energy is
released, resulting in 26 MeV for the complete cycle of four protons form-
ing a helium nucleus.
The rates of the reaction depend on the number of nuclei per unit vol-
ume and on the temperature. The higher the temperature, the faster the
810
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
FIGURE 18.32
Cecilia Payne-
Gaposchkin (1900-1979), the
first person to receive a PhD in
astronomy from Harvard Uni-
versity, discovered that stars are
primarily made of hydrogen and
have varying temperatures. 

thermal motion of the particles and the more frequent and energetic the
collisions. At the temperature of the Sun's interior, which has been esti-
mated to be 10 million to 20 million degrees, the kinetic energies result-
ing from the thermal motion are in the neighborhood of 1 keV.
Fusion reactions are nature's primary source of energy for the Universe as
a whole. It is reasonable to hope that in the future they will be ours as well.
FURTHER READING
L. Badash, Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons (New York: Prometheus,
1995).
B. Greene, The Elegant Universe (New York: Vintage, 2000), (especially recom-
mended as guide to current ideas, from quarks to superstring theory).
G. Holton, Scientists Organizing to Fulfill Their Civic Responsibility, Physics and
Society, 28 (1999), 11-13.
G. Holton and S.G. Brush, Physics, The Human Adventure, "Construction of the
Elements and the Universe" (Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2001),
Chapter 32.
FURTHER READING
811
FIGURE18.33
View of Les Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer by Vincent Van Gogh. Courtesy of Os-
kar Reinhart Collection "Am Römerholz," Winterthur, Switzerland.

Physics Today 50, no. 6 (1997). Issue devoted to the problem of nuclear waste.
R. Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb (New York: Touchstone Books, 1995).
R. Rhodes, Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb (New York: Touchstone
Books, 1996).
J. Rotblat, Scientists and the Quest for Peace: A History of the Pugwash Conferences
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972).
E. Segrè, Enrico Fermi, Physicist (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995).
R. Sime, Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996).
S. Weart, Nuclear Fear: A History of Images (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1989).
H.G. Wells, The World Set Free (New York: Harcourt,1914). A remarkably prescient
science-fiction book.
SOME NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
artificial transmutation
neutron
binding energy
nuclear bomb
breeder reactor
nuclear proliferation
chain reaction
nucleon
control rods
nuclide
critical mass
positron
fission
proton
fusion
proton-electron hypothesis
heavy water
proton-neutron model
hydrogen bomb
reactor
light-water reactor
strong force
moderator
transuranium elements
neutrino
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
18.1 The Problem of Nuclear Structure
1.
What was one of the main questions raised about the nucleus?
2.
What are the two main areas in which research has been pursued?
18.2 The Proton-Electron Hypothesis
1.
Alpha and gamma rays are emitted by some radioactive nuclei. Why couldn't
they be used as building blocks of the nucleus?
2.
Why was the idea of hydrogen atoms being a basic building block of all atoms
given up in the nineteenth century?
3.
How could protons and electrons be used to build up the nuclei of atoms?
812
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS

4.
On the basis of the proton-electron hypothesis, what would a nucleus of 12
6C
contain?
5.
Does the proton-electron hypothesis work out for, say, 4
2He?
6.
Why did this model ultimately fail?
18.3 The Discovery of Artificial Transmutation
1.
What evidence showed that the bombarding  particle was temporarily ab-
sorbed by the nitrogen nucleus rather than simply broken up and bounced off?
2.
Why was the reaction called "artificial transmutation"?
18.4 The Discovery of the Neutron
1.
What was Rutherford's hypothesis about protons and electrons in the nucleus?
2.
Why could the neutral penetrating radiation from bombarded beryllium not
be considered  rays?
3.
Why did the mass of a neutron have to be found by measurements on protons
ejected by the neutrons in collision?
4.
How could the principles of conservation be used to find the mass of the
neutron?
18.5 The Proton-Neutron Model
1.
Briefly describe the proton-neutron model of the nucleus.
2.
According to the proton-neutron model, what is contained in the nucleus 
of 14
7N?
3.
How does this model account for the existence of isotopes?
4.
Describe an ordinary helium atom in terms of the three elementary particles:
protons, neutrons, and electrons.
5.
If nuclei do not contain  particles, how can  emission be explained?
6.
What happens inside the nucleus in  emission? As a result, what happens to
every isotope that emits a  ray?
18.6 The Neutrino
1.
Why was an almost undetectable particle invented to patch up the theory of
 decay?
2.
What is the almost undetectable particle? Has it been detected?
3.
214
82Pb undergoes  decay with a half-life of 26.8 min. From the information
given on  decay, what would be the daughter nucleus? Write the nuclear equa-
tion for the  decay of 214
82Pb.
18.7 The Need for Particle Accelerators
1.
Why can low-energy  particles cause transmutations only in nuclei of rela-
tively small atomic number?
2.
Why are protons more effective projectiles for producing nuclear reactions
than are  particles or heavy ions?
STUDY GUIDE QUESTIONS
813

3.
What are some of the devices for producing high-energy particles to be used
as projectiles?
4.
What are some devices for detecting nuclear reactions induced by such 
projectiles?
18.8 The Energy of Nuclear Binding
1.
When energy is "liberated" during a nuclear reaction, what becomes of it?
2.
What is the definition of binding energy for the case of the deuteron nucleus?
3.
Which would have more mass:
(a) a deuteron, 2
1H?
(b) a proton and a neutron moving freely and independently of each other?
4.
Explain the difference in mass between 3(a) and 3(b).
18.9 Nuclear Binding Energy and Stability
1.
Which would be more stable, a nuclide with a high total binding energy or a
nuclide with a high average binding energy per nucleon?
2.
Where on the periodic table are elements for which (a) fission and (b) fusion
processes can take place?
3.
Using the graph of binding energy per nucleon, explain why energy is emit-
ted in fission reactions and in fusion reactions.
18.10 Nuclear Fission: Discovery
1.
What happens in nuclear fission?
2.
Why was Fermi bombarding uranium with neutrons?
3.
How did he make use of  decay in his research?
4.
What two successive reactions can result in the appearance of a transuranium
element?
5.
Describe in your own words the sequence of events that leads to the element
plutonium.
6.
Why couldn't the observed lanthanum and barium be the products of the fis-
sioning of a single uranium nucleus?
7.
How did the physicists Meitner and Frisch explain the appearance of lanthanum
and barium in the samples obtained by the chemists Hahn and Strassmann?
8.
What product of the fission process makes a chain reaction possible?
18.11 Controlling Chain Reactions
1.
A low-speed neutron is fired at a group of uranium isotopes. Describe what
can happen if:
(a) the neutron hits a 238U isotope;
(b) the neutron hits a 235U isotope.
2.
What is a moderator? Why is it needed?
3.
What is an advantage and a disadvantage of using regular water as a modera-
tor in nuclear reactors?
4.
How can the rate of reaction be controlled in a reactor?
5.
What is the difference between a light-water reactor and a heavy-water reactor?
814
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS

6.
Why are light-water reactors usually chosen for delivery to other nations?
7.
Describe in your own words how a nuclear reactor works.
18.12 Nuclear Power Plants
1.
How is a nuclear reactor used to produce electricity?
2.
How does the operation of a nuclear power plant compare with the operation
of a fossil-fuel electric-power plant?
3.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of nuclear and fossil-fuel power
plants?
4.
Why did scientists in the U.S. during World War II agree to develop atomic
weapons?
18.13 Nuclear Weapons
1.
What are breeder reactors? What do they breed and why?
2.
With the Cold War over, is the world now safe from the use of nuclear weapons?
Explain.
3.
Where do the decisions ultimately lie regarding the uses of nuclear energy?
18.14 Nuclear Fusion
1.
Why are very high temperatures required to cause fusion reactions?
2.
How could extremely hot gases be kept from contacting the wall of a container?
3.
In what way has fusion energy been used by humankind?
4.
How does the Sun make use of fusion energy?
5.
Is the ratio of the amount of hydrogen to the amount of helium in the Sun in-
creasing or decreasing?
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
(Consult the periodic table as needed.)
1. When ordinary chemical reactions take place, such as the fusion of hydrogen
and oxygen to form water, why do we not observe a loss of mass similar to
the loss of mass when neutrons and protons fuse together to form a nucleus?
2. Complete the following nuclear equations:
(a)
6
3Li  1
1H  4
2He  (
);
(b) 9
4Be  1
1H  4
2He  (
);
(c)
9
4Be  1
1H  (
)  2
1H;
(d) 11
5B  4
2He  14
7N  (
).
3. Complete the following nuclear equations, then describe in words what is hap-
pening in each case:
(a)
4
2He4  10
5B   (
)  1
1H;
(b) 1
1H  9
4Be  (
)  2
1H;
(c)
4
2He  (
)  35
17Cl  1
1H;
(d) 2
1H  27Al  (
)  4
2He;
(e)
1
0n  27Al  28Al  (
).
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
815

4. How many electrons are there in a neutral atom of:
(a) platinum-196;
(b) gold-198;
(c) mercury-198;
(d) mercury-199.
5. Why would it be difficult to explain the nucleus of 235
92U as a mixture of 
particles and electrons?
6. Describe the following nuclear reactions in words:
1
0n  27
13Al  27
12Mg  1
1H,
27
12Mg7  27
13Al  
0
1e  
  
(T1/2  9.5 min).
7. How may the discovery of artificially radioactive nuclides have helped the de-
velopment of theories of nuclear structure?
8. Complete the following table:
Number of
Number of
Number of
A
Z
protons
neutrons
electrons in atom
1H
2H
3H
4He
7Li
13C
238U
234Th
230Th
214Pb
206Pb
9. Write a set of equations that describe the decay of the fission product 92
36Kr
into 92
40Z.
10. Why are the high temperatures produced by the explosion of a fission bomb
necessary to initiate fusion in a thermonuclear device?
11. It is generally agreed that stars are formed when vast clouds of hydrogen gas
collapse under the mutual gravitational attraction of their particles. How
might this process lead to fusion reactions beginning in such stars? (Hint: The
cloud has gravitational potential energy.)
12. A team of scientists announces that it has discovered a possibly new source of
cheap, nonpolluting, renewable energy that will solve all of our energy prob-
lems. They caution that further research will be required to determine if it is
indeed feasible, and much work will be needed to render it commercially vi-
able. However, there is one problem: the possibility exists that this new source
of energy might also be turned into a new military weapon of enormous de-
structive power. The scientists declare that they are very eager to solve the
world's energy problems, but they are worried that if it does prove feasible,
816
18. THE NUCLEUS AND ITS APPLICATIONS

this source might also lead to a new weapon of mass destruction. They have
turned to the public for advice.
(a) As an informed member of the public, what do you recommend?
(b) Assume you are a member of the scientific team. What are your thoughts
on the issue?
(c) Set up a debate in your class or group on these issues.
13. Write an essay on one of the following topics:
(a) The various ways an informed citizen can help assure that technological
innovations will be made and used in a manner benefitting society as a
whole.
(b) The differences between technology and basic science.
(c) The responsibilities of scientists to society.
(d) The responsibilities of society to further science.
(e) The fields of physics or related sciences in which you may want to do fur-
ther study.
14. In studying this Part Two of the text, you have followed some of the immense
transformation of humankind's culture, from the pre-scientific period to cur-
rent research questions. After thoughtful reflection on this experience, write
a page or two summarizing the stages in this adventure of the creative mind.
Quantitative
1.
Compare the mass of a helium nucleus with the sum of the masses of two 
hydrogen nuclei, two neutrons. What conclusions do you draw from your 
result?
2.
Suppose that a nucleus of 13
6C is formed by adding a neutron to a 12
6C atom.
Neglecting any kinetic energy the neutron may have, calculate the energy that
becomes available to the nucleus because of the absorption of that neutron to
make 13
6C. The atomic masses of 12C and 13C (in an unexcited state) are, re-
spectively, 12.000000 u (by definition, an international convention), and
13.003354 u.
3.
The atomic mass of 4He is 4.00260 u; what is the average binding energy per
nucleon?
4.
Use the graph on page 784 to find the binding energies for 235U, 141Ba, and
92Kr. Use these values to show that the energy released in the fission of 235U
is approximately 200 MeV.
5.
Fusion reactions in the Sun convert a vast amount of hydrogen into radiant
energy each second. Knowing that the energy output of the Sun is 3.90 
1026 J/s, calculate the rate at which the Sun is losing mass.
DISCOVERY QUESTIONS
817

This page intentionally left blank 

Illustration Credits
FRONT COVER
The Ancient of Days by William Blake, © The British Museum.
Bubble Chamber © Kevin Fleming/CORBIS.
BACK COVER
Portrait of Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin by Patricia Watwood,
courtesy of Harvard University.
PROLOGUE TO PART 1
Image of Albert Einstein™ licensed by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, represented
by The Roger Richman Agency, Inc., www.albert-einstein.com
CHAPTER 1
Figure 1.1
Courtesy of History of Science Collections, University of
Oklahoma.
Figure 1.3
Courtesy of History of Science Collections, University of
Oklahoma.
Figure 1.5
Courtesy of Reuters/ARC/Timepix.
Figure 1.17
Courtesy of Zoology Section of "La Specola" Museum of Natural
History of the University of Florence.
Figure 1.19
Courtesy of Harvard College Observatory.
page 53
Courtesy of NERAIL Photo Archive.
page 54
Courtesy of Jacky Naegelan/Reuters/TimePix.
page 54
© Cory Sorensen/CORBIS.
CHAPTER 2
Figure 2.1
Courtesy of Davison Art Center, Wesleyan University.
Figure 2.2
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives
Figure 2.3
Courtesy of Jagiellonian Library, Krakow.
819

Figure 2.8
Courtesy of History of Science Collections, University of
Oklahoma.
Figure 2.9
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 2.14
Courtesy of Mount Wilson Palomar Observatory.
Figure 2.16
Courtesy of British Museum.
Figure 2.17
© Roger Ressmeyer/CORBIS
Figure 2.18
© Bettmann/CORBIS
Figure 2.22
Courtesy of Jagiellonian Library, Krakow.
Figure 2.26
Courtesy of History of Science Collections, University of
Oklahoma.
Figure 2.27
Courtesy of Mansell/Timepix.
Figure 2.28
Courtesy of Royal Observatory, Edinburgh/SPL/Photo 
Researchers, Inc.
Figure 2.29
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 2.30
Courtesy of Harvard College Observatory.
Figure 2.37
Courtesy of Sidney Harris.
Figure 2.38
Courtesy of Instituto e Museo di Storia della Scienza, Firenze, Italy.
Figure 2.39
Courtesy of History of Science Collections, University of
Oklahoma.
Figure 2.40
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 2.42
Courtesy of History of Science Collections, University of
Oklahoma.
Figure 2.43
Courtesy of Mount Wilson Palomar Observatory.
Figure 2.45
Courtesy of Lowell Observatory.
Figure 2.47
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives
CHAPTER 3
Figure 3.2
© Jonathan Blair/CORBIS.
Figure 3.5
Courtesy of Harvard College Observatory.
Figure 3.6
Courtesy of David Couzens.
Figure 3.7
© Tecmap Corporation/CORBIS
Figure 3.19
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 3.21
© Mike King/CORBIS.
Figure 3.23
© The Harold & Esther Edgerton Family Trust, courtesy of Palm
Press, Inc.
Figure 3.31
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 3.32
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 3.34
Courtesy of NASA.
820
ILLUSTRATION CREDITS

Figure 3.35
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 3.36
© Wally McNamee/CORBIS.
Figure 3.41
Courtesy of NASA.
CHAPTER 4
Figure 4.1
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 4.2
Courtesy of Harvard College Observatory.
Figure 4.3
Courtesy of Harvard College Observatory.
Figure 4.9
Courtesy of Harvard College Observatory.
Figure 4.10
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
CHAPTER 5
Figure 5.2
© The British Museum.
Figure 5.5
Courtesy of Metropolitan Museum of Art, Purchase, Mr. and 
Mrs. Charles Wrightsman Gift, in honor of Everett Fahy, 1977.
Figure 5.6
Courtesy of Cornell University Library, Division of Rare and
Manuscript Collections.
Figure 5.14
Courtesy of Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences and Letters.
Figure 5.15
Courtesy of Burndy Library, Dibner Institute for the History of
Science and Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Figure 5.16
© Michael Nicholson/CORBIS.
Figure 5.17
© Duomo/CORBIS.
Figure 5.18
Courtesy of Nat Farbman/Timepix.
Figure 5.21
© Owen Franken/CORBIS.
Figure 5.22
Courtesy of Albert B. Gregory.
Figure 5.24
© The Harold & Esther Edgerton Family Trust, courtesy of Palm
Press, Inc.
Figure 5.25
Courtesy of David Couzens.
CHAPTER 6
Figure 6.1
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
Figure 6.2
© CORBIS.
Figure 6.4
Courtesy of Houghton Library, Harvard University.
Figure 6.5a
© Stephen Frink/CORBIS.
Figure 6.6
Courtesy of Stan Sherer.
Figure 6.10
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
ILLUSTRATION CREDITS
821

Figure 6.11
Courtesy of Science Museum/Science & Society.
Figure 6.14
Courtesy of American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
Figure 6.15
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 6.16
Courtesy of Harvard College Observatory.
Figure 6.17
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
CHAPTER 7
Figure 7.2
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
Figure 7.4
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Zeleny Collection.
Figure 7.6
Courtesy of Historisches Museum, Basel.
Figure 7.15
Courtesy of David Couzens.
Figure 7.16
© The Harold & Esther Edgerton Family Trust, courtesy of Palm
Press, Inc.
Figure 7.17
University of Vienna, courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual
Archives.
Figure 7.19
Courtesy of David Couzens.
Figure 7.22
© Peter Turnley/CORBIS.
Figure 7.23
Courtesy of David Couzens.
Excerpt from "West-Running Brook" from The Poetry of Robert Frost, edited by
Edward Connery Lathem.  Copyright 1928, © 1969 by Henry Holt and Company, 
© 1956 by Robert Frost.  Reprinted by permission of Henry Holt and Company, LLC.
CHAPTER 8
Figure 8.1
Courtesy of David Couzens.
Figure 8.2
Courtesy of David Couzens.
Figure 8.6
© CORBIS.
Figure 8.24
Courtesy of United States Navy.
Figure 8.36
Courtesy of United States Navy.
Figure 8.38
© Kevin Fleming/CORBIS.
Figure 8.39
Courtesy of David Couzens.
Figure 8.41
Courtesy of Bausch & Lomb.
Figure 8.44
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 8.47
Smithsonian Institution, courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 8.49
General Electric Research Laboratory, courtesy of AIP Emilio
Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 8.50
Courtesy of Houghton Library, Harvard University.
822
ILLUSTRATION CREDITS

CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.1a
Image of Albert Einstein™ © CORBIS, licensed by the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, represented by The Roger Richman
Agency, Inc., www.albert-einstein.com
Figure 9.2b/c
Image of Albert Einstein™ licensed by the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, represented by The Roger Richman Agency, Inc.,
www.albert-einstein.com
Figure 9.16
Courtesy of Fermilab.
Figure 9.17
© Kevin Fleming/CORBIS.
PROLOGUE, PART 2
Image of Albert Einstein™ © CORBIS, licensed by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
represented by The Roger Richman Agency, Inc., www.albert-einstein.com
Portrait of Isaac Newton property of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Burndy
Library; courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.1
Courtesy of Burndy Library, Dibner Institute for the History of
Science and Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Figure 10.3
Courtesy of Burndy Library, Dibner Institute for the History 
of Science and Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Figure 10.5
Courtesy of Burndy Library, Dibner Institute for the History of
Science and Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Figure 10.6
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, E. Scott Barr
Collection.
Figure 10.9
© W. Perry Conway/CORBIS.
Figure 10.11
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
Figure 10.15
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Landè Collection.
Figure 10.19
Courtesy of Stanford Linear Accelerator Center.
Figure 10.20
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, E. Scott Barr
Collection.
Figure 10.23
Courtesy of Nationalhistoriske Museum, Frederiksborg, Hillerod.
Figure 10.27
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 10.31
Courtesy of Jan Curtis.
ILLUSTRATION CREDITS
823

CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.1a
Courtesy of Deutsches Museum, Munich.
Figure 11.2
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 11.4
The Royal Institution, London, UK/Bridgeman Art Library
International, Ltd.
Figure 11.9
© CORBIS.
Figure 11.10
Courtesy of Ted Russell/Timepix.
Figure 11.11
Courtesy of Thomas Alva Edison Foundation.
Figure 11.12
Courtesy of Queens Borough Public Library, Long Island Division,
and Latimer Family Collection.
Figure 11.17
Courtesy of Manfred Krutein/Photovault.com.
Figure 11.19
© Kevin R. Morris/CORBIS.
Figure 11.21a/b
Courtesy of National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Figure 11.22
Courtesy of National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Figure 11.23
Courtesy of National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Figure 11.24
Courtesy of Tennessee Valley Authority.
Figure 11.25
© Roger Ressmeyer/CORBIS.
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.1
Courtesy of Royal Institution/Bridgeman Art Library
International, Ltd.
Figure 12.2
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 12.8
Property of Deutsches Museum, Munich; courtesy of AIP Emilio
Segrè Visual Archives, Physics Today Collection.
Figure 12.14
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
Figure 12.16
Courtesy of SE-IR Corporation.
Figure 12.17
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 12.19
Courtesy of General Electric Co.
Figure 12.20
Courtesy of Brookhaven National Laboratory.
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.1
Courtesy of Science Museum/Science and Society.
Figure 13.2
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, W.F. Meggers
Collection.
Figure 13.3
Courtesy of Othmer Library of Chemical History, Chemical
Heritage Foundation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Figure 13.5
Courtesy of Cavendish Library, Cambridge.
824
ILLUSTRATION CREDITS

Figure 13.6
Courtesy of California Institute of Technology Archives.
Figure 13.11
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 13.12
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, gift of Jost
Lemmerich.
Figure 13.13
Photograph by Aufnahme u. Verlag v. A. Baumann Nacht, München,
courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Landè Collection.
Figure 13.14
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
Figure 13.16
Courtesy of Eastman Kodak Company.
Figure 13.17
© Steve Chenn/CORBIS.
Figure 13.18
Courtesy of Straus Center for Conservation, Harvard University
Art Museums.
Figure 13.19
Courtesy of U.S. Department of the Interior National Park
Service, Edison National Historic Site.
CHAPTER 14
Figure 14.6
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 14.11a
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Margrethe Bohr
Collection.
Figure 14.11b
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, W.F. Meggers
Gallery of Nobel Laureates.
Figure 14.11c
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Margrethe Bohr
Collection.
Figure 14.15
Courtesy of University of California, Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, and the Department of Energy, under
whose auspices the work was performed.
CHAPTER 15
Figure 15.1
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, W.F. Meggers
Collection.
Figure 15.3
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 15.4
Courtesy of Prof. Harry Meiners, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Figure 15.7
Photo by Francis Simon, courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual
Archives.
Figure 15.8
Max Planck Institute, courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual
Archives.
Figure 15.9
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 15.11
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 15.12
Institut International de Physique Solvay, courtesy of AIP Emilio
Segrè Visual Archives.
ILLUSTRATION CREDITS
825

CHAPTER 16
Figure 16.4
From Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Volume 2, edited by John
Stachel and David Cassidy (Princeton University Press, 1990).
Figure 16.11
© Michael S. Yamashita/CORBIS.
Figure 16.16
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 16.18
© Charles O'Rear/CORBIS.
CHAPTER 17
Figure 17.1
Courtesy of Burndy Library, Dibner Institute for the History of
Science and Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts; courtesy of
AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 17.3a
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, W.F. Meggers
Collection.
Figure 17.3b
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, E. Scott Barr
Collection.
Figure 17.3c
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 17.3d
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 17.8
Courtesy of University of Pennsylvania Library, Edgar Fahs Smith
Collection.
CHAPTER 18
Figure 18.4
Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley;
courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 18.5
Photo by Börtzells Esselte, Nobel Foundation; courtesy of AIP
Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Weber and Fermi Film Collections.
Figure 18.8
Courtesy of Los Alamos National Laboratory.
Figure 18.9
Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley;
courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 18.10a/b/c
Courtesy of Fermilab.
Figure 18.14
Courtesy of Argonne National Laboratory.
Figure 18.15
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 18.17
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 18.19
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives, Herzfeld Collection.
Figure 18.20
Courtesy of Argonne National Laboratory.
Figure 18.23
© Hulton-Deutsch Collection/CORBIS.
Figure 18.25
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
826
ILLUSTRATION CREDITS

Figure 18.26
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
Figure 18.27
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
Figure 18.29
© Roger Ressmeyer/CORBIS.
Figure 18.30
Photo by K.G. Somsekhar, AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives.
Figure 18.31
Courtesy of NASA.
Figure 18.32
Painting by Patricia Watwood, courtesy of Harvard University.
Figure 18.33
Courtesy of Oskar Reinhart Collection "Am Römerholz,"
Winterthur, Switzerland.
COLOR PLATES
Plate 1
© Roger Antrobus/CORBIS.
Plate 4
The Museum of Modern Art, New York.  Lillie P. Bliss Collection.
Photograph © 2001, The Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Plate 5
Courtesy of J. Talbot, University of Ottawa.
ILLUSTRATION CREDITS
827

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
829
Absolute temperature scale, 271, 298-299
Absolute zero temperature, 271, 281, 298-299
Absorption of radiation, 639-647, 650
absorption spectra, 624-626
Acceleration
average, 34
centripetal, 159-162, 180-182, 184-185,
197-198
circular motion and, 158-159
deceleration, 35
defined, 31
of gravity. See Free fall; Gravitational
acceleration
inclined plane experiments, 43-47, 119
inertial vs. noninertial reference frames and,
415
linear motion, 31-37
net force and, 125
Newton's second law, 128-132, 431-432, 454
uniform, 34, 41, 119
as vector, 34
Acoustics. See Sound waves
Action at a distance, 187, 579
Activity, 726-727. See also Radioactivity
Aeolipile, 260
Aether. See Ether
Agricultural technology, 266
Air column, standing waves and, 354
Air pressure, 294-295
pressure field, 474-475
pressure-volume relation, 295-297
temperature-pressure-volume relation (ideal
gas law), 297-300, 308-312
Air resistance, 39
Alkali metals, 588, 652
Alpha () particles
artificial transmutation of elements and,
766-767
identification as helium nuclei, 736-737
mass of, 736
"mousetrap" for, 737-738
nuclear structure and, 764-765
radioactivity and, 733, 738-743
Rutherford scattering, 630-635
size of nucleus and, 636-637
Alpha Centauri, 4
Alternating current (AC), 481, 713
choice as standard, 525-528
generator and, 513-514, 516
Altitude (astronomical measure), 63
Amber, 459-461, 462
Amorphous solids, 696
Ampere
defined, 494
unit of charge and, 469
Ampère, André-Marie, 492-494, 516
Amplitude, of waves, 339
Amplitude modulation (AM), 565-566
Analogue wave, 566
Andromeda galaxy, 4
Angle of reflection/angle of incidence, 363
Ångstrom, Anders Jonas, 391
Ångstrom, defined, 391
Angular momentum, of electron in orbit,
668-669
Angular speed, 157
Anode, 590
Antenna, 564

Antineutrino, 775-777
Antinodal lines, 348-349, 358-360
Archeology, 755-756
Archimedes, 59
Architecture, sound waves and, 372
Aristarchus, 76
Aristotle
free fall and, 39
ideas on cosmology, 9-12, 48, 62, 83, 85
laws of motion and, 121-122
"natural" vs. "violent" motion, 118-119
philosophical approach to physics, 9-10,
12-13
Artificial transmutation of elements, 766-769
Artwork, 58, 613, 614
Astrology, 73
Astronauts, weightlessness and, 138-140,
155-156
Astronomy, 57-116
See also Stars; Sun; Universe
Brahe's hybrid theory, 91, 106
Brahe's observations, 88-91
comets, 200-202
Earth's roundness, 64-65
eclipses, 69
electromagnetic spectrum and, 573
experimental tests of relativity theory and, 436
Galileo's telescope observations and his
conclusions, 102-109
geocentric theory, 61-62
Greek concepts of, 9-12, 48, 62, 83, 85
heliocentric theory, 59-60, 76-86, 106-109
Kepler's laws of planetary motion, 94-102
Moon's phases, 69-70
observations in antiquity, 63-74
period-radius relationship for planets, 81-82
positions of the Moon and Sun, 63-64, 67-69
projectile motion and moving-Earth
hypothesis, 146-150
Ptolemaic system, 75-76, 83, 85, 86, 106-108
seasons and, 67-69, 77
Atmosphere
blue sky, 390-392
refraction and, 369
Atom
See also Atomic physics
evidence for existence of, 457-458
Greek concepts of, 7-8, 453, 457
Atomic bomb, 439-440, 605, 799-805
Atomic mass, nuclear binding energy and,
781-782, 786
Atomic mass number, 749, 751-753, 764,
773-774
Atomic mass unit, 586-587, 749
Atomic number, 588, 749-751
Atomic physics, 585-619, 621-660
See also Nuclear physics; Quantum mechanics
Bohr's atomic structure model. See Bohr's
atomic structure model
cathode rays and, 590-594
Einstein's light-quantum hypothesis, 602-608,
639, 662
energy of stationary states, 641-647
energy quanta, 606-607, 639, 662
excitation of atoms, 642, 647-648, 650
Franck-Hertz experiment, 646-648, 650
hydrogen spectrum, 626-630, 640-647
nuclear charge and size, 635-637
orbital radii, 640-642
periodic table, 585-590, 648-649, 652-653
photoelectric effect, 598-608
Rutherford's atomic structure model, 630-637
smallest charge determination, 593-596
spectroscopy and, 621-626
summary of equations, 656-657
Thomson's atomic structure model, 596-598,
630-631
uncertainty principle and the size of atoms,
677-678
X rays and, 608-616
AU (Astronomical Unit), 81
Aurora borealis, 498
Autumn equinox, 68, 77
Aviation technology, 196-197, 393
Azimuth (astronomical measure), 63
Bacon, Francis, 214
Balmer, Johann Jakob, 626-629
Balmer lines, 626-629, 643, 645
Balmer's formula, 626-629, 642-647
Band theory of metals, 702-705
Bardeen, John, 706, 714
Barometer, 295
Bartholinus, Erasmus, 393
Battery
invention of, 274, 480-481
light bulb and, 488
voltage of, 486
830
INDEX

BCS theory, 706-707
Beats, sound waves and, 372
Becker, H., 769
Becquerel, Henri, 724, 734, 736, 745
"Becquerel rays," 727-728. See also Radioactivity
Bell, Alexander Graham, 536
Bernoulli, Daniel, 302-303
Berry, George, 266
Beryllium, artificial transmutation and, 769-771,
793
Beta () particles
charge of, 734-737
discovery of radioactivity and, 733
identification as electrons, 736
mass of, 736
neutron discovery and  decay, 775-777
nuclear structure and, 764-765, 774-775
radioactive transformations and, 738-743,
774-775
transformation rules and, 749-750
Binding energy, 780-786
Biomass energy, 541
Blake, William, 267
Bloch, Felix, 673, 702-705
Blodgett, Katherine Burr, 386
Blue sky, 390-392
Bohr, Niels, 670
atomic structure model. See Bohr's atomic
structure model
biographical summary, 638
complementarity principle, 682-684
Bohr's atomic structure model, 637-656, 751
angular momentum of electron in orbit,
668-669
de Broglie waves and, 668-669
energy of stationary states, 641-647
experimental confirmation of, 646-648
ground state, 642
hydrogen spectrum and, 640-647
limitations of, 654-655
orbital radii, 640-642
periodic table construction, 648-649, 652-653
postulates of, 637-640
Schrödinger's wave mechanics and, 672
size of hydrogen atom, 640-642
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 303, 315, 317, 321, 324
Born, Max, 670, 673, 681, 683, 684
Bothe, W. G., 769
Boyle, Robert, 213, 297, 395, 457
Boyle's law, 297, 302
Brackett series, 629, 643, 645
Brahe, Tycho, 87
biographical summary, 88-91
hybrid solar system theory, 91, 106
Kepler and, 91, 92
nova observation, 88
Brattain, Walter, 714
Breeder reactors, 800-801
Bright-line spectra, 622-624, 626-630
Brown, Robert, 312-313
Browne, Thomas, 462
Brownian motion, 312-313, 458
Bruno, Giordano, 110
Btu, defined, 257
Bubble chambers, 498
Bunsen, Robert W., 624
Caloric fluid, 253-254
calorie, defined, 255
Calorie, defined, 257
calorie, defined, 257
Camera obscura, 375
Carbon-12, atomic mass unit and, 587
Carbon dating, 755-756
Carnot, Sadi, 269-273
Carnot engine, 270-273, 533-534
Carroll, Lewis, 28
Cars
banked curves and, 160
energy consumption of, 529, 535, 537
history of industry, 536
Cathode, 590-591
Cathode rays, 590-594
charge of, 592-596, 734
fluorescence and, 725
magnetic field and, 591-593
Cathode ray tube (CRT), 567
Cavendish, Henry, 192
Cavendish balance, 192-194
Cayley, George, 196
CD (compact disc), 717
Celestial sphere, 9, 10, 63-65
Cell phones, 564
Celsius temperature scale, 271, 298
Central force
inverse-square law, 179-182, 465-466
planetary orbits and, 180-182
INDEX
831

Centripetal acceleration, 159-162
of Moon, 184-185
planetary orbits and, 180-182
of space shuttle, 197-198
Centripetal force, 159-162
planetary model of atom and, 637-638
Cerenkov radiation, 577
CFCs, 575
Chadwick, James, 766, 771-773
Chain reaction, 791-796, 799
Charge, electric, 462-465
See also Current
cathode rays and, 592-594, 734
charge on , , and  rays, 734-737
Coulomb's law, 468-469, 477-479
electrostatic induction, 471-472
magnetic fields and moving charges, 495-498
Millikan oil drop experiment (determination
of smallest charge), 593-596
nuclear charge, 635-637
unit of, 469-471, 596
Chemical energy, 258, 274, 456, 505, 530-531
Chemistry
See also Dalton; Mendeleev
Bohr atom and chemical properties, 649,
652-653
integral proportions for compounds, 457,
585-586
Lavoisier and, 215-217
Circuits, 481, 521, 523
Circular motion, 156-162
See also Centripetal acceleration; Centripetal
force
acceleration and, 158-159
frequency, 157
period, 156-157
speed and, 157-158
velocity and, 157-158
Clausius, Rudolf, 281, 293, 303, 305, 307
Clockwork universe, 100, 313, 455
Closed systems
conservation of energy and, 273
conservation of mass and, 215, 217
conservation of momentum and, 226
entropy and, 314, 317-319
Cloud chamber, 767-768
Coal, as fuel, 530-531
Coil
generator and, 509-516
induction coil and electromagnetic waves,
561-563
transformer and, 526
Cold War, 802-804
Collisions
artificial transmutation of elements and,
766-767
discovery of neutron and, 771-773
elastic, 227-231, 242-243, 320-321, 647-648
excitation of atoms and, 647-648, 650
fission and, 790
Franck-Hertz experiment, 646-648, 650
inelastic, 232, 650-651
kinetic energy conservation and, 229-232
momentum conservation and, 217-222
reversibility paradox and, 320-321
Color, 386-392
blue sky, 390-392
"body" vs. "surface" color, 389
wavelengths of visible light, 574
Columbus, Christopher, 64
Comets, 200-202
Communication satellites, 153
Commutator (generator component), 516, 525
Compact-disc (CD), 717
Complementarity principle, 682-684
Composite bonding, 696-697
Compton, Arthur H., 663-665
Compton effect, 664-665, 676
Computers, 717-719
Condenser (heat engine component), 262-263,
272
Conduction band, 704
Conductors
Bloch's band theory of metals, 702-705
classical free-electron model, 700-701
conducting electrons, 699-701
convention for current direction, 486
defined/described, 479
electron shells and, 652
Maxwell's 
electromagnetic 
theory 
and, 
551-556
Conservation laws, 211-252
conservation of energy, 274-278, 457
early statements of, 274-278
kinetic energy and, 229-232
mechanical energy and, 239-243
neutrino discovery and, 282, 775-777
neutron discovery and, 771
832
INDEX

conservation of mass, 211-217
conservation of momentum
closed systems and, 226
collisions and, 217-222, 227-231
derived from Newton's laws, 223-227
friction and, 221
neutron discovery and, 771
for particles, 283
Constructive interference, 348
Control rod (reactor component), 796
Coolidge, William, 615
Cooper, Leon, 706
Cooper pairs, 706
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum
mechanics, 684
Copernicus, Nicolas
biographical summary, 59-61
conflicts with religious authorities, 85
heliocentric theory, 59-60, 76-86, 106-109,
410
period-radius relationship for planets, 
81-82
philosophical approach to physics, 79-80
Cosmic rays, 437-438
Cosmology
See also Astronomy; Universe
Galileo and, 48
Greek concepts of, 9-12, 48, 62, 83, 85
Coulomb, Charles, 466-468
Coulomb, defined, 469
Coulomb's law, 468-469, 477-479
Counter Reformation, 85, 109
Cowan, Clyde, 776
Critical mass, 793
Crookes, William, 590-592
CRT. See Cathode ray tube
Crystalline bonding, 696-699
Curie, Irène, 770
Curie, Marie, 734, 736
biographical summary, 730-731
discovery of new elements, 728-733
Curie, Pierre, 734, 736
biographical summary, 730
discovery of new elements, 728-733
radon discovery, 737
temperature of radium sample, 739
Current
See also Conductors; Generator, electric
alternating, 481, 513-514, 516, 713
currents acting on currents, 492-494
defined/described, 479-481
direct, 481, 515-516, 713-714
displacement current, 553
electromagnetic induction discovery, 
507-512
magnets and, 488-492, 495-498
Maxwell's electromagnetic theory and,
551-556
Ohm's law, 486, 499, 699, 701
summary of equations, 499
transmission systems and, 525-528
units of, 469, 494
voltage and, 486, 699
Curves, banked, 160
Cycles, Universe and, 322-324
Cyclotron, 439
Cylinder (heat engine component), 262
Dalton, John, 457, 585-586
Dark energy, 205
Dark-line spectra, 624-626
Daughter elements, 741-743
da Vinci, Leonardo, 374, 375
Davisson, C. J., 667
Davisson-Germer experiment, 667
Davy, Humphry, 255, 520
Debierne, André, 737
de Broglie, Louis, 665-666
de Broglie waves, 665-669, 680
Decay, radioactive. See Radioactivity
Decay rate, 742-746
Deceleration, 35
Decibels, 370-371
Deferent, 75
Democritus, 7-8, 453
Density
ideal gas law and, 303, 324
of medium for wave propagation, 338
Derham, William, 371
Descartes, René, 451, 457
conservation law debate and, 232
ether concept, 182
on world machine, 212
Destructive interference, 348
Deuterium, 774, 785, 794-795, 805
Deuteron, 773, 781-782, 809-810
Dialogue Concerning Two Chief World Systems
(Galileo), 106, 109-110, 149-150
INDEX
833

Diffraction
of electrons, 666-668, 681
of light, 382-386
probability interpretation of quantum
mechanics and, 679-681
of sound waves, 373
of water waves, 354-360
wave motion and, 354-360
of X rays, 577, 611-613
Diffusion, 307
Digital signals, 566
Diodes, 710-714
Dirac, Paul A. M., 670, 671, 673
Direct current (DC), 481, 515-516, 713-714
and decision to use alternating current as
standard, 525-528
Discorsi (Galileo), 18, 38-39, 41, 43, 48, 118,
294, 377
Displacement, wave propagation and, 333-335
Displacement current, 553
Doping, 709-710
Doppler shift, 364
Double-slit experiments. See Two-slit
experiments
Double stars, 202, 436
DRAM (dynamic random access memory),
717-719
Drude, Paul, 697-698, 700
Drude-Lorentz free-electron model, 700-701
Dynamics, defined, 48, 128
Dynamo, 512, 513, 517. See also Generator, electric
Dyne, defined, 135
E  mc2 (Einstein's equation), 433-434, 439,
662, 781
Earth
age of, 4
global warming, 572-574
ionosphere, 565
knowledge of round Earth in antiquity, 64-65
magnetosphere, 498
projectile motion and moving-Earth
hypothesis, 146-150
radius of, 4
Eastward drift of planets, 71
Eastward drift of Sun, 67
Eccentricity of ellipse, 95-97
Eclipses, 69
Ecliptic, 67
Edison, Thomas A., 520-524, 613, 615
Edison Electric Light Company, 522, 527
Efficiency, 268-269, 271, 532-534
defined, 269, 271
of power plants, 532-534
Einstein, Albert
biographical summary, 408-410, 605
Brownian motion and, 313, 458
dark energy and, 205
general relativity theory, 205
light-quantum hypothesis, 662
Maxwell's equations and, 580
Nobel Prize, 602, 606
philosophical approach to physics, 7, 410
photoelectric effect theory, 602-608
on probability in quantum mechanics ("God
does not play dice" statement), 685-686
relativity theory, 405-448
on scientific process, 452
separation of fluids of different densities and,
10
specific heat of solids and, 697-699
on theories and their applications, 222
Einstein's equation E  mc2, 433-434, 439, 662,
781
Elastic collisions, 227-231, 242-243, 320-321,
647-648
Elastic potential energy, 238, 240-241
Electric age, 505-547
See also Electricity; Energy resources
alternating vs. direct current as standard,
525-528
battery invention, 480-481
electric generator, 511-519, 525-528
electric lights, 520-524
electromagnetic induction discovery, 507-512
Faraday's electric motor, 506-507
modern energy consumption, 528-531
motors, 516-519
telephones, 536
transmission systems, 517, 525-528
Electric field, 477-479, 483-484. See also
Electromagnetic waves
Electricity
See also Charge, electric; Conductors; Current;
Electric age; Insulators; Resistance;
Voltage
Coulomb's law, 468-469, 477-479
early studies of, 459-468
834
INDEX

electric field, 477-479, 483-484
electric force, 465-471, 477-479
electric power, 488
electrodynamics, 463-464
electrostatic induction, 471-472
electrostatics, 463-464
Ohm's law, 486, 499, 699, 701
summary of equations, 499
technology and. See Electric age
word origin, 461
Electric potential energy, 238, 268, 456. See also
Voltage
Electrodynamics, 463-464
Electrolysis, 610-611, 652
Electromagnetic spectrum, 563-578
 rays. See Gamma () rays
greenhouse effect, 572-574
infrared radiation. See Infrared radiation
microwaves, 570-571
Newton's studies, 386-389
ozone depletion and, 575-576
radio waves, 564-566
ultraviolet radiation, 575-576
visible light, 574
wavelengths of various types of radiation, 
563
X rays. See X rays
Electromagnetic waves, 549-584
See also Electromagnetic spectrum
ether and, 578-580
excitation of atoms and, 648
Faraday's suggestion on the nature of light,
549-551
Hertz's experimental confirmation of
equivalence of light and electromagnetic
waves, 560-563
Maxwell's principles of, 551-556
Maxwell's recognition of light as
electromagnetic waves, 559
propagation of, 556-560
speed of, 557-559
as transverse waves, 557
Electromagnetism
See also Electricity; Electromagnetic waves;
Magnetism
currents acting on currents, 492-494
discovery of effect of currents on magnets,
489-491
electric generator, 511-519, 525-528
electromagnetic induction discovery, 507-512
Maxwell's principles of, 551-556
Electron accelerator, 484-485
Electron gas, 701
Electron gun, 484, 647
Electrons
See also Beta () particles; Cathode rays
angular momentum of electron in orbit,
668-669
Compton effect, 676
conduction and, 700-704
Cooper pairs, 706
de Broglie wavelength of, 666-668
diffraction of, 666-668, 681
mass of, 593
Millikan oil drop experiment (charge
determination), 593-596
nuclear structure and, 764-766
photoelectric effect, 598-608
two-slit experiments and, 681
uncertainty principle and, 675-676
Electron shell, 649, 652-653
Electron volt, defined, 485
Electrostatics, 463-464
electrostatic induction, 471-472
Elements
discovery of new elements, 728-733
Greek concepts of, 7-12
periodic table, 585-590, 636, 648-649,
652-653
transformations of. See Fission reactions;
Fusion reactions; Radioactivity
Ellipses, 95-98, 180-182
Emission of radiation
Bohr atom and, 639-647
emission spectra, 622-624, 626-630
heat and, 606-607
lasers and, 650-651
Empirical laws, defined, 100
Endeavor (spacecraft), 160-162, 195
Energy
See also Kinetic energy; Potential energy
chemical, 258, 274, 456, 505, 530-531
conservation of, 457
kinetic energy, 229-232
neutrino discovery and, 282, 775-777
neutron discovery and, 771
origins of conservation law, 274-278
Einstein's quantum hypothesis and, 602-608
INDEX
835

Energy (Continued)
electrical, 456
electric potential difference. See Voltage
electron volts, 485
energy-frequency relation, 602, 662
energy quanta, 606-607, 639-640, 662
energy requirements of the human body, 528
forces and, 456-457
heat as, 253-258, 456
light as, 373, 606-607, 662
mass-energy relation E  mc2, 433-434, 439,
662, 781
mechanical, 456, 505. See also Electric age;
Heat engines
modern energy consumption, 528-531
nuclear binding energy, 780-786
of photon, 602, 644, 648, 662
power and, 267-268
of stationary states. See Energy states
uncertainty principle and, 676
Energy resources, 530-531
See also Nuclear reactors
conservation of, 531-537
efficiency of power plants, 532-534
renewable and alternative sources, 537-542
types of, 530
Energy states, 641-647
experimental confirmation of, 646-648
formula for, 642, 644, 646
of hydrogen atom, 627
in Schrödinger's wave mechanics, 672
Engines. See Heat engines
Entropy, 314-315
defined, 280
latent heat of fusion and, 694-696
Maxwell's demon, 315-318
second law of thermodynamics and, 280-281,
284-285
Epicycle, 75
Epicycle-deferent, 75
Equilibrium, forces in, 122-125, 127
Equinox, 67-68, 77
Erg, defined, 257
Ether, 395-396
Descartes' concept, 182
electromagnetic waves and, 412, 551,
557-558, 578-580
gravitation and, 187
Maxwell's theory and, 412, 557-558
Michelson-Morley experiment, 441-442, 580
Fajans, A., 749-750
Fallout, nuclear, 804
Faraday, Michael, 274, 506-512
biographical summary, 508
electric motor, 506-507
electromagnetic induction discovery, 507-512
ideas on the electromagnetic nature of light,
549-551
Faraday disk dynamo, 512
Feedback, engines and, 262
Fermi, Enrico, 282, 776, 786-787, 796
Feynman, Richard P., 82
Field, 472-479
defined/described, 472-474
electric, 477-479, 483-484
magnetic. See Magnetic field
scalar vs. vector fields, 474-476
Field effect transistor, 714
First law of thermodynamics, 278-280
First principles, 7
Fission reactions
chain reactions, 791-796
discovery of, 786-791
nuclear power plants, 797-799
nuclear weapons, 799-805
Fizeau, Armand H. L., 382, 558-559
Fluids, wave motion in, 333, 334
interference patterns, 345-350
refraction, 367-369
wave fronts and diffraction, 354-360
Fluorescence, 609, 725
Fluorescent lights, 590
Fluoroscope, 613, 615
Force
centripetal, 159-162, 637-638
electric, 465-471, 477-479
energy and, 456-457
equilibrium and, 123-125, 127
fields and, 472-479
forces that do no work, 243-246
gravitational force field, 476-477
inverse-square law, 179-182, 465-466,
476-477
lines of, 492, 506-507, 509, 511-513, 
550-551
measurement of, 132-136
on moving charge in magnetic field, 496-498
net force, 124-125
Newton's laws and. See Newton's laws
units of, 135, 454
836
INDEX

vector addition of, 125-127
weight and, 136-140
Ford, Henry, 536
Fossil fuels, 530, 535, 537
efficiency of power plants, 533-534
greenhouse effect and, 572
Foucault, Jean B. L., 382
Fourier, Jean-Baptiste, 344
Fourier analysis, 344
Franck, James, 646-647
Franck-Hertz experiment, 646-648, 650
Franklin, Benjamin, 308, 463-465, 479-480
Fraunhofer, Joseph von, 624
Fraunhofer lines, 624-626
Free fall, 36-48, 138, 143-144
See also Weightlessness
equation for, 42-44
inclined plane experiments, 43-47, 119
Frequency, 157
energy-frequency relation, 602, 662
harmonics and, 354
periodic waves and, 339
refraction and, 368
of sound waves, 370
stationary states and, 639, 644-645
thermal radiation and frequency of radiation,
606-607
units of, 370
Frequency modulation (FM), 565-566
Fresnel, Augustin, 383-385, 393
Friction
conservation of momentum and, 221
currents and, 700
free fall and, 39
heat and, 253-254, 256-257
linear motion and, 19
Frisch, Otto R., 789-790
Frost, Robert, 313
Fusion reactions, 440, 785, 805-811
fusion reactors, 805-808
stars and, 809-810
Galilean relativity principle, 149-150, 412-414
Galileo Galilei, 88, 118, 451
biographical summary, 16-18
conflicts with religious authorities, 109-111
cosmology and, 48
free fall and, 37-48, 119, 138
inclined plane experiments, 43-47, 119,
143-144
lift-type pumps and, 294
nova observation, 102
pendulum experiment, 241
phases of Venus and, 106, 108
projectile motion and, 143-144, 146-150
relativity principle, 149-150, 412-414
speed of light and, 377
telescope observations, 102-109
thought experiment on inclined plane with
zero angle of inclination, 120-121
uniform acceleration concept, 119
Galileo (spacecraft), 105
Gamma () rays, 577-578
neutral charge of, 735-736
nuclear binding energy and, 781-782
radioactivity and, 733
transformation rules and, 749-750
Gases
See also Ideal gas; Kinetic theory of gases
spectra of, 621-626
states of matter, 300-302
word origin, 301
Gassendi, Pierre, 457
Gay-Lussac, Joseph Louis, 297
Geiger, Hans, 631-634
Geiger counter, 633-634
Geissler, Heinrich, 590
General Electric, 527
General relativity, 205
Generator, electric, 511-519
See also Induction, electromagnetic
motors and, 516-519
transformers and, 525-528
Geosynchronous orbit, 153
Geothermal energy, 541
Germer, L. H., 667
Gilbert, William, 459-462, 472
Global positioning satellites, 153-154
Global warming, 572-574
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 276, 390
Goldstein, Eugen, 590-591
Governor (heat engine component), 262, 264
Graphite, as moderator in nuclear reactors, 796
Gravitation, 178-198
action at a distance and, 187
derivation of inverse-square law, 179-182
free fall, 36-48, 119, 138, 143-144
gravitational force field, 474, 476-477
Kepler's early suggestion of "magnetic force"
from the Sun, 101, 183
INDEX
837

Gravitation (Continued)
magnitude of gravitational force, 188-192
Newton's apple and, 175
Newton's law of universal gravitation,
178-198, 454-455, 474, 476-477
equation for, 191
projectile motion and, 143-149
satellites in orbit, 150-156
tides, 199-200
weight and, 133, 136-140
Gravitational acceleration, 44, 138, 194-195,
197-198
space shuttle and, 195, 197-198
weightlessness and, 138-140, 155-156
Gravitational constant G, 191-198
measurement of, 192-194
Gravitational potential energy, 237-241
Greece, ancient, 6-12, 451-453
See also specific philosophers
"atom" concept, 453, 457
"elements" concept, 7-12
"ether" concept, 396
ideas on light, 374
influence on Renaissance Europe, 59
knowledge of round Earth, 64-65
Pythagorean ideal, 351
Greenhouse effect, 572-574
Ground state of atoms, 642, 678
Hahn, Otto, 788-789
Half-life, 743-746
Halley, Edmund, 175, 201
Halley's comet, 201
Halogens, 588-589
Harmonic motion, 339-340
Harmonics, musical, 351-354
HDTV, 569
Heat, 253-291
See also Infrared radiation; Temperature;
Thermodynamics
as energy, 253-258, 457, 606-607
engines. See Heat engines
friction and, 253-254, 256-257
greenhouse effect, 572-574
kinetic-molecular theory of. See Kinetic
theory of gases
latent heat of fusion, 694-695
mechanical equivalent of, 257
specific heat, 255, 697-699
summary of equations, 286
units of, 255-256
wavelengths of, 563
"Heat-death" of the Universe, 285, 323
Heat energy, 253-258, 456, 606-607. See also
Infrared radiation
Heat engines, 259-269
Carnot engine, 270-273, 533-534
components of, 262-263, 272
efficiency of, 268-269, 271, 532-534
energy consumption and, 529
examples, 260-267
internal combustion engine, 272
origins of thermodynamics and, 269-273
power of, 267-269
reversible, 270-272, 280
second law of thermodynamics and, 280-281
steam engines, 505
"Heavy water," 774, 794-795
Heisenberg, Werner, 670, 672-675, 765-766, 773
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. See
Uncertainty principle
Heliocentric theory, 59-60, 76-86, 410
arguments against, 82-86
arguments in support of, 79-82, 106-109
Helium
 particles as helium nuclei, 736
fusion and, 809-810
nuclear binding energy and, 784-785
Rutherford's "mousetrap" for  particles,
737-738
Henry, Joseph, 509
Herapath, John, 303
Heron of Alexandria, 260
Herschel, John, 624
Herschel, William and Caroline, 202
Hertz, defined, 370
Hertz, Gustav, 646-647
Hertz, Heinrich, 365, 560-563, 598
High Definition TV, 569
High-energy physics, 780
Highways, banked curves on, 160
Hittorf, Johann, 590
Hooke, Robert, 389
Hoover Dam, 540
Horsepower, 268
Human body
energy requirements of, 528
radioactivity and, 734, 753
Huygens, Christian
collision theory and, 229-230
838
INDEX

light as wave idea, 375, 381
speed of light measurement, 378
wave fronts and, 356
Huygens' principle, 356-360
Hydroelectric power, 530, 540-541
Hydrogen
Balmer's formula, 626-629, 642-647
Bohr's model of, 640-647
emission spectra, 626-630
energy levels of, 627, 641-647
ground state, 642
isotopes, 764, 773-774
size of hydrogen atom, 640-642
Hypotheses, Newton and, 186-188
Ideal gas
ideal gas law, 297-300, 308-312
Maxwell's velocity distribution for molecules,
303-305
pressure-volume relation, 295-297, 302
sizes of molecules and, 305, 307-308
Ideal gas law, 297-300
equation for, 298
kinetic theory explanation of, 308-312
Image, reflections and, 362
Incandescent lighting, 520-524. See also Light
bulbs
Inclined plane
acceleration and, 43-47, 119
projectile motion and, 143-144
thought experiment on inclined plane with
zero angle of inclination, 120-121
Induction, electromagnetic, 507-512
See also Electromagnetic waves
electric generator and, 512-516
transformers and, 525-528
Induction, electrostatic, 471-472
Industrial Revolution, 258-267
Inelastic collisions, 232, 650-651
Inertia
defined, 121
mass as, 131, 132
Newton's first law, 121-122, 125, 453
Inertial reference frame, 415
Infrared radiation, 571-574
See also Heat energy
frequency of radiation and, 606-607
hydrogen spectrum and, 645
semiconductors and, 708
wavelengths of, 563
Inquisition
Copernicus and, 85, 109-110
Galileo and, 109-111
Insulators
band theory of metals and, 704
defined, 479, 700
electromagnetic waves and, 553-556
examples, 480, 701
Intensity of sound waves, 370-371
Interference patterns, 345-350
constructive and destructive interference,
348-350
nodal and antinodal lines, 348-350
Poisson bright spot, 383-385
sound waves and, 371-372
standing waves and, 350-354
two-slit experiments in water, 356, 360
two-slit experiments with electrons, 681
two-slit experiments with light, 382-384
wavelength and, 349-350
Internal combustion engine, 272
Inverse-square law for central forces, 179-182,
465-466
Ionization
radioactivity and, 727, 734
X rays and, 610-611
Ionosphere, 565
Irreversible processes, 284
Isolated systems. See Closed systems
Isotopes, 746-749, 751, 764, 773-774
Isotopic tracers, 753-756
John Paul II (Pope), 111
Joliot, Frédéric, 770
Jordan, Pascual, 670, 673
Joule, defined, 236, 257
Joule, James Prescott, 236
conservation of energy and, 274-277
heat studies, 255-257
kinetic theory of gases and, 293, 303
Jupiter
measurement of speed of light and, 377-378
moons of, 105-106
Keats, John, 267
Kelvin, Lord (William Thomson), 284, 299,
308, 320-322
Kelvin temperature scale, 271, 298-299
Kepler, Johannes, 88, 92-102, 451
biographical summary, 92-94
INDEX
839

Kepler, Johannes (Continued)
Brahe and, 91, 92
"clockwork universe" concept, 100
laws of planetary motion. See Kepler's laws of
planetary motion
"magnetic force" suggestion, 101, 183
philosophical approach to physics, 92-93
Platonic solids and, 92-93
Kepler's laws of planetary motion, 94-102
derivation of inverse-square law and, 179-182
first law (law of ellipses), 94-95, 97
second law (law of areas), 95, 97-98, 101
third law (harmonic law), 98-100
Kilby, Jack, 715
Kilogram, as standard of mass, 134
Kinematics, defined, 48, 128
Kinetic energy, 456
conservation of, 229-232
conservation of mechanical energy and,
239-243
defined, 229
elastic collisions and, 229-231
electric potential energy and, 484
inelastic collisions and, 232
of photoelectrons, 600-604
work and, 235-236
Kinetic theory of gases, 293-330
air pressure and water pumps, 294-295
Brownian motion and, 312-313
ideal gas law explanation, 308-312
Maxwell's velocity distribution, 303-305
model for gaseous state, 300-302
pressure-volume relation, 295-297
recurrence paradox and, 322-324
reversibility paradox and, 320-322
second law of thermodynamics and, 312-315
sizes of molecules and, 305, 307-308
speed of molecules, 302-308
temperature-pressure-volume relation (ideal
gas law), 297-300, 308-312
Kirchhoff, Gustav R., 624
Kohlrausch, Rudolf, 558-559
Laborde, A., 739
Land, Edwin H., 394
Lanthanum, 788-789
Lasers, 377, 650-651
Latent heat of fusion, 694-695
Latimer, Lewis Howard, 522
Lavoisier, Antoine Laurent, 215-217
Lavoisier, Madame (Marie-Anne Paulze), 216
Lawrence, E. O., 778
Laws of nature, distinguished from theories, 94
Lead, 740-742, 747, 750
Leaning Tower of Pisa, 44, 148-149
Leblanc, Maurice, 568
LEDs, 713
Legge, Alexander, 266
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 231-232, 237, 282
Length
length contraction, 428-430, 438
universal standard of, 134
Lift pump, 294-295
Light, 373-396
See also Lasers; Spectroscopy
characteristics of, 373-375
color, 386-392
early ideas about, 373-375
Einstein's light-quantum hypothesis, 602-608,
639, 662
as electromagnetic waves. See Electromagnetic
waves
emission and absorption of. See Spectroscopy
as energy, 373, 606-607, 639-640
equivalence of light and electromagnetic
waves, 559-563
ether as medium for, 395-396
interference and diffraction of, 382-386
particle-like behavior of, 662-665
particle model of, 379-382
Poisson bright spot, 383-385
polarization and, 392-395
propagation of, 375-378
reflection and refraction of, 378-382
speed of
constancy of, 415-418, 436-437
Maxwell's determination of speed of
electromagnetic waves, 557-559
measurement of, 377-378
tests of constancy of, 436-437
uncertainty principle and, 678
as transverse waves, 393
wavelength of, 391, 393, 563, 574
wave vs. particle concept of, 374-375,
378-382, 608-616
Light bulbs
invention of, 520-524
parallel vs. series circuits, 520, 523
power and, 268, 488
Light clock, time dilation and, 422-423
840
INDEX

Lindemann, Frederick A., 699
Linear motion, 19-32
See also Free fall
acceleration, 31-37
equations for, 49
Galileo's thought experiment on inclined
plane with zero angle of inclination,
120-121
inclined plane experiments, 43-47, 119,
143-144
speed, 22-30
velocity, 30-31
Lines of force, 492, 506-507, 509, 511-513
light as vibration of, 550-551
Livingston, M. S., 778
Lodestone, 459-462, 472
Longitudinal waves, 393
defined/described, 334-335
sound as, 370
Lorentz, H. A., 701
Loschmidt, Josef, 320
Lunar eclipse, 69
Lyman series, 629, 643, 645
Mach, Ernst, 319, 324
MAD (mutually assured destruction), 802
De Magnete (Gilbert), 460
Magnetic field
cathode rays and, 591-593
currents and, 488-492, 495-498
lines of force, 492, 506-507, 509, 511-513,
550-551
lodestone and, 472
moving charges and, 495-498
right-hand rule for, 491, 495
Magnetism
currents acting on magnets, 488-492
Gilbert's work on amber and lodestone,
459-462
Kepler's "magnetic force" suggestion for solar
system force, 101, 183
summary of equations, 499
Magnetosphere, 498
Marconi, Guglielmo, 565
Mari´c, Mileva, 409
Mars, 92-93, 134
Marsden, Ernest, 631, 633-634
Mass
of  particles, 736
of  particles, 736
conservation of, 211-217
distinguished from weight, 133
of electron, 593
inertial mass, 131
mass-energy relation E  mc2, 433-434, 439,
662, 781
measurement of, 132-136
Newton's second law and, 130-132
relativistic effects, 431-432, 438-439
rest mass, 431
as scalar, 131
universal standard of, 133-134
Mass defect, 781
Mass number, 749, 751-753, 764, 773-774
Mass points, 189
Matter waves, 671. See also de Broglie waves
Maxwell, James Clerk
on Ampère, 492
biographical summary, 552
determination of speed of electromagnetic
waves, 557-559
electromagnetic theory, 405-406, 551-556
ether concept and, 579
kinetic theory of gases and, 303-304
Maxwell's demon, 315-318
prediction of different frequencies of
electromagnetic waves, 561
recognition of light as electromagnetic waves,
559
special relativity and, 415-416
Maxwell's demon, 315-318
Mayer, Julius Robert, 275-277
Mechanical energy, 456, 505. See also Electric
age; Heat engines
Mechanical waves, 332
Mechanical world view, 313, 455. See also
Clockwork universe
Mechanics, defined, 48, 128
Medician planets, 105
Medicine
radioactivity and, 734, 754
X rays and, 613-616
Medium, for propagation of waves, 333-336
light and, 395-396, 441-442, 551, 557-558,
580
refraction and, 366-369
stiffness and density of, 338
Meitner, Lise, 788-790, 794
Melvill, Thomas, 622
Mendeleev, Dimitri, 587-588
INDEX
841

Mersenne, Marin, 371
Meteorology, 474-475
Meter, as standard of length, 134
Metric system, 133-134
Michelson, Albert A., 441-442, 580
Michelson-Morley experiment, 441-442, 580
Microchips, 708, 715-716
Microwave radiation, 570-571
Milky Way galaxy, 4, 103-104
Millikan, Robert A., 594-596, 605-606
Millikan oil drop experiment, 593-596
Minkowski, Hermann, 443
Moderator (reactor component), 793, 795, 796
Molecules
See also Kinetic theory of gases
Brownian motion, 312-313, 458
integral proportions for compounds, 457, 586
sizes of, 305, 307-308
speed of, 302-308
Maxwell's velocity distribution for, 303-305
Momentum
angular momentum of electron in orbit,
668-669
conservation of
closed systems and, 226
collisions and, 217-222, 227-231
derived from Newton's laws, 223-227
friction and, 221
neutron discovery and, 771
defined, 219
of photon, 662-664
uncertainty principle and, 675-676
Moon
centripetal acceleration of, 184-185
distance to, 4
eclipses, 69
Galileo's telescope observations of, 103
observations of position, 63-64
phases, 69-70
tides and, 199-200
Moore, Hiriam, 266
Morley, Edward, 441-442, 580
Motion, 15-57
See also Circular motion; Linear motion;
Special relativity
Galilean relativity principle, 149-150,
412-414
natural, 117-122, 144
"natural" vs. "violent, 118-119
Newton's laws of. See Newton's laws
projectile motion, 143-149
Motor, electric, 506-507, 516-519
Muon, 437-438
Music
See also String, vibrating
beats, 372
harmonics, 351-354
interference of sound waves and, 372
standing waves and, 351-354
Mutually assured destruction (MAD), 802
Nanometer, defined, 391
Natural gas, 530
Natural motion, 117-122
Nature philosophy (Naturphilosophie), 275-278
Neptunium, 790
Nernst, Walther, 699
Neutrino, 775-777
discovery of, 775-777
energy conservation and, 282
Neutron
decay of free neutron, 776
discovery of, 769-773
fission and, 786-796
nuclear structure and, 773-775
Neutron physics, 773
New Astronomy: A Celestial Physics (Kepler), 101
Newcomen, Thomas, 261-262
Newton, defined, 135, 454
Newton, Isaac, 88, 451-452, 457
apple story, 175
approach to science as model for all physical
sciences, 204-205
biographical summary, 171-176
color theory, 386-389
comets and, 200
conservation of momentum and, 218-219
gravitation theory, 102, 175, 179-198,
454-455
hypotheses and, 186-188
ideal gas theory and, 303
laws of motion. See Newton's laws
light as particle idea, 374, 380-381, 392-393
polarization of light and, 393
spectra and, 386-389
tides and, 199-200
Newtonian synthesis, 185-186
Newtonian world machine, 211-212
842
INDEX

Newton's law of universal gravitation, 178-198
equation for, 191
Newton's laws
conservation of momentum and, 223-227
derivation of inverse-square law for
gravitation, 179-182
first law (law of inertia), 121-122, 125, 453
forces in equilibrium, 123-125
Principia publication and contents, 175-178
projectile motion and, 143-146, 152-153
reversibility paradox and, 320-322
satellites in orbit and, 150-156
second law F  ma, 128-132, 431-432, 454
special relativity and, 431-432
third law (law of action and reaction),
140-143, 454
Niagara Falls power plant, 527-528
Nipkow, Paul, 568
Nitrogen, artificial transmutation and, 768
Noble gas, 652, 653
Nodal lines, 348-350, 358-360
Noemi, Jean, 715
Noninertial reference frame, 415
Northern lights, 498
North Star, 63, 65, 67, 77
Nova
Brahe's observation of, 88
Galileo's observation of, 102
Novum Organum (Bacon), 214
Noyce, Robert, 715
n-p junction diode, 710-714
n-p-n bipolar transistor, 714, 716
n-type semiconductors, 710-716
Nuclear binding energy, 780-786
Nuclear physics, 723-761
See also Fission reactions; Fusion reactions;
Nuclear structure
decay rate and half-life, 742-746
discovery of new elements, 728-733
identification of rays emitted in radioactivity,
733-737
isotopes, 746-749
nuclear structure, 763-786
radioactive transformations, 738-743
radioactivity discovery, 724-728
Rutherford's "mousetrap" for  particles,
737-738
summary of notation for reactions, 751-753
transformation rules, 749-750
uranium-radium decay series, 741-743,
752-753
Nuclear reactors
breeder reactors, 800
critical size, 793
efficiency and, 533-534
fission reactors, 791-799
fusion reactors, 805-808
heavy-water reactors, 794-795, 800-801
light-water reactors, 795, 801
power plants, 530, 541, 797-799
slow neutrons and, 793
Nuclear structure, 763-786
See also Fission reactions; Fusion reactions
binding energy, 780-786
charge of nucleus, 635-637
discovery of artificial transmutation, 766-769
mass defect, 781
neutrinos, 775-777
neutron discovery, 769-773
particle accelerators and, 777-780
proton-electron hypothesis, 765-766
proton-neutron model, 773-775
Rutherford's atomic structure model and, 632
size of nucleus, 636-637
stability of nucleus, 783-786
Nuclear weapons, 440, 799-805
Nucleon, 774, 783-786
Nuclide, 748, 751-752
Oersted, Hans Christian, 274, 489-491,
549-550
Ohm, Georg Simon, 486-487, 699
Ohm's law, 486, 499, 699, 701
Onnes, Kammerlingh, 700
On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres
(Copernicus), 60-61
Oppenheimer, J. R., 673
Opticks (Newton), 389-390
Orbits
and forces that do no work, 244-245
geosynchronous, 153
Newton's law of universal gravitation and,
180-182
orbital radii for atoms, 640-642
of satellites, 150-156
Overtones, musical, 354
Oxygen, artificial transmutation and, 768
Ozone depletion, 575-576
INDEX
843

Pantheism, 110
Parallax, stellar, 83
Parsons, Charles, 517-518
Particle accelerators, 498
nuclear structure and, 777-780
relativity theory and, 437-439
Paschen, Friedrich, 629
Paschen series, 629, 643, 645
Pauli, Wolfgang, 282, 673, 775
Pauli exclusion principle, 703
Pauling, Linus, 804
Payne-Gaposchkin, Cecilia, 810
Pendulum experiments
conservation of energy and, 241
elastic collisions and, 228-229
periodicity and, 339
"Penetrating radiation," 726
Period, 156-157, 339
Periodic table, 585-589
atomic structure and, 589-590
Bohr atom and, 648-649, 652-653
nuclear charge and, 636
Periodic waves, 338-342
Pfund series, 629, 643, 645
Phase
interference patterns and, 349-350
wave fronts and, 356
wave motion and, 342
Phase changes, 694-696
Phases of the Moon, 69-70
Phases of Venus, 106, 108
Phosphorescence, 725-726
Photoelectric effect, 598-608
Einstein's theory of, 602-608
kinetic energy of photoelectrons, 600-604
semiconductors and, 708
stopping voltage, 600, 603
work function, 603-604
Photon
Compton effect, 664-665
Einstein's light-quantum hypothesis, 602-608,
639, 662
energy of, 602, 644, 648, 662
momentum of, 662-664
uncertainty principle and, 675-676
Photovoltaic cells, 537, 539, 708-709, 712-713
Pile (battery component), 481
Pitchblende, 729, 731-732
Pixii, Hippolyte, 516
Planck, Max, 606-607, 639
Planck's constant, 606-607
discovery of, 602-603
stationary states and, 639, 644
uncertainty principle and, 675-676
Planets
Galileo's observations of, 105-108
Kepler's laws of planetary motion, 94-102,
179-182
motions observed in antiquity, 71-74
name origins, 72
Newton's law of universal gravitation and,
180-182
orbital elongation, 81
period-radius relationship for, 81-82
retrograde motion of, 71-72, 74-75, 78-79
Plane waves, 363
Plasma, 807-808
Plato
astronomical problem, 9
ideas on elements, 7-8
influence on Kepler, 92
influence on Renaissance Europe, 59
phases of the Moon and, 69
philosophical approach to physics, 7, 9, 
79-80
Platonic solids, 6, 7, 92-93
Plücker, Julius, 590
Plum pudding model of atom, 597-598
Plutonium, 790-791, 800-801, 804
Poetry
cycles in time and, 323
Industrial Revolution and, 267
Newton and, 178, 390
second law of thermodynamics and, 313
Poincaré, Henri, 283, 323
Poisson, Simon, 383-385
Poisson bright spot, 383-385
Polaris, 63, 65, 67, 77
Polarization, 335, 392-395
Poles, magnetic, 461, 462, 489
Polonium, 731, 741-742, 744, 750
Pope, Alexander, 178
Positron, 809
Potential energy
elastic, 238, 240-241
electric, 238, 482-486. See also Voltage
gravitational, 237-241
work and, 236-239
844
INDEX

Potential well, 702
Power
defined, 267-268
electric, 488
electric lights and, 521
engines and, 267-269
generators and, 516
transmission systems and, 525-528
voltage and, 487-488
Power, Henry, 295
Power plants
See also Nuclear reactors
efficiency of, 532-534
Niagara Falls power plant, 527-528
Pressure, 294-295
defined, 295
ideal gas law, 297-300, 308-312
pressure field, 474-475
pressure-volume relation, 295-297
Priestley, Joseph, 465-466
Primary coil, 509, 526
Principia (Newton), 88, 151, 171, 175-178, 187,
303, 389
contents described, 176-178
Principia Philosophiae (Descartes), 212
Probability interpretation of quantum
mechanics, 679-681
Projectile motion, 143-149
moving-Earth hypothesis and, 146-150
orbiting satellites and, 150-156
Propagation of waves, 336-338
propagation of light, 375-378
speed of propagation, 338, 340-341
Protestant Reformation, 59
Proton, 764-768
Prout, William, 765
Ptolemaic system, 75-76, 83, 85, 86, 106-108
Ptolemy, Claudius, 75-76
p-type semiconductor, 710-716
Pulse, 332
Pumps, water, 294-295
Pupin, Michael, 613
Pythagorean ideal, 351
Quantum mechanics, 661-691
Bohr atom and, 639-640
complementarity principle, 682-684
Copenhagen interpretation, 684
development of, 670-674
Einstein's light-quantum hypothesis, 602-608,
639, 662
Einstein's objections to probability
interpretation, 685-686
particle-like behavior of light, 662-665
Pauli exclusion principle, 703
photoelectric effect and, 598-599, 602-608
probability interpretation, 679-681, 685-686
Schrödinger's wave mechanics, 670-672, 679,
702
specific heat and, 697-699
summary of equations, 686-687
uncertainty principle, 673-676, 765
wave-like behavior of particles, 665-669
Quarks, 596
Quasi-crystalline bonding, 696-697
Quintessence (Greek concept), 10, 396
Radar, 364-366, 565-570
Radioactivity
applications of, 753-756
charge and mass of emitted rays, 734-737
decay rate and half-life, 742-746
discovery of, 724-728
discovery of new elements, 728-733
identification of emitted rays, 733-737
isotopes and, 746-749
radioactive transformations, 738-743
transformation rules, 749-750
summary of notation for reactions, 751-753
uranium-radium decay series, 741-743,
752-753
Radionuclide, 751
Radio waves, 564-566
Radium
discovery of, 732-733
isotopes, 747
radon and, 737-738
temperature of sample, 739
uranium-radium decay series, 741-743,
752-753
Radon, 737-738, 741
Ramsey, William, 737
Rate, defined, 22
Ratio, defined, 22
Rays
of light, 375-377
waves and, 362-363
Reactor, defined, 793. See also Nuclear reactors
INDEX
845

Rectification, 713
Recurrence paradox, 322-324
Reference frame
See also Special relativity
Galilean relativity principle and, 150, 412-414
inertial vs. noninertial, 415
relative motion and, 411-412
Reflection of waves, 359-366, 373, 378-382
Refraction of waves, 366-369, 378-382
Reines, Frederick, 776
Relativity principle, Einstein's, 414-415. See also
Special relativity
Relativity principle, Galilean, 149-150, 412-414
Relativity theory, 405-448. See also Special
relativity
Religion
Copernicus and, 85, 109-110
Galileo and, 109-111
Rembrandt, 58
Renaissance, 58-59
Resistance
defined, 701
electric lights and, 521
Ohm's law, 486, 499, 699, 701
power and, 488
superconductors and, 705-706
Rest mass, 431
Retrograde motion of planets, 71-72, 74-75,
78-79
Reversibility paradox, 320-322
Reversible engines, 270-272, 280
Right-hand rule for magnetic field, 491, 495
Ripple tank, 346-347, 355-356, 367-369
Roemer, Ole, 377-378
Rogers, William Barton, 276
Romantic movement, 276
Röntgen, Wilhelm Konrad, 608-611, 725
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 524, 605
Rope, waves on, 332-333
periodic waves, 339-342
polarization and, 335, 394
reflection, 359-360
refraction, 366
standing waves, 350-354
superposition of waves, 343-344
transverse waves, 337-338
Royal Society of London, 171, 228-229, 480
Royds, T., 737-738
Rumford, Count (Benjamin Thompson),
254-255
Rutherford, Ernest, 630-635
artificial transmutation studies, 766, 768
on Bohr atom, 654
estimate of size of nucleus, 636-637
"mousetrap" for  particles, 737-738
neutron suggestion, 769
radioactivity studies, 733
on scientific progress, 173
temperature of radium sample, 739
Rutherford atomic structure model, 630-637
Rutherford scattering, 630-635
Rydberg, J. R., 628
Rydberg constant, 628
Satellites
energy sources for, 712
and forces that do no work, 244-245
projectile motion and orbits, 150-156
types of, 153-154
Satellites, planetary (moons), 105-106, 182. See
also Moon
Saturn, 105
Savery, Thomas, 261
Sawyer, W. E., 568
Scalar, defined, 31, 454
Scalar fields, 474
Scattering
atmospheric, 390-392
Compton effect, 664-665, 676
Rutherford scattering, 630-635
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von,
275-276, 549
Schmidt, Gerhardt, 728
Schoemaker-Levy comet, 200
Schrieffer, Robert, 706
Schrödinger, Erwin, 670-672
Schrödinger equation, 671-672, 679, 702
Science and Hypothesis (Poincaré), 283
Scientific Revolution, 57-59, 451-459
Seasons, 67-69, 77-78, 98
Second, as standard of time, 134
Secondary coil, 509, 527
Second law of thermodynamics, 280-281
Carnot engine and, 272-273
closed systems and, 317-319
consequences of, 284-285
efficiency and, 532
energy consumption and, 529
kinetic theory of gases and, 312-315
Maxwell's demon, 315-318
846
INDEX

reversibility paradox, 320-322
statistical view of, 315-318
Seismic waves, 372
Semiconductors, 704, 707-719
doping with impurities, 709-710
n-p junction diodes, 710-714
n-p-n bipolar transistor, 714, 716
n-type, 710-716
p-type, 710-716
transistors, 714-719
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 323
Ships, sinking over horizon, 65
Shockley, William, 714
SI units, 135
Sky, color of, 390-392
Slope of a line
acceleration and, 35-36
Planck's constant and, 606
speed and, 29-30
Soddy, Frederick, 737, 739, 747-750
Solar eclipse, 69
Solar power, 537, 539
Solar system
See also Kepler's laws of planetary motion
Brahe's hybrid theory, 91, 106
Galileo's observations of, 102-109
geocentric theory, 61-62
heliocentric theory, 59-60, 76-86, 106-109
Newtonian world machine, 211-212
period-radius relationship for planets, 81-82
Ptolemaic system, 75-76, 83, 85, 86, 106-108
Solar-thermal energy, 541
Solids, waves in, 333-334
Solid state physics, 693-722
BCS theory, 706-707
Bloch's band theory of metals, 702-705
conducting electrons, 699-701
formation of a solid, 694-697
latent heat of fusion, 694-695
phase changes, 694-695
quantum solids, 697-699
semiconductors, 707-719
specific heat, 697-699
superconductors, 705-707
Solstice, 68-69, 77-78
Sommerfeld, Arnold, 648
Sonar, 364
Sound waves, 370-373
beats, 372
diffraction of, 354, 356, 373
interference of, 372
as longitudinal waves, 370
loudness and intensity, 370-371
seismic refraction, 372
speed of, 371
wave fronts of, 356
Spacecraft
conservation of momentum and, 225
crash of Mars probe due to metric confusion,
134
energy sources for, 712
gravitational acceleration and, 195, 197-198
satellites in orbit, 150-156
space shuttle, 155-156, 160-162, 195,
197-198
weightlessness and, 138-140, 155-156
Space shuttle, 155-156, 160-162, 195, 197-198
Spacetime, 443
Special relativity
constancy of the speed of light, 415-418,
436-437
experimental tests of, 434-440
inertial reference frames, 415
length contraction, 428-430, 438
light clock, 422-423
mass and, 431-432, 438-439
mass-energy relation E  mc2 and, 433-434,
439
Michelson-Morley experiment, 441-442, 580
name origin, 415, 435
simultaneous events, 418-420
time dilation, 420-428, 437-438
Specific heat, 255, 697-699
Spectrograph/spectrometer, 629
Spectroscopy, 621-626
See also Electromagnetic spectrum
absorption spectra, 624-626
Balmer's formula, 626-629, 642-647
Bohr's atomic structure model and, 639-647
continuous spectra, 625
emission spectra, 622-624, 626-630
hydrogen spectrum, 626-630
spectrum analysis, 624
Speed
angular, 157
average, 23-30
for circular motion, 157-158
defined, 22
instantaneous, 33
of light. See Speed of light
INDEX
847

Speed (Continued)
of molecules, 302-308
of refracted waves, 368
as scalar, 31
of sound waves, 371
of wave propagation, 338, 340-341
Speed of light
constancy of, 415-418, 436-437
Maxwell's determination of speed of
electromagnetic waves, 557-559
measurement of, 377-378
tests of constancy of, 436-437
uncertainty principle and, 678
Sports
average speeds, 23, 25-30
Newton's laws and, 141-143
Sprengel, Hermann, 520
Spring
examples of waves in, 333-334
period of vibration, 339
spring-mass system, 339
Standing waves, 350-354
Stars
absorption spectra, 624-626
distance to nearest, 4
double stars, 202
fusion reactions in, 440, 809-810
parallax, 83
States of matter, 300-302
Stationary states, 639-641
energy of, 641-647
experimental confirmation of, 646-648
Steam engine, 258-267, 505
Steam turbine, 517-518
Stimulated emission, 650-651
Stopping voltage for photoelectrons, 600, 603
Strassmann, Fritz, 788-789
String, vibrating, 332
elastic potential energy and, 240-241
standing waves and, 350-354
tension and, 338
Strong force, 807
Strontium-90, 753
Stukeley, William, 174-175
Summer solstice, 68-69, 77
Sun
age of, 4
distance to, 4
eclipses, 69
Fraunhofer lines, 624-626
fusion as energy source for, 440, 809-810
Galileo's telescope observations of, 104-105
observations of position, 63-64
Superconductors, 700, 705-707
Superposition principle, 342-345
for fields, 479
Huygens' principle and, 358
interference patterns and, 345-350
sound waves and, 372
standing waves and, 350-354
Synchro-cyclotron, 439
Technology
agricultural, 266
aviation, 196-197, 393
batteries, 274, 480-481, 486, 488
cars, 160, 529, 535, 537
cell phones, 564
compact discs, 717
computers, 717-719
electricity and. See Electric age
lasers, 377
medical, 613-616, 754
microchips, 708, 715-716
nuclear power. See Nuclear reactors
radar and sonar, 364-366, 570
radioactivity and, 753-756
radio waves and, 564-566
semiconductors and, 707-719
spacecraft. See Spacecraft
superconductors and, 705-706
telephones, 536
television, 484-485, 565-570
transistors, 707, 714-719
Telephone, 536
cell phones, 565
Telescope, 102-109
Television, 565-570
High Definition TV, 569
picture tube, 484-485, 566
signals, 565-570
Temperature
absolute scale, 271, 298-299
absolute zero, 271, 281, 298-299
ideal gas law, 297-300, 308-312
"third" law of thermodynamics and, 281
Tennessee Lake, 540
Tennessee Valley Authority, 524
Tension, and wave propagation, 338
Terrestrial sphere, 10
848
INDEX

Terrorism, 798
Theory of Light and Color (Newton), 175
Thermal radiation. See Infrared radiation
Thermodynamics
See also Heat
Carnot and, 269-273
first law of, 278-280
Maxwell's demon, 315-318
origins of conservation law, 274-278
second law of, 280-281
Carnot engine and, 272-273
closed systems and, 317-319
consequences of, 284-285
efficiency and, 532
energy consumption and, 529
kinetic theory of gases and, 313-315
Maxwell's demon, 315-318
reversibility paradox, 320-322
statistical view of, 315-318
summary of equations, 286
"third" law of, 281
Thompson, Benjamin (Count Rumford),
254-255
Thomson, G. P., 667-668
Thomson, James, 390
Thomson, J. J., 592, 667-668
atomic structure model, 596-598, 630-631
determination of charge of cathode rays,
592-594, 734
photoelectric effect and, 598
X-ray research, 610-611
Thorium, 728-729, 741-742, 748, 750
Through the Looking Glass (Carroll), 28
Tides, 199-200
Time
recurrence paradox and, 322-324
reversal of, 427
reversibility paradox, 320-322
simultaneous events, 418-420
time dilation, 420-428, 437-438
uncertainty principle and, 676
universal standard of, 134
Torricelli, Evangelista, 294
Torsional waves, 334-335
Torsion balance, 192-194, 466
Towneley, Richard, 295
Tractors, 266
Traité Elémentaire de Chimie (Lavoisier), 215
Trajectory, 144
Transformers, 525-528
Transistors, 707, 714-719
Transmission of electricity, 517, 525-528
Transportation, energy consumption and, 529,
535, 537
Transuranium elements, 787-791
Transverse waves
defined/described, 334-335
electromagnetic waves as, 557
light as, 393
on rope, 337-338
Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (Maxwell),
559
Tritium, 805
Tropic zone, 69
Turbine, 517-519
Two New Sciences (Galileo), 18, 38-39, 41, 43,
48, 118, 294, 377
Two-slit experiments
electrons and, 681
light and, 382-384
water and, 356, 360
Ultraviolet radiation, 563, 575-576
Uncertainty principle, 673-676
consequences of, 676-678
nuclear structure and, 765
United States
atomic bomb and, 799-805
efficiency of automobiles in, 535, 537
energy consumption in, 528-530
energy resources, 530-531
global warming and, 574
Universal constants of nature
gravitational constant as, 416
Planck's constant as, 607
speed of light as, 416
Universal first principles, 7
Universal laws of nature, 128, 185, 203, 457
Universal standard of mass, 133-134
Universe
age of, 4
clockwork universe, 100, 313, 455
"heat-death" of, 285, 323
recurrence paradox and, 322-324
size of, 4
Uranium
atomic bomb and, 800-801
chain reactions and, 792-796
discovery of radioactivity and, 725-728
fission and, 786-791
INDEX
849

Uranium (Continued)
isotopes, 747-749
transuranium elements, 787-791
uranium-radium decay series, 741-743,
752-753
Valence band, 704
Van Allen radiation belts, 498
Vector
acceleration as, 34
defined, 30-31, 454
vector addition, 124-127
Vector fields, 474-476, 478-479
Velocity
for circular motion, 157-158
defined, 30-31
Maxwell's velocity distribution for molecules,
303-305
Velocity field, 474-475
Venus, phases of, 106, 108
Vernal equinox, 68, 77
Villard, P., 733
Volt, defined, 482
Volta, Alessandro, 274, 480-481
Voltage (electric potential difference), 482-486
of battery, 486
current and, 486, 699
generator and, 513
Ohm's law, 486, 499, 699, 701
power and, 487-488
stopping voltage for photoelectrons, 600, 603
transmission systems and, 525-528
units of, 483
Voltaire, 176
Volume
ideal gas law, 297-300, 308-312
pressure-volume relation, 295-297
Voyager (spacecraft), 105
Wallis, John, 229
Water
phase changes, 694-695
water pumps, 294-295
wave motion in. See Fluids, wave motion in;
Ripple tank
Watt, defined, 488
Watt, James, 262-264, 268
Wave fronts, 356-357
Wavelength
Balmer's formula, 626-629, 643-646
de Broglie waves and, 666-668
interference patterns and, 349-350
of light, 391, 393
momentum of photon and, 663-664
of periodic waves, 340-341
refraction and, 368
scattering and, 390-392
for standing waves, 352, 354
stationary states and, 626-629, 641-645
of various types of radiation, 563
Wave mechanics, 670-672, 679, 702
Wave-particle duality
complementarity principle, 682-684
particle-like behavior of light, 662-665
polarization of light and, 392-395
probability interpretation and, 679-681
reflection and refraction of light and, 378-382
wave-like behavior of particles, 665-669
X rays and, 611-612
Waves, 331-403
See also Fluids, wave motion in; Rope, waves
on; Sound waves
defined/described, 331-336
diffraction, 354-360
Doppler shift, 364
examples, 331-333
Fourier analysis of, 344
Huygens' principle, 356-360
interference patterns, 345-350
light as. See Electromagnetic waves; Light
longitudinal, 334-335, 370, 393
nodal and antinodal lines, 358-360
periodic, 338-342
phase of, 342, 356
plane waves, 363
polarized, 335
propagation, 336-338
propagation vs. waves that don't propagate,
336
pulse, 332
radar and sonar, 364-366
reflection of, 359-366
refraction of, 366-369
simple harmonic motion, 339-340
speed of propagation, 338, 340-341
standing, 350-354
850
INDEX

