Hey everybody, welcome.
I'm in the, I'm in the beautiful place, the living place.
Here's one of the Cooper's Hawks that I have known for a long time.
It's an amazing day here.
And part of what's amazing about it is that it's entirely ordinary.
Or at least one might say this.
I don't really have a plan today.
Just haven't made a video in a while and wanted to check in, say hello, maybe birdwalk
a little bit.
I'm really excited about the interviews I've done somewhat recently.
Ryan Firstdiver's long, unfinished interview about Blackfoot culture, his introduction
to it, and the first repatriation of a Blackfoot beaver bundle from the museum.
There's both video and just a straight audio interview of that.
And then the also unfinished interview with my friend Mark Kevin Carlton Davis on his
experiences in Africa.
And also with Molly Doma Somme.
And then the long interview on seeing and the non-ordinary with Holly Emmer, which
I'm really thrilled about all of these, these interviews.
And I hope to do more.
There's so many brilliant minds in my circle, my little circle.
And it's just an amazing opportunity when we can sit down together and learn and remember.
Things about our nature as humans that are easily sidelined in modernity.
There's so many beautiful life forms here.
I mean, just look at this stuff.
I often wonder what this place was like before it was populated by Western humans.
And certainly the Western humans get a bad rap for colonization and appropriation and
all these strange features of what is almost the opposite of something like a human culture.
But it's important to remember that they too were captured rather than being necessarily
captured by another people, another group of humans.
They were captured by something that is very difficult to point at.
And all of our human cultures with the exception of some indigenous cultures are similarly enslaved.
There doesn't have to be, though it's very concrete when there is, but there doesn't
have to be an invader, a human group that invades and colonizes and enslaves.
For us humans, our minds represent an environment.
Much like the living environment of Earth in which you have animals and plants and trees
and microbes and insects and fungi and so on.
But that environment is not visible to us in the same way that the living environment
is, but it's just as profuse as this.
There are all kinds of forms of life or there are all kinds of a peculiar mode of beings
that live and reproduce and execute functions in the environment of human minds.
And it turns out that we are extremely vulnerable to specific forms of these processes that
I call thrips.
So the human cognizium is the name for the environment that is the network of human minds.
And it has a wide array of features that we don't have language for, but that nonetheless
exist in a sense while we exist.
And the network of minds is connected by physical transports and also non-physical transports.
For example, it's my perspective that the experience we call dreaming is an experience
of connection with the cognizium, not just the human one.
And it repairs and reorganizes features of the cognizium both at the scale of all humans,
at the scale of the people we interact with, at the scale of the people we know, at the
scale of the people we love, and so on.
The dreaming mind is trying to actually understand the problem of the colonization of waking
consciousness by what I refer to as thrips.
In recent talks, for example, by Max Tegmark with Lex Friedman, Max talks about a problem
that is presently being referred to as molok, which is a way of talking about the sort of
negatively demonic problem with human minds, cultures, and civilizations being captured
by something that we don't really know how to refer to.
It certainly seems, in a sense, metaphysically evil, but it's not necessary to include the
metaphysics to see the damage, right?
We could think about it in very effective ways that were primarily psychological if
we had the models that would help us to understand more clearly the nature and activities of
the human cognizium, the mimula, which is the connection, the transports that connect
human minds in the cognizium and beyond, and thrips, which are the word, that's the word
that I coined to indicate these deleterious processes that hitchhike on human cognition
and are extremely oriented to dominate terrain, to dominate the transports, to become very
contagious and to produce something that resembles progeny, new forms of similar thrips.
Ethics and religion on earth are thoroughly infested with thrips, and they are weaponized
against the possibility of our human nature, intelligence, potential, and so forth.
So this is a model, and the human cognizium floats on all the other cognizia of earth,
which nourish it and create this incredible field of opportunity in consciousness and
relation, in memory, in creativity, in discovery, in wonder, in joy.
So it's a nested network where the different insect cognizia, the cognizia of the bees,
the wasps, the ants, the trees, the herbs, the fungi, the land animals, the raccoons,
skunk, badger, bear, to name a few, the water animals, whales, coral, plankton, octopi,
squids, dolphins, the insects, again, the preying mantises, spiders, microbes, all of the vast
varieties of microbial organisms in their swarming trillions.
The creatures of the air, the crow and bluejay and hawk and owl and dove and goose and duck,
all of these beings, right, they are together as one family, and they are doing something
that the humans generally rarely approach the idea of.
They are making the possibilities of consciousness and awareness locally for earth.
Of course, the humans right on top of this, completely unaware of it, and most of what
we do as a species rips those cognizia to shreds, right, poisons them, destroys them,
build cities, and so on.
But what we don't realize is that that same process in which it appears that bad humans
are colonizing nature, what's actually going on is that the humans themselves are colonized.
The human cognizium, something is riding on that, and it captures it in various ways.
And it, I mean, it's so difficult to find words to explain these situations, but effectively
one of the effects of the colonization of human minds by these thrips, which are really,
what are they?
They are actual beings, tough to say.
The simplest way to think of them is as processes that are attracted to certain modes of thought
behavior activity, right?
So you can see in human culture, for example, we've lost our privacy, the ability to have
private experiences and conversations with each other that never become public or to
have telephone calls and so on.
We've lost our privacy due to two principles.
The first is advertising, which you can see is like throwing a net to capture human attention,
right?
This is a very thrisplike feature of the colonizing aspect of our cognizium.
And then the other reason that we've lost privacy, and privacy is absolutely essential
to being human, is due to security, right?
Which has sort of two main branches, law enforcement and the military.
Most of our social structures are not really human.
They're the symptoms of specific networks of thrips that have colonized us in general.
And just to go back to the beginning here, you can see that before the Europeans went
on colonizing rampages around the globe, they themselves were intrinsically internally colonized
by ideas.
And really, thrips are an idea in both senses, right?
Like you have the idea of thrips, but you also have the result of the colonization of
humans by thrips in our language and religion, in the foundations of our representational
cognition.
So it's important to see that before, in one sense, in one way of thinking for certain
purposes, before the European colonizers laid waste to indigenous cultures around the world,
they themselves were first victimized in a very similar way, right?
I see this in all kinds of human problems and life stories and the stories of civilizations,
right?
So it is as if there's a kind of an evil force that is colonizing the humans cognitively.
And it seems to be a result of the urge to make representations of things.
There are very few creatures in nature that make representations.
None of them make abstract representations.
That's our specialty.
So certainly you can find a nest of wasps, or a beehive, or an anthill, or a tree in
which the blue herons gather in the correct season to reproduce and raise their children.
They make nests, right?
And you can think, oh, that's a representation, not in the same sense, because it's not abstract.
When it doesn't replace relationships, these features embody them, right?
They embody relationships.
And what the humans are mostly embodying is the absence of relationships.
And that's what our capacity, that's the danger that our capacity for representational cognition
introduces into the long sort of archeological record of the development of human consciousness,
right?
We could call it the evolution of human consciousness, even though in many cases, in many senses,
not all of them, it's actually the opposite of evolution.
We are, our minds are dying into abstraction.
And you can see this process happening in the sort of historical record of the development
of human consciousness as organized religions begin to show up on the scene, produce books,
weaponize those stories, right?
You either do exactly what we say here, or you'll be tortured forever.
Only we know the way to enlightenment, the divine, this kind of thing.
Most of those religions that are like that are actually just thrisp networks, right?
It's the absence of anything resembling insight, intelligence, awareness, consciousness, masquerading
as the only way to get there, right?
And making threats, right?
Not only do only we know the door to the sky and the divine beings, but we are telling
you that you will be destroyed forever if you don't sign on the dotted line, right?
Except the tenets of the thris-based religion.
This problem of absences turns out to be crucially important to how thrisps propagate in the cognisium
and continue to produce terrifying results.
It's as if in representational cognition, in general, there's a vulnerability in the domain
of abstraction, right, to depart an actual array of relational opportunities simply by
making representations of them, photographs, clinical analyses, math.
Now I'm not trying to denigrate ways of knowing.
I'm only trying to say that some of the ways of knowing carry with them this potential to
depart from insight, relationship, learning, curiosity, and growth into the production
of tokens, right?
And the most obvious tokens that replace those relationships and thereafter call to us because
they stand in that place of the absence of what they point at, right?
You can see this in any version of an insane religion.
I'll just pick one at random here.
The most obvious one around here is sort of damnation, theology, evangelical Christianity,
particularly how that network of vicious thrisps functions on television, right?
Television itself is already the absence of a relationship dancing in awareness as if
it is a relationship, right?
And then later, you know, over time, you get weirder problems like our social networks
and so on, yeah, let's see what's going on here for a moment.
That bird is telling me there are hawks nearby, and that's almost always true here.
So we have this problem and we don't have any much medicine for it because nobody is
teaching us these things.
I learned these things from long research and also the cooperation of another cognisium,
right?
A non-human cognisium.
And we have no immunity to this.
Things are incredibly vulnerable to this problem and it's become very serious over perhaps
the past 5000 years, more seriously the past two, hyper-seriously the past 500 years.
And it's just absolutely crystallizing in the moment that we live in today and over
the past 50 years with the rise of the Internet, which is almost pure representation, and technologies
such as those we are now about to face the impending consequences of that we are calling
large language models and artificial intelligence.
These are incredibly dangerous technologies that alter not just what it means to be human
but what memory is, which is one of the most foundational assets that must be protected
for humans to have the possibility of being intelligent, especially together.
So long before the colonizers went apeshit crazy on nightmare massacres of indigenous
populations, inside themselves this process was already occurring and had been occurring
for a long time, right?
They were colonized interiorly and extrinsically.
You can see that of all the representations that humans make, money is probably the most
dangerous in lots of different ways, right?
If you have money, you don't need relationships.
You can buy the opportunity to relate in a way that benefits just you mostly with cash.
So you can see that money is like the representation of the absence of relationships, and it's
incredibly powerful, yeah.
It replaces the principle of relation and value, the principles of relation and value,
with value itself, right, like value capital V, with tokens, yeah.
And that process drives a whole vast forest of dangerous other processes.
It's almost like, of course we've heard the trope, you know, money is the root of all
evil, but in a very real way, money is the motivating cause of vast arrays of human colonization,
harm, cruelty, and also the opposite, right?
Like it's so prevalent that it blocks the possibility of many virtues, while breeding
sort of ugliness and wickedness in a way, it at the same time ensures there's not enough
assets for the good stuff to flower and have a chance, you know, to come into inaction,
embodiment.
And of course, we, as the descendants of possibly colonial peoples, did my actual descendants
colonize anyone?
Not clear to me.
My family comes from Sicily, I don't know Sicily's history very well, certainly Italy
was involved in some colonization activity, however, it's not entirely clear whether my
ancestors actually were directly involved in colonizing anyone.
And my ancestors came here in the 40s and 50s, and this place once belonged to the Native
Americans, so to speak, I don't think they ever really believed they owned the land,
I think they believed they were co-embodied with the land, so it wasn't like the colonists
told something they owned, it was much worse, it was like they stole half their body, the
half that's in nature.
For the sake of money, so you can see that this colonization spiral just keeps happening
and the point that I'm trying to make in part is that we moderns are being re-colonized
in a hundred new ways per year by advertising and technology.
You can see that the training of large language models and what humans call artificial intelligence
systems is colonizing us at the deepest possible level.
It's sucking up all of the creative activity, writing, art, dance, music, philosophy, and
producing a kind of concentrated representational amalgam of that in language and deep fakes
and this kind of thing.
So the whole colonization process certainly didn't end anywhere and the colonizing peoples
themselves are being re-colonized by the imperatives and priorities that are the children of the
older thrips, right?
So these newer thrips like computation, AI, social media, and so on, these are the new
generation of the colonizing forces that have been effectively parasitizing the consciousness,
life paths, and awareness of human beings for a very long time.
Where does the problem begin?
Is it fundamentally physical or metaphysical?
Seems both.
Is it evil?
Are there like demons and devils?
It's hard to address these questions in any useful way because we have to be very cautious
about what we would mean.
If a demon is like the concentrated absence of authentic relation, intelligence, awareness,
kindness, generosity, wonder, creativity, if a demon is like the concentrated absence
of that, then it's not really there.
It's that something is missing, right?
Something's fundamentally missing and the absence coalesces into this force that is colonial.
In its nature.
So it's a difficult problem.
And the other thing is that we can examine the problem and build medicine for this problem
in each other, in our minds, in our cultures, in our societies.
Once we become aware of it, the problem there is that there's processes in the cognizium
that are extremely adept at capturing and representing and thus getting rid of any positive
movement that we may assemble.
We don't want to start a new religion.
We want perhaps ways of educating each other and our children about the dangers of representational
cognition and giving them some models that would allow them to both become aware of the
dangers and also select something else in such a way that it doesn't become captured
by the Thrysp network or Molok or whatever and continues to grow and evolve sort of in
enemy terrain, right?
You can see reflections of these ideas in lots of human stories.
It's there in much of science fiction.
It's there in fantasy, right?
Sauron is this image of essentially that which kills its vampiric, right?
It's parasitic.
In the matrix, something is feeding on the humans, right?
But there really is something like that going on, something that resembles it.
We don't have to have the perfect story.
We need to understand the principles and how they tend to function in the network of human
minds and in individual awareness.
I was looking at these fungi growing out of this hay bale
and there's all these little, I guess humans would generally call them gnats and they're
very interested.
They're fluttering around here in some degree of numbers.
They're not necessarily eating the fungi.
They're interested in the fungi.
It's almost as if the fungi is producing a gas that they find attractive and some of
them are mating here.
When I look at them very closely, their body structure is similar to that of wasps, but
I don't think they're actually wasps, though there are some very fascinating tiny wasps.
Many of the humans will say, colonization is no problem, that's just what nature does
all the time.
It's not true.
It's not true at all.
Whatever is going on in the organismal layer of earth is unimaginably sophisticated and
fundamentally symbiotic.
Benefits get shared, life and death feed each other, homeostasis of the living environment
has maintained even during crisis, unless you burn off enough of the ecology that that
can't happen very well anymore, which is part of what the humans have been up to.
So yeah, it's not untrue.
You can see the sudden and often apparently deleterious effects of what we may call an
invasive species.
And often, again, the invasion is actually a result of things like humans ripping stuff
apart in the ecologies and or transporting things while they're moving goods and services
around on the ocean and the air and so on, right?
And you know, I don't know if there were praying mantises in North America prior to
some time in the 1800s.
It appears that most of the praying mantises here come from China, and mantises lay egg
cases on branches of trees and plants.
So those egg cases are very easily transported to other countries.
And the climate here is good for them.
The degree to which they are invasive is not clear, because what are they really wiping
out?
Like what are they replacing?
But in, what is, there's a species of bird that invades the nests of songbirds and pretty
much wipes out their children.
It's called a cowbird.
And this wasn't generally a problem until the humans started wiping out the bison, right?
Which were the cowbirds natural symbiont.
At least it seems clear it wasn't a severe problem.
It's I'm not sure how much data we have from before the bison were obliterated.
So some of the invasive species, the colonizing species, right?
Their natural rhythms and relationships have been disrupted or destroyed, and that's what
produces the problem as a symptom of the destruction of ecological symbiotic networks.
Our minds are like what we're talking about.
That's the thing.
If our minds resemble anything on earth, they resemble diversely populated ecologies.
And the network of living relationships between those ecologies.
You know, many people will say things like, and many people aren't the standard, oh, you
know, all that Native American stuff, it's not real.
It's just superstitions and stories and stuff.
Wow, they could not be more wrong.
Anyone who's had a chance or the privilege of participating directly with indigenous
teachers and wisdom keepers to use the trendy language of the time.
Anyone who's had an authentic contact with the knowledge of the indigenous peoples will
immediately become aware that there are other dimensions to being human, that us moderns
have no idea about.
And at the same time, there are superstitions, right?
Codified stories that over time turned into representations, right?
The absence of the knowledge that the stories were originally based in or even the living
memory of.
For example, in some cultures, if a bird comes in your house, it has to be killed, right?
It's a portent, yeah.
And someone who's intelligent is not going to obey the, someone who's authentically in
touch with what's going on, is not merely going to obey the letter of the law, they're
going to approach it in a way that is alive and sensitive and aware.
So even indigenous knowledge ways over time, they had a very considerable concern about
various kinds of representations and what happens to language if we take it too seriously
and pretend that it tells us what things or who beings are, yeah.
You can see the same problem again and again in human culture.
The problem is that relationships collapse into representations and representational
language and the knowledge and the relationships die into those representations.
They literally like go away.
I'm going to pause here for a minute and I'll begin, I'll continue in a moment.
So this problem is what produces what are political systems, organized religion and
there are branches of religion that are deeply authentic as well, but it's very difficult
for them to evade capture by the colonizing forces that want to turn everything into this
sort of picture, right?
I remember my friend Ryan telling me, he's taught me so much, Ryan First Diver.
He talked about a problem where they were teaching indigenous knowledge in a classroom
and an elder was there and said, you know, what are you doing?
There's always this issue of if we record stuff, then it gets captured, right, in terms
it becomes representational.
Obviously, the recording is the first movement in that process.
And in this case, the teacher said, look, these children don't know, they don't know
like fundamental basic things about our traditions.
Our language is dying, our traditional knowledge ways are being replaced by Christianity and
things like this, right?
So in that kind of a situation, it's important to at least just try to keep a heartbeat there.
But there's another problem, which is that in another story, he was telling about some
elders getting together to record their stories.
And one of the first speakers said, this is not the way to do this.
If we record these stories, they're going to seem like they're written in stone and
they will become superstitions, right, is part of the elder's concern.
And it was the same kind of answer from the group, although that first speaker or the
early speaker influenced the group and sort of broke it apart, right, into different camps,
camps that are like, no, these have to be taught in a traditional way, they can't be
recorded and camps were like, we're dying here, we need to get this stuff.
We need to preserve the knowledge that the elders have, they're going to die without
transferring their stories, right?
So the humans have struggled with this for thousands of years, and we're still struggling
today.
Are there answers?
Yes.
But we need to understand the fundamental problems and features of the form of cognition,
the forms of cognition that are very vulnerable to representation.
And again, I think the ancient peoples were very aware of this.
There are many stories, one, for example, where two enemies meet in a cave and they're
blind because it's dark in the cave and they're struggling, there's a storm outside and they
both realize through touching each other that, oh, this person is my enemy, this is actually
the person I went on a mission to kill, but they don't decide to go that way, they decide
to go a different way, right?
So the idea that someone's my enemy is already hugely problematical because actual situations
are not like representations.
There's all kinds of domains of liberty, degrees of liberty that are available to us unless
we collapse into the language, as if it's written in stone, as if it's the only truth
or the one we must pay attention to or so on.
So we can recover knowledge of these problems and teach each other and our children to form
a curious and wise awareness of them and to practice the sort of medicines that give
us immunity to the colonizing forces in our very language itself and in our bizarre replacements
for actual traditions and so on.
I'm very grateful to those of you who are listening today and those of you who support
my endeavors through Patreon and please, if you want to, if you're getting some value
here, at least like, like and share the videos that you like and if you care to, feel free
to support me on Patreon, there are links in my YouTube page for that.
For now, I wish you wise ways, good dreaming and beautiful life paths.
Thank you for joining me.
I look forward to learning together again sometime soon.
Bye bye for now.
