The nature of the solar system, with its central sun surrounded by its numerous planets and
moons, asteroids, comets, and more, is the key to understanding Earth's origins and evolution.
For the past three lectures, we focused on the solar system and its myriad objects.
Let's summarize the key points. The sun, with 999 parts and 1,000 of the solar system's mass,
has always dominated everything. Even after the initial triggering of nuclear fusion reactions,
the sun continued to accumulate gas and dust, as it rather quickly settled into a stable phase
of hydrogen burning. The sun is an ordinary star. It's not particularly massive or unusual in its
composition, and that turns out to be a good thing for a nearby living planet. As we've seen,
more massive stars have much shorter lifetimes because big stars have much greater interior
temperatures, pressures, nuclear fusion reactions go much faster. A star 10 times the mass of our
sun lasts less than a tenth as long, and that's simply not enough time for a planet in orbit to
settle down, much less get life started before that star explodes. If the star is a lot smaller than
the sun, say a red dwarf star a tenth the mass, then it will burn more than 10 times longer than
the sun. But unless the planet is precisely positioned in the narrow Goldilocks zone, life will
have a difficult time getting started. One possible conclusion is that our average size sun is ideal
for starting and sustaining a living planet. The solar system is fortunate in another way as well.
Unlike almost two-thirds of all of the stars, our sun is a single star. Most stars are binaries.
Observations confirm that most of what we see as points of light in the night sky are systems in
which two stars circle each other about a common center of gravity. The sun could have wound up
in such a system too, had our nebula been a bit more turbulent with greater net angular momentum,
and that would have left more mass out in the orbit of Jupiter, so Jupiter could have grown
into a star as well, and if so, the sun would be smaller and Jupiter larger.
It's possible that planets like Earth wouldn't be affected. The Kepler mission has already identified
at least one stable planet in a double star system. Perhaps life wouldn't care either,
as long as there was a steady source of light energy. But it's also very possible that the
gravitational dynamics of two stars could induce an eccentric orbit, irregular spin,
dangerous climate swings. One of the most important findings in our studies of the solar system,
the observation that may place the greatest constraints on how Earth formed
is the distribution of the planets. The four Iraqi planets are closest to the sun,
the element silicon, oxygen, magnesium and iron abound, and the black volcanic rock basalt
dominates the surface. By contrast, the outer four gas giant planets are made primarily of
hydrogen and helium, with other volatile compounds thrown in. This dichotomy of worlds
suggests that early in the history of the solar system, an intense hot solar wind
refined and distilled the nebula, that's the context of Earth's formation.
So, there's obviously a lot to know about the solar system, about all the other planets and their
moons, and we're in a great, great age of discovery thanks to NASA and other space
agencies around the world. But now I want to shift focus to our own planet, to Earth.
Earth is in many respects a lot like the other planets of the solar system. One thing,
Earth orbits in the same plane, the same direction as the other planets. That's the plane that
reveals the average rotational sense of the original gas and dust in the solar nebula.
We also know from radiometric dating techniques of various rocks and minerals that Earth must
have formed at very close to the same time as the other planets. This condensation of the solar
nebula began about 4.567 billion years ago, and there are other important and revealing
similarities. Earth is made of the same chemical elements, and for the most part,
the same isotopes as most of the other objects in the solar system. And of course,
Earth obeys the same physical laws that hold sway throughout the cosmos. In fact,
in many respects, Earth is simply one more planet, and some people might argue it's a rather small
and insignificant planet at that. But Earth is also unique in important ways. As far as we can
tell, Earth is the only body with extensive deposits of liquid water on the surface. Virtually
all theories of life's origin point to the central chemical role that water must have played.
Water may be the universal medium for all life, at least life as we know it. So in that key aspect,
Earth is a pretty special place. Many of Earth's chemical and physical features are well suited
to a habitable surface, though we have to be careful here. Earth is the only living place
we know in the universe, so naturally, it's ideally suited for life. And that's
dangerously close to circular reasoning. Nevertheless, consider some key features
of our planet. For one thing, the Earth's sun distance is about 150 million kilometers,
which is close enough to maintain liquid water over most of the surface, most of the time.
But it's not so close as to boil the water away, so that's a pretty critical distance.
The 24-hour rotation period is also very important. That length of day is short enough to prevent
extreme temperature contrasts between night and day, like you see on Mercury or Venus,
but it's slow enough to prevent extremely violent weather patterns of the kind we see on Jupiter
and Saturn. And then there's the important matter of mass. Earth has a diameter of almost
13,000 kilometers, which is large and massive enough to have strong enough gravitational field,
and that field prevents fast-moving water vapor molecules from escaping the planet.
If we had been as small as Mars or the Moon, Earth would be a dry world.
Instead, Earth is held on to most of its water throughout its 4.5 billion-year history.
We can't be sure, but it's possible, that all of these characteristics,
distance from the Sun, size and mass, orbital and rotation parameters,
and more are keys to forming a living planet.
Details of the dramatic events that formed Earth from the Solar Nebula are revealed by
studies of the amazingly diverse variety of meteorites. These are rocks that have fallen
from space. Okay, it's rather unsettling to think that our planetary home is persistently peppered
by chunks of rock falling from the sky. Indeed, the concept of pieces of rock bombardous from space
was not taken seriously by the scientific establishment until rather recently.
In spite of the potential implications of meteorites and a litany of colorful
anecdotal accounts of meteorite falls, and it seems like a lot of those had to do with
serious injury to unfortunate French peasants for some reason. But until about two centuries ago,
there was little in the way of serious, observable or reproducible scientific evidence that could
be used to confirm the reality of meteorites. Much less explain where they come from.
The famed American statesman and scholar Thomas Jefferson, he was the third president of the
United States and a passionate amateur naturalist. Even he got into the act after reading a technical
description of an observed meteorite fall in western Connecticut in an 1807 report published
at Yale University. Jefferson is said to have quipped, I would rather believe that two Yankee
professors would lie than believe that stones have fallen from the heavens. Or as the great
18th century chemist Antoine Lavoisier put it, a stone cannot fall from the sky. There are no
stones in the sky. Well, two centuries and countless of meteorite finds later, that point of
view is no longer tenable. As meteorite experts examine more ground and as the voracious meteorite
collector community vies for the rarest varieties, both public and private collections across the
globe have swelled. The history of those collections is quite revealing about the very ways that
meteorites have been found and how they've been described and how they're valued. For a long time
meteorite collections were based on distinctive iron, nickel, metal meteorites. That's what was
found most commonly. These dense objects often feature black crusts and weirdly sculpted shapes
that cause them to stand out in a field or in a streambed. What's more, iron meteorites are
magnetic, so it's fairly easy to identify and separate them from ordinary stones. Now that
bias was largely corrected by the 1969 discovery by Japanese scientists of literally thousands
of untouched meteorites lying on pristine Antarctic ice fields. The Antarctic continent
features vast plains surfaced by ancient blue ice. These are ice deserts. They're places where it
never snows and where the hard frozen surface solely sublimes away for many thousands of years.
So think about what happens to a rock falling from space. It just lies there.
And because the surface is white, any dark object is obvious and completely out of place.
It's so tempting to go out and pick up piles of space rocks. Fortunately, there are rigorous
international treaties that ban any commercial exploitation of Antarctica. Those restrictions,
plus the fact that access to the remote ice fields is extremely dangerous and limited,
ensure that these irreplaceable extraterrestrial treasures are going to be preserved for scientific
study. The collection strategy is very systematic. An area of blue ice is selected and plotted into
grids. And teams of specially trained scientists on helicopters and snowmobiles systematically
examine square mile after square mile of desert. Any find is carefully recorded,
hermetically packaged, it's safely stored. And tremendous care is made so that no hand print,
not even a breath contaminates the pristine space exposed surfaces.
Each season of meteorite hunting ends with the new finds being added to great
and still growing public collections. One of the most important repositories for meteorites
is the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History. Their storage facility is
in suburban Suitland, Maryland, and it holds many thousands of specimens. The space rocks are preserved
in several buildings, each the size of a football field. And each with row upon row of ultra clean,
airtight storage cabinets. Almost as rich in meteorites, though much less amenable to
systematic recovery and especially sterile preservation, are the great sandy deserts of
Earth, including those in Australia, in the American Southwest, the Arabian Peninsula,
and most productively, the vast sandy Sahara Desert. Meteorites can be worth a lot of money.
So word is spread widely among the desert crossing nomads. I've heard one story that a
single extremely rare lunar meteorite, that's just a nondescript rock found in the desert
and now thought to have been blasted off the moon long ago, it was sold for a million dollars in a
private sale. Now any meteorite stands out as an object, a very odd object, against the uniformity
of the sand, the colored sand of the Saharan Desert. And it's a simple thing for a desert
writer to dismount his camel to retrieve that odd stone carried into the next village. And there's
this whole unofficial guild of meteorite middlemen. It's kind of a network linked by satellite phones,
and there's all this hyperbole that goes along with selling meteorites. The middlemen are very
rarely experts. And what they do is they offer nomads of pittance and cash for any fresh find,
then the stones sort of pass from one dealer to the next to the next. And the standard packaging is
a mixed burlap bag of rocks. Each bag is passed from dealer to dealer until and each time there's
a markup and eventually they reach the commercial centers of Morocco and Egypt, Marrakesh, Rabat,
Cairo. And from there the meteorites will wind up eventually on eBay or at one of the huge
international rock and mineral shows. On several occasions, while I've been on geological field
trips to remote parts of Morocco, I've been offered burlap bags with a collection of 10 or
20 pounds of rocks, all supposedly meteorites. And the typical sales pitch goes like this,
no middlemen fresh from the desert just found last week. These are cash only deals. They're always
rather unsettling because you're brokering these things in a dingy windowless back room of a typical
tan mud brick house. It's away from the blazing desert sun, so it's dark inside. It's almost
impossible to see what's being offered to you. And there are formalities that you have to observe,
a set of greetings, introductions, traditional cups of mint tea. And eventually the seller
dumps the contents of the bag on his carpet. In my experience, some of the rocks are just
random earth rocks. You might think of it as ballast. And I suspect it's sort of like a test
to see if you know what you're doing. Then a few of the rocks might be the commonest sort of
chondrite meteorite, perhaps the size of an olive or an egg. One or two might have a nicely
melted fusion crust, which is the fire result of falling fast through the sky. And that feature
adds a bit of value. The starting price for the lot is always ridiculously high. And if you say
they're too common or you're not interested, then a second smaller bag may be brought out from a
back room, perhaps with a nice iron meteorite or something even more exotic. And then there are
those high stakes deals. I recall one unusual negotiation that was worked by our guide on his
satellite phone, Abdullah. He was driving across the desert and he arranged to meet a meteorite
middleman on a dusty, deserted side road a few miles east of Sakura. The dealer demanded secrecy
and he baited the hook. It might be a Martian, 900 grams, just 20,000 dirhams. That's about 2,400
dollars. And it would have been a terrific bargain, if real. If real, it would be added to the two
dozen or so known meteorites that came from Mars. So it was potentially scientifically important
and very valuable. So they arranged the time and place to meet. And it felt to me something like
a drug deal right out of a movie. You got to picture this, two nondescript cars pulling up
beside each other. The three of us get out and stand in the tight little circle. I mean, there
are no guns, at least nothing that was visible. But it seemed very, very tense. And then the
dealer lovingly slips the rock in question. Her purple velvet pouch, that's kind of a nice touch,
that purple pouch. But the purported Martian meteorite looked just like an ordinary rock.
And that's true of all Martian meteorites. They all just look like ordinary rocks until you do
some very sophisticated chemical and isotopic analysis. So it's really just gambling.
The dealer dropped the price, 15,000 dirhams, and then down to 12,000 dirhams. But there was
really no way to be sure if the rock was what it was supposed to be. So Abdullah ultimately decided
to pass. Later that day, Abdullah confided to me that he was sorely tempted. He would have loved
to make a big score as he was trying to develop his reputation in the world of meteorite collectors.
But you know, there are always more meteorites to buy. And it's not a good idea to be greedy.
No one tells the complete truth in the desert. And all the deals are final.
Sadly, unlike the frozen meteorites from Antarctica, most of the desert specimens will never make it
into public research collections. And there are two reasons that conspire against Saharan finds.
First and foremost is the intense and growing competition from the passionate community
of amateur collectors. That collecting community is dominated by a few very wealthy aficionados
and is being fueled by the readily available Saharan finds. Anything unusual sells fast,
and money is not an object of the deep pocket collectors. I suppose that some of those specimens
will eventually wind up as donations to museums. Many collectors are also serious scholars,
and they understand the importance of their specimens. Also, it's still a good tax write-off.
But most specimens collected in the desert are essentially undocumented. They're poorly handled.
Much of the scientific value in a pristine meteorite can be degraded by contamination
from unprotected hands and, of course, ubiquitous camel dung. There's rarely any
hint as to when or where in the desert a meteorite was found. The dealers usually say Morocco,
and that's often a lie, as most of the sandy Sahara lies to the east in Algeria and Libya.
But it's now illegal to import specimens from those countries, and some museums simply won't accept
those donations. In spite of those limitations, the sand deserts of the Sahara and the ice deserts
of Antarctica benefit the study of meteorites in a critical way that goes beyond just finding
lots of new specimens. These virgin landscapes are essentially unbiased. They reveal all the
natural distribution of kinds of meteorites that fall from space, and thus provide unrivaled
clues to the nature of the matter that formed the early solar system, including the rocks
and minerals that formed our own planet. In the old days, iron meteorites dominated.
They dominated collections because they were the only meteorites that stood out on the ground.
Today, we have a very different perspective of the solar system's raw materials. What scientists
have discovered is that the great majority of meteorite finds are what are known as ordinary
chondrites. It turns out that chondrites represent almost 9 out of every 10 finds.
By contrast, only about 1 in 20 is an iron meteorite. Most of the other meteorite finds
encompass a diverse and therefore most revealing group of achondrites. These are rocky remnants of
a turbulent, coalescing nebula that speak of a time when chondrites clump together into larger
bodies. Those so-called planetesimals experienced a sequence of dramatic changes
on the way to becoming planets. We'll survey the rich variety of meteorites in the next two
lectures. In particular, we'll see how the rich mineralogy of meteorites reveals the first stages
of mineral evolution beyond the dozen or so ur minerals. Then in the coming lectures, we'll see
how these meteorites paint a vivid picture of the assembly of planets, including Earth.
But we first have to go back, back in time, to long before the first meteorites,
to the formation of the Sun. And it turns out that meteorites offer hints to the Sun's origin
in the form of those most common and ancient meteorites, the 4.56 billion-year-old chondrites.
Chondrites date from a time before there were any planets, before there were any moons,
to a time when the Sun's nuclear fusion reactor was just starting to turn on.
That earliest period of the solar system is called the T-Tauri phase, after a young star system in
the constellation Taurus, where a similar process is now underway. For almost all of its 4.5 billion
year existence, and for billions of years to come, the Sun has been a main sequence star.
A main sequence star is one that steadily is consuming hydrogen in its core,
steadily producing helium in a sequence of nuclear fusion reactions. And that's the normal
state for most stars, most of the time. And astronomical observations reveal that the
great majority of stars in the night sky are of this type. The Kepler mission, for example,
found that about two-thirds of the more than 100,000 stars it's monitoring are main sequence stars.
Main sequence stars don't all look exactly the same, because their temperatures
can vary so much. Hydrogen-burning stars much smaller than the Sun appear reddish,
or even reddish-brown, those are the so-called red dwarf and brown dwarf stars. Hydrogen-burning
stars much larger than the Sun are white-hot, or even blue-white, with surface temperatures much
higher than the Sun. But all of these stars share the characteristic of hydrostatic equilibrium.
That is, the force of gravity pulling inward is balanced by the force of hot hydrogen undergoing
nuclear reactions and pushing outward. But before the Sun achieved its present state,
it had to go through a violent birth. That's the T-tori phase. Let's examine these fascinating
young T-tori-type stars, which trigger the first stages of planetary origins.
There's a sequence of events leading to every Sun-like star. Stars begin in giant molecular
clouds. Such clouds can persist for many millions of years and maintain a kind of
balance between the slight force of gravity pulling the tenuous cloud inward and the equally
slight pressure of gas molecules colliding, which keeps the cloud inflated, so to speak.
And that's not unlike the equilibrium of a party balloon, where the elastic balloon
maintains an inward force, the colliding gas molecules push outward. That's a stable state,
just like the giant molecular clouds in space. However, if a volume of the cloud experiences
a perturbation, and that could be a shockwave or the close approach of another cloud or some
other source of turbulence, then a big volume can collapse rather quickly into that protostar,
which is defined as a large concentrated mass in the molecular cloud that hasn't yet become
a star with nuclear reactions. Picture this collapsing region as a kind of big hollow,
perhaps a light-year cross inside the much larger molecular cloud, which itself could be 100 light
years across. Astronomers have actually seen this kind of hollow. In the 1940s, Harvard astronomer
Bart Bach took photographs of such a phenomenon, and they're now called Bach globules.
For a sun-like star, it's estimated to take about 100,000 years to go from a uniform cloud
to a nebula with a central massive protostar. As long as gas and dust keeps falling into the
central mass, the object is still considered to be a protostar. Naturally, the temperature of the
protostar keeps rising as more and more mass is added, and gravitational potential energy is converted
into heat. But there aren't any nuclear fusion reactions at this stage. As more mass falls
inward, the protostar begins to rotate faster and faster. The angular momentum of the swirling
cloud is transferred to the central mass. By some estimates, a typical protostar will rotate on his
axis quite rapidly, perhaps no more than a few Earth days. All this happened in our solar nebula
about 4.6 billion years ago, in a fast process that defined what mass would eventually become
the solar system. Once the protostar that would become the sun formed, and once most of the mass
had accumulated into one central object, then that T-tory phase could begin. For stars with masses
about half the sun's mass up to about double that of the sun, the first stages of intense solar
radiation result not from nuclear reactions, but rather from the release of copious energy
through gravitational collapse. For a period as long as 100 million years, sun-like stars go
through this violent transition from a gas cloud to a stable star. Now imagine yourself back to
that turbulent time. As the protostar that would become the sun collapsed, it emitted huge amounts
of radiation, including a big range of the electromagnetic spectrum, radio waves, microwaves,
infrared, visible light, ultraviolet radiation, all the way up to x-rays. At this stage, the
young star developed a powerful magnetic field, a result of the swirling charged particles deep
inside the contracting sphere. There were also extremely powerful solar winds of charged particles.
Those winds blasted hot plasma rapidly outward into the disk of gas and dust surrounding the
evolving sun. The solar wind also had an important effect on angular momentum. By blasting a significant
amount of mass outward, it slowed down the rotation of the central star, and it transferred most of
the system's angular momentum to the region where the planets would form.
This picture of the earliest solar system is based in part on astrophysical theory, the physics of
gravity, the atomic and nuclear interactions of electromagnetic phenomenon, and the fluid dynamics
in the turbulent cloud are all well understood, so it's possible to make very accurate calculations
of what happens in dynamic star-forming systems. But our understanding of the births and early
lives of sun-like stars is also informed by lots of direct telescopic observations. Indeed,
we've now observed just about every step in the transition from molecular cloud to a planetary
system. Giant molecular clouds are common in the Milky Way Galaxy.
Variety of techniques reveal the frigid temperatures of the clouds, just a few tens of degrees above
absolute zero, and the composition, typically 90% hydrogen, 9% helium, 1% very dust in small
molecules, including some very interesting organic molecules important to life. And that includes
amino acids. We'll revisit these deep space organics when we explore the origins of life
in lecture 26. Many of those clouds are observed to feature Bach globules, those voids where protostars
begin. Astronomers have also studied dozens of T-Tauri-type stars, and they find circumstellar
disks of dust and gas around about half of them. So the idea that the sun has to go through a
sequence of stages before achieving stability is well established, both theoretically and observationally.
So we've come to the time in the solar system history, 4.567 billion years ago, when the sun
first set out, intense pulses of radiant energy and searing solar winds. These violent bursts of
energy broiled the encircling nebula in a blast furnace effect. Before that time, the nebula was
primarily gas and fine dust, but the heat melted the dust, which clumped together into clots of
small, sticky, rocky droplets called chondrules. And these ranged in size from BBs to small peas.
Such tiny objects may not seem like much, but they were destined to become the planets.
And as we'll explore in the next lecture, those little stony droplets hold dozens of minerals
that had never before formed in our solar system. And so as we watch the birth of earth,
we'll experience the beginnings of evolution, of mineral evolution on earth, as well.
