The first mineral in the cosmos was diamond, formed in the carbon-rich envelopes of exploding
stars. Temperatures were still high but cooling, allowing tiny crystals of carbon to form. Soon
other crystals followed. These were the first minerals. Together these dozen or so minerals
began to seed the universe with their own dust, becoming the initial raw materials for
the formation of any Earth-like planet. There is beauty in the idea that the first mineral in
our universe was diamond. But it astonishes me that until just a few years ago, in November of
2008, to be exact, no one seems to have asked when and where the first mineral formed. What was
the first mineral in the universe? That basic question had not been asked. Think about this.
Scientists have long asked when the universe itself began, or when Earth was formed, or when
life emerged from the primordial soup. We're constantly improving our estimates of when the
first plants or land animals or primates evolved. Indeed, it seems to be the most basic question
in almost any field of study to ask how things got started. But in spite of an extensive search,
I can't find a single mention of the oldest mineral anywhere in the vast literature of geology.
In this lecture, we're going to look closely at that question, the question of the beginning of
cosmic mineralogy, which in a very real sense is the beginning of all the rocky planets like Earth.
Okay, let's begin by defining our terms. A number of different definitions of mineral have been
proposed, but they all involve three key characteristics. First, a mineral is a naturally
occurring substance. That is, minerals must arise from some kind of physical, chemical,
and or biological process in nature, not in a laboratory or factory. Now, humans have learned
to manufacture literally thousands of mineral-like compounds from pigments used in paints to key
components of electronics like silicon semiconductors to crystals used in lasers. But most mineralogists
do not classify those synthetic compounds as minerals. There is one really intriguing gray
area here. There are a number of approved mineral species that are found only in old mind dumps
and old slag heaps where humans have concentrated or processed ores and left the remains to weather
at the surface. You can find little crystals of exotic minerals that form because the mining
operations, the smelting operations, but humans didn't actually form those minerals, so they passed
the test of a naturally occurring crystal. Second, a mineral is a crystalline solid. It's not a liquid
or a gas. It's also got a regular atomic structure, what's called a crystal structure, where the atoms
repeating over and over again in the same pattern. As a result, crystals often have a regular shape,
so minerals are crystals, and that means they differ from other types of solids, including glass
and plastic, which don't have the same kind of atomic regularity. There are natural glasses,
like the volcanic glass called obsidian. That's a black glass that was valued by Native Americans
because it could be worked into very sharp points. Glass is solid, but the atoms have a kind of random
distribution. And then there are also natural plastics, like amber, that solidified tree sap
that sometimes traps insects and preserves them as amazing fossils. In plastics, there's often a
regular atomic structure in one dimension, like the regular links of a chain, but there's not a
crystal structure. Consequently, neither natural glasses nor plastics are considered to be minerals.
Now, once again, there's another gray area, as there's some minerals, like the black manganese
oxides, that are loath to form anything remotely like a crystal. Indeed, in some of these substances,
atomic order exists only at the scale of a few dozen atoms, much, much too small to see
any crystals. So for all intents and purposes, the mineral seems to be non-crystalline, but if you
can show even a tiny region, the tiniest region of crystal in order, for example, using an electron
microscope, then it passes the test. And third, each of the more than 4,700 different official
species of minerals has a more or less well-defined chemical composition. In some cases, as in the
ancient minerals, diamond and graphite, both of which are pure forms of carbon, this chemical
criterion is easy to apply. Other minerals like quartz, which is the commonest form of silicon
dioxide or calcite, that's calcium carbonate, they're also commonly found in relatively pure form.
But I have to tell you, this last characteristic can be extremely tricky, because most minerals occur
over a range of compositions. That variability in composition is because almost every element in
the periodic table has at least one other element with a similar size and similar chemical behavior.
So it's sort of like that old story, the prince and the pauper, the elements can trade places quite
easily. If you look at the periodic table, you'll find that elements in vertical columns often have
these similar characteristics. And that leads to crystals in which the elements are invariably
mixed. It's a phenomenon called solid solution. Let's look at one of these. Let's look at the
element zirconium, element number 40. It's a rare element that forms only one common mineral called
zircon. Zircon is often found as small grains and granite, and occasionally in larger crystals
that make beautiful gemstones. In fact, it's the birthstone of December. Well, zircon also
invariably scavenges most of the atoms of a very similar and much, much rarer element, 72,
hafnium, which lies just below it on the periodic table. That means that zircon, whose ideal chemical
formula is one zirconium, one silicon, and four oxygens. In nature, it always has some hafnium
substituting for zirconium. And the actual formula is more complicated. It would be given as x atoms
of zirconium, then one minus x atoms of hafnium, one of silicon, and four atoms of oxygen. So in
this case, x is typically slightly less than one. In other instances, when two elements are
chemically similar, and both are common, you can have what's called complete solid solution.
Let's consider the important mineral group called olivine. The commonest mineral in the olivine
group is magnesium silicate, forasterite, which has two magnesiums, one silicon and four oxygens.
We'll see that forasterite was one of the very first minerals in the cosmos. Well, there's also
an iron silicate with the same crystal structure called phallite, two atoms of iron, one of silicon
and four of oxygen. But magnesium and iron are chemically very, very similar. So you can have
any ratio of magnesium to iron in an olivine, from pure forasterite to pure phallite. It turns out
that virtually all natural olivines have some magnesium and some iron. It's a continuous solid
solution. And the exact identity of the mineral depends on the dominant element. If there's more
magnesium than iron, it's called forasterite. If there's more iron than magnesium, it's called phallite.
But it's really just one continuous chemical series. This whole business of defining mineral
species on the basis of its dominant chemical composition can get really complicated because
some kinds of crystals commonly have several different positions for atoms, each of which
can have multiple elements substituting in that same spot. So, for example, the semi-precious
gemstone tourmaline, that's the birthstone for October. And you've probably seen it,
they're beautiful crystals with bands of pastel pink and green. Tourmaline has a very well-defined
crystal structure and a chemical composition whose formula is known, but it's really complicated.
Let's talk through it. So you have an atom of X, three atoms of Y, six atoms of Z, then there's
a little triangular group of one boron and three oxygen atoms taken three times. Then six atoms of
an element we call T, 18 oxygens and four hydroxyl molecules are fluorine atoms. So it really is a
complicated formula. And this formula X, Y, Z, and T are not chemical elements. Rather,
they're crystal sites for metal atoms. But each of those sites has the possibility of several
different chemical elements, all of which can substitute for each other and all of which
can coexist in the same crystal. So, for example, what's called the Y site in tourmaline crystals
commonly incorporates aluminum, iron, lithium, magnesium, manganese, zinc, chromium, vanadium,
and titanium. That's nine different possible elements in one site. And then the Z site can
incorporate five different elements. And in many specimens, there's no single element that makes
up most of the Y or Z site. And the same thing's true of X and the same thing's true for T sites
as well. You can have a site with one third magnesium and one third iron and one third
aluminum. And that just causes havoc with trying to come up with a systematic nomenclature for
tourmalines. And also, look at the end of that chemical formula, that parentheses, which has
an OH and an F. That's a hydroxyl group and the element fluorine. And they can substitute for
each other in yet another crystal site in tourmaline. In fact, there are at least 14 different names
for minerals of the tourmaline group, just to take care of some of these variations.
Bottom line, nature is chemically complex. So lots of mineral groups display this kind of
variability. You may have heard of such common groups of minerals as mica or feldspar or amphibol
will be meeting all of these mineral groups and more and solid solution will constantly play a role.
By the way, mineralogical nomenclature is constantly being revised and corrected.
One of the key roles of the International Mineralogical Association is to have special
committees on all the major mineral groups. And they're responsible for imposing some order on
these systematics. There's a committee right now trying to revise that complicated nomenclature
of the tourmaline group. So to recap, a mineral has to be naturally occurring,
has to be a crystalline solid, has to have a well defined chemical composition, and each of the
more than 4,700 known mineral species fits this definition. The story of Earth's mineralogical
richness began many billions of years ago in the black void of space, long before the origin of
our solar system. Now minerals are by definition crystalline solids. So think about what we've
learned about the early history of the universe. There were certainly no minerals right after the
Big Bang and those early times of unimaginably hot and dense cosmos, there weren't even atoms.
And even after a few hundreds of thousands of years when the first hydrogen and helium atoms
formed, with a sprinkling of the element lithium thrown in, there were no crystals. For one thing,
it was simply too hot. And also hydrogen and helium are gases. Minerals form primarily from the heavier
elements. And heavier elements form in stars by the processes of nucleosynthesis. That means
that the first minerals must have formed after the first stars made heavier elements, carbon
and above. That first population of stars was composed almost entirely of hydrogen and helium.
But recall that large, hydrogen rich stars go through a series of fusion reactions,
hydrogen fusing to make more helium and releasing lots of energy. That's why stars shine. They
radiate some of that nuclear energy. Then helium fuses to make carbon and releases more energy.
And carbon fuses in a succession of other energetic nuclear reactions that produce
oxygen, nitrogen, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, titanium, all the way up to element 26. That's iron.
In the final stages of a big star's evolution, the star is layered like an onion with hydrogen
and helium on the outside, then layers rich in carbon, oxygen, magnesium, silicon. Those are
all common elements that can form minerals. But of course, they were initially locked into stars.
And stars are made of super hot plasma, much too hot to form crystals.
No minerals can exist in the incandescent vapors of stars. But the largest stars have at least
two mineral forming tricks up their sleeves. The most dramatic mineral forming event in the cosmos
is the supernova. When a big star fuses all the way to iron, the fusion reactions just stop.
Up to that point, the star played a balancing act between those epic forces, gravity pulling
inward, nuclear reactions pushing outward. But iron is the ultimate nuclear ash. There's no way to
get energy by fusing iron to anything, so the outward force just stops and gravity takes over.
Of course, it's difficult to imagine what that sudden collapse of a star is like. But gravity is
so strong that the outer layers of a collapsing star reach relativistic velocities, a significant
fraction of the speed of light. When all that mass collapses down to the star's core, it revounds in
an epic explosion, a supernova that blasts all those chemical elements out into space.
Think about the very earliest minerals and how they formed.
Prior to the first exploding star, perhaps at a time when the universe was a few million years old,
there had never been a place that was both dense enough with mineral forming elements
and also cool enough to condense crystals. But when a dying star explodes into a supernova,
the star's element-rich gaseous envelope expands. And as it expands, it rapidly cools,
the outer layers cooling first. That's why we speculate that the very first mineral in the
history of the cosmos was diamond. That's pure carbon that crystallized in the outer reaches
of that first supernova explosion. The concentration of carbon was high enough, and the temperature
was cool enough. And by cool, I mean about 4,000 degrees above absolute zero, that diamond
crystal could grow under those conditions. Diamond was first by virtue of two facts.
First, there was a lot of carbon. And second, diamond crystals form at exceptionally high
temperature, much higher than almost any other known substance. I find it absolutely wonderful
to think of diamond as the first mineral. The crystals, of course, were really small,
maybe only a millionth of an inch across. That's less than one tenth of the wavelength of visible
light. So probably much too small to give the stardust a bit of twinkle, but it was diamond.
It was diamond nonetheless. Shortly after diamond appeared, the other common form of pure carbon
called graphite, with a slightly lower but still extremely high crystallization temperature,
around 3,500 degrees above absolute zero, also formed. You know, it's hard to imagine two minerals
that are more different from each other. Diamond is transparent. It's sparkly. Well, graphite is
dull and black. It's the material in the so-called pencil lead. Diamond is the hardest known substance,
and it's used as an abrasive. Well, graphite is one of the softest solids, and it's used as a lubricant.
And as you know, diamond is one of the most valuable gems, while graphite is
common and it's cheap. So how could pure carbon form two such contrasting materials?
Well, the answer is found in their crystal structures.
In diamond, every carbon atom is linked in a little pyramid to four others,
an arrangement that makes for an incredibly strong lattice of atoms. That's why diamond is so hard
and has the highest shear strength of any known material.
Well, by contrast, graphite. In this, it features carbon atoms linked in a plane to only three others.
So graphite has very strong sheets of atoms, but the sheets are only weakly linked to each other,
like a stack of Xerox paper. That's why graphite works so well in pencils. When you write with a
pencil, you are literally transferring sheets of pure carbon from the pencil lead to the paper.
Diamond and graphite are the first of what we call the Ur minerals. And this reference to Ur recalls
the most ancient roots of human civilization in the 5,000-year-old Mesopotamian city of Ur.
It's located in what is now Iraq. The preface Ur has been applied in various contexts to the
original version of something. So, for example, the Ur text of a novel is the earliest version,
the one to which later versions can be compared. Similarly, the Ur text edition of a musical
composition by Bach or by Beethoven is a printed version that reproduces the composer's intent
as faithfully as possible without any additional markings or changes.
It was in this spirit that I coined the term Ur minerals as the earliest crystals in the cosmos,
the starting point of perhaps a dozen different mineral species in all.
Let's quickly review those dozen precocious minerals. In addition to diamond and graphite,
there are at least two minerals where carbon combines with another element.
Carbon can combine with iron in coenite, and it can combine with silicon in the mineral called
moisonite. These combinations of carbon with another element are called carbides,
and they have crystallization temperatures that are almost as high as diamond. So in the
zone of the exploding star where carbon mixed with silicon or iron, the carbides readily formed.
Carbides rarely form on Earth today, but there's a very significant carbide manufacturing industry,
because carbide tools are very tough, they can withstand very high temperatures.
Then there are two odd minerals involving nitrogen, which almost never form so-called
nitride minerals on Earth today. The reason for this lack of natural nitrides is chemistry.
Almost all of Earth's nitrogen is tied up in the atmosphere as a chemically unreactive gas,
and if there's any oxygen around, oxygen can react with nitrogen to form other compounds called
nitrates, or react much more quickly than nitrogen with other elements. But in the hot,
relatively narrow, nitrogen-rich zone of exploding stars, there was very little oxygen,
but there was a significant amount of other elements like silicon and titanium.
As a result, both silicon nitride and titanium nitride formed nanoscale crystals
of the minerals nereite and osbornite respectively. These rare minerals have extremely high
crystallization temperatures above 3,000 degrees. And then, as the gaseous envelope continues to
expand and cool, came a suite of high-temperature oxide minerals, which are similar to the
commonest minerals in Earth's crust and mantle today. First, at the highest temperatures came
the so-called double oxides, the calcium-aluminum oxide, hibonite at about 2200 degrees,
and the magnesium-aluminum oxide called spinel at 2130 degrees. Note that aluminum is the third
most abundant element in Earth's crust after oxygen and silicon. These oxides were followed by
two more, the aluminum oxide corundum, with a crystallization temperature of over 2,000 degrees,
and root-heel the common oxide of titanium at about 1,840 degrees.
So as the stars' envelope cooled, more and more minerals could crystallize. Finally,
there appeared two types of magnesium silicates, minerals formed from three of the most abundant
elements, magnesium, silicon, and oxygen. In fact, these are the three most abundant elements
in Earth's mantle layer today that occurs just below the crust. So we have the olimene
forasterite that was first at about 1,900 degrees, and the other magnesium silicate to appear was
the pyroxene instatite at about 1,800 degrees. And these two silicates are among the most common
minerals today in Earth's crust and mantle.
Now, a supernova explosion may not be the only way for stars to make mineral crystals.
Red giant stars are old stars that have spent most of their lives in the hydrogen-burning phase,
but most of the hydrogen in the core has been used up. Our sun's going to enter this phase
in its 10-billion-year lifespan, and perhaps another three or four billion years. Anyway,
red giant stars have entered their dynamic helium-burning stage, and so they produce a lot
of carbon. That carbon is the principal byproduct of the fusion of helium atoms.
Red giant stars are so energetic that they don't easily settle down. They go through amazing cycles
of expansion and contraction, and they can generate very intense carbon-rich solar winds.
Just imagine the violent and mesmerizing scene of a star more than 100 times the diameter of our sun,
repeatedly expanding, contracting, and then expanding, contracting again over periods of a
few days or weeks as pulses of violent helium-burning occur. The star in this mode makes immense
quantities of carbon, and some of that carbon is blasted outward into the cooler surrounding space,
and so, as in a supernova explosion, if the density of carbon atoms is great enough,
and the temperature cool enough, diamond and graphite will form. The first of these
ur minerals, including carbon-rich diamond and graphite crystals, along with the 10 or so other
species that mentioned form very early in the history of the universe, probably within the first
few million years of the Big Bang, and all have been continuously present throughout the
subsequent history of creation. Think about the chemical elements involved in these earliest
crystals, those dozen ur minerals. There are only nine different elements, carbon, nitrogen,
and oxygen, that's elements 6 to 8 of the periodic table. Magnesium, aluminum, and silicon, that's
elements 12 through 14, then calcium, which is element 20, titanium, element 22, and iron,
element 26. All of these elements continue to play key roles on Earth today,
but there's another way to think about the ur minerals. Think about all the minerals
that didn't form, and here it's equally revealing to consider the chemical elements that are not
in the list. We don't see the most abundant elements, hydrogen or helium. We don't see
elements 3 to 5, lithium, beryllium, and boron. Sodium and chlorine, those are the common elements
of table salt, they're missing too, as are the essential biological elements, sulfur and phosphorus.
Why aren't these elements listed among the building blocks of the ur minerals?
And there are three reasons that contribute to what minerals appear and what minerals don't,
and these three reasons hold lessons that will recur over and over again in our consideration
of mineral evolution. First is just abundance. Some elements are just too rare to have found
each other and formed a crystal in the chaotic environment of a stellar envelope. So lithium,
beryllium, boron, and phosphorus would have to wait billions of years before an efficient
planetary concentration mechanism came into play. Second is chemistry. Some abundant elements like
helium, neon, and argon, they form that last column of the periodic table. They simply don't
form minerals. They remain in the gaseous state in virtually every cosmic environment.
And the third reason why some elements don't form ur minerals is temperature. All of the ur
minerals crystallize at extremely high temperatures because they're elements combined with extremely
strong bonds. The elements sodium, chlorine, and sulfur by contrast bond rather weakly,
so they form crystals at relatively low temperatures. The mineral halite, sodium chloride,
or common table salt, it melts or solidifies at only 800 degrees. Minerals containing hydrogen,
including micas and clays, typically break down at even lower temperatures. So there's no chance
that they'd appear in the list of ur minerals. I think this is a great story.
Diamond was the first mineral in our universe. About a dozen more kinds of crystals followed,
and those ur minerals represent the building blocks of everything we know.
But think about it. How can we possibly know for sure what ur minerals formed almost 14
billion years ago? What I've told you so far, I hope, is all pretty plausible.
We see that stars are rich in carbon. We see stars explode. They litter space with all chemical
elements. But is there anything tangible that can guide our thinking? And it turns out that we do
have real solid evidence for those most ancient ur crystals in the form of microscopic dust grains
that constantly rain down from space. These are microscopic dust grains that are by far
the oldest objects we know. These are the pre-solar grains, the rare remnants of the
original building blocks of our solar system. Recall how stars and planets form in the nebula
of dust and gas. Most of the nebula is hydrogen and helium, roughly 90% hydrogen, 9% helium,
with the balance dust. As the solar system formed, 99.9% of those raw materials wound up in the sun,
while almost all of the remaining one-tenth of one percent wound up in the planets, the moons,
asteroids, comets, but a tiny, tiny fraction of a percent of the original dust was never
captured by gravity. Or it just sort of stuck on the surface of a meteorite and has been sequestered
there for perhaps the better part of 5 billion years. The study of pre-solar grains is one of the
most challenging and painstaking tasks in science. These grains are incredibly small, typically only
a few millions of an inch in diameter, much too small to see with any but the most powerful electron
microscopes. Much more, they have to be teased out from all the background dust on what is,
let's face it, a pretty dusty planet. Not one in a million dust grains in our surroundings
is a pre-solar type. So how can you tell for sure if a grain is the rare pre-solar variety or just
ordinary dust? And the answer lies in both context and composition. First is the context.
Pre-solar grains are found concentrated in two principal places. Some grains are collected
very, very high in the atmosphere by NASA's fleet of specially modified U-2 spy planes that have a
kind of sticky paper attached to their wings. Maybe some of you remember the May 1960 incident
when a U-2 plane crashed in what was then the Soviet Union. The pilot Francis Gary Powers was
captured and it was a very embarrassing international crisis for the Eisenhower administration.
So the U-2s were retired from spying but NASA converted some planes to high-altitude scientific
research. Early studies of pre-solar grains relied on these stratospheric samples. These days most
pre-solar grains come not from the upper atmosphere but from meteorites. It turns out that primitive
meteorites concentrate and preserve some of the original unaltered bits of our nebula and with
care it's possible to identify and isolate such ancient bits of cosmic matter.
Now in this lecture we've seen that the earliest beginnings of mineralogy in the cosmos started
with about a dozen ur minerals. Microscopic grains that crystallized in the cooling carbon-rich
envelopes of energetic supernovas and in the solar winds of red giant stars.
Diamond and graphite were first. Followed by a modest suite of high-temperature carbides,
nitrides, oxides, silicate minerals. Those crystals survived to this day in the form of
pre-solar grains, the oldest objects we can study in the lab. But how can we possibly glean any
information from pre-solar grains? They're less than a thousandth of an inch across. You can barely
see them in a microscope, much less move them around with any normal procedures.
And they're chemically more or less the same as earth dust. So in the next lecture we'll turn
to what is now one of the hottest topics in cosmochemistry. The quest to find those amazing
grains and to identify the ur minerals they hold. Minerals that are older than our solar system.
