The Cambrian Explosion, when all sorts of animals learned to make their own protective
mineral shells, marked a turning point in Earth history.
Just before that time, our planet experienced intense cycles of extreme cold and extreme
heat, in part because of the equatorial position of the sprawling Rodinian supercontinent.
But the inexorable motions of the tectonic plates caused Rodinia to fragment, and as
land masses moved toward the poles, Earth's climate achieved a degree of moderation.
Recent new photosynthetic algal life bloomed along nutrient-rich continental margins and
helped debuffer the extreme fluctuations of carbon dioxide while raising oxygen concentrations
close to modern levels.
Earth may never again have to endure such excesses of global temperature.
The rise of atmospheric oxygen that promoted the evolution of the first animals of the
Ediacaran interval resulted in another crucial benefit that promoted life's increasingly
rapid evolution and its diversification.
The Sun's intense ultraviolet radiation has the ability to destroy essential biomolecules,
and so it kills most cells.
That's the simple explanation for why the dry surface has been a deadly, uninhabitable
wasteland for almost all of Earth's history.
Looking back at the history of life, it took at least half a billion years for life to
emerge, and then it took at least another three billion years for life to produce enough
oxygen in the atmosphere to generate the ultraviolet protective ozone layer.
But once that ozone layer was established, and life learned a few essential biochemical
tricks, it quickly took over every possible niche on land, at sea, and in the air.
Throughout Earth history, this kind of event chain has occurred.
Each stage in Earth's biological evolution and chemical evolution, and yes, mineral evolution,
depended on the stage that came before.
That's the way evolution works.
It can only build from one state of affairs to the next.
In this surprising way, the severe snowball, hot-house cycle ultimately played a central
role in the evolution of the modern living world, with such biological innovations as
crawling animals and hard shells, evolving Earth soon became infested with novelties,
swimming creatures, burrowing creatures, crawling and flying creatures, boasting evermore extreme
habitats of behaviors.
That pattern of evolution, with the changes in near-surface environment experienced in
one period, leading directly to changes in the next, has continued at an accelerated
rate for at least the last half billion years.
Indeed, at least five kinds of complexly interconnected factors have influenced Earth's surface during
the vibrant, phanerozoic eon, literally the eon of visible life, which encompasses the
last 542 million years.
Plate tectonics is the first of these factors, as continents have continued to shift their
relative positions across the globe.
First closing one ocean to form yet another great supercontinent, then breaking up to form
the still-widening Atlantic Ocean.
The second factor is climate, partly in response to continental geography, the positions of
mountain ranges, of seas, and interior plains.
The climate has fluctuated from hot to cold and back again many times, though never to
the snowball, hot-house extremes of the neoproterozoic era.
The oxygen content of the atmosphere is a third important and interconnected changing
factor.
The phanerozoic eon enjoyed a third great oxygen enrichment event, only to see atmosphere
concentrations drop almost in half and then rebound again to modern levels.
And a fourth intertwined factor that had a profound effect on Earth's surface is sea
level, which has risen and fallen countless times over the last half billion years.
These changes in the extent of polar ice have caused cyclical variations, often by hundreds
of feet.
In the process, Earth's coastlines have been constantly reshaped in ways that are hard
for us to imagine.
But by far the most spectacular agent of change at Earth's surface is life, which has evolved
radically and irreversibly over and over and over again.
Earth has always been a planet of repeated radical change, but the story of the phanerozoic
eon is much more sharply in focus than the Hedean, the Achaean, or the protozoic eons.
The phanerozoic rock record is much more complete for one thing and much less altered.
And the abundance of intricate fossils that reveal evolution in every successive rock
layer provides a narrative that is correspondingly more elaborate and more nuanced in its variations.
Indeed, the key to this rich story is the astonishing wealth of exquisitely preserved
fossils, which are the consequence of life's new found ability to make teeth, shells, bones,
wood, and other durable hard parts.
Unlike microbes, which can persist in their simple forms for billions of years, animals
and plants turn out to be particularly sensitive to changes in Earth's near-surface environment.
Animal and plant fossils thus record episode after episode of adaptation.
Microbes could survive almost any kind of change that resilience coupled with their
very simple shapes and rarity in the fossil record means that it's impossible to recognize
a mass extinction in the eons before the phanerozoic.
But life during the phanerozoic eon provides an altogether different story.
Nicely the extensive rock and fossil record from the last 542 million years, we see Earth
in rich detail as a planet of incessant change, and this is not a planet that changes leisurely
over tens or hundreds of millions of years, much less a boring billion.
But a giddy, changeable world in the phanerozoic eon every 100,000 years is different from
what came before and what came next.
Of course, part of this insight is the detailed record preserved in rocks that must have been
significant changes on short timescales prior to half a billion years ago as well, but it's
also built into the very nature of multicellular life.
Animals and plants, especially those life forms that colonize the lands, are exceptionally
sensitive to any environmental changes.
Terrestrial life responds to Earth's cycles quickly.
These plants and animals evolve fast.
Old species die out.
New species take their places.
On Earth today, 1.2 million plant and animal species have been catalogued, versus fewer
than 5,000 mineral species.
Now, while those numbers are not directly comparable, they do convey a sense of how much more complicated
is that story of life's evolution.
That's why the phanerozoic eon, certainly more than any other time in Earth history,
reveals the kinds of changes that will inevitably influence our modern world as well.
So let's look at each of the five factors of phanerozoic change in more detail to see
how that eon evolved.
Plague tectonics comes first, and as in the billions of years before, it's a story of
shifting continents.
After all, the continents are soon to become the stage for the evolution of Earth's increasingly
diverse biota.
That epic drama is well understood in its basic outlines, and it takes place in three
acts.
Act one finds us at the beginning of the Cambrian period 542 million years ago.
The protozoic supercontinent of Rodinia had long since broken into several large and scattered
pieces.
The largest chunk is given the name Gondwana after a region of India that preserves some
of that terrain.
Gondwana stretched from the South Pole to beyond the equator and incorporated all of
today's southern continents, plus a big swath of Asia jumbled together in one giant landmass
more than 8,000 miles from north to south.
There were other smaller post-Rodinia continents as well, and it appears that all of them were
situated in the southern hemisphere.
Those landmasses included the core of Laurentia, that's what today is North American Greenland,
and several other big islands, including much of Europe.
Given that all the big continents were in the southern hemisphere, that means the northern
hemisphere was dominated by one gigantic global ocean.
Now of course, that situation couldn't last.
With plate tectonics, no situation ever lasts.
Over the next 250 million years, all the continents moved northward.
Laurentia more than doubled its size, first by merging with what would become Europe,
then by coupling with a big piece of what would become Siberia.
So that takes us to about 300 million years ago, with all the continents, Gondwana and
Laurentia and the rest converging in the northern hemisphere.
The second act of our Phanerozoic plate tectonic drama finds the northward tracking Gondwana
colliding with Laurentia to form the most recent of the half dozen or so supercontinents.
That great gathering of continents is called Pangaea from the Greek for all land.
It was a lopsided globe that found Pangaea concentrating almost all of Earth's dryland
on one side of the planet, and about three quarters of that huge area situated in the
southern hemisphere.
And naturally, when there's one big supercontinent, there has to be one even bigger super ocean.
In this case, it's been named Panthalassa, which is Greek for all sea.
One of the most spectacular geological consequences of the merging of Gondwana and Laurentia
was the closing of a pre-Atlantic ocean between what is now North America and Africa.
And when those two continents collided and crumpled the intervening layers of sediment,
an immense mountain range was born.
Today, those Appalachian Mountains, which stretch from Maine to Georgia, seem like a relatively
benign, modest, and well-rounded sort of mountain range.
In many places, they're more like big hills, but the Appalachians were not always so tame.
The gently rolling topography we see today speaks to the power of erosion.
For 300 million years ago, these were craggy, sharp peaks that may have soared six or even
seven miles high.
They rival today's Himalayas as some of the tallest mountains in the history of the world.
And that is the nature of supercontinent assembly.
Continents collide, oceans close, and new mountain ranges are formed.
And then came an interval of stability as the Pigeon supercontinent persisted for 150
million years.
For a time, the forces of plate tectonics, which reflect deep mantle convection cells,
continued to weld Pangea together.
Yet a big continent traps a lot of mantle heat under its thick skin.
It's a lot like an insulating blanket that slows down the natural tendency of Earth's
inner heat to radiate out into space, so that heat builds up under the middle of Pangea,
and mantle convection cells slow, and reverse to begin the inevitable process of fragmentation.
And that brings us to Act 3.
The inevitable breakup of Pangea led directly to the modern globe, including the widening
Atlantic Ocean and the narrowing Pacific Ocean.
The opening of the Atlantic Ocean commenced about 200 million years ago, when the great
Pangean landmass began to fragment into seven major pieces.
First, what used to be Laurentia and Gondwana fractured, and that split formed the first
hints of what would become the North Atlantic.
The fracture gradually widened and expanded to the northwest and southeast, so the ocean
grew.
Antarctica split with Australia, and they split off Gondwana and moved south as each
chunk of land formed a new island continent.
Another rift between what are now the east coast of South America and the west coast
of Africa opened up the South Atlantic Ocean.
At the same time, what is now India broke off the east coast of Africa and began a 50
million year journey northward.
This relatively small Indian continent eventually smashed into the south coast of Asia and started
to crumple up the Himalayan mountains.
That process is still going on today, as Mount Everest and other tall mountains are actually
getting taller every year.
The motions of all the plates are especially well understood for the last 300 million years
or so, for which there's a tremendous amount of geological and paleomagnetic data.
In fact, there are a number of excellent animated reconstructions of Pangea forming and then
breaking up.
It's remarkable to me that Earth's modern outlines are only recognizable back about
100 million years.
Before that time, it's really hard to spot the modern continents.
And as you watch these animations, remember that similar kinds of continental motions
have been in play for billions of years.
That implies that if you could time travel to any period of geological history before
about 100 million years ago and see Earth from space, our planet's landforms would
look utterly unfamiliar.
And it's not just the positions of the continents and oceans, or even the shapes that would
be different.
Remember that the shifting positions of continents impose other big changes on Earth's surface.
When the continents are separated, there's much more coastline, which promotes more
life in nutrient-rich, shallow coastal waters.
When there are polar land masses, it's easier to build up thick ice sheets, and those masses
of ice lock away more water and significantly lower global sea level.
And the position of tectonic plates directly affects life's evolution, because life evolves
independently on isolated continents or in widely separated seas.
We also see from our modern world that the locations of mountain ranges or plains or
big lakes or oceans and their currents can dramatically alter climate.
It's always been true that each of Earth's great cycles affects every other cycle.
If you had to pick the single most important transformation of Earth's continental surface,
you would have to choose the rise of land plants.
For billions of years, dry land was barren and windswept, bare rocks dominated, with
thin layers of chemically weathered soil.
Nothing lived on that surface for 90% of Earth's history.
And then a great, green revolution occurred.
Plants were an innovation that's first recorded in the fossil record as distinctive rugged
microscopic spores in some sedimentary rocks as old as 475 million years.
We haven't found any fossils of those early, delicate, easily decayed vegetation yet, but
based on the distinctive shapes of the spores, it's likely that those first true plants were
similar to modern liverworts, which are rootless, ground-hugging descendants of green algae.
Liverworts can only survive in low, wet places where ponding water contacts directly those
plant tissues.
These earliest plants would have provided a green fringe to the low-lying swampy areas
of the continents, starting about 475 million years ago.
But dead plants quickly rot in swamps.
Consequently, for more than 40 million years, the only surviving evidence for these earliest
land plants are the microscopic decay-resistant spores.
At first, before the terrestrial ecosystem really got going, evolution of these hardy-green
pioneers seems to have been remarkably slow.
Then, roughly 432 million years ago, fossils of plant spores suddenly shift in character,
pointing to a new distribution of land plants.
Over the next 30 million years, the liverwort-like spores become much less abundant, while spores
that appear similar to those of modern mosses and the simplest of vascular plants, that
as plants with an internal plumbing system of roots and stems, become dominant.
This new pattern holds for rocks of this age from around the world.
From Scotland, Bolivia, China, Australia, and these rocks also preserve the oldest known
unambiguous fossils of the plants themselves.
Though fragmentary, the remains are clearly related to modern club mosses and other primitive
relatives of modern vascular plants.
These ancient plants lack extensive root systems, and they were probably restricted to low-lying
wet areas, but they didn't have to grow in swamps, so periodic floods and influxes of
sediments led to conditions that occasionally favored preservation of the plant tissues.
And as we move forward in time, the plants become more widespread and robust, and the
fossil record continues to improve.
By 400 million years ago, which is a long 75 million years since the first land plants
evolved, the primitive vascular plants had begun to colonize the barren, dry land.
And here is where we start to see a remarkable feedback between plants and rocks.
Those pioneering dry land plants were spindly, leafless, miniature shrubs with greenish,
sun-seeking photosynthetic stems and branches that rose just a few inches above the ground.
I imagine that it was a constant struggle to gather and retain water.
The roots were small, typically only an inch or two long, but they efficiently penetrated
the rocky ground and provided a sturdy anchor.
And plants obtained water by capillary action, which distributed the water up into the stem
and branches.
There's much to be learned from these plants about the evolution of the early Phanerozoic
Aeon, yet in spite of their obvious importance to the ability of life to survive on land,
fossil plants have received a lot less attention than such dramatic animals as trilobites and
dinosaurs.
After all, animals have more dynamic lifestyles as predators and prey.
They're a lot more like us in their forms and behaviors.
It's also true that most fossil plants are just fragments, like an isolated leaf or stem,
maybe a piece of bark or diagnostically patterned wood.
My friend and colleague Charles Kiven Boyce, who is a paleobotanist at the University of
Chicago, laments that plants lack what he calls the satisfying completeness of clams.
Nevertheless, plant fossils tell amazing stories, and we should never forget that most plants
can survive perfectly well without animals, but animals would quickly die off without
the photosynthetic production of plants.
I met Kevin Boyce in 2000 when he was a graduate student at Harvard.
He wanted to learn new stories about plants, but to do that he needed new kinds of data,
so he came to the Geophysical Laboratory to learn about some of our microanalytical techniques
for analyzing elements, isotopes, and molecules.
These powerful techniques had never before been applied in any systematic way to plant
fossils.
Our first joint research venture focused on some of the most famous of all the fossil
plants.
Those are the remarkably preserved fossils from the 400-million-year-old Reiny Chert
of Aberdeenshire, Scotland.
In a very unusual set of circumstances, those plants were saved from rotting when hot springs
in the vicinity flooded the plants with mineral-rich waters.
The plants were in effect hermetically sealed and partially replaced with tough, fine-grained
silica.
It was just by chance that a century-go geologist discovered boulders of the Chert in a stone
fence near the small village of Reiny.
And it wasn't until some time later that the actual bedrock with the Chert was found after
considerable excavation.
Some of those original quarried blocks were cut into thin slices for detailed study.
And some of those precious Reiny Chert specimens made their way to Harvard, where Kevin Boyce
prepared new thin sections for study.
He cut the fist-sized specimens into thin 2-by-3-inch transparent pieces.
In a microscope, these rocks reveal astonishing detail down to the scale of individual plant
cells.
Now, no one section can reveal what a Reiny plant looked like, but if you stack lots of
sections together, you get a picture of a bizarre green landscape at once familiar and
yet profoundly alien.
Most of the fossils are remains of stalk-like branching plants, each with green photosynthetic
stems but no leaves.
The discovery of the sizes and shapes of the Reiny floor was made decades ago in a heroic
effort.
It required the cutting and polishing of hundreds of thin slices, each providing a two-dimensional
review of a complex three-dimensional object.
Just imagine taking your favorite flower, first embedding it into something hard like
an opaque epoxy resin, and then trying to reproduce the flower's complex anatomy by
slicing the epoxy into flat pieces and then reassembling the sections.
That's what the pioneering Reiny paleobotanist had to do to discover that miniature suite
of odd, spindly, leafless plants.
And that's our oldest glimpse of the green terrestrial biosphere.
So what could Kevin do that hadn't been done already?
The strategy was to analyze freshly cut and polished Reiny fossils in disks roughly the
size and shape of a silver dollar.
We first used an electron microprobe to see what chemical elements form the fossils.
The microprobe is extremely familiar to those of us who study rocks and minerals, but it
had rarely been used in paleontology.
And we were delighted to find that the fossils were composed largely of carbon, presumably
the original atoms that formed the plants.
And once we confirmed the presence of carbon, it was an easy next step to measure the carbon
isotopes.
Sure enough, that carbon is isotopically light, which pretty much confirms that it's biological
in origin.
We made microprobe maps of the fossils that beautifully highlight the distinctive tubular
structures of these ancient vascular plants.
Our first publication together appeared in the proceedings of the National Academy in
2001.
That paper described the new techniques of cellular scale mapping of a variety of ancient
plant fossils, including some of the odd stems and plant spores that could be found in the
Reiny chair.
And not least, Kevin was able to publish some of the most beautiful images ever made of
these fossils.
We weren't satisfied with just finding carbon, even if that did provide neat images.
Kevin's next step was to see if he could detect any biomolecular information from fossils.
That is, was it possible to find actual molecular bits from the original plant tissues?
And for this effort, Kevin Boyce focused on the largest life form from the Reiny chair,
a mysterious 25-foot tall tree-like organism called proto-taxcites.
This large terrestrial organism had a thick trunk and branches, and it was the largest
known living thing on land 400 million years ago.
Proto-taxcites are found in a number of places around the world, but they remain enigmatic
because they seem to lack the typical cellular structures that are found in trees or their
smaller plant relatives.
Instead, the trunks of proto-taxcites seem to be composed of intricately interwoven tube-like
structures.
So Boyce meticulously extracted pieces of these fossils, and he dissected and analyzed unambiguous
molecular fragments from several specimens.
Those fragments turn out to be quite different from the adjacent plant fossils, different
isotopes, different molecules.
Kevin's amazing conclusion is that proto-taxcites was a giant fungus, perhaps the largest mushroom
in Earth's history.
And all of this research by Kevin Boyce has reinforced the conclusions of the paleobiology
community.
For the first time in Earth's history, the landscape 400 million years ago was green.
This was the Devonian period, but the plant and fungal life of that ancient world was
utterly alien.
Plants were little more than bare green branches, while the land was dominated by towering tree-like
fungi.
That strange ecosystem featured only a few small insects and spider-like animals, but
all of that was soon to change.
Imagine yourself back to that time during the Devonian period 400 million years ago.
You could probably have survived on Earth 400 million years ago.
There was plenty of oxygen to breathe and water to drink.
The protective ozone layer would have shielded you from ultraviolet radiation.
There was plenty of food in the form of plants and bugs, and who knows, proto-taxcites not
only provided shelter, but perhaps would have made a tasty mushroom stew.
But the landscape would have seemed so strange.
And that's because even though there were green stems and green branches, there were
absolutely no leaves.
In fact, it took tens of millions of years of evolution before that critical invention,
the first tiny energy-trapping leaves, that was a transformative invention which raised
the stakes in the plant kingdom's evolutionary struggle for sunlight.
You can think of a forest as a silent competition for light.
Taller plants with bigger leaves have an advantage.
The evolutionary race of the forest involves bushy, fan-like ferns, complexly branching
limbs and sturdy, woody trunks.
So the pace of evolution quickened.
By 360 million years ago, the forest had emerged as a remarkable new kind of terrestrial ecosystem.
In an amazingly short span of time, Earth was transformed to an emerald planet.
And here I'll conclude this lecture with a theme that has been repeated time and time
again in the history of life.
Minerals and rocks co-evolved with this new green life on land.
Indeed, the rise of fast-spreading plants on land had profound mineralogical consequences.
It all has to do with the formation of soils.
The rates of rock weathering, including the breakdown of basalt, granite, and limestone,
increased by an order of magnitude as a consequence of the chemical and mechanical ability of roots
to break down minerals and convert them to clays.
These new, clay-rich soils held tremendous advantages for plants.
They retained water while providing a stable foothold for roots.
As soils became deeper and richer in organic matter, they became rich ecosystems in their
own right with a host of microorganisms.
Deeper soils in turn provided an ever-expanding habitat for more and larger plants and fungi.
These amazing root systems, though they're hidden from view, evolved in remarkable ways
as well.
The most important innovation was a new kind of symbiotic relationship between plant roots
and vast networks of fungal filaments called mycorrhiza.
It's hard to conceive of this subsurface biosphere, but it's astonishing.
Root ecosystems of plants and fungi influence the great majority of plants you see today.
And it's been discovered that many plants grow poorly in soils that lack fungal spores.
Those mycorrhizal fungi efficiently extract phosphate and other nutrients from the soil
and pass them directly to the plant.
The plants in turn provide fungi with a steady diet of energy-rich glucose and other carbohydrates.
It's difficult to visualize that subterranean geometry, but the extensive network of a tree's
roots and fungal filaments below ground is often far larger than the entire tree that
we see above ground.
And that's just the early world of plants, for as we'll see in the next lecture, that
world was poised to welcome a new generation of animals to land.
