The quest to understand the origins of life has been a respected scientific pursuit for
more than 60 years.
Stanley Miller and Harold Urie of the University of Chicago were pioneers in origins experiments
and their work was followed by new contributions from hundreds of researchers around the world.
In that context, our team at the Carnegie Institution is a relative latecomer to origins
research, but I want to tell you about some of our work, not only because it's more recent,
but also because it's a good example of research to understand the second step in life's origin,
that is the arrival of big biomolecules.
We did our very first NASA sponsored experiments back in 1996 when we decided to investigate
the possible roles of deep organic synthesis on the ocean floor in dynamic black smoker
regimes.
Those are zones of high temperatures and pressures, which are exactly what the geophysical lab
is famous for.
In many ways, our strategy was like that of Stanley Miller.
Like him, we subjected chemical mixtures of plausible atmospheric gases to energetic conditions.
In our case, we used heat and chemically reactive mineral surfaces, which is exactly what's
found in deep volcanic zones.
And just like Miller, we synthesized amino acids and lipids and other molecules of the
kind used by biology.
When these weren't random or chance findings, our results have been duplicated and extended
in many other labors, showing beyond any doubt that it's easy to synthesize most of life's
molecules under conditions that are found across the globe in the pressure cooker conditions
of the shallow crust.
The elements of life are all there.
Volcanic gases contain carbon and nitrogen.
They react easy with many different common rocks and seawater to form just about all
of life's molecular building blocks.
And what I find especially appealing are experiments used the relatively gentle energy associated
with oxidation and reduction chemical reactions, not unlike rusting iron or caramelizing sugar.
Those are the same kinds of chemical reaction that life itself uses in metabolism.
And they are in stark contrast to the violent effects of lightning or ultraviolet radiation.
It's certainly true that lightning bolts can facilitate the synthesis of some small biomolecules,
but lightning just as easily rips molecules apart, destroying what it made before.
That's why many researchers think it makes a lot of sense for Earth to have made prebiotic
molecules with chemical reactions more or less in the identical way that cells do it
today.
Other and as followers were initially convinced that hot volcanic zones would destroy rather
than form biomolecules.
But as more and more data have come in, it seems that the sources of life's molecular
building blocks may be all of the above.
Every early environment with an energy source and a supply of small carbon-bearing molecules
probably generated amino acids and sugar and lipids and other key building blocks of life.
Lightning works, ultraviolet radiation works, black smoker environments and other deep hot
zones also work.
More biomolecules form during impacts of asteroids and comets, still more from exposure to cosmic
rays and sunlight.
Key organic molecules even form in the kind of space-bound molecular clouds that gave
rise to our solar system.
Those are places where microscopic particles of dust and ice are bathed in ultraviolet
radiation.
Earth was made from that dust and literally tons of organic-rich pre-solar dust still
rains down on Earth's surface every year.
So it's clear that the molecules for building life litter the cosmos.
The first step in life's origins, the synthesis of the fundamental biomolecules, is for the
most part solved.
It's easy to make amino acids and lipids and sugars.
Indeed, the problem is making too much or rather making too many different kinds.
A fundamental attribute of life is chemical parsimony.
Only a relatively few small molecules are used by life.
But nature manufactures millions.
That's why the second emergent stage in the origin of life seems to have been the selection
concentration and assembly of molecules from the complex but dilute prebiotic soup into
life's macromolecules.
Those macromolecules include structures that enclose the cell and promote its chemical
reactions and carry genetic information.
We suspect that two complementary processes likely played a role.
First self-assembly and then template-directed synthesis.
Let's consider self-assembly first.
Both times, elongated molecules with a skinny backbone of carbon atoms clump together spontaneously.
These chemicals, including molecules that form the encapsulating membranes of cells,
are called lipids.
They self-assemble into cell-sized spheres because one molecular end is attracted to
water, the other end is repelled by water.
If you place huge numbers of these molecules into water, they find each other.
They form a remarkable double layer with water-hating ends pointing inward, away from the water,
and water-loving ends pointing outward in contact with water.
Every known plausible source of biomolecules, miller-yuri volcanic vents, tidal ponds, deep
space all form lipid molecules that self-assemble in water.
These molecules that demonstrate this behavior are easy and they've led to most origin scientists
agreeing that lipid self-assembly must have played a key role in life's origins.
But self-assembly can't possibly be the whole story because most of the familiar biological
molecules don't self-organize.
Sugars and amino acids, for example, they tend to dissolve in water and remain there
in solution.
But there is a simple and effective way out.
These molecules can become concentrated and neatly arrayed on the protective, orderly
surfaces of different mineral crystals.
So these days, the principal experimental program for many, including my own research
team, is studying how life's molecular building blocks absorb onto the surfaces of virtually
every natural mineral, including all of the common rock-forming minerals in the major
rock types like basalt and granite.
We've investigated olivine, belt spar, pyroxene, quartz, and more.
In every case, amino acids and sugars are selectively pulled out of the solution and
array themselves on the mineral surfaces, and there's more.
When several molecules compete for the same surface, we find really interesting behaviors.
So in one set of experiments, we expose mineral surfaces to four different kinds of sugar
molecule, each with five carbon atoms, arabinose, lyxose, ribose, and xylose.
These four sugars have the exact same chemical composition, but the atoms are arranged in
slightly different ways.
And what we find is that ribose invariably is absorbed much more strongly, and the ribose
is the one that life uses in the critical molecule RNA and in other functions as well.
So here we have an easy way to concentrate ribose from the prebiotic soup.
And in other experiments, we find that when various amino acids are added to a solution
and exposed to mineral surfaces, those molecules often cooperate and yield complex surface
structures that appear to promote even more molecular absorption and perhaps more organization
as well.
It's easy to conclude from these experiments that wherever the diverse molecules in the
prebiotic soup contacted minerals, the result was highly concentrated arrangements of life's
molecules, sugars, amino acids, lipids, the building blocks of DNA.
So that's an effective mechanism for achieving those critical steps of selecting and concentrating
and maybe even templating more complex structures from the formless broth.
I have to take a moment here to provide a warning.
I think it's just an inevitable fact of life that all of us, including origin of life researchers
and all other scientists, see the world in a distorted way through eyes that are biased
by what we know best.
Scientists always seem to gravitate to models that highlight their own particular scientific
specialty.
So it's not surprising that organic chemists, Stanley Miller and his many colleagues saw
life's origins as essentially a problem in organic chemistry.
But geochemists, by contrast, tend to focus on the much more intricate kinds of origin
scenarios that involve all the messy geochemical variables like temperature and pressure and
chemically complex rocks in equally complex environments with cycles and fluxes and gradients.
And then you have experts in those membrane-forming lipid molecules who promote the lipid world
as the first example of self-replication and experts who study DNA and RNA and who gravitate
to self-replicating RNA as the model to beat.
And origins of life feel has attracted specialists in other areas, viruses, metabolism, clays,
the deep underground biosphere, and they all have their own training and prejudices as
well.
It's human nature.
We all do it.
No one gets a PhD degree in origins of life.
So everyone focuses on what they know best.
And we all see the origins problem through a lens distorted by that selective knowledge.
I'm no different.
I'm trained in mineralogy, so it's not hard to guess where my origins of life biases
probably lie.
I'm inclined by training and by experience to look for minerals to play a number of
central roles in life's origins.
But I'm certainly not the first origins researcher to come to that conclusion.
After all, what raw materials were there?
We have the atmosphere, the oceans, rocks, and minerals, and it's very hard to imagine
any fully developed origin scenario that doesn't rely on all three, the gases, the liquids,
and the solids.
In fact, virtually all biologists who have spent any time at all with the origins problem
agree they all eventually gravitate to minerals because any origins of life scenario involving
only oceans and atmosphere just runs into insurmountable problems when it comes to selecting
and concentrating life's molecules.
Nothing matches the solid crystalline surfaces of minerals in their ability to select, concentrate,
and organize molecules.
Turns out that understanding the selection and concentration of lipids, or sugars, or
amino acids is not that difficult.
In some cases, as with lipids, self-organization works perfectly well.
In others, mineral surfaces get the job done.
But there is one really difficult, naughty problem where the solution isn't so obvious.
Biochemical processes are intricate with complexly interwoven cycles and mind-boggling
networks of molecular reactions.
The only way for these layered chemical processes to work is for each molecule to have just
the right size and shape and chemical reactivity.
The origin of life is at heart a problem of finding the right molecule for each biochemical
job.
In this context, shape is destiny.
Each molecule must have exactly the right shape.
And that requirement leads us to what perhaps is the most daunting challenge in molecular
selection, the pervasive handedness of life, or chirality.
You see, many of life's most critical molecules come in mirror-image pairs, left-handed versions
and right-handed versions, just like your two hands.
These chiral pairs of molecules are identical and interchangeable in most respect.
Chiral molecules have the same chemical formulas.
They have the same melting and boiling points.
They look the same, the same color, the same luster.
They have the same magnetic properties, the same electrical conductivity.
But left-handed and right-handed molecules have different shapes.
They appear similar, but the shapes can't be superimposed.
Now that's a familiar characteristic to us because we've all had the experience of trying
to put a left-handed glove on our right hand or a right-handed shoe on our left foot.
Have you ever tried to use a left-handed bowling ball if you're right-handed?
So here's how this situation affects origins of life models.
Turns out that most experiments that synthesize biomolecules, hydrothermal experiments, or
Miller-Yuri experiments, or experiments that mimic deep space, all of them produce more
or less equal amounts of left and right-handed molecules.
What's more, most natural processes treat left and right-handed molecules exactly the
same way.
So it seems that the natural world, at least the non-living natural world, is for the most
part indifferent to the distinction between left and right.
Life on the other hand has structures so demanding that it is utterly dependent on finding molecules
of the correct shape.
If you need a left-handed amino acid, a right-handed amino acid molecule simply will not do.
Our research team decided to tackle this naughty question of how life somehow selected left-handed
amino acids almost exclusively over right, and right-handed sugars over left in a global
environment that didn't seem to care about handedness.
Just on minerals, we've been exploring the possibility that handed mineral surfaces were
the starring players in selecting handed molecules.
And if that's true, the minerals might have been even more critical than we previously
thought in the origins of life.
I began these experiments in the year 2000 when my colleagues and I realized what was
at the time quite a startling revelation, but is now, in retrospect, pretty obvious.
Turns out that chiral mineral surfaces are absolutely everywhere in nature.
Every rock, every soil is dominated by mineral surfaces on which atoms are arranged such
that the places where molecules attach, the tiny molecular scale handholds, if you will,
are chiral.
Some attachment surfaces are left-handed and some are right-handed.
We find that the distribution of these left and right-handed mineral surfaces are statistically
equal proportions.
And we conclude that Earth on both regional and global scales isn't biased one way or
another for left or right.
But every individual molecule is either left-handed or right-handed.
So those molecules do care where they wind up.
You can learn more about those experiments in my great courses offering on the origins
of life.
In short, our years of experiments have shown that left-handed molecules can be concentrated
on one set of crystal surfaces, while right-handed molecules tend to concentrate just as strongly
on the mirror image sets of mineral surfaces.
In that way, each chiral surface becomes a tiny experiment in molecular selection and
organization.
This discovery was greeted with a lot of interest, but it doesn't come close to explaining the
origins of life.
My colleagues and I suspect that life's origin occurred on a chiral mineral surface, where
just the right combination of small molecules was selected, concentrated, organized into
a system that could promote copies of itself.
This event occurred at a microscopic scale on one tiny place, on one small mineral grain.
And I doubt that any laboratory experiment with minerals and molecules is likely to
reproduce that exact historical event.
After all, there are thousands of different kinds of mineral surfaces and millions of
small organic molecules.
It took a planet like Earth with countless trillions of trillions of trillions of minute
mineral surfaces, each surface bathed in the molecule-rich organic soup, and miniature
chemical experiments were repeated over and over again for hundreds of millions of years.
In this model, the origin of life becomes an experiment in what's known as combinatorial
chemistry.
We try countless trillions of experiments and see what works.
That's very possible on a big, old planet like Earth, which must have eventually tested
virtually every combination of small molecules somewhere, sometime.
Only the tiniest fraction of all possible molecular combinations would have displayed
useful self-assembly into bio-structures, or developed an orderly binding to mineral
surfaces, or experienced greater stability at high temperatures and pressures.
Only the tiniest fraction would have learned to self-replicate and grow.
No one yet knows, and we may never know exactly what combination of molecules and mineral
surfaces led to the first lifelike assemblage of chemicals.
But we're now learning the guiding principles of molecular selection in the organization.
It's now certain that biomolecules were synthesized in abundance.
It's equally certain that some of those molecules formed larger and larger clusters.
One principle that has emerged from our experiments is that electric charge played a big role.
Some molecules carry a slightly positive electric charge, others have a slightly negative charge.
And quite a few interesting molecules, including water, are polar.
It is they are both a slightly positive and a negative end to the same molecule.
In a similar fashion, mineral surfaces have charged surfaces.
Some mineral surfaces are slightly positive, some are slightly negative, and sometimes
the mineral will have both positive and negative regions on its surface.
The result of all these charged regions of molecules and surfaces is that they can organize
spontaneously as positive electric charge attracts negative electric charge.
The details of this kind of prebiotic self-organization are still very much a frontier of origin research,
but it's clear that self-assembly has to have occurred on early Earth in virtually every
wet chemically diverse environment.
The first two steps in life's origin are pretty well understood, at least in principle.
Biomolecules like amino acid, sugars, lipids, they're manufactured abundantly in all sorts
of prebiotic environments.
Earth's surface had all the raw materials it needed, and those raw materials could be
assembled in complementary ways through self-assembly, by selection on mineral surfaces, some of
which were chiral, and by intricate combinations of those two processes.
These arrays of molecules, no matter how intricately they might be patterned, can't
be said to be alive unless they can make copies of themselves.
In here we come to what remains the biggest hurdle to understanding the origins of life.
How did a collection of lifeless molecules become organized in such a way that it could
make copies of itself?
What was the first self-replicating system of molecules?
First most distinctive characteristic is self-replication.
One collection of molecules becomes two, two becomes four, doubling again and again, in
geometric expansion.
In some cases we can work backwards by mimicking what life does so well.
Scientists have devised clever experiments that replicate portions of plausible reproductive
cycles, but no one has been able to create a lab system that takes in small food molecules
and makes copies of much bigger molecules.
This is a huge challenge.
We know that at some point in Earth history at some specific time and location, probably
in a volume smaller than a dust grain, an organized collection of molecules began to
copy itself while using other molecules in the environment as food.
So try to imagine Earth four billion years ago.
When it was about 500 million years old, it was surrounded by an ocean with a very
dilute broth of organic molecules.
It had an unimaginably vast surface area of reactive minerals with many chiral crystal
phases.
What's more, Earth had hundreds of millions of years during which it could conduct chemical
experiments in all kinds of geochemical environments with varying temperature and pressure, salinity,
acidity.
Most of those molecular experiments, indeed almost all of those random experiments, did
nothing at all of interest.
Most combinations of molecules displayed no useful function, but over 500 million years
I estimate that there was something on the order of 10 to the 50th or 10 to the 60th
power of different molecular experiments.
That's a trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, different experiments in the origins
of life.
What a big planet with lots of time gives you.
Only an infinitesimally small fraction of those molecular experiments on mineral surfaces
did anything useful by producing some kind of organized structure with some kind of enhanced
function.
Maybe stronger surface attachment or a way to attract more molecules to the local community
or perhaps the tendency to destroy competing molecular species.
And at some time, some place, a collection of surface-bound molecules discovered the
ability to make copies of itself.
And then imagine how quickly the natural world would have rewarded such an innovation.
Once self-replicating molecules took hold, they could rapidly take over, infesting every
habitable crack and fissure on the globe.
Let's take a couple of steps back.
First, why would any collection of molecules spontaneously start making copies of itself?
And why would that ability confer some kind of advantage?
I think the answer lies at the heart of why evolution is such a powerful force.
Evolution seems to be a universal feature of the cosmos.
We see complex evolving systems all around us in the emergence of the very elements and
isotopes formed in stars, in the evolution of minerals, which is such a central theme
of this course in the evolution of biomolecules, and in the origins and evolution of life.
In all of these cases and many more, the twin evolutionary pillars are variation and selection.
First, all of these systems evolve because they display a vast number of different possible
configurations.
The nuclear particles, protons and neutrons, can come together in millions of different
arrangements of which a few are the stable elements and isotopes.
Carbon, hydrogen and oxygen are flexible and abundant atoms that can adopt an almost infinite
number of different arrangements of which the familiar biomolecules are particularly
stable examples.
And those biomolecules can adopt a combinatorially vast number of structures.
Those are all examples of variation.
These natural systems display tremendous potential variation because they are made up of lots
of smaller components that can be arranged in vast numbers of different configurations.
The second and equally essential attribute of all evolving systems is selection.
If all possible configurations are equally probable, then evolution couldn't happen.
But you just have a mess.
In these systems, though, it turns out that some configurations are much more likely to
survive than others.
In the case of protons and neutrons, only a few arrangements are stable.
That is, they aren't radioactive and spontaneously disintegrate.
The same thing for organic molecules.
Most atomic arrangements spontaneously break apart.
And that's, of course, true for collections of molecules.
That's selection.
What survives the first cut is what is stable.
But collections of molecules have the potential for even more powerful selection.
For a collection of molecules to be stable, it has to first survive.
But now imagine a vast prebiotic collection of hundreds of thousands of different more
or less stable molecules, all of which are made of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
maybe with some sulfur or phosphorus thrown in.
And that's not an unreasonable estimate of diversity.
Prebiotic synthesis, like Stanley Miller's experiment in natural samples, for example,
what we find in meteorites, display this high degree of molecular diversity.
But it's easy to imagine that not all molecules are equally suited for survival.
Some molecules are relatively unstable, and so they decompose.
Any unstable molecule is quickly eliminated from the competition.
Other molecules probably clumped together into useless tar-like black masses, which
floated away or sank to the ocean floor.
Those molecules couldn't play no further role.
But some small fraction of molecules must have proved to be especially stable.
And that stability was surely enhanced when they bound themselves to others of their kind
or to a stable mineral surface.
All sorts of molecular interactions further refine the prebiotic mix.
Some groups of molecules cooperated with each other to attach to various mineral surfaces
in ways that individual molecules could not, thus enhancing the survival of the group.
Other small molecules must have acted as catalysts that enhanced survival in two ways.
Some chemical species promoted stability by catalyzing the formation of new chemical
bonds, while others accelerated the destruction of molecular species by breaking their bonds.
In this way, the molecular soup was inexorably refined.
For a time, perhaps for hundreds of millions of years, the prebiotic soup was refined in
these varied ways.
But being the most stable molecule is not always the best way to ensure survival.
Ultimately, security in the prebiotic soup was to be found not by eliminating the competition
or just surviving.
The ultimate guarantee of survival went to that precocious collection of molecules that
learned to self-replicate.
That's because self-replication increases the concentration of the winners, while gradually
consuming that is eating the competition.
And it's even better than that, because in the natural world, mistakes are made.
Self-replication can't be perfect every time, so mutant versions of the self-replicating
molecules pop up from time to time.
And while most of those mutants, at best, have no effect on the system, and at worst
are going to slow down or halt reproduction, once in a while a lucky mutant will be better
at the self-replication trick.
It might replicate faster, or be more energy efficient, or perhaps be able to work its
chemical magic in different environments where it's hotter or saltier or more acidic.
So self-replicating systems have the potential to evolve into new systems that do the tasks
of life even better.
But while we observe all kinds of evolving systems all around us, from elements to minerals
to molecules, most of those evolving systems don't include self-replication.
That's what distinguishes living systems from the rest of the natural world, and it's also
life's greatest advantage.
Reproduction is a profound invention.
But how did it happen?
How can lifeless molecules begin to make copies of themselves?
No one knows for sure, but three competing models are now vying as scientists attempt
to describe the first living systems of molecules.
The origin of reproduction is the greatest unanswered question in efforts to understand
the origins of life on Earth.
