The journey of our evolving Earth is far from over.
If 4.567 billion years has taught us one thing, it's that there's much more to come.
Earth's lessons, once deciphered, give us a new appreciation of who we are, and how far
our planetary home has come.
And we can appreciate our amazing world as a place where rocks and life continue to co-evolve,
where new wonders continue to emerge.
We are coming to the end of our incredible journey.
The story of Earth is an immense and complex tale filled with details and nuances that
can at times be breathtaking and more than a little overwhelming.
But step back from the sweeping transformations and subtle complexities and we find three
profound truths that underlie any consideration of our amazing planetary home.
First, for its entire 4.567 billion year history, Earth has been and continues to be a planet
of incessant, remarkable change.
Sometimes sudden, sometimes gradual, but always change.
Nothing you see of our planet today is the way it always was or the way it always will
be.
Many of the grandest mountains, like Mt. McKinley or Mt. Everest, began forming only
about 50 million years ago.
And surface features can be far more recent still, San Francisco Bay on the west coast
of North America and the Chesapeake Bay on the east coast.
Both date from just 10,000 years ago.
All plants and animals are newer than we realize too, having appeared on Earth only after more
than 85% of Earth's history has already passed.
From 600 million years ago, very early mammals and flowering plants only began to take over
some 60 million years ago, while the split between monkeys and humans from a common genetic
pool was 30 million years ago.
The first dandelions, so ubiquitous today, appear in the fossil record only 5 million
years ago and that was long before modern humans came on the scene.
A second profound insight is that such changes have been occurring through billions of years
of history as revealed by a site like the Grand Canyon whose layers stretched back over
2 billion years ago.
Getting to know our world means coming to terms with the power of deep time to alter
every aspect of the planet.
And third, more than any other factor, life has profoundly affected our planet in ways
that are unparalleled in any other known place in the cosmos.
Just look at the immense limestone reefs that formed the highest peaks of the Canadian Rockies
or the vast coal deposits of Pennsylvania.
It's only in the context of these three truths, incessant change, deep time, and life, that
we can come to know our home.
As we look at the planet today with a new sense of that dynamic history and with more
informed eyes, we can appreciate our amazing home as a place where rocks and life continue
to co-evolve in remarkable ways.
The planet changes, but we can learn to see those changes and what remains today.
In this final lecture, I want to revisit this wonderful story with a special emphasis on
mineral evolution and the 10 stages of Earth history that frame that evolution.
I also want to share some personal observations on our dynamic planet and our place on it.
When I think about our planet's epic past, what is sure to be an equally epic future,
I can't help but place the narrative in the context of my own passion, mineralogy.
You might be especially intrigued by the role of life on our planet or the impact of plate
tectonics, but I hope you now see that the story of minerals parallels and even provides
a foundation for many other aspects of the story of Earth.
In the beginning, in the first millions of years following the Big Bang, there were no
minerals, no planets anywhere in the cosmos.
Only after the first generation of giant stars exploded were all the planet-forming
chemical elements produced and ejected into space.
Only then could the first dozen or so Earth minerals crystallize in the expanding and
cooling gas envelopes of those stars.
In those ancient times, most chemical elements were much too scarce and widely dispersed
to form minerals.
On the other hand, the abundant element carbon formed microscopic crystals of diamond which
became the very first mineral, and diamond was soon joined by a dozen or so other hardy
micro crystals with a common element, silicon, aluminum, magnesium, iron, calcium, and of
course oxygen.
And I love the idea that diamond was among the first of the crystals.
It appeared so simple and it lasts virtually forever to reveal the earliest times of our
universe.
And it was carbon and a handful of companion elements widely dispersed in the succession
of supernova explosions which became the great engines of mineral formation and seeded the
first generation of Earth-like planets.
At each stage of Earth's mineral evolution, new mechanisms selected and concentrated combinations
of elements that altered and enriched the mineralogy as well as the life-forming molecules
of our planet's surface.
I want to reemphasize a fundamental insight.
Most of Earth's thousands of varied mineral species owe their existence to the origin
and evolution of life on the planet.
It's so easy to think of all the non-living world as a fixed stage on which life plays
out its evolutionary drama.
But we now know that that perspective is incorrect.
And this drama, the actors, the microbes, the plants, and the animals of Earth's rich
biosphere are constantly renovating their theater along the way.
This observation also has profound implications for our ongoing quest to find signs of life
on other worlds.
As a consequence of this co-evolution, the sturdy minerals rather than fragile organic
remains may provide the most robust and lasting signs of a living world.
Life eventually transforms minerals.
But minerals came first, so the first five stages in this ten-stage history were driven
by physical and chemical processes that might have occurred on any Earth-sized rocky planet.
First came the solar nebula with its swirling cloud of dust and gas.
Most of our nebulas mass fell inward to form the sun.
The meager leftovers progressively clumped into larger and larger bits, which at first
held little more than the limited repertoire of a dozen or so herb minerals, with all the
other atoms and molecules merely coming along for the ride in trace amounts.
Look for the Orion Nebula in the nighttime sky and think of diamond and some other birthstones
forming there.
Minerals of heat from the young sun melted and remixed elements and produced tiny droplets.
The chondrules were scores of new minerals that are now found in the most primitive chondrite
meteorites.
This first stage of mineral evolution saw a leap from a dozen to perhaps sixty different
mineral species.
Gravitational forces called chondrules to clump into planetesimals, some of which grew to
more than a hundred miles in diameter.
As planetesimals grew larger, they partially melted and differentiated into the onion-like
layers of distinctive minerals, including a dense, metal-rich core.
Stage two of mineral evolution includes all the new minerals formed by heating, by interactions
with water, and from frequent high-velocity collisions.
And what I find utterly remarkable is that we can hold actual pieces of the raw building
materials of planets in our hand.
They literally fall from the sky.
They lie on Earth's deserts and ice fields in plain view, just waiting to be found and
picked up and studied.
All told, perhaps two hundred fifty different mineral species arose as a consequence of
these dynamic planet-forming processes, and all of them are still found today in the diverse
suites of meteorites that fall to Earth.
When you look at a meteor shower, remember that you are seeing some of the solar system's
oldest and simplest rocks fall to Earth.
No one looking at the moon can fail to be amazed at how it formed.
Primordial Earth was the largest of the planetesimals in our orbital zone.
Larger planetesimals had swallowed smaller ones, until only two major rivals remained
in our orbital zip code, the proto-Earth and the smaller, Mars-sized body known as Thea.
In a final paroxysm of unimaginable violence, Thea sideswiped the proto-Earth, vaporizing
its outer layers and blasting one hundred million trillion tons of incandescent rock
vapors into space to become the moon.
This violent scenario explains many unusual features of the moon, including why its bulk
composition so closely matches that of Earth, and why the lunar surface looks sort of battered
and splotchy, though of course meteorite impacts have contributed to that final appearance
as well.
Following that moon-spawning collision about four and a half billion years ago, the molten
Earth began the cooling that continues to this day.
Thea's impact served as a mineralogical reset button.
It left Earth's outer layers thoroughly mixed with many less common elements, far too dispersed
to form separate crystals.
Our planet at this point, stage three of mineral evolution, was a desolate, hostile world incessantly
bombarded by nebula debris and largely covered by a veneer of black basalt.
That crust stayed black, unlike lava today, because there was no oxygen in the air for
it to oxidize.
Not every planet possesses Earth's great mineral-forming potential.
Many dehydrated mercury, and Earth's equally dry moon became frozen before much melting
could occur.
Consequently, we estimate that no more than about 350 different mineral species will be
found on those worlds.
Mars is a little better off because it's modest water budget and slightly larger size.
So it probably has an inventory of hydrous species such as clays and evaporate minerals
that form an ocean stripe.
Minerals might even have had a short interval of some kind of activity like plate tectonics.
So NASA probes might eventually identify as many as 500 different minerals on the Red
Planet, but that's only about a tenth of our planet's mineral diversity.
Earth is bigger, hotter, and wetter than Mercury or Mars and Earth's moon, and it has a few
other mineral-forming tricks to play.
All the rocky planets experience volcanism that poured basalt across their surfaces,
with its stage 3 assortment of minerals.
But Earth had enough inner heat to remelt some of that basalt to form those buoyant
igneous rocks called granites, and then to remelt granites and concentrate rare incompatible
elements that are unable to find a comfortable crystallographic home in common minerals.
The resulting rocks feature more than 500 distinctive minerals, including giant crystals
of species rich in lithium, beryllium, boron, cesium, niobium, tantalum, uranium, and a
dozen other rare elements.
Think of Barrel.
It takes time.
Evidence suggests more than a billion years for these elements to achieve mineral-forming
concentrations.
This planetary twin, Venus, may have been sufficiently active for long enough to progress
this far.
But neither Mars nor Mercury has yet revealed significant surface signs of granitization.
Earth gained even more mineral diversity during stage 5, through the planetary-scale
process of plate tectonics.
New basaltic crust is generated along chains of volcanoes like the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, while
old crust is swallowed up in subduction zones where one plate slips under another and is
returned to the mantle.
Immense quantities of wet chemically diverse rocks are subducted from the crust into the
hot mantle where they partially melt, and that partial melt concentrates a host of scarce
chemical elements which rise with the magma to produce new crustal rocks and pulses of
mineral diversity.
Many more unusual mineral species first appeared at Earth's surface when tectonic forces uplifted
and exposed deep rock domains with a horde of distinctive minerals like jadeite that
only form under the high pressures of the mantle.
All told, perhaps, 1550 years ago, the Tectonic Force was the first to form the Tectonic
high pressures of the mantle.
All told, perhaps, 1500 different minerals found near Earth's surface might have been
generated by dynamic physical and chemical processes in the crust to mantle during Earth's
first two billion years.
But mineralogists have now cataloged almost 5,000 different mineral species, and here
we come to the dominant role of life in mineralogy.
Earth's magnificent biosphere distinguishes it from all other known planets and moons.
On a personal note, I must say that it was with some trepidation that my colleagues and
I first proposed that at least two-thirds of all known mineral species are a consequence
of Earth's biological transformations.
Having been taught mineralogy in a professional environment where biology played almost no
role, this was an almost heretical point of view.
But life has irrevocably transformed the near-surface environment, most conspicuously
the oceans and atmosphere, and it turns out also the rocks and the minerals.
Still, keep in mind that for a very long time, probably for more than a billion years and
maybe closer to two billion years, life did not help to diversify the mineral kingdom.
Stage six of mineral evolution encompasses life's earliest manifestations, beginning
at least three and a half billion years ago when primitive single-celled organisms fed
on the chemical energy of rocks.
Biologically formed rock formations including reefs made of calcium carbonate and banded
iron formations date back to at least three and a half billion years.
The land was still barren and virtually untouched by life.
The atmosphere lacked oxygen, weathering was slow, and the earliest microbial life did nothing
to increase the number of approximately 1500 pre-existing minerals.
But that situation changed in a geological instant with the rapid rise of an oxygen-rich
atmosphere, which marks the seventh and perhaps the most pivotal stage of Earth's mineral
evolution.
This fundamental change in atmosphere chemistry, the great oxidation event, resulted from the
biological innovation of oxygen-producing photosynthesis by new kinds of algae.
Just like the masses of green algae, we can see on lakes and ponds today.
By 2.2 billion years ago, atmospheric oxygen had risen to greater than one percent of modern
levels.
That's a small amount by today's standards, but it was enough to forever transform Earth's
surface mineralogy.
We see the results even today in thousands of distinctively colored minerals of copper,
iron, cobalt, and uranium.
Our chemical modeling suggests that the great oxidation event paved the way for perhaps 3,000
new minerals, many of which are hydrated and oxidized weathering products of pre-existing
minerals.
These new kinds of crystals were unlikely to form in the previous anoxic environment,
which is why we suggest Earth's biochemical processes appear to be responsible directly
or indirectly for the great majority of Earth's snow mineral species.
Most of these minerals occurred as little more than thin coatings and rinds of altered
material on existing rocks.
Many rare mineral species are known only from a handful of precious crystals that weigh
less than a gram, so mineral novelty by itself didn't radically alter granite, basalt, and
many other rock formations.
Nevertheless, the great oxidation event had global consequences with profound changes
to the atmosphere, the oceans, to rocks, and to life.
And I love this idea of life triggering mineral diversity as much as anything because it made
Earth so colorful.
Early in Earth's history, the planet was black, the color of basalt, then the first granite
continents were gray, but the great oxidation event saw an explosion of colors.
Green algae came first, followed by a red landscape, just like Mars, but my favorite
rainbow of colors come from more exotic minerals, the brilliant pinks and reds of iron oxides,
the bright orange and yellow of uranium minerals, and then you have those gorgeous blues and
greens of copper minerals like azurite and malachite and the purple cobalt minerals.
Every color of the rainbow thanks to the effects of oxygen.
Stage 8 of mineral evolution, that billion-year interval starting about 1.85 billion years
ago doesn't appear to have changed the character of our planet's surface very significantly.
At first blush, that boring billion era saw no new mineral forming processes.
But we now know that the gradual oxidation of the shallow subsurface on land eventually
led to thousands of new mineral species.
That subsurface oxidation took a long time, and much of the transformation occurred during
stage 8.
And then came stage 9, the time of the snowball and hot house Earth episodes.
Imagine land across the entire planet oscillating from climates like Antarctica to the Sahara
desert and back again.
This time period about 800 million years ago is a great illustration of how both chance
and necessity play roles in Earth's history.
It was pure chance that the planet's supercontinent of that time, Rodinia, happened to be located
at the equator when that supercontinent began to break apart.
But it was necessity that the more extensive equatorial coastlines, the greater rainfall,
the more rapid rock erosion conspired to remove atmospheric carbon dioxide.
It was necessity that the greenhouse effect weakened, and the climate cooled.
The polar ice expanded, and that the growing ice sheet reflected more sunlight back into
space, further reducing the sun's heating effects.
Yes, once these events were set in motion, it was equally inevitable that Earth could
not remain locked in ice forever.
Volcanoes inevitably continued to emit carbon dioxide, which increased to many times modern
atmospheric levels.
A new cycle of greenhouse warming resulted in the melting of equatorial ice, which allowed
more of the sun's energy to heat Earth's surface and caused a runaway warming episode.
The snowball, hot house cycles of the next 200 million years seem, at least in retrospect,
a logical outcome.
But all of those dramatic changes were a consequence of the chance location of Rodinia
on the equator.
Causes and effects.
They are such a central theme in our view of Earth's changeable history, and for the
co-evolution of the geosphere and biosphere.
So the snowball, hot house cycles have profound consequences for life.
The global ice ages shut down almost every ecosystem, whereas the warming periods saw
abrupt increases in biological productivity.
In particular, at the end of the last big glaciation, atmospheric oxygen rose sharply
from no more than a few percent to approximately 15 percent, produced in part by vigorous
and widespread coastal algal blooms.
Again, causes and effects.
Many biologists suggest that such high levels of oxygen were an essential prelude to the
origin and evolution of large animals, with their increased metabolic demands.
Indeed, the earliest known multicellular organisms appear in the fossil record just five million
years after the last of the great global glaciation.
And with that significant rise in atmospheric oxygen, we come to the tenth, but perhaps not
the final stage of Earth's mineral evolution, the time when life colonized land.
Throughout the last four hundred million years, the geosphere and biosphere have co-evolved
at an accelerated rate, especially as diverse microbes and animals learn to grow their own
protective mineral shells.
The innovation of carbonate skeletons led to deposition of massive limestone reefs,
which punctuate the world's landscape in countless cliffs and canyons.
Such minerals were not new, but their prevalence was unprecedented.
We see biomineralization all around us, and the process can be fast as you'll sometimes
see in rocks near the water.
I've seen a metal watch band cemented by iron biomineral into a rock, and in that case
we can even date the amount of biomineralization that has been taking place, because it turns
out the watch band is from a surveyor who remembers losing the watch forty years ago,
and an unusual repair that had been made on that particular watch band pegs the date when
it was lost.
What a remarkable transformation life on land has made.
For more than 80% of Earth's history, the land was uninhabitable because of the Sun's
ultraviolet radiation.
Higher levels of atmospheric oxygen, oxygen produced by life, led to a protective stratospheric
ozone layer which shielded the land and its terrestrial biosphere.
Life on land took time to thrive.
The most dramatic terrestrial transformation had to await the development of land plants
about 460 million years ago, when mosses thrived in low, wet places.
Widespread colonization of the land took another 10 million years, with the rise of vascular
plants.
The roots of vascular plants efficiently penetrate rocky ground to provide a sturdy anchor, and
capillary action distributes water through the roots to stems and leaves high above
the ground.
And with stage 10, Earth for the first time became what most of us think of as an Earth-like
planet.
It amazes me to think of the co-evolution of minerals in life on land.
Plants and fungi increased weathering rates of surface rocks such as basalt, granite and
limestone by an order of magnitude.
The resultant soils, rich in clay minerals and organic matter, became deeper and more
widespread, and provided an ever-expanding habitat for more and larger plants and fungi.
As a result, the abundance and variety of clay minerals and other characteristic soil
minerals dramatically increased, and the very character of the surface world was transformed.
By perhaps 400 million years ago during the Devonian period, the land was for the first
time covered by green forests and was populated with a diverse cast of crawling and flying
insects, four-footed vertebrates, and other air-breathing creatures.
And thanks to the profound influence of life, Earth's near-surface mineralogy had also
achieved something close to its modern state of diversity and distribution.
Well, is that the last stage?
A lot of people ask me whether we might not be entering an 11th stage of mineral evolution,
an Anthropocene Age, that reflects the invention of new mineral-like chemicals.
And I have to agree, one of the characteristics of modern technology is the synthesis of literally
thousands of new mineral-like compounds, many of which are modeled after naturally occurring
rocks and minerals.
In the 19th century, new mineral-like compounds were manufactured for paints and dyes, for
tableware and ceramics, and for building supplies and industrial hardware.
Gluten minerals began to be spun into mineral wool, also called stone wool, and mineral
fibers around that time.
Then the pace of discovery accelerated in the 20th century with new materials for semiconductors
and other electronics, medical technologies, and of course the military.
Of special note are mineral-like crystals employed in lasers, in optical devices, and
as synthetic gemstones.
And today, discoveries in the synthesis of mineral-like materials contribute to numerous
societal needs, including energy, environment, resources, health, transportation, and security.
So perhaps we are in the 11th stage of Earth's mineral evolution, with life once again transforming
the mineral inventory of our planet.
The concept of mineral evolution points to some very exciting opportunities for future
research.
For example, we see that different planets achieve markedly different stages of mineral
evolution.
Small, dry worlds like Mercury and the Moon possess relatively undifferentiated surfaces
of low mineral diversity.
These bodies essentially froze billions of years ago and are now geologically dead.
Small wet Mars fared a little better.
Billions of years ago is a wet, active planet that saw the formation of diverse hydroxides
and evaporates clay minerals and ices.
Venus is now much less active, but life might have begun at some point in the distant past.
Bigger planets like Earth and Venus, with their greater stores of volatiles and inner
heat, progressed further, perhaps through the formation of granitoids and the initiation
of plate tectonics.
But the origin of life and the subsequent co-evolution of biology and minerals sets Earth apart.
Consequently, minerals may be as valuable as organic remains for identifying the signature
of life on other worlds.
Only those planets with photosynthetic life would likely be extensively oxidized, for
instance.
So watch for these traits to help us identify exoplanets most like Earth.
And remember, Jupiter's moon Europa and Saturn's moon Enceladus, both of which are believed
to harbor liquid oceans of water beneath their surface.
These moons are thus prime sites for possible extraterrestrial life.
But to me, the most profound consequence of viewing minerals in an evolutionary context
may be that Earth exemplifies a more general theme of evolving systems throughout the cosmos.
Evolution occurs when simple components combine into increasingly complicated states.
We observe this phenomenon in the evolution of all the chemical elements, from neutrons
and protons and the nuclear furnace of stars.
We see it in mineral evolution through the assembly of chemical elements in planets.
We see a molecular evolution of building blocks for life in meteorites and all over
the solar system, and on Earth we see molecular evolution lead to the origin of life, followed
by biological evolution through Darwinian natural selection.
We live in the universe apparently primed for complexification.
Hydrogen atoms form stars.
Stars form the elements of the periodic table.
Those elements form planets, which in turn form minerals abundantly.
Minerals catalyze the formation of biomolecules, which on Earth led to life.
Biomineralization, complex multicellular organisms, a sweeping series of steps in the evolution
of a cosmos that is learning to know itself.
And here mineral evolution holds another lesson for us today, because Earth's mineralogical
diversity reveals how unique and special our planetary home is.
Given this new integrated perspective on the natural world, we see Earth with a new understanding
of the intertwined co-evolution of the geosphere and the biosphere.
All transformations are occurring before our eyes.
Early in this series, way back in lecture 6, I described taking long walks along the
magnificent fossil-packed cliffs of Calvert County, Maryland, along the western shore
of the Chesapeake Bay.
Anyway, with the Calvert County cliffs experiencing a foot or more erosion every year, and at
least one or two houses on the cliffs that are condemned and falling into the bay every
year, one gets a pretty good sense that geological change can be rapid at times.
And remember, the Chesapeake Bay as a whole is only about 10,000 years old.
But it wasn't until December of 2011 during a walk on a crisp early winter day that I
began to see how rapidly the cliff itself could evolve.
The setting of my discovery was the southernmost stretch of cliffs near a small coastal promontary
known as Little Cove Point.
It's a stunningly beautiful stretch of cliffs with a sweeping panorama over the bay.
And it's been known to sailors for a long time, at least 400 years, because the Cove
was a natural harbor that provided protection for ships during the strongest storms from
the south or from the north.
Armed with this new perspective on Earth, my colleagues and I spotted something that
no one had seen or described before.
An amazing array of biologically deposited minerals of iron and manganese strewn across
the beach.
Beautiful iron oxides and carbonates, sulfates and brilliant blue phosphates.
A decade or two ago, I probably would never have given these telltale objects a second
glance, and I doubt that anyone would have paid much attention or recognized their significance.
But now we can collect these beautiful objects, bring them to our laboratories, and learn
their fascinating story.
Here's how they formed.
First, rain falls on the undulating land above the cliff face.
That rainwater reacts in stagnant, swampy lowlands with dead plant material and the soil to become
anoxic and acidic.
As the acidic water slowly percolates through a mile or more of the subsurface, it dissolves
and concentrates iron and manganese from the soil.
Suddenly, that mineral-rich water springs forth from the sheer cliff face in some places
as little water falls that stain the cliff face.
There on that wet vertical surface exposed to reactive oxygen and brilliant sunlight,
the waters provide a rich meal for hosts of microbes that chemically transform the iron
and manganese by oxidation and deposit new minerals in the process.
Here we find a microcosm of earth.
Minerals provide the essential environment for plants, while plants create the essential
environment for the formation of mineral-rich waters.
Those waters nurture a new generation of microbes, which in turn form a new generation
of minerals.
We live on a seemingly magical world where life and minerals co-evolve, and wherever
you live, I encourage you to get out and experience such microcosms for yourself.
Throughout Earth's 4.567 billion-year history, the air, the seas, the land, and ultimately
life have been shaped by Earth's transformative powers.
The energy of sunlight, together with Earth's inner heat, the ability of water to select,
concentrate, and redistribute elements.
The chemical reactivity of carbon, oxygen, and iron, the ceaseless convection of the
deep interior and consequent formation of continents, and the disruption of the crust
through earthquakes, volcanoes, and the incessant shifting of continental plates.
Through these diverse mechanisms, Earth has evolved.
From black, through gray, to blue, and red, and icy white, and ultimately to the green
living world we know today.
It has been an amazing journey, and it's nowhere near its end.
Every day, if we are attuned to these dynamic processes of our planetary home, we can observe
and benefit from our understanding of these intertwined creative forces that make Earth
possible.
And we can then truly come to know how dynamic and changeable our beautiful home can be.
