Volcanic eruptions in other natural phenomena remind us that Earth is a dynamic, evolving
planet. Over geological time, the heat from Earth's core drives convection of soft rocks
in the mantle, which causes about a dozen thin slabs, called tectonic plates, to shift
around on the surface. As a result, oceans open and close.
This is stage 5 of mineral evolution, where new minerals appear that are rare or absent
elsewhere in the solar system.
Following the global disruptions of World War II, Earth scientists were once again poised
to tackle the big question of how mountains and oceans form. As I noted in the last lecture,
mineral developments provided the new key evidence. In fact, it was two developments
in anti-submarine warfare, both declassified and adopted by oceanographers in the 1950s
that led directly to transformative discoveries about the dynamic Earth.
The first key advance was sonar, which employs the echoes of sound waves to measure distance
and direction. This is technology that's more than a century old, and it's certainly familiar
to anyone who's enjoyed any of the stylish Hollywood submarine movies. The sonar sends
out a ping, and that brief sound is answered a short while later by a software echoing
ping. In naval warfare, that sound wave is bounced off the solid hull of a hidden submarine.
And have you ever noticed how the effect on the audiences is quite different depending
on whether the movie's point of view is inside the submarine or on the deck of a destroyer?
Anyway, you have that tension building effect. Ping. Ping. Ping. Ping. Ping. The faster the
echoes come, the closer the submarine. The exact same concept has also been put to scientific
use in the study of the ocean floor. Ocean floor topography. That's critical, not just
to science, but also to the Navy, whose submarines need to navigate in the deep ocean. And even
the deepest hidden ocean mountains and valleys can be observed and mapped with sound waves.
Even before sonar, there were hints that the floor of the mid-Atlantic had great mountains.
In the 1870s, British scientists employed relatively crude deep-water soundings aboard
HMS Challenger, and the first echo-sounding technology was developed for iceberg detection
following the 1912 Titanic disaster. And then sonar saw rapid improvement during World War
I in an effort to track German submarines. So scientific applications began with ocean
floor mapping in the 1920s, and that's when it became clear that great mountain ranges
lay hidden beneath all of Earth's ocean. But just as oceanographers were coming to grips
with the implications of submerged mountain range, along came the Great Depression and
the looming World War, and oceanographic research was all but stopped. The Second World War
began a new generation of high-sensitivity sonar detectors. After the war, not only could
oceanographers map the ocean floor topography, but they could also measure sound waves reflected
from deeply buried rock layers to get a sense of ocean floor geology. The most general topographic
features of the Atlantic Ocean were quickly confirmed. The continental shelves extend
up to hundreds of miles away from the present Atlantic coastlines. They deepen gradually
farther from shore and then reach a steep edge where depths suddenly increase to an
abyssal plain two miles deep and a thousand miles across. That distinctive feature is
much wider and flatter than anything on dry land. Oceanographers also confirmed that the
Atlantic is divided right down the middle by a huge mountain range called the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge, so those findings agreed with earlier results. What was new was the discovery that
the ocean crust is significantly thinner than continental crust. Now, geologists have
predicted that the ocean crust would be thinner than continents and that the ocean crust would
thin gradually the farther you got from the continental shelf. What they found instead
was an abrupt change from tens of miles of crust beneath the continents. The ocean crust
only about five or six miles thick and the transition was extremely sharp between continental
and oceanic crust. The Sonar operators sailed back and forth across the Atlantic dozens
of times and each transect gave the same result. Hidden beneath the ocean, right down
the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, there's a dramatic mountain change more than 10,000
miles long. It's the largest mountain chain on Earth and the shape of the range is unmistakable.
It has the exact same sweeping S-curve of the continental coasts. Even more dramatic was
the newly discovered fit of the continents. If you use the submerged continental shelves
as the edges, then the resulting match between continent shapes is uncanny, almost as if
you fit the pieces of a broken china plate back together. Scientists couldn't possibly
dismiss this evidence as a coincidence. And then, as more detailed traverses of the center
peaks of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge were completed, new patterns emerged. These are no ordinary
mountains. Now you've seen pictures of the Rockies or Himalayas. These mountain chains
have a jagged line of high peaks right along the center. By contrast, the very center line
of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge turns out to be a wide trough-like rift valley. This is a distinct
feature. It's about 20 miles wide and more than a mile deeper than the adjacent sides
of the valley to the east and the west. And there's another really curious aspect to the
ridge. It doesn't follow a smooth, continuous curve north to south. Instead, over and over
again the rift valley is sharply offset by hundreds of miles to the east or to the west
as if someone had taken the whole ridge and cut it with a knife and then shifted the pieces.
These offsets, called transform faults, give the entire ridge a jagged and broken appearance.
No one knew what was going on. It would have been so easy for these rather esoteric findings
to be lost in the arcane oceanographic literature. There were, after all, hundreds of amazing
post-war scientific discoveries in physics and chemistry and biology, and in a very real
sense it was all just data. But there's an important point in science. It's not just
what you discover. It's how you promote those discoveries, and often that means it's how
you visualize your data. Turns out that the lead investigators in the Ocean Floor Topography
Project were especially gifted publicists. Bruce Hazen, no relation to me, and Marie Tharp
were those creative marine scientists working at Columbia University's LeMont Geological
Observatory. They devised a dramatic new topographic map of Earth's surface, one that looked
beneath the ocean's surface. They followed the convention of other topographic maps representing
elevations with a series of colors and shades. Now, it's been traditional to show higher
elevations on land by gradations in color from greens and yellows to browns, and ultimately
white for the highest, coldest mountain elevations. In that way, all Earth's big mountain ranges
stand out on the globe. Hazen and Tharp used the exact same trick by employing varying shades
and hues of blue. So the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and other deep sea features clearly stand out,
and they appear absolutely monumental on a global scale. They also used a great trick
by centering their exquisite map right on the Atlantic. In this view, those identical
shapes of coastlines in the Mid-Atlantic Ridge are highlighted in an unforgettable way. It's
amazing how powerful one visual image can be. By the 1960s, thanks to the National Geographic,
just about everyone had seen Hazen and Tharp's iconic map. And whatever the cause, the link
between continents across the wide Atlantic was obvious to everyone. I want to share a
personal story about the impact of their map. When I enrolled in geology at MIT as a freshman
in the fall of 1966, I didn't know anyone in the department. So I was surprised to find
that some of the most senior faculty members were quite respectful, and they went out of
their way to shake my hand. Well, I didn't know at the end, but I suspect it has to do
with the fact that Bruce Hazen's last name, which is spelled H-E-E-Z-E-N, is pronounced
just like my last name, Hazen. And you see, in science, distinguished pedigrees can have
a real advantage. And some of those faculty members must have made a connection, whether
it was conscious or unconscious, between Bruce Hazen and Bob Hazen. Anyway, that gives you
a sense of how influential Bruce Hazen and Marie Tharp had become only a decade after
the publication of their first map in 1957. It's not surprising the revelations of the
shape and geology of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, as well as discoveries of similar under-sea
volcanic ridges in the Indian Ocean and the East Pacific, cause scientists to revisit
the possibility of continental drift. Now, everyone knows that the continents aren't
drifting, but geologists were much more inclined to search for some kind of force that could
shuffle Earth's surface. The 1950s were particularly heady time in Earth sciences. Discovery followed
new discovery, and the new data kept confounding the experts. In 1956, Hazen and his boss at
Columbia University's Lamont Laboratory seismologist Maurice Ewing found a remarkable connection
between a 34,000-mile-long pattern of small ocean floor earthquakes extending around the
globe and the positions of ocean floor ridges. Clearly, rift valleys and earthquakes are related,
and that suggests that ridges are dynamic, changeable features. The rocks dredged from
the ocean floor has also surprised many geologists, some of whom had predicted that the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge was a typical mountain range, perhaps capped by marine limestone like the Canadian
Rockies. But collections of rocks along the ridge and from some of Atlantic's many islands
were invariably dominated by volcanic basalt. And the ages of the basalt were surprisingly
young. The ocean floor has a thin veneer of soft sediments, but the ocean's crust is
made almost entirely of basalt. Stretching more than 2,500 miles from east to west, basalt
forms the ocean crust at the Atlantic Ocean. And if you use dating techniques based on
decay rates of radioactive elements like uranium, there's a very simple pattern in the rock
ages. All basalt samples collected from the rift valley itself are recent, never more
than about a million years old. And the farther you move east or west for the central rift
valley, the older the basalt becomes. The rocks near the continental margins are typically
more than 100 million years old. And that's a real mystery. Why should rocks near the
mid-Atlantic ridge be so young while rocks near the continents are old? It's logical
to conclude that the mid-Atlantic ridge is a line of active volcanoes where new basalt
or crust is being generated. But that still doesn't explain where those much older rocks
at the ocean margins come from. Okay, the new data that clinched the discovery of plate
tectonics relied on a second submarine hunting technology called the magnetometer. Submarines
of the Second World War were big hunks of iron-rich metal alloys. And that means they're
magnetic. Magnetometers have been known for a long time, but a new type of sensitive magnetic
detectors were deployed by submarine hunting airplanes that could measure the anomaly
of a nearby enemy submarine. So after the war, geophysicists improved the sensitivity
of those magnetometers so they could detect extremely small changes in magnetic fields
on the ocean floor. So instruments were towed behind an oceanographic ship just above the
sea bottom where they studied ocean floor basalt. Okay, here's the story. Basalt always
carries a weak magnetic signal because it contains small crystals of magnetite, a magnetic
iron oxide mineral. When basalt magma cools, the magnetite crystals lock in the orientation
of Earth's magnetic field just like tiny compass needles frozen in ice. So ocean floor
basalt preserves the orientation of Earth's magnetic field at the time when the rock hardened.
There's now a big subdiscipline of geology devoted to this field that's called paleo-magnetism.
So in the 1950s, oceanographers began to drag magnetometers across the sea floor and they
found something really striking. They found a totally unexpected magnetic pattern of long
north-south trending stripes. All the basalt right at the ridges and rift valleys in both
the Atlantic and the Pacific have a normal magnetic orientation. The little magnetic
crystals point in a direction close to today's north magnetic pole. But when they went a few
miles east or west of the rift valleys, the magnetic signal flips around by 180 degrees.
The north magnetic pole of these basalts is pointing in the opposite direction of its
present position. The north pole of these rocks is where the south pole is supposed
to be. And it gets more confusing because if you sail a few more miles in either direction,
the magnetic field flips 180 degrees again to the correct orientation. And there are
dozens of these reversals on any given transect moving away from the rift valleys.
Okay, there are three key facts. First, rocks with flipped magnetic fields occur in long,
narrow north-south trending bands that exactly parallel the ridges. In the places where the
central rift valley is offset by transform faults, so are the magnetic bands. Second,
whatever pattern appears on one side of the rift valley, the exact same pattern is mirrored
on the other side. Magnetic stripes are symmetrical about the ridge axis. And third, ages of basalt
from ridge systems around the world confirm that the magnetic reversals are global events
and they can serve as a kind of ocean floor timeline. What do these three facts imply?
First, Earth's magnetic field is extremely variable. Every half million years on average,
for at least 150 million years, the magnetic field has flipped 180 degrees. The last major
reversal was our current polarity was about 780,000 years ago, though recent work also
suggests a very brief reversal back and forth took place during the last ice age about 41,000
years ago. How can this happen? The magnetic field arises from convection at Earth's liquid
iron outer core, so that convection must vary chaotically from time to time. Earth's rotation
usually stabilizes this convection, so magnetic poles usually line close to the rotation axis,
but the motions of liquid metal in the core can become unstable and the poles can flip,
perhaps in the span of a century or less. Second, mid-ocean ridges must produce an inch
or two of a new basaltic crust every year. This new lava solidifies at the ridge. Older
crust moves sideways, both east and west, like conveyor belts in two opposite directions,
so the Atlantic grows maybe two inches wider every year, which means it takes roughly 30,000
years to produce a mile of new crust. And if you play Earth's tape backwards 150 million years,
the Atlantic didn't exist. Just as Wagner proposed almost a century ago, the Americas,
in Europe, plus Africa, must have been locked together. Evidence piled up from every ridge
system around the globe, and in a remarkably fast transformation, all sorts of specialists in
geology, geophysics, geochemistry, paleontology, and more began to talk to each other in ways
they had never talked before, seafloor spreading as it was called, integrated efforts in Earth
science. A flood of publications shifted the collective mindset of geologists, and by the
mid-1960s, most were convinced that continents are moving. How could anyone deny that the Atlantic
Ocean has been opening for more than 100 million years? Seafloor spreading raised one obvious
unanswered question. If new crust is being generated at an incredible rate of a mile-wide
swath every 30,000 years along more than 30,000 miles of mid-ocean ridges, how does it all fit?
Is Earth really growing larger, as Bruce Hazen advocated for a while? Otherwise, the crust has
to go somewhere. Seismologists solved that problem thanks to new global arrays of seismometers
that were put in place to monitor nuclear weapons testing. During the Cold War with Russia, we
needed to be able to verify nuclear treaties, and continuous seismic monitoring was the key. The
result was the worldwide standard seismographic network which combined 120 stations around the
world. This seismic array could tell the exact locations, depths, magnitudes, and motions of
small earthquakes or big explosions anywhere on Earth. Geophysicists reaped the benefits
because they could sense thousands of previously undetectable small earthquakes and see global
patterns that just weren't possible to track otherwise. Turns out that most earthquakes occur
along narrow, curving lines of intense seismic activity, particularly at mid-ocean ridges
and along some continental margins, for example, around the Pacific Ocean's notorious
Ring of Fire. Geologists knew that relatively shallow earthquakes often occur just offshore,
not far from deep trenches and on the ocean floor, and deeper earthquakes often strike
farther and farther inland from the coast. And some of the deepest known earthquakes occur under
chains of dangerous explosive volcanoes like Mount St. Helens in Washington State. Those
volcanoes are usually located many miles inland, far from the coast. But the late 1960s, it was
clear that there are important connections among trenches, earthquakes, and volcanoes.
The shallowest quakes occur exactly at deep ocean trenches, which are the deepest places on Earth's
surface, and earthquake depths increase away from the trenches. This pattern of deeper and deeper
quakes reveals that huge slabs of ocean crust are moving down into the mantle along subduction
zone. Old basaltic crust is colder and denser than the hot mantle, so subducting slabs are swallowed
up, and this rigid subducting basalt buckles the adjacent crust downward to form trenches.
It's a simple equation. Every square mile of new crust made at ocean ridges is balanced by a square
mile of old crust lost at a subduction zone. So it was the plate tectonics, the new paradigm of
the Earth sciences was born. Earth's surface is formed from a dozen shifting plates. Each a cold
and brittle slab of crust and upper mantle, each only a few tens of miles thick, but hundreds to
thousands of miles wide, plate boundaries are defined by ocean ridges and subduction zones.
These thin rigid plates easily slide across the hotter, softer mantle rocks. That's how continents
can drift. Look at a map of Earth. One large plate is defined by the Pacific Ocean's Ring of Fire
Antarctica, and its surrounding seas comprise another plate. North and South America are on two
big plates that extend westward from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge all the way to the Pacific Coast, and the
Eurasian plate extends eastward from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge to the Pacific Coast of East Asia.
The African plate is especially intriguing because it's beginning to split apart. A new rift valley
is forming that traverses the equator stretching from Ethiopia in the north down to Tanzania
in the south. So someday Africa will wind up as two plates, and a new ocean will start to grow
in between. Ocean ridges make new basalt, while subduction zones swallow up old crust,
but there's a problem because Earth is a sphere. On a sphere, some moving plates have to scrape
against each other at long, scar-like features called transform faults. You've probably heard of the
San Andreas Fault, which causes many of the big California earthquakes. Every day, more stress
builds up along this transform fault because the North American plate moves to the southeast
relative to the Pacific plate. I still haven't addressed the original objection of EGNER,
what epic forces drive plate motions. The answer is to be found in Earth's inner heat.
The second law of thermodynamics demands that heat must flow from hotter to cooler objects by one of
three familiar mechanisms, conduction, convection, or radiation. Rocks and magmas don't conduct
heat very well over large distances, nor do they allow much heat transferred by radiation.
But long-range convection is possible because at high temperature, rocks become soft and plastic.
Over millions of years, rocks deform, they ooze, they flow. Hot, buoyant rocks gradually rise
toward the surface. Even as cooler, dense rocks sink. These motions set up great convection
cells thousands of miles across, motions that drive plate tectonics. After all, even the biggest
continent is a tiny, tiny thing compared to Earth's mantle. Shifting continents are like
scum on the surface of a pot of boiling soup. The rate of convection is vast. It may take
a hundred million years or more for a single turn of the convection cell,
which is exactly the same time required for opening and closing oceans.
Think back to Earth's earliest time, four billion years ago. We imagine that mantle convection back
then must have been a chaotic, swirling hodgepodge. There were dozens of hot mantle plumes rising
like a lava lamp, carrying hot melts of low density and disorganized pulses and plumes to the surface.
And isolated dense chunks of colder crust must have sunk into the interior, but lateral
tectonics, plate tectonics, wasn't yet a global, organized cycle. Over the next billion years,
mantle convection became more orderly. Many smaller convection cells consolidated into a
handful of majestic cycles, each thousands of miles across, where these convection cells rose
to the surface, new seafloor ridges rose up, where convection cells cycled back into Earth,
where convection cells cycled back into Earth, subduction zones formed.
Earth in cross-section might have looked like a collection of sideways whirlpools,
with each swirling rotation taking a hundred million years.
Thanks to plate tectonics, Earth's surface evolved, and the topography became more extreme.
Giant mountain ridges of basalt grew at the diverging boundaries of ocean ridges.
Deep, gash-like trenches were formed where old crusts plunged downward at subduction zones.
Subduction also accelerated the production of granite and the growth of continents,
that because the wet, subducted basalt began to heat up and melt. Not completely,
mind you, but perhaps twenty or thirty percent, and this partial melt rose back to the surface
as granite. Granite floats. That's the key to making continents.
Granitic melt slowly, inevitably rises to form near-surface rock masses. Countless
granite islands are formed by this continuous process, and plate tectonics not only produces
granite island chains, but also assembles them into continents. That's because low-density granite
won't subduct. Basalt easily sinks into the mantle, but granite is like a floating scum.
So imagine a subducting plate of basalt crust that has unsinkable granite islands on it.
As the basalt subducts, the islands remain at the surface to form a strip of land
immediately above the subduction zone. After tens of millions of years, lots of granite
islands pile up to form wider and wider strips, while new volumes of granite melt rise above the
subducting slab. In this way, a continent forms from lots of smaller granite islands.
Plate tectonics transformed the Earth's sciences. In the dark ages of vertical tectonics,
every geological discipline was more or less separate. Paleontologists had no need to talk to
oceanographers. Research of volcanoes seemed unrelated to orgyology, and geophysicists were
unconcerned with life's origins and evolution. Now, plate tectonics has unified everything about
Earth. Earth is an amazingly complex, integrated system, where every component affects and in turn
is affected by every other. Nowhere is this interconnectedness more obvious than an Earth's
mineral evolution, where plate tectonics is a great driver of mineral diversity on Earth.
The most notable mineralogical effects were associated with extensive hydrothermal processing
of the upper mantle and crust. Subduction zones in particular are sites of lots of mineral action,
as cold, wet slabs subduct. They partially melt. They release lots of water in the process. That
hot water rises toward the surface in the process interacting with vast volumes of Earth's upper
mantle and crust. Hot water strips out all sorts of rare and widely dispersed elements.
It's a lot like the formation of pigmentites that we saw two lectures ago, but at a much
greater scale. These hydrothermal processes and subduction zones rework literally millions of
cubic miles of Earth's outer layers and concentrated immense quantities of metal in the first episodes
of massive sulfide ore bodies. Massive sulfide deposits and their associated precious metal
concentrations are truly awe-inspiring. The largest mines can hold as much as 10 million
metric tons of copper. Hot water concentrates copper, lead, zinc, nickel, gold, silver, many
other metals, along with sulfur. When the fluids near the surface cool, all these metals precipitate
out as new minerals, primarily groups of metal ore minerals called sulfides and sulfasolts.
Only about a dozen different minerals form the major ore reserves, but literally hundreds
of other minerals occur as accessories. And many of these are found only in this kind of rich,
massive sulfide deposit. The oldest such massive sulfide deposits are found in 3.5
billion-year-old formations in Australia, and they speak to a time when plate tectonics was just
getting started. North America is especially rich in younger sulfide ore bodies, with major
mining operations in several western states. Plate tectonics led to lots of other mineralizing
events. The new kinds of volcanoes above subduction zones involved magmas that can interact with
the surrounding rock, what geologists call the country rock, in very complex ways. So you can
get magmas enriched and alkalized like sodium and potassium, or calcium or carbon. Each can in
turn lead to some fascinating new minerals. One whole series of minerals that are relatively
high in sodium and potassium, but low in silicon, produce new suites of minerals like
sodalite and lazurite, which sometimes occur in a beautiful blue form known as lapis lazuli.
Now, we can't tell for sure, but it's likely that the first sodalite in all sorts of related
minerals, low in silicon, first appeared around this time. And yet another mineralogical consequence
of plate tectonics was the uplift and subsequent exposure of rocks that had experienced very high
pressure metamorphism. In some places, a very rapid subduction, a wedge of buoyant crustal rocks,
can be driven down deep as much as 50 miles down, only to pop back up to the surface. And by pop,
I mean a process that only takes a few million years. The high pressures and temperatures can
produce distinct new minerals through extreme metamorphism. Quartz, for example, is observed
to transform not just to quartzite, but to an even denser form called cosite. And Feldspark can
transform to the lustrous hard mineral jadeite, which is one of several prized minerals that used
in Asia as jade. In fact, there are perhaps 20 distinctive high-pressure minerals that only
reach Earth's surface through seduction-related processes. With plate tectonics, we've reached
the fifth stage out of 10 in Earth's mineral evolution. We started with a dozen Earth minerals
that increased to 60 primary minerals and chondrites, and up to 250 different species and
all the varied kinds of meteorites. The next stage of igneous processing yield 350 minerals in the
dry moon and mercury, perhaps 500 minerals on wet Mars. Then the advent on granites on Earth,
and especially the novelty of pegmatite minerals up the total to 1,000. And with plate tectonics,
we add perhaps 500 more for a grand total of about 1,500 minerals on Earth by roughly three
billion years ago. But Earth did not remain stuck at 1,500. Something else had been happening over
that same period, something that would eventually take over and drive mineral and planetary evolution
for the rest of Earth's history. Our planet, having attained roughly 1,500 minerals,
had also provided a home for the origins of life.
