The central theme of this course is the story of Earth, but it's also the story of Earth
materials. All kinds of materials from rocks and minerals to the oceans and atmosphere.
Have you ever noticed the amazing diversity of materials all around us?
Look closely at a pair of your sneakers or a backpack. There are probably dozens of different
kinds of fibers and metals and plastics. You'll find nylon and polyethylene, aluminum alloys,
velcro, going to a hardware store. You'll find hundreds of other specialized materials like paints,
glues, lubricants, sealants, pesticides, fertilizers, all sorts of chemicals for cleaning and polishing,
an astonishing range of metal alloys. Walk into a drugstore or a grocery store and there are literally
thousands of other chemical products, cosmetics, bug sprays, pharmaceuticals, deodorant, sunblock,
petroleum jelly, margarine, cooking oils, not to mention all kinds of paper and plastic products
and packaging as well. By contrast, imagine yourself back 200 years to a time when the
United States was a young nation with ambitions for expansion to the West.
What materials did our pioneer ancestors have to work with? It's hard to imagine that time when
the typical general store probably had no more than about 100 different kinds of materials. Wood,
leather, bone, rocks, natural fibers were the most obvious and there may be eight or 10 different
kinds of metals, iron, brass, tin, copper, silver, some gold, for example, and you could have obtained
a few kinds of dyes, glues, oils, and paints as well, but it was nothing like today's material world.
One of the keys to all this material diversity of our modern society is the process known as
refining. That's the process of separating and concentrating useful chemicals from complex
mixtures like petroleum. The commonest method of refining involves a tall distillation column
that's hotter at the bottom, cooler at the top, and you're probably driven by chemical
refineries with what looks like forests of these columns, many with a bright flame burning at the
top. Petroleum is an incredibly complex mixture of tens of thousands of different kinds of organic
chemicals all mixed together, so the first step in refining petroleum is to inject that sticky
black goo near the hot bottom of a column and only the most viscous components of petroleum,
that's the asphalt, the tar, they remain liquid and they flow out of the bottom of that column.
Everything else vaporizes and that's the key to distillation and the vapor rises to the cooler
part of the tower, and so a succession of chemicals condenses out and flows into waiting
receptacles. Candle wax comes out as a liquid in the lower part of the column, then heating oil
condenses a little higher and kerosene, jet fuel, gasoline, butane, propane, and ultimately natural
gas the higher and cooler you go. There are lots of additional steps in the production of the most
chemicals, but this kind of separation by distillation is the first step. In this sense human
activities today mimic what earth has been doing for more than four and a half billion years.
Earth is like a giant still that's hotter in the center, cooler on the outside, and that temperature
gradient distills all the elements of the periodic table. The sequence of rock types that we've seen
so far, first peridotite, then peridotite partially melting to form basalt, and then basalt partially
melting to form granite, that illustrates the point. And think about it from the mineral evolution
point of view. Early in the history of the universe there were only a dozen or so different ur minerals.
Then came about 60 primary minerals in the chondrite meteorites, and more than 250 minerals as
chondrites clumped together and were subjected to differentiation and alteration by water, heat,
impacts, and even after earth formed and the surface cooled, there probably weren't more than
about 500 different kinds of minerals. So just like the early days of the United States, the number
of different materials on earth was rather limited. Now, pegmatites, they represent one more case,
and an extreme one at that, of distillation. The definition of pegmatite is somewhat fuzzy,
but basically a pegmatite is an igneous rock with a mass of large crystals that formed near
the end of the cooling process, usually the cooling of granite. Whereas the grains in granite
are visible but small, in pegmatites the grains are by definition at least half an inch in size,
and often as large as your fist. And because pegmatites represent the very last stages of
crystallization when sufficient water is present, they tend to concentrate all of the strange and
rare chemical elements that don't easily fit anywhere else. And that means that pegmatites
can form hundreds of rare minerals that simply don't occur anywhere else. In fact,
with the advent of pegmatites, the mineral richness of earth, they have doubled from about 500
to about a thousand different mineral species. The key to understanding pegmatites is to see
where elements fit comfortably into crystal structures. You see, there are lots of elements
that don't form minerals in peridotite, or in basalt, or in granite. And as you go from one of
these rock types to the next to the next, these so-called incompatible elements just keep getting
more concentrated in the residual fluid, the part that doesn't solidify. The key to understanding
pegmatites is seeing what elements don't fit easily anywhere else, which ones are left over at the
very end of the cooling process. As the residual liquid cools in a pocket, usually inside a larger
body of granite, beautiful crystals of exotic minerals can grow to immense sizes. Topaz,
tourmaline, aquamarine, and other gems are found in these pegmatites, hundreds of new
mineral species formed in these rocks. As granite slowly cools, all of its principal
elements gradually crystallize out. As part of quartz and feldspar, the dominant minerals of
granite, quartz, which is silicon dioxide, concentrates silicon, and nothing else. In quartz,
there's only one kind of site for a metal atom. That's where silicon lives. It's surrounded by
four oxygen atoms and has a charge of plus four. And there's really no other element in the periodic
table that can substitute easily for silicon. Look at the periodic table. We need to find a small
atom, one in the first few rows that can adopt a plus four valence and is four coordinated with
oxygen. Okay, in the first few rows of the periodic table, the only atoms that consume a plus four
valence are in the fifth column. Carbon, element six, the element above silicon, is too small.
It only bonds to two or maybe three oxygen atoms, never four. Germanium, the element below silicon,
is too large for four coordination with oxygen. In fact, germanium almost always is found in
six coordination. So quartz is often quite pure. And even when it has minor impurities,
that doesn't help with finding a home where other elements can concentrate.
Okay, then there's the feldspar group of minerals. Feldspar includes silicon, just as in quartz.
Then there's also aluminum, which also occurs in four coordination with oxygen,
and has a valence of plus three. Now, aluminum can be replaced by a couple of other elements. The
common element iron in its plus three valence state is one minor substitute. A little bit of iron
in feldspar gives many granites their pinkish color. It's the same color as rust. And then there's
the rare element boron, which occurs right above aluminum in the periodic table. Boron is really
too small to fit easily into the feldspar structure, but a small amount sometimes winds up there.
Directly below aluminum in the periodic table is gallium, another rare element that can also
enter feldspar in small amounts. It's really a bit too large to fit comfortably, though.
The other key elements in the feldspar's of granite are the alkali metals sodium and potassium in
the first column of the periodic table. These elements always have a plus one valence state,
and they reside in fairly large sites with more than six oxygen neighbors. And as you might expect,
a few other elements can substitute. If you look at the periodic table, the first column,
the next largest alkali element, is rubidium, which can snuggle into feldspar, though it's
pretty tight. The smallest alkali is lithium element 3, and that really is too small. It's also
common to find some calcium or even some barium from the second column. So unlike quartz, feldspar
can incorporate perhaps nine or even 10 elements in all. The only other common minerals in granite
are the little dark specks you see in a polished granite countertop. There can be any of several
common minerals including pyroxene, mica, amphibole, or garnet that hold the elements iron and magnesium.
And if the granite has a small amount of the elements zirconium, you might get tiny red crystals
of zircon. If the granite holds any titanium, you might get crystals of the yellowish mineral sphene.
But most of the other rare elements of the periodic table are incompatible. They simply don't have a
comfortable bonding environment in any common rock-forming minerals. These incompatible elements
become highly concentrated in residual liquids. For example, the water-rich liquids left over
as granite crystallizes, and that's the secret of pegmatites. Let's look at this very last stage
of a cooling granite body. As with all cooling magma's granite, cooling involves the formation
of crystals, which can then separate from the leftover melt. In this case, the quartz,
feldspar, dark minerals crystallized together to form the solid granite, which surrounds
pockets of hot liquid that's very concentrated in water, plus the major elements of granite,
and possibly some of those incompatible elements. Those pockets can be anywhere from a few inches
in diameter to many feet across. And in a few special cases, the leftover fluids concentrate
in central chambers more than 100 feet across. It's those pockets and chambers that produce
the biggest crystals on earth and those rare exotic minerals. Let's follow the crystallization
of one of these special bodies, what's known as a complex pegmatite. A pegmatite is really a very
general term for any igneous rock that crystallizes into really big crystals. By the way, the mineralogical
community has been admitted tremendously from the studies of specialists who devoted their
careers to studying pegmatites. Of special note is professor David London of the University of
Oklahoma, who has spent three decades of research and recently contributed a magnificent volume
summarizing what we know and don't know about pegmatites. His book called Simply Pegmatites was
published in 2008 by the Mineralogical Association of Canada, where some of the world's most important
pegmatites are located. David London and other experts describe pegmatites in terms of a crystallization
sequence in which some minerals appear before others. This sequence is shown most dramatically
in places where the pegmatite forming fluids gradually migrate away from the host granite.
So you get a series of mineral zones as the fluids migrate and cool and progressively get
even more concentrated in rare elements. This process really is a kind of geological counterpart
to distillation. The first big crystals to form are always quartz and feldspar, just like in the
original granite, but without the black magnesium iron minerals. What you see in a rock outcropper
places where the fine grain speckled granite host surrounds what were clearly pockets that got filled
with much larger grains. You often see veins of coarse quartz and feldspar linking different
pockets, so it's easy to imagine how there was a kind of plumbing system for those late
melts. Typically these first assemblages of coarse crystals are barren pegmatites. They don't have
any of the rare minerals, just quartz and feldspar, and maybe some big flat crystals of mica.
One mineralogical novelty of these barren pegmatites is a curious intergrowth of quartz
and feldspar called graphic granite. Graphic granite occurs when two large crystals, one of
clear quartz and one of white feldspar, grow simultaneously and then become intertwined.
The result is a fascinating rock that looks like it carries a coated message in some strange
alphabet. Graphic granite is just one of the many mineralogical wonders that's unique to pegmatites.
However, graphic granite is not what causes mineral collectors to flock to pegmatites.
The first of the rare pegmatite minerals occur in the next zone where the element
beryllium concentrates. Beryllium is element four of the periodic table. It occurs at the top
of the second column, right above the important rock-forming elements magnesium and calcium.
And like magnesium and calcium, beryllium is always found in its divalent state.
It forms ions with a plus two charge. Now, you might think that beryllium would simply
follow magnesium and calcium and enter such common minerals as pyroxene and olivine,
where those elements reside in sites surrounded by six oxygen atoms. But beryllium is just too
small to fill those structures. It always occurs in crystal structures surrounded by only four
oxygen atoms. In fact, beryllium is the only element that has the combination of plus two charge
and four coordination with oxygen. That's why beryllium forms more than 100 different minerals
and most are pretty rare. If there's a significant amount of beryllium around,
it has to form its own mineral. Now, here you might ask why there isn't a lot of beryllium around.
After all, it's element number four coming after hydrogen, helium, and lithium. Shouldn't it have
formed abundantly in stars? Well, the trick is in the isotopes. Hydrogen fuses to form a lot of
helium-4, but beryllium-8 is unstable. So helium fusion in stars pretty much skips over beryllium
and forms lots of carbon-12 instead. Supernovas don't stop to make any of the lightest elements
either, so there just isn't a lot of beryllium in the universe. The only stable isotope is beryllium-9,
which is what you find on Earth. But it's just three parts per million in the crust. That's
less than a thousandth of a percent of the crust. Beryllium is only the 48th most abundant element,
and that's why it doesn't play a big role in most rocks. Beryllium is economically important
because it has a number of highly specialized technological uses, for example, because it's
so lightweight and also because it's transparent to x-rays. Beryllium forms its own minerals only
when it becomes sufficiently concentrated in those very late-stage pigment-type fluids, typically
about 100 parts per million. So that's at least a 30-fold concentration. That's when beautiful
beryllium minerals begin to crystallize. By far the most important and familiar beryllium mineral
is beryll. It's a beryllium aluminum silicate with a formula BE3AL2SI6O18. Not only is beryll
the most important or beryllium, but you've also admired this mineral in its beautiful green and
blue colored forms, which are the gemstones emerald and aquamarine.
For such a rare element, the formation of big beryllium crystals in six-sided prisms
is quite remarkable. They can grow to be more than a foot long. The history of beryllium minerals
on earth tells us a huge amount about mineral evolution in general. My friend and colleague
Edward Gru, who is a professor at the University of Maine in Orano, is the world's expert on these
minerals. So in 2008, I challenged him to think about when the first beryllium minerals appeared on
earth. He then proceeded to do an absolutely remarkable study of the ages of every one of the
106 known beryllium minerals. What Ed Gru found is that the oldest known beryllium minerals,
crystals of beryll found in Australia, formed in pigmatites only about 3 billion years ago.
Now, it's possible they're much older examples that haven't been found, or that
may have eroded away long ago, but it's clear that beryllium minerals were much,
much rarer early in earth's history than they are today. What's more,
almost all of the other 100-plus beryllium minerals formed within the last 1.8 billion years.
The take-home message is clear. It took more than a billion years of processing of crustal
materials to sufficiently concentrate beryllium into fluids that could produce
beryll and other beryllium minerals. It takes time, and it takes a lot of fluid rock interactions.
The reasonable conclusion is that such processes simply cannot occur on a relatively dry planet
like Mercury or on the moon, and they can't occur on a small planet like Mars that doesn't have enough
internal heat to generate lots of granite. In fact, with the possible exception of Venus,
Earth is probably the only planet in our solar system with all the conditions necessary to
make beryllium minerals, as well as hundreds of other rare pegmatite minerals of other exotic
elements. The next rare element to form minerals after beryllium in many pegmatites are the twin
elements, niobium and tantalum. These two elements, numbers 41 and 73 of the periodic table respectively,
are found in the fifth column. Both are scarce at concentrations of much less than a part per
million in the crust, but they do have a few specialized commercial uses, notably as an
alloying agent in corrosion-resistant steels. Niobium and tantalum have remarkably similar
chemical properties. In their metallic state, both elements are very inert at low temperature. In
fact, tantalum is sometimes used in surgical implants, and both elements adopt an unusual
plus-five ionic charge in minerals, and they prefer big crystal sites with at least six
surrounding oxygen atoms. No other elements have this combination of characteristics,
so niobium and tantalum tend to form their own distinctive minerals. Indeed, there are dozens
of unusual niobium-tantalum minerals found in complex pegmatites, and these minerals constitute
the principal ores. By the way, in the niobium-tantalum-rich zones of some unusual pegmatite,
you can also find concentrations of the heavy elements tin and uranium, which are commercially
valuable and form their own pegmatite minerals. Pegmatites don't constitute the principal ores
of these elements, but some pegmatites are sufficiently enriched to be mined for tin and
uranium along with that niobium and tantalum. And then we come to lithium. That's element number
three of the periodic table. Lithium, like beryllium, is a lot rarer in nature than you might expect
from its prominent position in the periodic table. It's in column one, right below the most abundant
element hydrogen, and it's just above the common rock-forming element sodium of sodium chloride
or table salt fame. But lithium is present in the crust at only about 20 parts per million,
and it must be concentrated in the late-stage fluids more than 100-fold before it can begin
to form its own distinctive minerals. That's because lithium is the only common element with a
plus one charge that's comfortable in six coordination with oxygen, what we've called
octahedral coordination, because the six oxygen atoms form a tiny eight-sided octahedron.
Now this situation leads to an intriguing crystal chemical trick. The commonest minerals with atoms
in six coordination with oxygen are magnesium, iron, silicates, like olivine or pyruxy. In those
minerals, the octahedral magnesium and iron atoms have a plus two charge. But if there's a lot of
lithium and aluminum around, as there is in many complex pigmentites, then you can substitute one
lithium atom with a charge of plus one, and one aluminum atom with a charge of plus three
for two iron or magnesium atoms, each with a charge of plus two. That's called a coupled
substitution, and it's a guiding principle in lithium minerals. When lithium does achieve
a sufficient concentration, the results can be remarkable. One of the most important ore
minerals of lithium is spodiumene, a lithium aluminum silicate with a composition LiAlSi2O6
that occurs in immense crystals that can approach 30 feet in length in some pigmentite bodies.
Spodiumene is a pyroxene, just like the magnesium silicate called Instatite, which is MG SiO3. But
in spodiumene, every pair of magnesium atoms is replaced by lithium plus aluminum. By the way,
in its purple form, spodiumene is used as the gemstone called kunzite, and in its rare green form,
it's a gemstone called triphane. That trick of substituting lithium plus aluminum for two
magnesium atoms means there are lots of other lithium minerals as well, and the most abundant ones
are all aluminum silicates. There's the purple lithium mica called lipidolite, which is just
beautiful. They're also the rather ordinary looking grayish-white minerals, petalite and eucryptite.
In fact, that name eucryptite literally means well hidden, but the same Greek root has in the
word encryption. Eucryptite looks almost exactly like quartz, so it's easily overlooked in pegmatites.
There are a few other unusual elements that can become concentrated in pegmatite. One of the most
important in terms of sheer mineral diversity is phosphorus, element 15 in the periodic table.
Now, phosphorus is an extremely important element in nature. It's the 11th most abundant of all the
crustal elements at about a tenth of a percent, so phosphorus is relatively common, at least compared
to the other pegmatophile elements we've been talking about. The calcium phosphate mineral
appetite is widely present in crustal rocks. In fact, it's the reference mineral for number five
on the Mohs hardness scale. Phosphorus is also a key element in life. For example, phosphorus
oxygen clusters called phosphates form part of the backbone of the genetic molecules DNA and RNA,
and our cells have energy transported by a triphosphate called ATP. Phosphorus has unique
crystal chemical behavior because it's most commonly gives away five electrons to become a
plus five ion, but it's so small an atom they can only attach to four surrounding oxygen atoms.
And here we have a new phenomenon because that cluster of a central phosphorus atom and four
surrounding oxygen atoms is nonetheless so stable and rigid that it behaves like a separate molecular
building block, a five atom PO4 group with a minus three charge. This cluster is the phosphate
ion and it is the essential building block of all of the hundreds of phosphate minerals.
So when phosphorus becomes concentrated in a pegmatite along with all those other more exotic
elements, you suddenly get hundreds of new kinds of phosphate minerals that simply don't occur
anywhere else on earth and probably don't occur anywhere else in our solar system. There are
beryllium phosphates and niobium tantalum phosphates and uranium phosphates and lots and lots of
lithium phosphates. Many of these minerals are extremely rare, form it only tiny crystals that
only the most experienced mineral collectors can identify on site. Some of these minerals form
as colorful microscopic crystals and tiny open pockets, which reveal that at the very last
stages of cooling pegmatite some of the minerals form from a hot vapor and probably not as a liquid.
And then we come to boron, element five. It's yet another distinctive and relatively rare
mineral forming element. At only a 20th of 1% of earth's crust, boron is not a major rock
former, but it does tend to concentrate into one of the most fascinating minerals in nature,
or rather the group of minerals called termally. Like lithium and beryllium, boron is unique
in terms of its crystal chemistry. It's the only element that has a plus three charge
and typically occurs in three coordination with oxygen. Tiny BO3 triangular clusters of atoms
lead to numerous unique minerals, but the tourmaline group dominates in pegmatites and many other
kinds of rocks as well. As we saw when discussing earth minerals in lecture four, the complex
tourmaline crystal structure has all sorts of atom sites, room for alkali metals and
divalent atoms in six coordination and silicon and aluminum and more, in fact more than 50
different chemical elements can find some kind of home in the accommodating tourmaline structure.
That's why there are almost 20 different categories of tourmaline minerals and literally
thousands of compositional variants. Tourmaline's individual crystals can grow and change composition
at the same time. A phenomenon called zoning and those zones can be different colors. Now most
tourmaline crystals are black, but when they incorporate other sorts of elements, you get
these triangular prismatic crystals, roughly triangular in cross-section and they can be
absolutely gorgeous. Some of those amazing and beautiful crystals in nature are zoned
tourmalines. You may have seen the varieties sold as watermelon tourmaline with a pink
interior and green ends and they're blue tourmalines and they're red tourmalines and yellow
tourmalines and all sorts of amazing zoned varieties. I think my very favorite tourmaline
specimen and it's hard to choose a favorite is the famous candelabra from the Palomine in
California. That specimen at the Smithsonian Institution has three big watermelon tourmaline
crystals standing in a row surrounded by other beautiful crystals of quartz and feldspar.
That specimen epitomizes what collectors love about pigmatites. But I've saved the most amazing
example of a pigmatite mineral for last. Cesium, element 55, is one of the rarest
elements in nature to form its own mineral. Cesium is in the first column of the periodic
table like the much more common elements lithium, sodium, and potassium. Cesium represents only
about two atoms per million in Earth's crust and yet in certain complex pigmatites you can find
crystals of the mineral polysite. Cesium, aluminum, silicate. In order to form a polysite crystal the
fluid concentration has to rise from two parts per million to at least 40,000 parts per million.
That means four percent cesium is needed. That's because at lower concentrations cesium follows
other alkali elements as a minor element in feldspar and mica. So there needs to be a
concentration mechanism by a factor of at least 20,000. But what is most amazing is that
in some pigmatites there are individual masses of polysite crystals more than 30 feet across.
How's that possible? David London estimates that those polysite crystals represent the
concentration of cesium by fluid rock interactions of a volume of crust approaching 10,000 cubic
miles. And that is what's so special about pigmatites and how pigmatites in the unique
mineralogy may distinguish Earth from all other planets. Earth is an engine of mineral diversification.
It may have taken a billion years or more to distill our planet to the point where barrel
and tourmaline and polysite can form. But now what treasures lie in wait for the keen-eyed
collector? And yet as extraordinary as pigmatites may be, that whole ensemble of diversifying
minerals is also moving across and plunging deep into the surface of Earth. Next time we'll trace
discoveries leading to the realization that Earth's continents move and that Earth's rocks travel from
deep inside the planet to the surface again and again in a round trip we call the rock cycle.
