Our oceans and seas have invited many theories as to their origins.
What is crystal clear is that liquid water covers nearly 70% of Earth's surface.
Every molecule of water cycles in a continuous waltz, exchanging heat, influencing climate,
coming and going.
This unique hydrogen-oxygen compound has transformed Earth's surface through erosion,
weathering, transport, and ultimately, life.
We've come a considerable way in our story of Earth, 4.45 billion years ago when Earth
was a mere 100 million years old, much of the surface was already hardened with a thin
layer of black basaltic crust that floated on a deep ocean of magma and peridotite.
Before basalt it was impossible for any topographic feature to rise significantly above the mean
elevation.
The magma crystal mush simply wasn't strong enough to hold up a mound.
That situation changed with the production of basalt.
Basalt has an average density of 3 grams per cubic centimeter, about 3 times the density
of water.
That value is about 10% less than the density of the peridotite and its parent magma, more
than 3.3 grams per cubic centimeter.
Consequently, a floating mass of basalt can have about 10% of its mass above the surface
of the heavier magma.
For example, a floating mass of basalt 10 kilometers thick will typically form a topographic
high more than a kilometer above the magma ocean.
And tapered features such as a volcanic cone could easily have risen more than 2 kilometers
above the mean.
Rather quickly, Earth's surface began to become more varied as a result of this density difference.
It's fun to imagine what Earth looked like from space, for example from the safe distance
of the surface of the young moon.
Black with red highlights must have dominated.
Earth's basaltic crust was black, but it was broken by long, curving red cracks and localized
luminous highlights where fountaining volcanoes and magma flows broke the surface.
Those volcanoes must have generated lots of volatiles along with plumes of dirty white
ash laden steam, so some of the surface would have been obscured by the growing atmosphere.
This ancient version of our home planet is unfamiliar and hostile.
You would not have been able to survive in such an alien and violent landscape.
Meteors up to kilometers across frequently bombarded the surface.
These space bombs cracked the basaltic crust and splattered chunks of rocks and blobs of
magma across the surrounding plains.
There must have been thousands of volcanic cones all across the globe, each belching
out steam and other volatiles, but there was no trace of free oxygen in the atmosphere.
Added to this harsh environment were the severe consequences of the nearby moon.
That hovering world slowly receding, but still less than a tenth of today's Earth-Moon
distance would have generated globe-spanning magma tides.
The surface, especially around the equator, must have repeatedly cracked and buckled opening
fissures that delayed formation of a solid surface.
The moon's uncomfortable proximity also meant that Earth continued to rotate much more rapidly
than today.
The consequent short days, less than six hours long, were accompanied by cyclonic storms
and mega-tornadoes much more severe than anything experienced today.
In spite of these tumultuous surface effects, the deeper interior was settling down into
a more or less steady state.
Peridotite formed by the fractional crystallization of olivine and pyroxene, basalt formed by
the partial melting of peridotite, and the very crystals, rocks, and melts rose or sank
depending on their relative densities.
The partially molten interior separated into volumes of distinctive chemical compositions,
silicate rich zones that would ultimately become the continents, the ocean floor, and
the underlying layers of deep crust and upper mantle.
These processes of chemical separation foreshadowed subsequent segregations of elements into the
oceans and atmosphere, and ultimately into plants and animals.
All of these processes of elemental selection and concentration have all continued right
up to today.
In all of these earliest stages of Earth evolution, heat was the principal agent of change.
Heat caused the entire planet to melt, and thus divided the denser iron core from the
less dense silicate mantle and crust.
Vulcanism also, driven by heat, separated the volatiles that would eventually become
oceans and atmosphere from the rocks.
Earth's earliest history is marked by a succession of heat-driven element separations.
It was because of heat that Earth spent a brief part of its infancy as a blackened basalt-covered
world, but that phase couldn't last long on a volatile rich planet.
The globe was about to be enveloped by a new volcano-born layer of brilliant blue.
We can deduce a general picture of Earth's initial cooling and the subsequent release
of volatiles to form the atmosphere in oceans.
But much of what we deduce boils down to informed speculation based on lab experiments and computer
models.
Hardly any rocks are known to have survived from the Hedian eon.
Before examining the early origins and evolutions of the ocean, we should make an inventory
of what we don't know.
The collective evidence of astronomy in moon rocks suggests that the moon formed by a giant
impact.
Yet we aren't sure the exact timing of that event, nor do we know the details of Thea's
final interjectory.
We can imagine the rain of incandescent silicate droplets that must have followed the big thwack,
but we don't know how long it took to cool Earth's superheated surface.
We're equally uncertain about the fast-changing orbital dynamics of the young Earth-moon system.
How fast did the moon recede, and Earth therefore slow its frenetic rotation?
By the same token, scientists are unsure when the oceans first formed, or where they formed,
or what they looked like.
We can deduce a general picture of Earth's initial cooling and the subsequent release
of volatiles to form the atmosphere and ocean, but much of what we deduce boils down to informed
speculation based on lab experiments and computer models.
Hardly any rocks are known to have survived from that early period.
But there are some pretty convincing ideas out there, and I want to give you a version
of the story that's probably as good as any for now.
One thing is very clear.
With active volcanism and abundant volatiles, Earth could not remain black and dry for long.
Thundering volcanic vents blasted hot nitrogen, carbon dioxide, water vapor into the thickening
atmosphere at rates of many millions of tons per day.
The atmosphere elements and compounds, the atoms and molecules that are gases in our
atmosphere, were the same atoms and molecules that formed all the different ices of the
former solar nebula.
In fact, they're the exact same atoms that you're breathing right now.
As you listen to this lecture, they're the atoms that contribute to all the tissues of
your body, and those volatiles have played many roles throughout Earth's history, including
in the rapidly evolving Hedean Earth.
Hot water played several crucial roles in the evolution of rocks and minerals.
Water and carbon dioxide mixed with magma, which lowered the melting temperature of the
rocks significantly and turned the liquid rock into a superheated soup that more quickly
ascended to the surface.
Once that water-saturated magma came close enough to the surface, all the dissolved gases
transformed rapidly and violently from liquid to expanding gas.
The result of massive volcanic explosions were like mountain-scale replicas of a shaken
warm soda can.
Rocks and magma and ash were blasted across the countryside.
Water-rich fluids associated with magmas played another key role.
They had dissolved and concentrated all sorts of rare elements that don't find a ready home
in the common rock-forming silicates.
If you look at the periodic table, you'll see the light elements lithium, beryllium,
and boron.
They were concentrated in the hot liquid water phase.
Many of the elements that formed common salt-like minerals also entered the aqueous phase, sodium
and chlorine, as well as fluorine, sulfur, potassium.
So were rare metal elements like silver, gold, and uranium, and many more that would
eventually become concentrated in the world's great ore bodies.
As bodies of water accumulated in larger and larger volumes, water began to shape the surface
in ways that volcanoes and meteorites never could.
Roaring rivers cut deep valleys while crashing waves ate away at shorelines.
After this became the principal agent of rock erosion, which produced Earth's first
sandy beaches along with ever-thicker accumulations of near-shore sediment wedges, water quickly
became the chief architect of Earth's surface.
This focus on water, on oceans and atmospheres can appear to reflect a rather anthropocentric
view.
Water is volumetrically a trivial fraction of the whole planet.
All of the oceans today represent only about two-hundredths of a percent of Earth's total
mass.
And the atmosphere is much less than that, about one part in a million of its bulk.
But the oceans and atmospheres have always exerted and they continue to exert disproportionately
great influences on our planet.
H2O, as much as any chemical, makes Earth what it is today.
So let's take a step back and review the character and properties of the five principal
elements that contribute most to Earth's outermost layers, the ocean and the atmosphere.
These are not the big six elements that predominate in the mass of the planet as a whole.
Only oxygen is important enough to be in both groups.
Instead, the five elements here are hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, and sulfur.
All assume important and rather different roles as Earth's mobile gaseous components.
All five of these elements are produced abundantly in large stars.
So all are common in the cosmos and are widely dispersed in supernova explosions.
All five of those elements are important in the most primitive C-I carbonaceous chondrite
meteorites that formed more than 4.56 billion years ago in the solar nebula.
Now recall the average composition of C-I chondrite meteorites is similar to that of
Earth as a whole.
The major lithophile and citrophile elements, oxygen, silicon, aluminum, magnesium, calcium,
iron, remarkably similar in relative proportions, and that goes for numerous less common elements
as well.
But even a casual glance at the composition of C-I chondrites proves that Earth is a
highly depleted planet in volatile elements.
For example, these most primitive chondrites average more than 3% carbon, but if you add
up all Earth's known carbon reservoirs, it's less than 0.1%.
Either there's a vast and hidden deep carbon reservoir, or most of it's been lost.
Similarly, the average C-I chondrite holds as much as 100 times more water compared to
the bulk composition of Earth.
This kind of extreme compositional disparity points to the early era of solar nebula distillation.
Most of the volatiles that must have originally occurred in the vicinity of the rocky planets
were blown by the solar wind to the orbital distance of Jupiter and beyond.
The key to understanding how Earth diverged from blasted and inhospitable worlds like
Mercury and the Moon lies in its peripatetic volatiles.
We can be confident that the next phase of Earth history is becoming a blue planet rested
on the behavior of water.
Yet understanding the detailed history of the oceans and atmospheres is extremely challenging.
That's because essentially nothing remains from Earth's first 500 million years.
None of Earth's volatiles survives in an unaltered state.
All of the water, the nitrogen, the carbon, the sulfur have been recycled over and over
again countless thousands of times because the same atoms are used over and over again.
If the atoms have been recycled so often, what possible clues could have survived?
Again, the most primitive chondrite meteorites are a useful quantitative starting point.
And we do have a modest store of rocks and mineral samples from Earth's first billion
years as well.
This data, coupled with all the ancient meteorites and lunar samples, inform speculations.
Equally important are the distinctive physical and chemical characteristics of the volatile
elements and their molecules.
Four ingredients.
Nitrogen, carbon, sulfur, and water are potentially the most important volatile elements.
Nitrogen is the easiest to deal with because it's a chemically inert gas that rarely forms
minerals.
Nitrogen plays no significant role in the formation of rocks, and it concentrates in
the atmosphere.
Indeed, that seventh element of the periodic table only had important chemical roles since
the rise of life, which cycles nitrogen in ways that were unknown during the first billion
years of Earth's history.
Carbon and sulfur, likewise, will come into much greater prominence after the origin of
life in a billion years.
The final of the four principle volatile ingredients, water, has played the longest central role.
Water's many roles in Earth's history are a consequence of the distinctive chemical
and physical properties of H2O, the oxide of hydrogen.
Hydrogen is the first element of the periodic table, while oxygen is the eighth.
Neither element has a magic number of electrons, so two hydrogen atoms share their electrons
with one oxygen.
The result is the V-shaped H2O molecule with a larger oxygen atom flanked by two smaller
hydrogen bumps, an arrangement not unlike Mickey Mouse's ears.
Given oxygen's propensity as an electron acceptor, it borrows the two electrons from the two hydrogen
atoms, and thus develops a slightly negative charge.
The two hydrogen atoms develop a correspondingly slight positive charge, and important consequence
is that water molecules are polar.
They have a positive and negative electric charge ends, and that polarity accounts for
many of water's distinctive properties and behaviors.
Water is an excellent solvent, because the positive and negative ends can exert strong
electrostatic forces that tend to pull apart other molecules.
That's why table salt, sugar, many other chemicals dissolve so rapidly in water.
It's also why the oceans are salty.
Rocks can take a long time to partially dissolve, but over an accumulated millions of years
ocean water has become enriched, and virtually the entire periodic table of the elements.
It's just hard to imagine how much it's dissolved in the ocean, but think about gold.
Every cubic mile of salty ocean water contains 11 kilograms of gold.
That's more than a half a million dollars worth at recent prices.
In fact, we don't have the technology to extract the gold, and if we did, the price
of gold would probably drop pretty fast.
The amazing ability of water to dissolve and transport other chemical compounds is what
makes it such an ideal medium for the origins and evolution of life.
All known life on earth, and some researchers argue that all possible life in the cosmos
is dependent on water.
The polarity of water molecules dramatically affects the properties of both liquid and
ice.
Water molecules bond strongly to each other, as the positive side of one water molecule
attracts the negative side of other molecules.
As a result, ice is unusually strong for a molecular solid.
You probably know that if you've ever slipped while ice skating.
Ice also has an unusually high melting temperature for a small molecule.
Ice won't melt until 32 degrees Fahrenheit compared to minus 108 degrees for solid ammonia,
that's NH3, minus 109 degrees for solid carbon dioxide or dry ice, and minus 297 degrees
Fahrenheit for methane or natural gas, that's CH4.
Another consequence of water's unusually strong intermolecular forces is its high surface
tension, which is a fascinating property that allows small insects literally to walk
on water.
Surface tension also facilitates capillary action, that's the ability of water to rise
up against the force of gravity through the stems of vascular plants.
That's why trees can grow to heights hundreds of feet above the land, even though they don't
have a water pumping system.
Yet another phenomenon related to surface tension is rounded raindrops, which are drawn
into their shape by the strong mutual attraction of water molecules.
Raindrops are absolutely vital to maintaining earth's unusually rapid water cycle.
It turns out that non-polar molecules like methane and carbon dioxide can't form droplets
as easily, so they would probably just float in the atmosphere as a fine, pervasive mist.
Rain might be unlikely on a planet without polar atmospheric molecules, so the cycling
of volatiles would probably be much slower and certainly very different in character.
Strong bonding between water molecules leads to yet another of water's curious and critical
properties.
Turns out that liquid water is 10% denser than solid ice.
That's odd, in almost every other known chemical compound, the solid state is denser, so crystals
sink in their liquid.
That situation is intuitively logical, because a repeated packing of the same molecules in
a crystal contrasts with a more random distribution in a liquid.
One analogy is the way you might store shoe boxes in the back room of a shoe store.
It saves a lot of volume if you stack everything in neat rows.
A random pile like chaotically tumbling molecules in a liquid would always seem to occupy more
volume, but that's not the case with water.
The V-shaped H2O molecules actually pack more efficiently in their random liquid state than
orderly ice crystals, and important consequences follow.
Whether it's an ice cube in your drink or a frozen ice layer on a pond or river, the
ice floats.
Were it not for this curious trait, many bodies of water would freeze from the bottom to the
top, rather than forming a relatively thin surface layer of ice, and many bodies would
thus freeze solid bottom to top.
One could imagine that aquatic life would be severely challenged in cold regions of such
a frozen world, and the vital water cycle would certainly come to a screeching halt
once everything was solid.
And here's another really interesting characteristic of water, even so-called pure water.
It isn't ever pure H2O, no matter how carefully you might filter or distill water, it's never
made entirely of H2O molecules.
Inevitably, a very small fraction of those three atom units break apart into two smaller
units.
If you have positively charged hydrogen ions or hydrons, those are simply H plus ions,
which are nothing more than individual protons without any electrons attached.
And there are also negatively charged hydroxyl groups, or OH minus molecules.
Now, because hydrons have positive charges, the hydrons quickly latch on to the more negative
oxygen end of water molecules to produce H3O plus hydronium ions.
So pure water at room temperature has negative hydroxyls and positive hydroniums.
And these components have to occur in equal concentrations to maintain the totally neutral
electric charge.
That's a requirement of any liquid.
Turns out that the concentration of positive hydronium and negative hydroxyl groups is
about one part in 10 million.
In chemical terms, that's 10 to the minus seventh or one 10 millionth of a mole of hydroxyl
and hydronium per liter of water.
This arcane concentration measurement is usually reported as a power of hydrogen or pH of seven.
Now seven is admittedly a nice round number of convenient size, but this definition of
pH is frustratingly obscure.
pH is the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles of H plus
per liter of solution.
Okay, when describing any body of water and Earth's oceans are a prime example, a major
focus is the bulk composition, both the pH and the salt content.
Turns out that these two chemical properties are closely related.
Water readily dissolves as lots of impurities, some of which carry a positive electrical
charge like the electron donor elements sodium, which forms sodium plus one ions, and calcium
which forms calcium plus two ions.
Other electron acceptor elements or molecules have negative electrical charges, common examples
are chlorine, which forms chlorine minus one ions, and also carbonate ions.
That's CO3 groups with a minus two charge.
An important rule of thumb is that the net electrical charge of any bulk water solution
has to be zero.
There has to be an exact balance between the total number of positive charges and negative
charges.
In pure water at room conditions, the requisite 10 to the minus seventh mole of positive hydronium
ions is exactly matched by 10 to the minus seventh moles of negative hydroxyl ions.
But the balance can be achieved in other ways.
In an acid, there are more hydroniums than hydroxyls.
The excess positive hydronium ions are matched by negative ions like chlorine.
That's what happens in hydrochloric acid, for example.
Similarly, in bases, excess negative hydroxyl ions are balanced by positive ions like sodium
or potassium or calcium, magnesium.
The resulting molecules are called hydroxides, for example, sodium hydroxide, and they are
some of the most common bases in chemistry.
The strength of an acid or a base can be quantified on that arcane pH scale.
By using pH less than seven, indicate acidic solutions, those with more H3O plus than OH
minus, more hydroniums than hydroxyls.
A slightly acidic solution with pH six, which is quite typical of untreated tap water in
many localities, has 10 times more hydronium ions than the neutral solution at pH seven.
Increasingly strong acids include coffee, that's about pH five with 100 times more hydronium,
and there's vinegar or acetic acid at pH three that has 10,000 times more hydronium, and
lemon juice with citric acid at pH two with 100,000 times more hydronium.
We can do exact same kind of survey for common bases, all of which have more hydroxyls than
hydroniums, and that's pH values greater than seven.
Oxygen soda, it has an informal chemical name of sodium bicarbonate, but it's really
sodium hydrogen carbonate, and it has a pH of about 8.5.
The common antacid, milk of magnesium, it's magnesium hydroxide.
It has a pH equal to 10, and household ammonia cleaners can have pH in excess of 12.
And we'll see throughout this course, the changing pH and salinity of Earth's ancient
oceans remains topics of the debate.
Water is among the most abundant chemicals in the universe.
It seems like almost everywhere we look, we find more.
Ground-based telescopic observations can be tricky at times, since water in our own atmosphere
can get in the way.
But really, concentrated deposits of H2O in space stand out.
Such as the case of one distant galaxy-sized object, a quasar named APM 08279 plus 5255,
which has a giant black hole at its center.
Judging from its immense distance from Earth, this quasar is 12 billion light-years away.
So we're seeing the object as it appeared during the first 2 billion years of the universe.
This quasar is the wettest known place in the cosmos.
It has an estimated 140 trillion times all the water in our oceans.
Now it's admittedly galaxy-sized, but that's an immense amount of very old water.
It proves that water has been a ubiquitous chemical in the universe for almost its entire
history.
Astronomers have also found lots of younger and smaller water concentrations in space.
Some objects like those in the Kuiper Belt and other distant parts of our solar system
reveal an icy surface by their distinctive spectral signature.
One telltale sign is a weak absorption of infrared radiation with wavelengths of about
1-10 millionth of an inch.
This absorption provides a spectroscopic fingerprint that indicates many comets.
Some asteroids also incorporate significant amounts of ice or snow.
All of the gas giant planets hold significant stores of water vapor in their dense atmospheres.
In Saturn's bright rings are made principally of water ice.
And we've seen that Jupiter's large moons Europa and Callisto may well have thick ice
coatings over even deeper encircling oceans of water.
The situation at first glance seems quite different for the terrestrial planets.
Mercury appears desiccated.
It's too close to the sun for surface water to remain, except for small amounts and the
shadowed craters near the sunless poles.
This probably had some water early on, but today it appears to be almost totally devoid
in near surface H2O.
Its atmosphere is superheated carbon dioxide and lacks water.
The story of Mars is much more complicated.
There's no question that Mars had quite a bit of water locked into its white polar ice
caps.
Those features expand and recede along with the 687 day cycle of Martian seasons.
The ice caps are easily seen from Earth, so astronomers have long speculated that the
red planet might be a wet world, even a living world.
In the 1870s, during one particularly close approach of Mars to Earth, the Italian astronomer
Giovanni Giapparelli documented several dark, linear features which he interpreted as natural,
possibly water bearing channels, canali in Italian.
However, the English translation of Giapparelli's descriptions erroneously called them canals.
And that word has an implication of high-tech engineered structures.
Well, the idea of an intelligent, extinct Martian race took on a life of its own.
The most famous Mars life enthusiast was a Harvard-trained astronomer, Percival Lowell.
In the 1890s, he became obsessed by Giapparelli's discoveries.
He was a wealthy person, he was wealthy enough to construct a private observatory in Flagstaff,
Arizona, the Lowell Observatory, where he devoted decades to the study of Mars.
Using a state-of-the-art 24-inch telescope under generally clear Arizona skies, Percival
Lowell imagined he could resolve an elaborate network of canals stretching from the presumably
ice-covered poles all the way to the dry equator.
He translated his findings into three immensely popular books.
First came Mars in 1895, then Mars and its canals in 1906, and finally Mars as the abode
of life in 1908.
In these books, Lowell goes so far as to describe the last desperate technological masterpiece
of a now lost, water-starved race.
You can imagine how Lowell's fanciful findings fueled a lot of science fiction stories and
novels.
The most famous is H.G. Wells' 1898 classic, The War of the Worlds.
But this kind of speculation did not convince the scientific community that Mars is wet,
much less that it's living.
It's almost impossible to prove there is water on Mars with an Earth-based telescope.
That's why NASA has played such a major role in our growing understanding of the Red Planet.
Space exploration of Mars began with a flurry of sophisticated flyby missions, starting
with Mariner 4, which sped past Mars in 1965, and then orbiters.
The first Mars orbiter was Mariner 9 in 1971, and then Landers, starting with Viking, which
landed on Mars in 1976.
Even with these advances, there was no definitive evidence for any extensive Martian water repositories.
The first unambiguous evidence for polar water ice came with the Viking missions, which
made spectral measurements in the late 1970s.
But it was only since 2000 when a combination of Mars orbiting satellites and analytical
machines on the Phoenix lander and the Spirit and Opportunity Rovers of the true vast extent
of water and the nature of its repositories of Mars has been revealed.
And so, in the next lecture, we'll discover how the latest round of NASA missions and other
research projects have dramatically changed our understanding of water throughout the
inner solar system, from Mars to our moon to Earth itself.
