Media rights are pieces of rock that have fallen to earth from space.
They record the earliest history of the solar system, a time when the sun was just getting
going and planets had yet to form.
These remarkably diverse objects provide a sample of many stages of chemical, physical,
and mineral evolution in the solar nebula from the time of the sun's first fitful bursts
of energy to the gravitational attraction of matter into larger and larger bodies to
the formation of planets.
You've seen that the chondrites are varied meteorites that feature chondrules and calcium
aluminum rich inclusions, those CAIs, which are small droplets of once molten silicate
minerals.
Chondrites point to the earliest stages of the transition from a more or less uniform
disk of gas and dust around the protostar that would become our sun to the prolonged
processes of clumping that would eventually produce the four inner rocky planets, Mercury,
Venus, Earth, and Mars, and the four outer gas giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
and Neptune.
One consequence of this earliest phase of processing the solar nebula was a marked diversification
of the mineral kingdom from the initial 12-er minerals to about 60 different mineral species
during what I've called stage one of mineral evolution.
These new minerals reflect a range of new chemical and physical environments.
For example, local accumulations of dust for the first time concentrated the important
elements sulfur, phosphorus, chromium, and sodium to the point that they could form
their own minerals.
Also, there are regions of the nebula that refine those elements at temperatures in the
range of 1,500 to 1,900 degrees Celsius, somewhat cooler than in the envelopes of the energetic
stars.
Those cooler temperatures allowed the formation of the first feldspar minerals, the first
mellolite, and other new crystals.
And then there were the unusual oxygen pore zones where the strange mineralogy of the
instantiate chondrites evolved, and the carbon-rich zones of the carbonaceous chondrites were
abundant organic molecules, including many of vital importance to life were synthesized.
In 2008, when my colleagues and I were first developing the framework of mineral evolution,
we realized that the formation of chondrites represented only the first of many stages of
diversification.
We were really fortunate that the community of meteorite experts had made detailed catalogues
of meteorite minerals and their characteristics in all the very types.
That's why we could be confident that there were only about 60 different minerals known,
at least known so far, in chondrites.
These minerals represent what are called primary phases.
Ones that formed as the superheated dust melted and then cooled, but were not subsequently
altered by interactions with water, or by reheating, or by impact.
And these efforts, collaborating with other experts, was essential.
For one thing, we needed a standard of comparison for the modern world.
We needed to know exactly how many different minerals occur on Earth today, or at least
how many have been officially recognized.
And luckily for me, one of my former students is Professor Robert Downs at the University
of Arizona.
Bob Downs heads what's known as the Rough Mineral Database Project.
He's a fascinating scientist.
He's got a really interesting past.
He was born in Canada, and he was both a scholar, a math major at the University of British
Columbia, and an athlete.
He ran the 400 meters for the Canadian Olympic team.
After college, he became a gold miner.
And then he was a mineral dealer, and even a construction worker on the Alaskan Pipeline
before going back to graduate school for a PhD in mineralogy from Virginia Tech.
Bob Downs is now responsible for maintaining the list of every mineral officially approved
by the International Mineralogical Association.
So he has the most up-to-date information.
As of late 2013, there were more than 4,700 approved minerals, and that number grows
by several dozen every year.
Perhaps the most basic question of mineral evolution is how do 12 ER minerals become
processed by planets, ultimately to form more than 4,700 different minerals we find on Earth
today.
We've seen that the very first stage, the formation of chondrites quintupled the number
of minerals to 60.
In this lecture, we'll see another big jump to more than 250 species.
And here's where the meteorite experts really come to the rescue.
The accumulation and processing of the chondrites to make those hundreds of new minerals is an
amazingly rich story.
Now, it was obvious from the outset that we needed an expert in the formation of meteorites,
so I called my friend Tim McCoy at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural
History.
That's where one of the world's largest meteorite collections is maintained, and it's just
a few miles south of my Carnegie Lab.
Tim is not only a leading scientist, he's also passionate about public engagement.
In fact, he's one of a relatively small number of Native American scientists.
So he also acts as an important role model for young scientists from underrepresented
groups.
When I first approached Tim, he quickly understood and he embraced the concept of mineral evolution.
Perhaps that's not surprising as meteorite experts have long talked of the evolution
of meteorites.
So it was Tim.
He's the one who led me and showed me how chondrules and other materials clumped together
by gravity to form the chondrite meteorites, and then the chondrites in turn, they form
larger and larger bodies called planetesimals, and as the planetesimals grew to hundreds
of kilometers in diameter, the primary chondrite minerals were subjected to repeated cycles
of alteration by water, by heating, by melting, and also with impacts with other bodies, and
these processes eventually led to the second class of meteorites, the achondrites.
These varied objects hold more than 250 different minerals.
Tim McCoy and I concluded that these 250 minerals represent the starting point for
any planet, any moon, in our solar system.
The origins of all the chemical richness of Earth were locked into those meteorites, but
most elements were impossibly dilute, a few atoms per billion or less, barring some remarkably
efficient concentration mechanisms, the chance of most chemical elements clumping together
to form separate distinct minerals is vanishingly small.
The mineral evolution story, therefore, is a four and a half billion year narrative of
successive stages of elements selection and concentration through diverse physical, chemical,
and biological processes, and that story begins in earnest with the achondrites.
Planets formed by the clumping together of matter into larger and larger objects, that's
a phenomenon called accretion.
Accretion in the solar nebula took place by two very different physical processes.
At first, clumpiness arose from the surface properties of small particles, the kind of
electrostatic attraction that causes dust bunnies.
This kind of accumulation called coagulation dominates for nebular objects up to the sizes
of several centimeters in diameter.
Electrostatic particles and CAIs, thus mixed with smaller dust grains and those early coagulates,
emasses that must have been sort of fluffy, they're loosely consolidated, they're irregularly
shaped.
But electrostatic attraction is ineffective for objects larger than a meter or so.
So another mechanism of accretion had to take over.
Astronomers assume that gravity is the culprit.
But models suggest that gravity doesn't take over in a big way until objects are about
a kilometer across.
So how does accretion work for those meter-sized masses?
One hypothesis is that turbulence leads to local concentrations of coagulates and gravitational
collapse.
And that's not unlike the way that the entire solar system was triggered by a gravitational
instability in a giant molecular cloud.
In any event, there's still a lot of work to be done to understand how you get from
lots of objects the size of a basketball to fewer objects the size of a small town.
Once kilometer-sized objects had accreted, the story becomes much clearer.
At some point in the early solar system, perhaps over the span of its first few millions of
years, billions of these kilometer-scale planetesimals had formed.
With a large population of large bodies, gravity could take over in a big way in what's known
as runaway accretion, larger and larger planetesimals grew, the size of Rhode Island, the size
of Ohio, the size of Texas, the size of Alaska, perhaps up to 1,000 kilometers in diameter.
Within 100,000 years, gravity had clumped most of those smaller planetesimals into proto-planets,
which are objects large enough that they pulled themselves into a spherical shape by gravity.
As millions of planetesimals merged together by this chaotic process of accretion, they
experienced new ways to diversify.
As they grew to more than about 100 kilometers or more in diameter, two complementary and
more or less comparable sources of heat, won the gravitational potential energy of many
small objects smashing together, plus the nuclear energy of fast-decaying radioactive
elements that were abundant in the early solar system, they thermally altered minerals and
eventually melted the planetesimal interiors.
And here we come to the next critical phase, and the distillation of the solar system,
a phase called differentiation, which is the separation of a proto-planet into layers.
Once a mini-planet was molten inside, then density became a powerful driver of element
separation.
Dense iron and nickel metals separated from magnesium silicates to form for the very first
time, concentrically layered structures, metal cores, silicate mantles, as well as a thin
crust of even less dense material.
That layering by chemical and density separation is the process of differentiation.
New minerals invariably followed from this selection and concentration of elements.
Pervasive internal heat, ubiquitous water, they further expanded the mineralogical repertoire
inside these growing proto-planets.
Heat led to the first molten rocks enriched in silicon, while water-rock interactions
produced the first clay minerals.
Mineralogical diversity was also enhanced through catastrophic hypersonic collisions between
planetesimals, which added a suite of distinctively shocked and deformed minerals that can form
only in the violent fractions of a second, when impacts caused temperatures and pressures
to soar.
Of course, all of these new minerals would have remained inaccessible, they'd be locked
inside the growing planetesimals and proto-planets, were it not for these increasingly violent
impacts.
The usual scenario was that smaller objects impacted bigger ones and were simply swallowed.
There was swallowed whole in a kind of cosmic, rich-get-richer drama.
Sometimes however, when two big bodies of similar mass smashed together with sufficient
force, the objects were blasted to smithereens.
And that's why we have such a diversity of non-chondritic meteorites.
Most of the varied achondrite meteorites that are found on Earth today represent different
parts of these destroyed mini-planets, core, mantle, crust.
Studying achondrites is just something akin to a messy anatomy lesson from a cadaver that
has exploded.
It's taken meteorite experts a lot of time, patience, and a growing inventory of planetary
bits and pieces.
But we're beginning to get a pretty clear picture of the original body.
The dense metallic cores of planetesimals, which wound up as the distinctive class of
iron-metal meteorites, are the easiest to interpret.
Because the irons are so durable and they look so different from surrounding rocks,
they were once thought to be the most common type in existence.
However, the unbiased sample of meteorites from Antarctica reveals that irons represent
a modest 5% of everything on Earth that lands from space.
Metal cores must have been correspondingly small relative to their stony mantles.
Metallic meteorites are subdivided in two different ways.
In fact, there's a lot of terminology, but this is how we get access to some of the earliest
moments in our solar system.
Historically, meteorite experts recognize three principal types based on their metal
compositions, as well as their mineralogy and texture.
The key textural feature is called a Widman statin pattern, and it can be observed when
an iron meteorite is cut, polished, and then etched with acid.
This distinctive pattern of crisscrossing elongated crystals arises when two different
iron-nickel alloys crystallize at the same time.
There's camisite with more iron and tainite with more nickel.
You only see this pattern if both minerals form in more or less similar amounts.
First come hexahedrites, the most iron-rich and nickel-poor of the iron meteorites, with
predominantly camisite.
The hexahedrites don't have well-formed Widman statin patterns.
Then there are the octahedrites, which are defined by their prominent Widman statin pattern.
Octahedrites have comparable amounts of both camisite and tainite.
And finally, we have the A-taxites made primarily of nickel-rich tainite.
And again, they don't have those patterns.
There's also a more current chemical classification scheme for iron meteorites based on trace
elements gallium, germanium, and iridium, all of which tend to concentrate in the metal
phase during differentiation.
Furthermore, these elements have very different volatilities.
Gallium melts at only 30 degrees Celsius, it can actually melt in your hand.
But germanium melts at 938 degrees, and iridium at almost 2,500 degrees.
That means the ratio of these elements reflect how close to the sun an object formed.
Based on these diagnostic ratios, most of the iron meteorites probably came from one
of four asteroids.
The stony iron meteorites with approximately equal mixtures of metal and silicate minerals
also represent fragments from the deep interiors of fragmented planetesimals.
Two principle types are known.
The beautiful palisites, oh, these are gorgeous, they feature large crystals of gemmy green
olivine.
Those crystals can be up to a centimeter across.
And it's in a metal matrix, a shiny metal matrix.
These meteorites appear to come from the core mantle boundary of planetesimals, regions where
the metal and silicate hadn't fully separated from each other.
These palisites are prized by collectors, especially when they're cut and polished into
thin plates, so light can shine through those beautiful olivine crystals.
A second kind of stony iron, the mesociderites also combine silicates and metal, but the
texture is entirely different.
Here we see an impact breccia, that's a rock with angular fragments of material that
have been cemented together.
So mesociderites testify to a violent process in which shattered pieces of rock and metal
have clumped together.
Then we come to the revealing group of stony meteorites that lack condrules, the achondrites.
One group of primitive achondrites stands alone.
These are meteorites that show no evidence of differentiation, but they do have igneous
textures.
That is, their crystals grew from hot liquid rock.
They retained their original iron and nickel contents, so iron could not have differentiated
into a core.
That's why they're called primitive.
So what's the conclusion?
These meteorites must represent chondrites that have been remelted and that melting destroyed
the original chondrules.
Then they cooled to crystallize a new suite of minerals.
By far the largest number of achondrites, the group called asteroidal achondrites,
come from the mantles of disrupted planetesimals.
These silicate-rich meteorites come at a host of types, many of which represent different
places within a differentiated mantle.
And by far the largest number of asteroidal achondrites are the so-called HEDs, named
for three principal subtypes.
Each is the howardites, which combine both of the next two types.
E is the eukrites, which have small crystals, and D is the diogenites, which have larger
crystals.
These meteorites are surprisingly abundant.
They comprise about 5% of all falls.
That abundance, coupled with the conclusion that HEDs represent igneous rocks that have
gone through extensive differentiation, much like rocks on Earth today, leads to the conclusion
that they came from a relatively large protoplanet.
In fact, based on their compositions, the HED achondrites are thought to have originated
on four Vesta, which is the second largest asteroid, with a diameter of about 530 kilometers.
Vesta is so large that it accounts for almost 10% of the mass of the asteroid belt.
You may remember that the number four in the name four Vesta means that it was the fourth
asteroid to be identified, so there's one series, two-palace, three-genome, and so forth,
thanks to intensive sky surveys and space probes named asteroids now number in the thousands.
Turns out, we know a lot about Vesta, because the dawn spacecraft was in orbit around the
asteroid from July 16, 2011 to late July 2012.
This mission is being conducted by NASA in conjunction with several European partners.
In mid-2012, dawn moved on to the largest asteroid, Ceres, who will arrive in orbit there in 2015.
Now this mission is really exciting because both Vesta and Ceres are thought to be surviving
protoplanets.
They grew large enough to differentiate a mantle and an iron-rich core, but never accreted
to a larger planet, and they didn't shatter in a collision either.
Furthermore, these two bodies appear to have rather different chemistries.
It's a consequence of having accreted in different regions of the solar nebula, so the comparison
of these two will be especially revealing about planet formation.
In particular, Ceres is relatively rich in volatiles, including water, whereas Vesta is
rather dry.
That's a clear sign the protoplanet formed closer to the sun.
The dawn spacecraft got as close as 210 km to Vesta and produced spectacular photographs
of the near-spherical body.
The surface has lots of impact features, including a really big dent that may have blasted off
as much as 1% of the mass in the space, and this may be where all those HED meteorites
come from.
Dawn also carries a spectrometer to provide mineralogical data from the way light reflects
off the surface, and a neutron spectrometer that produces data on Vesta's chemical composition.
The distinctive character of the different kinds of HED meteorites reveals a lot about
their origins.
Eukaryotes are by far the most common with more than 100 known examples.
These achondrites are pieces of basalt, a common type of igneous rock that forms most
of the surface of all the rocky planets.
Basalt, which we're going to examine much more closely in lecture 17 because it's so
important on Earth itself, it features two predominant minerals, a pyroxene and a feldspar.
There are several varieties of eukaryotes, but all have relatively small crystals that
appear to crystallize rather quickly from a magma, probably within a few kilometers
of Vesta's surface.
Now diogenites are pieces of igneous rock that crystallize much deeper in Vesta and
therefore cool more slowly to form bigger crystals.
Some diogenites represent crystal mush, where denser crystals of pyroxene settled and concentrated
in a cooling magma chamber.
And finally, the howardites are examples of impact breaches, similar in violent origins
to the stony iron mesociderites.
Recall that mesociderites are made of angular fragments of silicates and metal.
Similarly, howardites are made from numerous angular fragments of eukarytes and diogenites
that have been fused together.
As the name implies, these distinctive rocks arise from the frequent impacts that must
have pulverized Vesta's surface for billions of years.
As you can imagine, howardites, eukarytes, and diogenites comprise a group with all
sorts of gradations, different grain sizes, different ratios of crystals, different amounts
of breccia.
There's a continuum of possibilities, so the classification of HEDA kindreds has to
be a bit flexible.
By the way, all these meteorites yield pretty consistent ages between about 4.4 and 4.55
billion years.
Given all of this information, hundreds of actual rock samples amplified by the data
from dawn, astronomers have come up with a pretty convincing story of how howardites,
eukarytes, and diogenites reach Earth in such large numbers.
Vesta formed by the accretion of primitive chondritic material in a region of the solar
nebula where the rocky planets would eventually form, a region that had lost most of its water
and other volatiles.
As the body grew larger and larger, it partially melted, forming an iron-rich metal core, a
silicate mantle.
Within the last billion years, a big impact in the asteroid belt blasted about one per
cent of Vesta's crust and mantle into space, and fragments from that collision regularly
fall to Earth today as the HEDA kindreds.
A variety of relatively rare asteroidal a kindreds come from as yet unidentified parent
bodies.
Angrites, named after the Angridos race meteorite that fell in Brazil in January of 1869, is
made of a kind of basol, similar to eukarytes, but in angrites the dominant mineral is a
calcium-rich pyroxene called olgite, not the more magnesium-rich pyroxene of typical
basalt.
There are other compositional idiosyncrasies, including relatively high titanium content
that also distinguishes these angrite meteorites.
And then, aubrites, they're a kindreds formed of yet another type of igneous rock, in this
case with abundant endstitite crystals in a distinctively brecciated, fragmented rock
that is rock-composed of all these sharp, angular pieces.
The spectroscopic signature of this meteorite group is quite similar to a small, Earth-crossing
asteroid 3103-EGGER, so some expert thinks that's the source.
And then, urolytes, they're an unusual achondrite that they have relatively high carbon contents
averaging about 3% in the form of both graphite and micro-diamonds.
The mineralogy is dominated by olivine and pyroxene, and that suggests a relatively high
temperature formation.
And so far, there's no known asteroid that matches those distinctive characteristics
of the urolytes.
So you can see, there are lots of different kinds of meteorites, each with a different
source body, and more oddities are found every year.
Well, that's almost it for the known achondrites, except for two really fascinating groups.
Meteorites from the Moon, and meteorites from Mars.
Lunar meteorites have been collected for more than a century, but they weren't recognized
as such until 1982, when Smithsonian expert Brian Mason was handed a strange sample collected
in the Allen Hills region of Antarctica the previous year.
The meteorite's name is Allen Hills 81005, that's the fifth find of the 1981 collecting
season.
And it's really easy to see why this type of meteorite had been overlooked, because
most lunar rocks look very much like other commoner types of meteorites, basalt, breccia,
and so forth.
The lunar origins have to be confirmed by comparisons with distinctive compositions
of Apollo moon rocks.
Lunar meteorites are not only rare, but they're also typically very small.
In contrast to irons that can weigh many tons, the 150 so-confirmed lunar meteorites
collectively weigh about 100 pounds.
These rocks reach Earth following asteroid impacts on the Moon.
Moon rocks don't stay in space for too long, measurements of space weathering ages, that's
the best way to tell how long a meteorite's been in space, it suggests that most lunar
meteorites were blasted into space less than 100,000 years ago.
So far, these Moon rocks haven't dramatically changed the view of the Moon provided by the
Apollo missions.
And I'm going to return to that important subject in Lectures 15 and 16.
But lunar meteorites found in the Sahara Desert represent the only pieces of the Moon that
can be legally owned by private citizens, so they command extremely high prices on
the meteorite market.
And finally, we come to what are perhaps the most precious meteorites of all, the Martians.
These rare objects represent only about one in every 500 meteorites and are our only known
samples from another planet.
Experts had long recognized that some falls were different from most other meteorites,
but the identification of the Martian origins had to await data from the Viking lander that
was in 1970s.
That mission first determined the distinctive chemical and isotopic composition of the
Mars atmosphere.
In 1983, scientists analyzed small gas bubbles encased in minerals and found a similar chemical
signature, a similar isotopic signature.
It pointed to Mars.
Almost all Martian meteorites are divided into three groups, the shurgotites, the noclites,
and the chasignites.
In fact, Martian meteorites are often collectively called SNC types or SNICs.
They are by far the most abundant, more than 80% of all the Martians.
And they are igneous rocks typical of terrestrial planets.
Much rarer noclites with about a dozen known examples, and only two confirmed chasignites
are also igneous rocks, but with different mineralogies.
Whenever the subject of Martian meteorites comes up, one specimen stands out.
Allen Hills 84001, the first find of the 1984 season in the Allen Hills region of Antarctica.
The meteorite is unique, unlike any of the SNICs.
It also is unique in that it holds a variety of microstructures and trace amounts of carbon
that some scientists have interpreted as signs of life on Mars.
The evidence for life spelled out in an now-famous or infamous paper, depending on your point
of view, is that Allen Hills 84001 holds five lines of evidence, possibly suggestive of life.
They're carbon-rich organic molecules.
They're tiny crystals of the mineral magnetite and sizes and shapes characteristic of biominerals
on Earth.
They're signs that water was present when the rock formed, and there's some mineral
evidence that suggests a cool temperature at the time of formation.
Now all observations from these four lines of evidence were consistent with an environment
that might support life.
The clincher, according to NASA's Dave McKay and several co-authors, was the presence of
tiny elongated carbonate structures reminiscent of microbes, though much, much smaller than
any microbes on Earth today.
They announced the discovery of Mars' life on August 7, 1996, in a highly publicized
press conference.
Even President Bill Clinton got into the act praising the discovery, and NASA's Astrobiology
Program, which I have to state for the record, funds a good bit of my own research, got a
nice bump in funding.
McKay and colleagues presented their findings in the journal Science.
The discussion, I think, was rather reserved.
They acknowledged that no one line of evidence was sufficient to argue for alien life.
But it was the last sentence that changed the tone of that paper, and it really caused
an uproar.
They wrote, although there are alternative explanations for each of these phenomenon
taken individually, when they are considered collectively, particularly in view of their
spatial association, we conclude that they are evidence for primitive life on early Mars.
Well, suffice it to say that the great majority of scientists, myself included, were not persuaded
and the Allen Hills 84001 story has faded from prominence.
Nevertheless, the search for life on other worlds, and especially on Mars, continues.
And the Allen Hills 84001 meteorite remains the single best sample from the early time
when water may have been present on the surface of Mars.
Before leaving the subject of meteorite classification, I have to tell you about one more type.
Remarkably, the most revealing meteorites for Earth's history may eventually come from
Earth itself.
We've never found a convincing piece of rock from Earth's earliest history when the planet
was just beginning to form, but such rocks must exist.
Most Earth meteorites would have fallen back to the surface, and they've long since disappeared.
But some early Earth fragments must have landed on the nearby Moon, where weathering is not
as big of an issue.
Indeed, one of the principal scientific rationals given for revisiting the Moon is that there
may be pieces of earliest Earth in the form of meteorites that were blasted off our planet
and landed on the Moon.
We've surveyed the variety of meteorite types, so we're now in a position to understand the
principal source of information preserved in meteorites, the rich variety of minerals.
So in the next lecture, we're going to turn more directly to the second stage of Earth's
mineral evolution, which saw the accretion, differentiation, and alteration of the planetesimals
and protoplanets.
And an accompanying explosion of mineral diversity.
