We've surveyed the major types of meteorites, but we've only just skimmed the surface.
As gravity clumped the early chondrites together and as crushing pressure, scouting
temperature, corrosive water, and violent impacts reworked the growing planetesimals
more and more new minerals emerged.
Altogether more than 250 different minerals have been found in all the varieties of meteorites,
a 20-fold increase over the dozen pre-solar ur minerals.
These varied solids became the starting point for Earth and all other planets.
As planetesimals gravitationally attracted more and more mass and grew correspondingly
bigger and bigger in the process, three primary mechanisms altered the 60 or so chondritic
minerals, heat, water, and impacts.
Together these three agents of change ushered in the second stage of mineral evolution.
Three sources of heat transformed the evolving solar nebula.
The first was the sun.
The solar winds like a blast furnace that baked the innermost regions, stripped gases
and other volatiles from the extended zone inside the orbit of Jupiter, and provided
the first significant episode of distillation in the solar system.
The sun caused dramatic contrast between the inner rocky planets and the gas giant
outer planets.
The sun was the likely culprit in the production of the odd oxygen-pore insta-type chondrites
as well.
The 60 or so stage one minerals, all contained in primitive chondrite meteorites, arose as
a consequence of the sun's refining power.
As the sun settled down into a more stable hydrogen burning phase, two additional sources
of heat energy took over.
The first was gravity, or more specifically the transformation of gravitational potential
energy into heat as planetesimals got larger.
Each new collision added more heat.
The bigger the planetesimal, the more amplified that effect.
Lastly, the accretion of mass also trapped large amounts of highly radioactive isotopes,
the decayed and thus released more heat energy.
Studies of the distinctive isotopic decay products of those short-lived radioactive
isotopes are revealing some key details of the earliest stages of our solar system.
It turns out that some meteorites contain significant amounts of isotopes that can only
be produced by the radioactive decay of isotopes that have relatively short half-lives.
For example, aluminum-26, it decays to stable magnesium-26 with a half-life of only 720,000
years.
Likewise, xenon-129 decays to stable iodine-129 with a half-life of about 16 million years.
These are very short times compared to the formation of stars and planets, so we learned
some key information by the ratios of isotopes of magnesium or iodine.
For one thing, the mere fact that the early solar system had any magnesium-26 means there
had to be a nearby source, probably a supernova that exploded within a million years or so
of the collapse of our region of the giant molecular cloud.
It's likely that the shockwave from that supernova both triggered the nebular collapse and contributed
the radioactive aluminum-26, which is distributed only in supernovas.
Perhaps supernova explosions and other very large stellar ejections produce some of that
as well.
That insight alone is pretty amazing, but we also know that aluminum-26 and other radioactive
isotopes such as iron-60 and manganese-53 would have produced a lot of heat inside the
growing planetesimals.
Certainly heat comparable to that from conversion of gravitational potential energy.
All told, when a body reaches a size of perhaps 100 kilometers in diameter, it began to melt
internally.
And when the mixture of oxygen, magnesium, silicon, iron, and other elements melted,
they formed two different hot liquids, emissable liquids like oil and water.
The greater volume was silicate magma, not unlike the magmas erupted from Hawaii's great
volcanoes.
These magmas also concentrated rarer elements like calcium, aluminum, sodium, potassium.
The second liquid, much smaller in volume and much, much denser, was predominantly iron
metal with significant nickel and various other metal constituents.
Most of the gold, most of the platinum went into that melt, as did cobalt and manganese.
And the iron metal also accumulated a significant amount of phosphorus and sulfur.
Those are elements that didn't alloy with iron, but formed little clots that would ultimately
become new dense mineral species.
Further quickly, gravity caused that denser liquid metal to sink, and the less dense silicate
magma to rise.
By the way, this gravitational unmixing caused an even greater release of gravitational potential
energy.
More mass was accumulating deeper and deeper, so the process continued to drive more melting.
It was kind of a runaway positive feedback for a time.
What we see today is the iron, the stony iron, and achondridic stony meteorites are the consequence
of this heat-driven process of differentiation.
Many new minerals arose from that differentiation alone.
For example, in the metal-rich portions, we find the iron-phosphide shribersite, which
has been invoked as a source of phosphorus for early life.
And in the silicate-rich portion, we see the very first occurrence of the common mineral
quartz, silicon dioxide, and the major mineral in many rocks and in much speech sand.
This is a key theme.
Any time you separate and concentrate elements into new volumes, you're likely to produce
new minerals.
Water.
Water is so important, it represents a second powerful source of mineralogical innovation
in planetesimals.
Water is unparalleled as an agent of change because it's both chemically reactive and
it's mobile.
Think about the last time you were at the shore.
The ocean's saltwater speaks of water's ability to break down and dissolve minerals.
And then if some saltwater happened to evaporate from your skin, you get those tiny little
crystals of the mineral halite.
This forms simply by evaporation.
Sodium chloride, common table salt, was produced by water's ability to first dissolve and then
transport other chemicals.
The same thing happens in Earth all the time.
As a result, achondrite meteorites hold a variety of similar evaporite minerals.
Halite forms some beautiful purple crystals and the color comes from the extreme age of
the crystals that have suffered billions of years of radiation damage.
And there are other water-deposited minerals, including the first appearances of both the
important sulfate mineral gypsum as well as the carbonates.
These are minerals that today form coral reefs and snail shells.
Water also reacts with rocks to produce hydrous minerals, minerals that incorporate oxygen-hydrogen
bonds.
Important examples include the large silicate group of mica's, amphiboles, and clays.
Let me show you one of the chemical reactions, one of the most critical reactions called
serpentinization.
That's the production of the clay mineral serpentine from the chemical reaction of water
with a common magnesium silicate, olivine, which we've met as one of the herb minerals.
That reaction occurs extensively on today's ocean floor and it's been implicated as an
essential energy source for many deep sea ecosystems and perhaps even as a major energy
source for the origin of life.
The basic chemical reaction, it's simplified here, but it involves just four components.
The magnesium olivine called forasterite, ocean water, the clay mineral serpentine,
and the magnesium hydroxide mineral brucite.
In this reaction, two molecules of forasterite plus three of water produce the hydrous minerals
serpentine and brucite, both of which would have been new to our solar system.
This chemical reaction also produces significant energy that can heat up the rocks or drive
biology.
And even more interesting, chemical reactions occurs when the olivine contains iron, the
n-member phthalite, as it always does.
In this reaction, phthalite or iron olivine reacts with water to produce the iron oxide
magnetite plus silica and hydrogen, both of which are dissolved in the water.
And again, this reaction releases energy.
What's more, hydrogen is an extremely important molecule in driving organic chemical reactions.
So the iron side of the serpentinization reaction, they have played a key role in promoting
prebiotic chemistry and the origin of life.
And finally, we come to the dramatic mineral forming effects of impacts.
When a small asteroid hits a growing planetesimal, a brief period of extremely high temperatures
and pressures follows.
The effects of this shock include the production of a variety of minerals that can only be
produced at extreme conditions, those typically found deep inside planets.
What happens is that the extreme temperature disrupts the chemical bonding of the low pressure
phase, olivine or quartz, for example, then the atoms remain more or less in place.
They don't have time to migrate and they don't have time to react much with the adjacent
mineral grains, but they reorganize themselves into a much denser arrangement.
So shocked olivine commonly adopts the wazelite or the ringwite form of magnesium silicate.
Those are minerals thought to dominate in Earth's upper mantle and deeper transition
zone hundreds of kilometers down.
And quartz also transforms to much denser minerals, cosite, stichivite, with the same
composition SiO2, but very different crystal structures.
All told, more than a dozen shock minerals occurred in our solar system for the first
time during this violent period of planetesimal accretion.
The second stage of mineral evolution included the first fine grained clays, the first sheet
like mica, the semi-precious zircon, all of which became building blocks of planets.
But that's not the entire story of stage two mineral evolution.
It's also really important to consider what minerals didn't form and why.
It's easy to focus on the 250 or so minerals that had appeared by the time of the Aekondroids.
Is an increase from about 1% to 5% of Earth's future mineral inventory.
But what is perhaps equally important are the myriad minerals, almost 95% of all known
species that had not formed by 4.5 billion years ago.
Even in the most processed Aekondrite meteorites, most elements including uranium, boron, beryllium,
lithium, dozens of others did not form their own minerals.
Or if they did, they're so rare and the crystals are so tiny they haven't been found yet.
An important unanswered question is where those rare elements reside.
And here there are a number of compelling ideas.
Some elements could be randomly distributed as foreign atoms and other minerals.
In lecture four I introduced the concept of solid solution where one element substitutes
for another element of similar size and bonding character.
One common example is iron substituting for magnesium and olivine.
And the element hafnium always substitutes for zirconium, most commonly in the mineral
zircon.
Hafnium is right below zirconium in the periodic table and it's likely that other rare elements
substitute in exactly the same way for more common elements from the same group in the
periodic table.
Galium for aluminum, lithium for sodium, selenium for sulfur, for example.
Another hypothesis is that trace amounts of rare elements concentrate at grain boundaries,
perhaps in tiny volumes that don't have regular crystalline structures.
Something like a dumping ground for unwanted elements.
Or perhaps some of the elements are present in nano phases, but we just haven't found
them yet.
By the end of stage two, only about 250 minerals of the over 4,700 known today had appeared.
One way to understand all those missing minerals is to look at the geochemical classification
of the elements.
First introduced in the 1920s by the Swiss mineralogist and geochemist, Victor Goldschmidt.
It would be hard to overstate the influence of Victor Moritz Goldschmidt, who was born
in 1888 and became a towering figure in the earth sciences during the first half of the
20th century.
His seminal papers and the creative approach to earth materials transform the way we think
about the chemistry of earth and other planets, and his impact was felt long after his death
in 1947.
Today the most prestigious award in the field of geochemistry is the Goldschmidt Medal awarded
by the Geochemical Society at its annual meeting, the Goldschmidt Conference.
While Goldschmidt was born in Zurich, he spent his childhood in Switzerland, but moved with
his family to Oslo, Norway at the age of 13, and it was in Norway that he spent most of
his life in academic positions at Oslo.
His career in science was amazingly fast and a continued rise.
He received his doctorate degree at the remarkable young age of 23.
Norwegians don't get that promotion until a decade or two later.
At the age of 24, he was awarded one of the most prestigious scientific prizes in Norway
for his studies of contact metamorphism.
That's the phenomenon of mineralogical changes that occur when older rocks are heated and
changed by their proximity to an intrusion of hot magma.
And two years later, he was appointed professor at the University of Christiania in Oslo and
remained there from 1914 until 1929 when he accepted the prestigious position of chair
of mineralogy at the University of Goettingen in Germany.
Because he was Jewish, the rise of the Nazi movement in Germany caused a decade of turmoil
for Victor Goldschmidt, as it did for so much of Europe and the rest of the world.
First, he was forced to leave his professorship in Germany, and he returned to the University
of Christiania for a period of relative quiet.
But when Germany invaded Norway and began rounding up Jews, Goldschmidt was at extreme
risk.
He was arrested on October 26, 1942 as part of the Norwegian persecution.
And he was detained at the Berg concentration camp with many other academics prior to their
deportation to the infamous Auschwitz death camp.
Many Norwegian professors were murdered there.
But the last minute, Goldschmidt was spared deportation to Auschwitz, but only on the condition
that he uses geochemical expertise to aid the Nazi cause.
The Germans had great need of mineral resources, and they also needed chemical expertise to
develop new explosives, including a possible atom bomb.
Soon after his release, he managed to escape to Sweden, and thence he went to the United
Kingdom to Scotland, where among other activities he provided advice on the geochemical processes
The Germans might use to produce heavy water.
See, isolated, deuterium-rich, heavy water was one of the initial steps in making an
atomic bomb.
Goldschmidt remained in Scotland until 1946, doing research, writing papers.
He returned to his beloved Norway after the war in June of 1946, but he died soon thereafter.
Victor Goldschmidt made many contributions to mineralogy, including revealing field studies
where he grew to realize that new minerals form in environments where key elements have
been concentrated by various means, including water and heat, a key theme of this lecture.
His observations led to his most famous and influential publications written while he
was still in his 30s.
The title of these lasting contributions can be roughly translated from the original German
as Geochemical Laws of the Distribution of the Elements.
Today they are best known as the Goldschmidt classification of the chemical elements.
Goldschmidt's elegant idea is that different chemical elements have different geochemical
affinities that can be separated and concentrated in a few broad types of natural environments,
in much the same way as the early solar nebula separated gases like hydrogen and helium from
the silicate-rich rocks.
The original classification scheme focused on the 86 most common elements that are found
in Earth and divided the periodic table into four major groups, the lithophile elements,
the sitterophile elements, the calcophile elements, and the atomophile elements.
Elements within each of these groups share chemical features that lead to distinctive
mineralogies.
More than half of these elements, Goldschmidt counted 45 out of 86, are lithophile or rock-loving
elements.
These elements readily combine with oxygen-to-form minerals that predominate in Earth's rigid
outer layer, what's called the lithosphere, and these elements don't contribute significantly
to Earth's core.
Many of the lithophile elements, including the first column of the periodic table, from
lithium to cesium, the second column from beryllium to barium, and the next to the
last column from fluorine to astatine, readily form ions by adding or subtracting a few electrons
to achieve a magic number.
Now recall that atoms with 2 or 10 or 18 or 36 electrons are particularly stable.
That means a magnesium atom, element 12, wants to get rid of two electrons.
If magnesium meets up with an oxygen atom, element 8, which wants to gain two electrons,
a strong ionic bond forms.
In fact, most of these lithophile elements engage in ionic bonding, and we see this kind
of magnesium-oxygen bond in hundreds of different minerals, including many of the most common
minerals in Earth's crust and mantle.
The elements silicon and aluminum in the third row of the periodic table also form strong
bonds with oxygen, and they are among the handful of relatively low mass elements that
dominate in the crust.
Silicon for example is element 14.
It lies just below carbon in the periodic table.
Now you can imagine two very different bonding scenarios for silicon based on that atomic
number 14.
One way of thinking about silicon's bonding is that it wants to get rid of four electrons
to achieve the magic number of 10 electrons and become an ion with a charge of plus 4.
These four electrons are taken up by two oxygen atoms to make the common oxide of silicon quartz.
That's SiO2.
That would be an ionically bonded crystal, because every atom in the crystal can be thought
of as an ion, an electrically charged atom.
On the other hand, silicon could adopt a covalent bonding strategy like carbon.
In that case, silicon would seek to share four additional electrons to give it a magic
number of 18.
In that extreme case, silicon dioxide would probably be a gas, just like carbon dioxide.
In fact, studies of silicon compounds revealed that it has an intermediate bonding state,
partially ionic, partially covalent in character, based on the distribution of its electrons.
The low atomic numbers of oxygen in silicon 8 and 14 relative to iron's 26 mean that
silicates and oxides are much less dense on average than iron metal.
Consequently, most minerals made from lithophile elements tend to float.
They tend to make the crust and mantle on all terrestrial planets.
Lithophile elements contrast with the citrophile or iron-loving elements.
Gulchment recognized only 13 of these, including iron itself, which is by far the most abundant
of the citrophile elements, and other less common elements that really dissolve into
iron by forming metallic bonds, and thus would have concentrated in the dense cores of terrestrial
planets.
Other abundant citrophile elements include nickel, cobalt, manganese, all of them so-called
transition metals near to iron in the fourth row of the periodic table.
How much scarcer sources citrophiles are the six elements of the platinum group?
They include the familiar platinum, palladium, both of which have been used as coin metals,
as well as rare uranium, ruthenium, iridium, and osmium.
There's also the closely related metal gold, and the very interesting element molybdenum,
which we'll explore in Lecture 35 when we turn to the supercontinent cycle.
Most of these citrophile elements do not readily bond to oxygen, that's why nuggets
of gold and platinum can be mined from rivers and streams, like the 49ers that the Great
California Gold Rush did more than 150 years ago.
These metals are also very dense, so miners could use various density separation techniques
like panning and sleucing to separate the gold from other less dense rocks.
So that's yet another process by which elements can be selected and concentrated.
By the way, the precious metals aren't precious because they're the rarest metals in the cosmos.
No, they're precious because most of the gold and platinum is locked in the core.
There's even a very serious proposition that at core pressures and temperatures, gold and
platinum separate from the less dense iron and form an innermost core of solid precious
metals.
It could be several miles across.
Wherever those valuable metals reside, one consequence of the citrophile elements being
concentrated in the core is that their crustal abundances are accordingly reduced to much
less than in the primitive C.I. type carbonaceous contracts.
All that the C.I. meteorites are thought to be the least processed objects we have.
They provide a kind of chemical benchmark for the starting composition of the solar system.
Citrophile elements are thus recognized as such in part because they are severely depleted
relative to the C.I.
Condrites.
Next, we come to Goldschmidt's calcophile or ore-loving elements.
These are metallic elements that readily bond to sulfur, as well as several elements that
mimic sulfurous chemical behavior.
All of these elements are typically found concentrated in large sulfide or deposits.
On the periodic table, these are elements stretching from copper and silver on the left to the
sulfur column on the right, copper, lead, silver, and zinc are among the most abundant and economically
important calcophile metal elements, with major deposits all over the world, including
big mines in Arizona and Colorado, in Missouri, Montana, Tennessee, many, many other states.
The calcophile elements tend to form denser minerals than the oxides and silicates typical
of the crust.
Consequently, they've concentrated more in Earth's mantle than in the crust, and many
of the largest ore deposits result from fluid exchange from the mantle to the crust, notably
in volcanoes associated with plate tectonics.
Minerals can generate massive deposits of sulfides and related minerals.
Turns out that sulfur has some important chemical similarities to several other less abundant
calcophile elements, selenium and tellurium, which lie just below sulfur in the periodic
table, and arsenic and antimony, one column to the left.
These elements often combine in complex ways in a very large group of minerals called sulfosolts.
There are hundreds of them, but they're rare.
They don't play much of a mineralogical role until stage five, which we'll investigate
in lecture 25 when we turn to plate tectonics.
And finally, Goldschmidt, he recognized a fourth group of atmophile or atmosphere-loving
elements, hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, and the six elements in the last column of the
periodic table.
Aluminum through radon, which are the so-called noble gases or inert gases.
All of these elements have very low melting and boiling points, so they tend to concentrate
in the liquid or the gas phase, unless they're concentrated in the outer layers of rocky
planets like Earth.
These are also the elements most susceptible to loss from the inner solar system and concentration
in the outer domains of the gas giant planets, which are mostly hydrogen and helium.
Consequently, Earth is significantly depleted in atmophile elements relative to the C.I.
carbonaceous chondrates.
While exact planetary inventories of these volatile elements are not firmly established,
it appears that from 90% to more than 99% of these elements were long since stripped off
our planet.
In fact, the two rarest, stable elements on Earth are the two heaviest noble gases, xenon
and krypton.
The Goldschmidt classification has lots of subtleties that enrich the field of geochemistry.
For one thing, quite a few elements have mixed character.
So iron, which is the defining ciderophile element, also commonly occurs with sulfur,
for example, in the lustrous golden mineral, pyrite, or fool's gold.
And iron is also one of the commonest elements in the crust in oxides and silicates, for
example, in the important magnetic mineral, magnetite, which is an iron oxide that's
one of the principal iron ores.
Indeed, most of the ciderophile elements, including manganese, nickel, and cobalt, can
take on lithophile characteristics if there's a lot of oxygen around.
Well, many of the lithophile elements can bond to sulfur and become calcophile under
low oxygen conditions.
We saw that with the unusual Institite chondrite meteorites, which incorporate sulfides of calcium
and magnesium, which are normally lithophile elements.
Temperature and pressure also play key roles.
As many lab experiments have shown, it turns out that virtually every chemical element
takes on metallic properties at high enough pressure.
As atoms are forced closer and closer together, inevitably some electrons become too confined.
They break free.
They move freely about the substance, and that's the definition of a metal.
High pressure experiments have demonstrated the metallization and high pressure of all
sorts of elements, from iodine to sulfur to oxygen.
One of the great challenges in experimental material science is to achieve the extremely
high pressure necessary to turn hydrogen gas into a metal.
Some researchers, including scientists at my own geophysical laboratory at the Carnegie
Institution, have gotten very close.
Hydrogen crystallizes to a colorless solid at about 50,000 atmospheres, and that's really
easy to achieve.
The crystals consist of regular rows of little H2 molecules, like dumbbells, and at lower
pressure the dumbbells rotate every which way.
Then as you get to higher pressures, as the volume decreases and space gets tight, the
dumbbells get locked into one orientation, because they don't have room to move or rotate
freely.
Of a million atmospheres, the little H2 molecules begin to break apart.
The two hydrogen atoms actually get farther apart, while the spaces between the molecules
get much shorter.
And then, at some really high pressure, maybe five million atmospheres, the atoms should
become evenly spaced and form a metal.
Now this is a huge experimental challenge, but theoretical calculations make it pretty
certain that hydrogen metal will be the stable phase, and that the metallic state of hydrogen
must occur inside the gas giant planets.
In fact, some astrophysicists suggest that metallic hydrogen inside big planets is the
commonest mineral by volume in the universe.
In any event, the hydrogen story reveals the nuances and the flexibility of the Goldschmidt
classification of elements.
Naturally, as the decades have passed and the Goldschmidt classification scheme has been
adopted by more and more specialists, new subclassifications arise.
One of the most interesting is the category of pegmatophile, or pegmatite-loving elements.
As part of the fourth stage of mineral evolution, in lecture 23, we'll meet the pegmatites,
which are extremely water-rich igneous rocks that tend to concentrate some of the rarest
lithophile elements.
This interesting group of elements includes not only some with very low atomic numbers,
such as lithium, beryllium, boron, and fluorine, but also tantalum, elements 73, and uranium,
element 92, to name just a few.
Hundreds of rare minerals, including the gemstones, emerald, aquamarine, topaz, termiline, occur
primarily in pegmatites.
Pregmatites also host the principal ores for some really rare elements like cesium and
tantalum, so pegmatites are prized by miners and mineral collectors alike.
Victor Goldschmidt's classification of the elements is just another way to catalog elements,
but these are not just lists.
The classification scheme and its subsequent elaborations help us understand the many
ways that elements can be selected, concentrated, transported, and crystallized into earth's
rich mineralogical heritage.
Ciderophiles are densest, and most likely to be found toward the core.
Calcophiles are not quite as dense, lithophiles are even less dense, and the atomophiles
are the least dense of all, common in the atmosphere or lost to space.
We've seen these processes at work in the solar nebula and in the very meteorites that
survive from that ancient time.
Now we're ready to shift our focus to the origins of earth itself.
