Planets come in a rich variety of sizes, of compositions, and physical conditions.
We've already examined the inner planets, Mercury, Venus, and Mars, but we've also seen
from telescopic observations and the Kepler mission that there are thousands of other
confirmed or suspected exoplanets orbiting more distant stars as well.
All of these bodies provide hints as to the origin of the solar system from a great nebula
of gas and dust.
And all other planets shed light on the origin and evolution of planet Earth as well.
Let's continue our overview of the solar system with a focus on the four gas giant planets,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
Recall that the accepted idea is that 4.567 billion years ago when the Sun ignited and
it swept the solar winds out past the planets.
Hydrogen, helium, and other gases were stripped off and blown outward, far out into the colder
regions of space where the gases could condense into liquids or into ices.
As a consequence, the character of the solar system changes radically out beyond the asteroid
belt, farther out than about 750 million kilometers from the Sun.
Here we enter the colder, darker domain of the gas giant or Jovian planets.
Jupiter is by far the largest of the Jovian planets, and like all the gas giants, it's
basically just a ball of hydrogen and helium, probably with an unseen rocky core that actually
may be about the same size and mass as one of the inner terrestrial planets.
Even so, that rocky center represents at most only a few percent of the total mass.
Jupiter is big, is about two and a half times as massive as all the other planets combined.
And because it's so massive and because it's so far from the Sun, Jupiter holds a significant
fraction of the angular momentum of the solar system.
Let's revisit the idea of what happens to spheres of hydrogen and helium in space, and
these are concepts that apply to all the gas giant planets.
We've now met a variety of such objects in the form of stars.
If such a ball is the size of the Sun, then it fuses hydrogen to helium for a long time,
perhaps 90% of its 10 billion year lifespan, and then it becomes an energetic red giant
star.
And if the star contains 10 times the mass of the Sun, then it ends up consuming its
hydrogen fuel much faster, in less than a billion years, and winds up as a supernova,
an exploding star.
So big stars burn relatively quickly, and then blow themselves up.
Stars smaller than the Sun burn their nuclear fires much, much longer.
Some red dwarf stars a tenth the size of the Sun might have formed shortly after the Big
Bang, and they'd be going strong, while at least still radiating energy today, and would
continue doing so for tens of billions of years more.
But if the hydrogen ball has much less mass than the Sun, say only a hundredth or a thousandth
of the Sun's mass, like Jupiter, then nuclear fusion never gets underway.
These objects are the gas giant planets, so one way to think of a gas giant planet like
Jupiter is a failed attempt to make a star.
The interior of Jupiter and other gas giants is hot, and it's compressed to be sure.
A lot of gravitational potential energy is converted to heat as the planet forms.
But there's not nearly enough temperature and pressure to make fusion reactions go.
Jupiter, at five times the Earth's Sun distance, orbits the Sun every twelve Earth years.
Even so, the Jupiter day is short, only about ten hours, because Jupiter rotates on its
axis really fast.
That rapid rotation causes the planet to bulge about its middle, and you can see that phenomenon
in photographs of the planet, and it also causes really extreme weather.
That's because the circumference of Jupiter at the equator is more than 430,000 kilometers.
So the atmosphere at the equator has to travel about 43,000 kilometers per hour, relative
to the atmosphere at the poles, and as a consequence, the fast rotation breaks Jupiter's thick atmosphere
into fast moving bands and swirls, which are easily seen as a sequence of lighter and darker
stripes parallel to Jupiter's equator.
Jupiter also experiences extreme wind shearing that creates immense vortices, cyclones, many
times the diameter of Earth that can last for many years with sustained winds of hundreds
of kilometers per hour.
And there's an important lesson here for Earth.
Earth's two experiences atmospheric banding, and weather patterns governed by wind shear.
The jet streams are one notable example.
In the case of Earth, though, with a smaller circumference of only 40,000 kilometers and
a longer day of 24 hours, the equatorial atmosphere is moving only about 1,700 kilometers per
hour relative to the poles.
The contrast between poles and equator, well, of course, significant, is much less than on
Jupiter, and that's a good thing, as life at Earth's surface could be a lot more challenging
with frequent wind speeds of 100 miles per hour or more.
Exploration of these gas giant planets faces real challenges that don't apply to the closer
terrestrial planets.
For one thing, NASA can't land on Jupiter.
There's no real surface, just a thicker and thicker atmosphere the deeper you go.
The one entry probe we have sent to Jupiter, that was a 750-pound capsule released from
the Galileo spacecraft in December of 1995, it would just swallow it up.
It disappeared after sending some data on the intense weather.
The probe encountered intense turbulence and increasing temperatures and pressures during
its nearly one hour descent, and that's another problem with visiting Jupiter.
Not only are the winds intense, there's also violent lightning and extremely powerful magnetic
fields.
All of those factors challenge the design of electronics that need to operate and transmit
the data from the planet.
Galileo also monitored a natural atmospheric probe when Comet Shoemaker-Laving 9 fragmented
and impacted Jupiter's atmosphere in July of 1994.
That collision, which was the first ever to be observed and studied by astronomers, provided
incredibly valuable information about the composition of deeper layers in Jupiter's atmosphere.
The big comet fragments essentially punched holes in the atmosphere, and scientists could
peer in to look for the characteristic optical signatures of chemical compounds.
They found lots of sulfur and nitrogen and carbon compounds, and those chemicals are
of the kind that might have played roles in the origin of life on Earth.
In spite of the difficulties in any close approach to Jupiter, we have had some spectacular
space probes visit the big planet, notably the Voyager, Galileo, and Ulysses missions
that have returned gorgeous photographs and reams of data on Jupiter and its vicinity.
Indeed, we've had flyby missions to all the gas giant planets, as well as many of the
exotic moons.
The photos of Jupiter reveal a colorful planet with an atmosphere enriched in a lot more
than just hydrogen and helium.
The colors are the result of active chemical reactions in the lightning-laced atmosphere,
reactions that produce a rich variety of organic molecules.
These molecular species are especially apparent in the great red spot, that's a persistent
cyclonic storm that exposes more chemically diverse layers of the atmosphere deep down.
The red color has been described to organic molecules, though the exact composition is
still a matter of intense debate.
One of the most amazing aspects of Jupiter, and one that has importance for understanding
Earth's origin and evolution, is the wealth of moons.
In fact, astronomers have identified at least 64 moons orbiting Jupiter, and they range
in size from big rocks, only a kilometer or two in diameter, to irregular asteroid objects
up to 200 kilometers in diameter, to several round worlds ranging in size up to the planet-like
Ganymede, more than 5,200 kilometers in diameter.
That's significantly bigger than the planet Mercury.
The smaller irregular moons, that is those moons not in spherical shape, account for
most of this big number, that's about 56 and all, and the number keeps growing as more
little ones are found.
These smaller moons are probably just captured asteroids.
Their orbits tend to be all over the map, they are quite elliptical in many cases, and
there's a hodgepodge of directions, front to back, top to bottom, and so forth.
And there are few groups of little moons with similar orbits, but by and large these irregular
moons don't appear to have any sort of common source.
By contrast, Jupiter's regular or spherical moons have almost circular orbits, they all
lie in a single orbital plane that matches Jupiter's rotation plane, and the directions
of orbit are the same as Jupiter's rotation, and if you think about it, that's just like
a miniature solar system.
And the best model for their origins is pretty much the same.
As Jupiter formed, there were significant debris left over, and they formed Jupiter's
eight regular moons in much the same way as the eight planets formed around the sun.
I have to confess that the number eight is pretty much a coincidence, though models
show that six to eight is a typical number of orbiting bodies in this kind of scenario.
And that's whether it's a star with several planets or a planet with several moons.
The similarities, they simply outweigh the differences, it's just a matter of scale.
So we have four large moons of Jupiter called the Galilean moons, because Galileo first
saw them in his telescope in the early 17th century.
They're arguably the most interesting, and they deserve special attention.
Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto.
They're all large enough to see with a good pair of binoculars, and by the way, these
are all names from Greek mythology.
Each was a lover of Zeus, who was called Jupiter and Roman mythology.
So each moon has been studied by space probes in close flybys.
So we have a lot of data, including close-up photographs, lots of physical and chemical
information as well.
Let's look at them one by one.
Io, Jupiter's innermost moon, it's one of the most amazing and puzzling places in the
solar system.
It has a diameter of 3,642 kilometers, in fact it's the fourth largest moon in the solar
system, and it's almost as large as Mercury.
Io presents a strange yellow appearance with reddish polar regions, which are the consequence
of abundant sulfur compounds at the surface.
And it's pockmarked.
It's pockmarked by about 400 active volcanoes, making Io the most geologically active object
we know.
It also has huge mountains, some taller than Mount Everest, and so it must have ongoing
mountain-building processes.
Io's intense geological activity arises from its proximity to Jupiter, which subjects
Io to severe tidal forces.
Those stresses keep the interior hot, and provide a continuous source of energy to maintain
volcanic activity and mountain-building.
Here, Io holds important lessons for investigation of Earth's history, not to mention the larger
issue of mineral evolution throughout the cosmos.
It turns out that Io is a rocky moon.
It has an average density of about three and a half times that of water, and that's similar
to Earth's silicate crust and upper mantle.
So the assumption is that Io is largely composed of silicates.
But Io is extremely enriched in sulfur.
So the mineralogy will be quite different from Earth's.
Many of the same minerals must appear on both Earth and Io, but the ratios will be very different,
and Io must have a host of sulfur-bearing minerals that simply don't occur on Earth.
So Io, perhaps more than any other object in our solar system, suggests that there are
many possible ways diverging pathways in a planet's mineral evolution.
Jupiter's second largest moon, Europa, has probably received the most press, because
it may possess a deep ocean of water.
With a diameter of about 3,100 kilometers, it's only slightly smaller than Earth's
moon.
But it looks totally different.
Photographs of the Europa surface reveal a bright, highly reflective surface with a
bizarre complex of linear ridges and long, dark-colored cracks.
Europa seems to be the smoothest object in the solar system.
It has no high mountains.
It has no deep valleys.
It has no deep craters, though there's plenty of evidence for past impacts.
And it has no volcanoes.
And that flatness is a key to why Europa has attracted so much attention.
The current theory is that Europa is covered by a thick layer of ice, primarily water ice.
And that ice covers a deep ocean.
And here we're talking epic thicknesses by some models.
The ice is 10 to 30 kilometers thick, while the ocean is as much as 100 kilometers deep.
By comparison, the deepest point in Earth's ocean is only about 10 kilometers.
The surface of Europa is being intensively studied because it seems to be so dynamic.
And it gives hints to the ocean beneath.
It has what appears to be a cracked and shifting surface, formed by a dynamic ice sheet that
buckles and breaks and then gets filled with water from below that that freezes into long,
dark features.
That means there could be some exchange of material from the deep ocean all the way to
the surface.
As in the case of Io, the surprising behavior of Europa is controlled in large part by tidal
stresses from nearby giant Jupiter.
It appears that tidal stresses keep the ocean warm.
What's more, based on Europa's average density of about three times that of water, the warm
ocean is probably floored by silicate rocks and minerals.
That means there's a ready source of chemical energy to drive organic chemical reactions
of the type that led to life on Earth.
So Europa may harbor the most Earth-like environment anywhere in the solar system.
In some scientists' view, it is the most likely place beyond Earth to harbor life.
This prospect of a second, water-rich living world has inspired NASA to plan a variety
of ambitious missions to visit Europa and maybe someday to land on its icy surface.
On the drawing boards right now is the Europa-Jupiter system mission, EJSM, a joint effort
by NASA and the European Space Agency scheduled to launch in the year 2020.
The mission will include the Jupiter-Europa orbiter, which would conduct a detailed survey
of the icy surface and would use exacting gravity measurements to detect a subsurface
ocean.
And that's possible because any sizable ocean would swell and distort under Jupiter's
gravitational pull, and a properly instrumented satellite could detect that bulging.
So there's a lot of excitement building as we have the prospect of learning more about
Europa.
Ganymede, that's the third big moon out from Jupiter, and it's the largest moon in the
solar system.
It's 5,268 kilometers, which is significantly larger than Mercury.
In many respects, Ganymede is reminiscent of Europa.
It too has an icy surface with innumerable ridges and grooves, as well as a deep ocean
that's floored by silicate rock.
Like Europa, Ganymede gains internal energy from the tidal stresses created by Jupiter.
But there are also important differences.
For one thing, Ganymede is a lot farther away than Io or Europa, so it gets less tidal
energy.
Ganymede's average density of just two times that of water suggests its composition is
about half water and half rock.
That's a much higher percentage of water than Europa.
It's colder too, so the icy layer may be more than 200 kilometers thick, and the cratered
ice surface suggests that it has been essentially frozen.
It's solid.
It's inactive for the last four billion years.
On Ganymede, the ocean begins much, much deeper, perhaps 200 kilometers down, and it's correspondingly
smaller in volume.
The surface is only partially covered by ice, only about two-thirds of the surface area.
The rest is very ancient silicate rock, and that rock is very heavily cratered.
Ganymede is also the only moon in our solar system with a significant magnetic field,
and that's a phenomenon that suggests a core made of liquid iron.
Ganymede holds several important insights for our study of Earth.
Like the other Galilean moons, it offers glimpses of alternative pathways in the evolution
of terrestrial planets.
One important observation is the way these moons are influenced by Jupiter.
Io, Europa, and Ganymede are so close to massive Jupiter that their orbits are really
short, less than two, four, and eight days respectively.
The moons are tidally locked, with one side always facing Jupiter, just like our moon,
and their orbits are also locked to each other, so that for every one orbit of Ganymede, your
Europa orbits twice, and Io orbits four times.
This tidal locking is a major reason for the internal stresses that keep adding energy
to those three moons.
So think about the implications for Earth.
If we were closer to the Sun, or to another big planet, we could have had one hemisphere
always facing the Sun, and the other always in darkness, and that would be a very, very
different planet.
It also underscores how a smaller world, even one constantly energized by Jupiter's tidal
forces, can be geologically dead.
It's simply too small to have the kind of dynamic geological processes, notably plateectonics,
that help to maintain our biosphere on Earth.
See, in the realm of planets, size really does matter.
By the way, we're likely to learn a lot more about Ganymede in the next decade that Jupiter
Ganymede Orbiter is a small probe linked to the Europa Jupiter system mission.
That's the one that's scheduled for a 2020 launch.
And now we come to the fourth Jovian moon.
This is Callisto.
It's another rock and ice world, virtually the same size as Mercury, but frozen solid.
It has a very ancient cratered surface.
In fact, it's the most heavily cratered surface known.
In fact, any new impact simply replaces older craters.
It's so densely cratered.
Another intriguing aspect of Callisto, it's the most likely spot for a space base if we
ever choose to colonize the region around Jupiter, because it's far enough from Jupiter
to avoid the high levels of radiation, has lots of potential resources, including water.
Now, moving on to our tour of the gas giant planets, Saturn, the ringed planet, is a majestic,
beautiful site.
It's only about a third the mass of Jupiter, but it's quite similar in composition and
character.
Like Jupiter, Saturn is made primarily of hydrogen and helium.
And like Jupiter, it also has violent weather and lots of moons.
Saturn's far away.
It's almost 10 times farther from the Sun than Earth, and it takes almost 30 years to
complete one orbit.
So unlike the other planets we've met, each of which tends to move significantly in the
night sky from year to year, if not month to month, Saturn wanders the sky at this leisurely
pace.
Like Jupiter, Saturn's 10-hour day causes an equatorial bulge, and it causes severe weather
with the same extreme atmospheric shearing and intense cyclonic storms.
Of course, Saturn's most distinctive feature, visible even in a modest telescope, is the
magnificent complex of rings.
What appears at first to be a continuous broad ring is actually a complex system of ringlets
with a very dynamic set of shepherding moons and other complex gravitational interactions.
The bright rings are composed primarily of tiny ice crystals in a surprisingly thin,
flat sheet.
So why did the rings form?
Why not more moons?
The answer holds a key message for Earth, and it has to do what's known as the Roche limit.
It turns out that every star or planet has an imaginary surrounding sphere inside of
which planets or moons can't form because of gravitational disruptions.
The gravity is simply too great.
Saturn's rings lie inside this Roche limit, and we'll come back to this point when we
explore the origins of Earth's big moon.
Astronomers have identified more than 60 Saturnian moons, and these are all objects larger than
one kilometer in diameter.
Most of them are irregular asteroid-like bodies, but 24 have been classified as regular
satellites.
That is, they have near-circular orbits in Saturn's plane of rotation.
By far the most interesting moon, indeed one of the most interesting places in the entire
solar system is the largest moon, Titan.
This planet-sized world has a thick atmosphere.
It's the only moon with that feature, and it has its own unique dynamic surface as well.
It's the only body other than Earth with lakes and rivers at its surface.
Titan's bigger than Mercury, though only half is massive because it's about half ice, and
so it's much less dense than Silicate Rock.
The Cassini-Huygens space probe landed on Titan and took amazing photographs during its
descent of a complex system of lakes and rivers, probably filled with liquid hydrocarbons since
the temperatures at the surface are far below the freezing point of water.
Cassini confirmed that Titan has a substantial nitrogen atmosphere, with the surface pressure
estimated to be about one and a half atmospheres.
Titan's atmosphere also features fascinating orange smog that seems to be made of carbon-based
compounds.
That's the kind of chemistry that must have preceded life's origin on Earth, so Titan is
another place where planetary scientists want to visit in their search for life on other
worlds.
And now we come to the outer two major planets, Uranus and Neptune, neither of which is visible
without the aid of a good telescope.
That seventh planet, Uranus, was discovered in 1781 by the celebrated English astronomer
William Herschel, who lived from 1738 to 1822.
He and other astronomers suspected the existence of this seventh planet because of orbital
irregularities in Saturn.
As Isaac Newton stated, no object in the solar system can change its path without a force.
So the deviation of Saturn from its predicted orbit implied some other big as yet unseen
source of gravity.
Uranus turns out to be about 19 times the Earth's sun distance, with an orbital period
of 84 years.
The planet is more than four times the diameter of Earth, and 15 times more massive.
Voyager 2 revealed that the Uranian day is about 17 hours long, and that the rotation
axis of Uranus is on its side relative to the other planets.
Now think about that, Uranus actually sort of rolls along in its orbit.
So unlike other planets, each pole of Uranus receives direct sunlight for 42 years at a
time.
This orbital, anominally, like that of retrograde Venus, provides key clues about Earth's history,
and we'll come back to this point in lecture 16.
Like the other gas giant planets, Uranus is composed mainly of light elements, but it
has a lot more ices, including methane and ammonia as well.
Uranus has five major moons, all of which appear frozen and inactive, as well as more
than 20 smaller moons, and a complex system of rings as well.
And finally we come to Neptune, the most distant planet.
Its discovery was a great triumph of Isaac Newton's model of gravitation and forces.
Recall that Uranus was discovered because the orbit of Saturn appeared to be perturbed
slightly.
Well, astronomers had noticed that the orbit of Uranus itself was also perturbed slightly,
so the existence and approximate location of the 8th planet was deduced independently
by astronomers in England and France.
Then in 1846, the planet was observed by French and German astronomers.
Neptune is very, very far away, 30 times the Earth's sun distance, so it takes about four
hours for light to travel from the sun to Neptune.
It orbits the sun once every 165 Earth years.
Neptune is hard to study in Earth-based telescopes because it's so faint and so far away, but
we got a pretty good view in 1989 from the Voyager 2 flyby.
That's when we got the best photographs of the beautiful blue planet.
It turns out that the atmosphere consisting of hydrogen and helium, laced with methane
and ammonia, is a frigid 60 degrees above absolute zero.
The planet rotates fast once every 16 hours, which drives dynamic weather patterns.
It has big, long-lasting, cyclonic storms, just like those seen on Jupiter and Saturn.
And like all other gas giant planets, Neptune has lots of moons, 13 moons at last count,
and a ring complex as well.
The largest and most interesting moon is Triton, 2,700 kilometers in diameter with its own
methane-rich atmosphere.
It's a fascinating object in its own right.
Triton is a real anomaly.
It has an ice plus rock composition that is quite different from Neptune.
And it's also orbiting around Neptune in the wrong way.
It's a retrograde orbit.
These characteristics suggest that Triton is a captured plutoid.
It's just slightly larger than Pluto, and it doesn't appear to be a moon formed in
place like Jupiter's Galilean moons.
And that's a very tricky scenario for a planet to capture a big moon.
So Triton provides us with perhaps our best chance at understanding the plutoids.
And they do seem to be strange beasts.
For one thing, Triton appears to have what are called cryovolcanoes.
Those are ice volcanoes where the magma is liquid water or ammonia or even methane instead
of molten rock.
The surface appears to be covered with frozen nitrogen and water and carbon dioxide.
And there are very few craters which suggest that the surface is constantly reworked and
still very, very active.
There's also a lot of silicate rock deep inside.
These rocks may hold radioactive elements that continue to provide some heat energy to drive
all that cryovolcanism.
All in all, Triton is a very different and a very fascinating world.
What we've seen this lecture in the last is that the solar system is in an incredibly
rich and varied place with innumerable objects that provide hints about the origins and evolution
of individual planets and moons, as well as systems of gravitationally linked bodies.
The inner solar system is dominated by the relatively dense planets, Mercury, Venus,
Earth, and Mars, with surfaces of silicate rocks and minerals.
By contrast, the four outer planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune are gas giants
made primarily of hydrogen and helium, but with a lot of other interesting molecules
thrown in.
The diverse inventory of moons, notably the several remarkable planet-sized moons orbiting
the outer planets, provide even more perspective on common themes in the behavior of terrestrial
worlds, and also what makes our own planet so special.
And so, with that background, we can begin to assemble our own home, our world, planet
Earth.
