This series is a scientific biography of Earth's, its violent births, its turbulent adolescence,
its remarkable transformation to a living world, and its repeated, subsequent changes
as the geosphere and biosphere co-evolved.
All that drama occurred over the past four and a half billion years.
But to understand the story of Earth, we first have to journey back in time even earlier,
not just to the birth of our planet, but much, much farther back, to the dawn of all things.
We have to go back almost 14 billion years to the big bang.
In the beginning, there was no planet called Earth, nor was there any sun to warm it.
Our solar system, with its glowing central star and all its rich variety of planets and
moons, its comets and asteroids, is a relative newcomer to the cosmos.
Our solar system is only about 4.567 billion years old, which is only the last third of
the universe's history so far.
A lot had to happen before Earth could form.
Most important, the universe had to begin, which happened about 13.8 billion years ago
by that latest estimate.
That moment of creation remains perhaps the most elusive event in the history of the universe,
but it also was the defining event that set everything we know in motion.
In this lecture, I'll review those ancient, epic events from the big bang to the formation
of the first atoms.
The story of Earth's evolution begins with the evolution of the cosmos.
We'll look at what we know and what we don't know, and see how the big bang set into motion
a process of cosmic evolution.
Let's begin a century ago, at a time when the size and history of the universe were
topics of great interest, yet when there was essentially no measurable data on which to
base conclusions.
If you look at the sky with a modest-sized telescope, you can see that the hazy band
of the Milky Way is composed of countless millions of stars.
Each of those stars has a tiny pinprick of light, a point source.
But there are countless other, less distinct objects that appear as fuzzy masses, not points.
Those cloud-like objects called nebula were the subject of much debate a century ago.
Some astronomers acclaimed that nebula are nearby dust clouds that are illuminated by
other stars, so nebula are close by.
In that case, they would have no resolvable structures, even in the most powerful telescope.
Others suggested that nebula were much more distant clusters of lots of individual stars,
but they're much too far away for those stars to be resolved.
But no one could make such observations with the tools available before 1920.
No telescope was big enough.
Early in the last century, the Carnegie Institution of Washington built a mammoth new telescope
with a 100-inch mirror on Mount Wilson near Los Angeles, California.
That telescope helped to settle the controversy in 1924 when American astronomer Edwin Hubble
took high-resolution photos of the Andromeda Galaxy.
That's one of the closest galaxies to our own Milky Way.
Based on his research, Hubble made two monumental discoveries in cosmology, that is the study
of the nature and origin of the universe.
First, Hubble used the 100-inch telescope to study an unusual type of star called a
Cepheid variable.
Cepheid variables are very bright giant stars that get noticeably brighter and dimmer over
a period ranging from a few hours to several weeks.
These stars literally expand and contract, oscillating in size and in apparent brightness.
A few years earlier, astronomer Henrietta Swan Levitt had discovered a simple relationship
between the period of a Cepheid variable and the amount of light it gave off.
It turns out that the absolute brightness of these stars is directly related to the length
of the cycle.
So astronomers can look for this type of variable star in other objects like Andromeda Galaxy
and estimate their distance just by measuring the period and the apparent brightness.
Using the mount Wilson Telescope, Hubble was able to resolve individual Cepheid variable
stars for the very first time, and what Hubble found was that the variable stars appear to
be extremely faint, much too faint for anything within our own Milky Way galaxy.
So it turns out that Andromeda is a vast collection of stars that lie well beyond our immediate
neighborhood in the cosmos.
So that was Hubble's first great discovery.
Nebula are in fact vast, gravitationally bound collections of tens or hundreds of billions
of stars.
We call these objects galaxies.
Subsequent studies by Hubble and others reveal that galaxies are incredibly far away.
Andromeda, which is our nearest big galactic neighbor, is already an astonishing two million
light years away.
That is, it takes like two million years to travel from Andromeda to us.
And when you look at the Andromeda galaxy, you're seeing what it looked like two million
years ago.
Now, two million light years is a very long distance.
Light travels 186,000 miles every second, so 186,000 miles is a light second.
Multiplying 186,000 miles per second times 60 seconds per minute times 60 minutes per
hour times 24 hours per day times 365 days per year times two million years gives an
astonishing distance of more than 10 quadrillion miles.
That's a one with 16 zeros after it.
And that's our closest big galactic neighbor.
There are other galaxies more than a thousand times farther away than that.
And recent detections are even beginning to reach as far as 13 billion light years away.
So Edwin Hubble's first great discovery was that the universe is composed of distant galaxies
that are actually enormous collections of stars.
Our own Milky Way galaxy is now thought to have hundreds of billions of stars.
But Hubble's greatest discovery, also based on studying galaxies, was yet to come.
You see, it was Hubble studies that led to the first clear observational evidence for
the age and origin of the universe.
Hubble and other astronomers measured the relative velocities of galaxies by what's
known as their red shifts.
The red shift is an apparent change in the wavelengths of light coming from a distant
object, such as a star or a galaxy.
If the object moves toward you, then waves pile up more closely together, and there's
a shift of apparent wavelength to the higher frequency blue part of the spectrum.
That's a blue shift.
And then if the object moves away from you, then waves spread out, there's a parent shift
of wavelength to the lower frequency red part of the spectrum, and that's a red shift.
The Doppler effect is a familiar example of this red shift phenomenon.
In fact, you hear the Doppler effect whenever a fast-moving vehicle, and ambulance or a
race car, goes by.
Listen carefully for the next time the vehicle is going by, you hear how higher-pitched sound
as the vehicle approaches, and a lower-pitched sound as it moves away sort of rrrrrrrrrr.
Well light from galaxies behaves exactly the same way, with what Hubble discovered, was
that more distant galaxies are moving away from us more quickly.
For instance, the nearby andromeda galaxy at a mere 2 million light-years is actually
moving slowly towards us, so it has a small blue shift, but a slightly more distant galaxy
visible in the constellation Virgo is 63 million light-years away and has a noticeable red
shift that indicates it's moving away at 1200 kilometers per second.
That's about four tenths of one percent of the speed of light.
And a much more distant galaxy visible in powerful telescopes in the constellation Hydra
is about four billion light-years away and has a much greater red shift corresponding
to moving away from us at 61,000 kilometers per second.
That's about 20 percent of light speed.
So the more distance a galaxy, the faster it's speeding away.
Hubble measured the red shifts of about 20 galaxies and realized that there's a simple
relationship between distance and velocity.
But this result leads to an amazing conclusion.
The universe is expanding, and if you play the cosmic take backwards, everything is converging
back to a point in both space and in time.
So Hubble's great discovery of the expanding universe has startling implications regarding
the origin of the universe.
In fact, it now appears that the universe began at an instant of time approximately 14 billion
years ago, and it has been expanding ever since.
This theory that the universe came into existence at one moment in time and has subsequently
undergone rapid expansion is called the Big Bang.
When thinking about the Big Bang, I like to take a step back and consider the philosophy
of cosmology.
Before Edwin Hubble and the Mount Wilson Observatory came along, there were no data to address
the origin of the universe.
You couldn't tell if a galaxy was a nearby cloud of gas or a much more distant collection
of many stars.
So cosmology was a largely philosophical pursuit.
But even without data, scientists and philosophers like wanted to know how the universe came
to be.
So what does your philosophy or your intuition tell you about that question?
It turns out that a lot of astronomers had very strong feelings, and some of them were
quick to debate the matter even without sufficient observational data.
You see, some scientists, including Albert Einstein and the influential British astrophysicist
Sir Arthur Eddington, referred a steady state universe with no obvious beginning, no creation
event.
Other scientists like Belgian astronomer and Catholic priest Georges Lemaitre, who studied
for a year under Eddington, were absolutely committed to an origin event.
They believed in a moment of creation and their cosmology conformed to that idea.
So think about that big question.
If you had no observational evidence, which side would you have supported?
A moment of creation or a steady state universe?
The debate is in some ways similar to attitudes towards mineralogy.
The dominant view for a long time has been a kind of steady state, time, independent
description of the mineral world.
Mineral evolution, on the other hand, emphasizes origin events for different minerals and dramatic
changes through time.
But the data are now in, and three lines of observational evidence support the Big Bang
theory.
There's the universal expansion, then the discovery of a pervasive background of microwave
radiation in the cosmos, and finally the ratios of the light elements hydrogen, helium,
and lithium.
First and foremost was Hubble's discovery in the 1920s of the expanding universe, which
has now been amplified by thousands of observations.
Time and again, astronomers have confirmed that all but the closest galaxies are speeding
away from us, and that the farther the galaxy, the faster it's receding.
So we have compelling evidence that the universe is expanding.
However, I have to stress that expansion alone doesn't prove the Big Bang.
It's possible, for example, that the universe is in a steady state expansion with new matter
materializing, continually forming new galaxies as old galaxies get farther apart.
Think about that.
You could have a steady state universe with no origin moment, and still what you would
see is expansion.
As cosmologists grappled with the strange consequences of universal expansion, they divided themselves
into opposing two camps, sometimes called the bangers and the anti-bangers.
So in spite of Hubble's great discovery, expansion by itself didn't resolve the issue
of the origin of the universe.
A second compelling piece of evidence for the Big Bang discovered quite by accident in
the 1960s is a pervasive background of microwaves that seemed to flood every corner of the universe.
This cosmic microwave background radiation at first seems inexplicable.
It was discovered by two researchers at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's
Bell Laboratory in New Jersey.
Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson were studying microwave communications, and they had developed
a new high sensitivity cone-shaped microwave antenna that they were testing.
But right from the start, they experienced a high level of noise or static, and that
certainly is not a good situation for communications.
They tried everything to eliminate the noise.
They even dealt with pigeons who had built a nest in the antenna, thinking that their
droppings might have affected reception somehow, but nothing worked.
The noise persisted.
And it was just chance.
But at the same time, Philip James Peebles, a theoretical astrophysicist working just
a short distance away at Princeton, had been thinking about the consequences of the Big
Bang, and he realized that what Penzias and Wilson had discovered was exactly what theoretical
astrophysicists had predicted.
The microwave static was actually primordial electromagnetic radiation left over from the
Big Bang.
This was a great discovery.
Imagine what must have happened.
At the instant of the Big Bang, the universe was flooded with all the matter, all the energy
that would ever be, unimaginable amounts of energy were converted into highly energetic
electromagnetic radiation with unimaginably short wavelengths, because short wavelengths
translate into very high energies.
Then as the universe expanded after the Big Bang, as the universe began to cool, and the
wavelengths of that electromagnetic radiation were stretched out to lower and lower energy
along with the expansion.
The background microwave radiation we see today represents the remnants of that initial
intense radiation, which has been stretched out to microwave wavelengths.
That's wavelengths on the order of a foot long.
This unanticipated discovery won Penzias and Wilson the 1978 Nobel Prize in Physics,
and that wasn't the last Nobel Prize in this subject.
In 2006, John C. Mather of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center and George F. Smoot of
the University of California, Berkeley, won the physics Nobel for work that documented
a kind of fine structure in the cosmic microwave background.
Using much more sensitive satellite-based measurements of the background in all directions,
Mather and Smoot were able to show that the background, while remarkably constant, is
not completely uniform in all directions of the sky.
There are subtle variations that may help to explain why today's universe is so lumpy
with immense clusters of galaxies and even larger voids.
The third line of evidence for the Big Bang is based on the ratios of the lightest elements,
number one, two, and three.
That's hydrogen, helium, and lithium that we measured today.
As we'll explore in more detail in the next lecture, these three lightest elements of
the periodic table condensed directly out of the Big Bang.
While most of this matter was in the form of hydrogen atoms, about a tenth was helium
plus a very small amount of lithium.
Measurements of the relative amounts of these light elements provide strong evidence for
the Big Bang.
Especially important in this regard is the ratio of two variants of the hydrogen atom,
normal hydrogen, and the heavier version, an isotope called deuterium.
We'll come back to this point, but for now just keep in mind that the observed ratios
of light elements in the universe closely match the predictions of a Big Bang origin
as opposed to the steady state model.
And think about it, hydrogen atoms are fundamental building blocks of water in all our food,
in petroleum products, and in our own bodies which are roughly 10% hydrogen by mass.
You might even say that 10% of your own weight is contributed by atoms forged in the Big
Bang.
The Big Bang was the beginning of everything, including the prologue to our own planet Earth.
So let me try to paint a picture of what the Big Bang was like.
And up front I have to confess that it's impossible to paint such a picture.
Nothing in our experience is remotely related to the Big Bang.
Nothing you will ever imagine could possibly be anything like that origin event.
But let's at least try.
First, imagine all those distant galaxies moving away from us.
The farther away a galaxy is, the faster it's moving away from us.
So everything in the universe seems to be expanding away from us.
And if you play that video backward for long enough, then all the galaxies in the universe
would appear to converge to a single point.
And we can actually do that by looking at distance galaxies in every direction and measuring
distances and speeds.
So think about all the matter of the universe zooming back towards a common center with
more distant masses zooming in much faster than those close by.
Closer and closer all the galaxies converge until the big crunch.
Everything in the cosmos is back together at a single point.
And our best estimate is that event was about 13.8 billion years ago.
That's the Big Bang played in reverse.
To understand what this Big Bang was really like, you should first think about what it
was not like.
In spite of its name, the Big Bang was not an explosion in which matter expanded into
an existing space.
OK, this is a critical point.
Existence itself expanded and not into anything.
There was no inside and no outside.
This is a totally foreign concept, so don't be frustrated if you can't imagine it.
But I have to emphasize again, the so-called Big Bang was not an explosion.
Instead it was what physicists call a singularity.
It was a transformation from nothing to something.
We know of no way to make any measurement that provides any insight at all about what
came before the Big Bang.
In the beginning, all space and energy and matter came into existence from an unknowable
void.
Nothing, then something.
The concept is beyond our ability to craft metaphors.
Our universe did not suddenly appear where there was only vacuum before.
For before the Big Bang, there was no volume and no time.
Our concept of nothing implies an emptiness, but before the Big Bang, there was nothing
to be empty in.
But then, in an instant, there was not just something, but the beginnings of everything
that would ever be, all at once, albeit in a volume smaller than an atom's nucleus.
Such an ultra-compressed cosmos began as pure, homogeneous energy with no particles to spoil
the perfect uniformity.
Swiftly, the universe expanded, not into anything.
Remember, there is no outside to our universe.
The atom itself emerged and grew.
As existence expanded, it cooled, and as it cooled, gravity began to concentrate matter,
and then lumpiness happened.
So what was the Big Bang like?
The surface of an expanding balloon is often used as a helpful analogy.
The idea is to imagine yourself as a two-dimensional being on the surface of a balloon.
So there are certain rules you have to obey.
You can move from any point to any other point on the surface, but you have absolutely no
concept of a third dimension.
Now imagine what it would be like if the balloon started to expand.
There you are at one point on the surface.
Every other point on the surface is moving away from you as the balloon expands.
What's more?
The faster away the point is, the faster it appears to be moving away from you.
So that's just like Hubble expansion.
But from your two-dimensional point of view, the balloon doesn't expand into anything.
The balloon just keeps getting larger.
If you were a two-dimensional being on the surface, you'd perceive the same kind of expansion
as Hubble saw in our universe.
But there are real problems with this analogy.
And one thing you have to imagine yourself as a two-dimensional being, we all actually
know that the balloon is expanding into a third dimension.
Unlike the balloon, our universe isn't expanding into anything, at least not into anything that
we perceive.
So that's one way the analogy breaks down.
What's more, the analogy is misleading because the dots on our balloon get bigger, but our
galaxy is not expanding.
It's only the vast spaces between the galaxies that's expanding.
And a balloon simply can't replicate that, though you might try to attach fixed-sized
galaxies to an expanding balloon.
OK, this leads to another possible analogy for the Big Mac, which is sometimes compared
to a large batch of raisin bread dough as it rises and expands.
From the point of view of any raisin, all other raisins are moving away.
Furthermore, more distant raisins move away faster because there's more intervening expanding
dough.
But there's a real problem with this analogy as well.
Any massive raisin dough has an obvious inside and an obvious outside, but the universe has
no outside.
It isn't expanding into anything.
There's another important point about the expanding universe.
It's tempting to think that we are at the center of the universe, at a special place.
Within these analogies, Earth doesn't occupy a special place in the cosmos.
According to the Big Bang view of the universe's origin, all observers anywhere in the universe
see exactly the same sort of expansion.
This is also somewhat of a philosophical point.
Most astronomers believe in a homogeneous universe.
That's a universe in which, at least on a large scale, all places are similar to all
other places.
All places have the same natural laws.
They have the same universal constants, such as gravity and so forth.
So let's get back to the Big Bang and the very first instant of our universe.
And here we have to think about the concept of freezing, or phase transition, which happens
when a very hot object gets colder.
First I want you to imagine taking all of the familiar objects around you, all the furniture,
all the books, all the electronic gear, all your clothing, even every living thing, and
placing everything in an immensely hot fire.
Think about what would happen if that furnace was hot enough, all the metals and plastic
and glass would break down to a gaseous mixture of elements.
Every living thing would do the same, stripped down to atoms of carbon and oxygen and hydrogen
and so forth.
Then heat the mixture even hotter, and the atoms would start to smash into each other
and fragment into smaller particles, perhaps to a uniform mixture of protons and electrons.
The higher the temperature, the more uniform everything becomes.
At the highest imaginable temperature, everything would just be a completely homogeneous continuum.
Only by cooling would you be able to freeze out all the distinctive solids and liquids
and gasses that make our planet.
Well, that's what happened after the Big Bang.
To study the Big Bang, see the universe today as a place where not only different particles
matter, but also all the forces, like gravity, have frozen out of an earlier, uniform and
perfectly symmetric time, a time 13.8 billion years ago when all the particles and all the
forces were indistinguishable.
So think yourself backward in time, to that instant of creation when all the matter and
energy of the universe appeared at a point at that hot, compressed universe, cooled a
dramatic series of seven cosmic freezings took place.
The earliest three freezings occurred in a fraction of the first second as the four
known forces in nature separated from their initial homogeneous state.
The first of these freezings, according to calculations, occurred when the universe was
only 10 to the minus 43 seconds old.
That's a 10 millionth of a trillionth of a trillionth of a trillionth second.
That's a very short time indeed.
At that point in early cosmic history, gravity forever split off from the other forces and
the universal expansion was opposed by gravity for the very first time.
So before that time is referred to as the inflationary period, a time when the universe
expanded extra fast, perhaps all the way up from a point to the size of a grapefruit.
There's no known way to reproduce the incredible concentrated energy of that earliest cosmic
event nor of the second freezing which occurred at about 10 to the minus 35 seconds when what
is called the strong force froze out.
The strong force holds the nuclear particles like the proton and the neutron together.
So this was an important step in the invention of atoms.
Everything we know of those early two freezings comes from theoretical calculations.
At 10 to the minus 10th seconds when the universe was one 10 billionth of a second old, the two
remaining forces separated.
One of these, the weak force, is manifest today in radioactivity.
It's the force that causes dangerous particles to fly away from a radioactive atom.
The other force, the so-called electromagnetic force, is manifest in such everyday phenomena
as static cling and refrigerator magnets.
The electromagnetic force holds atoms together and is ultimately responsible for all the
matter that makes up our planet.
Hints of this third cosmic freezing can be gleaned from experiments at the world's largest
particle accelerators which can reproduce the energies associated with the unified
electro-weak force.
Now subsequent freezing has led to all the matter we see today.
At 10 to the minus 5th seconds, that's 10 millionths of a second, all matter existed
as electrons and other isolated particles called quarks and leptons.
Today there are no isolated quarks, though isolated leptons such as the negatively charged
electrons still play a major role in our material world.
In fact, electricity is nothing more than the flow of electrons in a metal wire.
At 10 to the minus 5th seconds, the quarks combine to form all sorts of additional particles
including protons and neutrons.
Protons are massive positively charged atomic particles while neutrons are similar to protons
in mass but have no electrical charge.
Both of those particles play major roles in the atomic nucleus.
A proton, for example, is essentially a hydrogen atom that's missing its electron and each
is formed by a combination of three quarks.
And so when the universe was still less than a second old, all four forces had frozen out
as had the basic building blocks of atoms, electrons, protons, and neutrons.
It took about three minutes more for the first atomic nuclei of protons and neutrons to fuse
together and form deuterium.
That's an atomic nucleus that contains one proton and one neutron.
Recall that the modern ratio of hydrogen which has a nucleus with just one proton to deuterium
is one of the lines of evidence for the Big Bang.
Well this is the time when that ratio was set.
These hydrogen and deuterium nuclei were surrounded by a sea of hot, speeding electrons, forming
one immense plasma.
A plasma is the state of matter that forms stars.
It's extremely hot and it's like a gas, but the atoms are broken apart into positive nuclei
and negative electrons.
Things were still ridiculously hot in that early universe and they remain so for about
half a million years.
Gradually as the universe continued to expand, the cosmos cooled to a few thousand degrees
and that's sufficiently cold for electrons to latch onto nuclei and form the first atoms.
The overwhelming majority of those first atoms were hydrogen, more than 90% of all atoms,
with a few percent helium and a trace of lithium thrown in.
As we'll see in the next lecture, that mix of elements is what would form the first stars.
To summarize, in this lecture we've seen that the universe is a vast and scale, epic in
its history.
Three lines of evidence support the Big Bang theory of the universe's origin approximately
14 billion years ago.
The universe expansion demonstrated by receding galaxies, the cosmic microwave background left
over from the Big Bang, and the distribution of the three lightest elements, hydrogen,
helium and lithium, and virtually all the hydrogen in the universe today was created
at that time.
Even today, hydrogen and helium are the most common elements in our solar system, contributing
almost all the mass of our sun, as well as most of the mass of the large gas giant planets
of the outer solar system.
But what about the rest of the building blocks?
If the Big Bang contributed mostly hydrogen, where did all the other elements come from?
For example, the leading elements of Earth as a whole are iron and oxygen.
Where did they come from?
The next dramatic steps leading to the birth of Earth took place over the next several
millions of years, as the first elements formed stars and the first stars began to give birth
to the entire periodic table of the elements.
That process is called nucleosynthesis.
So in the next lecture, we'll turn to that history, the story of where we got all the
other elements that make up Earth.
