In this lesson, I would like to shift our focus a bit and review material on linear equations
and functions, especially as it relates to the connection between the equations themselves
and what the graphs look like. It's very important that we remember that algebra
is much more than solving equations and manipulating algebraic expressions. In particular,
it's critical that we keep the visual or graphing side in mind as we study algebra.
In this lesson, I want to touch on three main subjects, the slope intercept form of a line,
the point slope form of a line, and the special pairs of lines that we call parallel
and perpendicular lines. So let me remind you of the definition first of the slope intercept form
of a line. If m is the slope of a line and b is the y intercept of the line, then the slope
intercept form of the equation of a line is y equals mx plus b. Here's the picture you might
want to have in mind. You're going to have a y-intercept in most cases where the line crosses
the y-axis. In this case, the y-intercept is at the point 0 comma 1. And remember, the value
m is going to be a number. That's going to be the slope of the line in question.
Sometimes you've heard people refer to the rise over run, for example. So we'll talk more about
slope as we walk through the following examples. Here's our first one. Let's find the slope
intercept form of the equation of this line. In order to do this, let's write the slope
intercept form once we have found the slope and the y-intercept. That's why it's called the slope
intercept form. And let me point out that we only need the y-intercept when we're writing down the
slope intercept form. We don't need to worry about the x-intercept, the place where the graph crosses
the x-axis. We only need to know the y-intercept. Well, if you look at the graph, the y-intercept
here is easy. It's just b equals 3 because the graph is going through the point 0 comma 3.
Now let's figure out the slope. We need to know this rise over run, the change in the y-direction
divided by the change in the x-direction. To do this, let's pick any two points on the line,
any two we'll do, and we can use those to find the slope. So I'm going to use 0 comma 3, that was
that y-intercept, and the point 1 comma 5. And then with those two points, I can find the slope.
The slope, which we often call m, is going to equal 5 minus 3 divided by 1 minus 0. That's the
change in the y-values, or the difference in the y-values, divided by the difference in the x-values.
When you do a little simplification, the numerator is 2, the denominator is 1,
so the slope here is equal to 2. And that means that the equation of this line, which is y equals
mx plus b, is exactly y equals 2x plus 3. Okay, let's look at a second example of this form.
Let's determine the slope-intercept form of the equation of this line. Well, here I see the y
intercept very quickly again. It's just b equals 1. That's because the place where this line crosses
the y-axis is exactly the point 0 comma 1. So now we need to figure out the slope. What is that?
Well, we know it has to be negative because the line is going down as we look at it from left to
right. In other words, as we read it left to right, the line is actually going down. And that means
the slope has to be negative. It's also got to be pretty small because the line is somewhat flat.
It's not exactly flat. We would call that horizontal, but it is kind of flat. So our slope is going to
be negative, and it's probably going to be pretty small. Now, let's calculate it. I need two points
again. And if I look at my graph, I can see that the line goes through 4 comma 0 and 0 comma 1.
Those are the two intercepts, the x-intercept and the y-intercept. And once I use that information
in the formula for slope, I'm going to have the following. m equals 1 minus 0 divided by 0 minus
4, which is the same as 1 over negative 4 or negative 1 fourth. That's negative, and it's
also relatively small. 1 fourth is a pretty small number. And that means we're probably in the right
ballpark. And if we use that information to find the slope intercept form of the equation,
we will have y equals negative 1 fourth x plus 1. That's the equation we wanted.
Now, let's transition a bit. What about if we wanted to do the opposite kind of problem? That is,
if I give you the slope intercept form of the equation first, could we figure out how to draw
the graph? That would be sort of the opposite problem to what we've just done. Now, I have to
admit the slope intercept form of a line seems to be the most popular one among lots of students
and even among teachers. But I'm not sure why that is because maybe it's the simplest form of the
equation of the line that you can find. But let me be honest with you, in almost every example
that I showed you so far, the y-intercept was basically handed to us. You could see it very,
very clearly on the graph. What if that value b, which is where the y-intercept is located,
hadn't been so obvious? What if it had been like b equals 1 19th or b equals 7 thirds? It might not
have been so clear and we would have had much more work to do to find that intercept. So,
that's a disadvantage, a problem when you want to use the slope intercept form of the equation of
a line. If b isn't basically handed to us, then it's very difficult to write down the slope intercept
form of that equation. So, what do we do? We just give up and quit? No, we need to think about this
slightly differently. It turns out we can learn another form of the equation of a line
which doesn't require us to find the y-intercept first. And that leads us to something called the
point slope form of a line. Let me show you an example to try to motivate why this point
slope form of a line is very useful. So, here's the example I want us to do. Find the equation
of the line that's given to us here. Now, let me be clear about what we know. We see that the
line goes through the point 2, 0. That's the x-intercept of the line. Let's assume we're also
told that the line goes through the point negative 2, 10 thirds. From here, just having those two
points, I want to work out the equation of the line. Well, with the two points that we're given,
we can calculate the slope. Remember, the slope simply needs two points. It doesn't matter what
the two points are, it just needs two points. So, in this case, the slope is going to be
10 thirds minus 0 divided by negative 2 minus 2. And that's the same thing as 10 thirds in the
numerator divided by negative 4, which is the same as negative 10 over 12 or negative 5 over 6.
Notice that that's a negative slope, and from the picture we see, it should have been negative,
because again, the line is going down as we read from left to right. Now, that's one piece of
information. We know the slope. Now, we need one more piece of information. If we want the slope
intercept form of this line, we would have to find the y-intercept. But what is it? If you look
at the graph of this equation, it was given to us, it's very difficult to see the y-intercept,
because it looks like it's going between two whole numbers. It's obviously something between
one and two. Is it one and a half, one and one third, one and two thirds, one and four sevenths?
I don't know. It's just not clear. And that's the downside of the slope intercept form of the
equation of a line. If you can't find the y-intercept easily, or if it's not given to you, then the
slope intercept form is a bit unfriendly. Now, don't get me wrong. We could find that y-intercept
with a little bit of algebra, but I claim that there's a better form of the equation
that we can write down. And that's the point-slope form of the equation of a line. And that's what
I want us to now think about as we move forward with this lesson. So, to get us started thinking
about this, let's talk about the point-slope form of the equation of a line and write down its definition.
Here we go. The point-slope form of the equation of a line that passes through any point, let's call it
x1, y1, and has a slope m is given by y minus y1 equals m times x minus x1. This is an extremely
important formula, and you should put it to memory as soon as this lesson is over. In fact,
you might even want to spend a few moments memorizing it right now. y minus y1 equals
m times x minus x1. Now, let's point out the x1 and the y1 were parts of the point that we already
knew we had. The x and the y are variables in themselves. Now, with this form of the equation
of a line available to us, we can now write down the equation of the line that we were talking about
a few moments ago. Remember, we figured out that the slope was equal to negative 5 over 6,
and we know that the line goes through the point 2 comma 0. That's the x intercept, not the y
intercept. So, thanks to the point-slope form of the equation of the line, we know that that
equation is equal to the following. y minus 0 equals negative 5 6 times the quantity x minus 2.
The negative 5 6 came from the slope, and the 2 and the 0 come from the point
that we know the line goes through. Now, we could leave the equation that way. That could be our
final answer if we wanted, or we can simplify it a bit. I'd like to simplify it just a bit with you
and show you something thanks to all that simplification. So, we have y minus 0 equals
negative 5 6 times the quantity x minus 2. Of course, y minus 0 is just y, so I can rewrite this as
y equals negative 5 6 times the quantity x minus 2, and now I can use the distributive property
to give me y equals negative 5 6 x minus 2 times negative 5 6. That's the same as y equals negative
5 6 x plus 10 over 6. 2 times 5 gives me 10, and the negative times the negative gives me a positive.
And if I simplify that just a little bit more, I get y equals negative 5 6 x plus 5 thirds.
Now, what's so special about the formula that we just wrote down? What is true about that equation?
It's the equation of the same line we've been talking about, but notice that it's now in the form
y equals m x plus b. That's the slope intercept form of the line, and it's the same one we've
been discussing. So, now I know where that y intercept really was. It was at 5 thirds,
and that means it was at one and two thirds. Remember, the point looked like it was between
one and two. Now we know exactly where it went through. It went through one and two thirds.
So, I see that this point slope form of the equation, it feels a little more flexible to me
than the slope intercept form, and that's because I can use any point that's on the line
and the slope to find that equation. So, once I can use that point slope form, if I really,
really want to know the y intercept, I can convert it to slope intercept form the way I just did
to find the y intercept of 5 thirds in that example. Now, let's move on to another example
where we can use the point slope form of the equation of a line to our advantage. And what I'd
like to suggest you do is stop the video and see if you can find the point slope equation
for this line yourself first. Let me give it to you. Write down the equation of the line
that has slope 5 that passes through the point negative 1, negative 3. Now, with the slope
intercept form of the equation, you'd have some difficulty because the problem didn't tell you
anything about the y intercept. The point that we know the line is going through is nowhere near
the y intercept, but with the slope and with any point, I can use the point slope form of the
equation of a line to write down this line's equation. So, here we go. Let's check to see if
you've got the work that I'm about to show you. The point slope form of the equation of this line
is y minus negative 3 equals 5 times the quantity x minus negative 1. And if I wanted to get rid of
some of those minus signs, I know that a negative times another negative is a positive, and that
means the point slope form of the equation of this line can also be written as y plus 3 equals
5 times the quantity x plus 1. Remember that that 5 is going to have to be multiplied with
both the x and the 1 if you decide to do any other work to simplify this equation. Now,
if you got that equation, y plus 3 equals 5 times the quantity x plus 1, great job. You did it right,
and you can move forward then. Now, let me make a couple comments as we continue on with these ideas
of lines and their graphs and the equations of lines. First of all, a very common mistake
that's made by some students is to switch the roles of the x-coordinate and the y-coordinate
of the point they have when they're writing down the point slope form of a line. So, instead of
writing y minus negative 3 equals 5 times the quantity x minus negative 1, like we just did in
that example, some students will accidentally write down y minus negative 1 equals 5 times the
quantity x minus negative 3. Do you see how the negative 1 and the negative 3 got switched
when we did that incorrectly? You have to be very, very careful not to make this mistake,
because in almost every instance, you're going to get the wrong equation if you accidentally
make that flip. So, be really careful where the y goes and where the x goes from your point.
Now, secondly, as I mentioned a few minutes ago, once you have written down the point slope form
of the equation of a line, you can actually write down the slope intercept form of the equation of
that same line, if you want to, or if you're asked to do that. So, let me suggest that we try converting
the line we just wrote down, the point slope form of that equation. Let me suggest that we try to
convert it to slope intercept form. So, here's that equation again. y plus 3 equals 5 times the
quantity x plus 1. See if you can convert that to slope intercept form. Well, here's how I would do
it. I'd start with y plus 3 equals 5 times the quantity x plus 1. I then have to multiply that
5 through the parentheses using the distributive property. We've done that several times now in
our earlier lessons. And that's going to give me y plus 3 equals the quantity 5x plus 5. Now,
I'm going to subtract 3 from both sides to get that y by itself. And when I do that, I'll have y
equals 5x plus 5 minus 3, which is the same as y equals 5x plus 2. So, let's just point out quickly
before we move on. We now have the slope intercept form of that same line we were discussing earlier.
It turns out actually it had a pretty friendly y-intercept. That y-intercept would have been at
2 right through the y-axis. Or if you wanted to worry about the point, it would have been the point
0, 2. So, we know the slope was 5, which we knew already. And now we know from the slope
intercept form of this line that the y-intercept was at 2. Now, I'd like to transition a bit
to another part of this review lesson, which is on parallel lines and perpendicular lines.
First, let me talk about parallel lines by remembering the following properties. So,
this is very important. Basically, this is the definition for parallel lines.
Two non-vertical lines are parallel if they have the same slope and they have different
y-intercepts. Now, let me just unravel that definition really quickly. So, two lines are
going to be parallel if they have the same slope. But of course, they also need different y-intercepts
because if they actually have the same y-intercept and the same slope, they would be the same line.
So, in order for two lines to be parallel, they need to have the same slope, but they have to
cross the y-axis at different places. So, they need to have different y-intercepts.
One other quick comment about that definition. It said two non-vertical lines. Obviously,
if you have two different vertical lines, they will also be parallel. But the reason the definition
didn't talk about those is because vertical lines have undefined slope. They actually
don't have a slope that we can write down as a number. So, two vertical lines that are different
will also be parallel even though the definition doesn't talk about that. So, for example,
if I take the lines y equal 3x plus 2 and y equals 3x minus 4, I see that they both have the same
slope. That's pretty obvious thanks to the slope-intercept form of these two equations.
They both have slope 3. Notice that they have different y-intercepts. The first one has a y
intercept at 2, which is above the origin, and the second line is going to have a y-intercept
at negative 4, which is actually below the origin. So, these two lines have the same slope.
That means they're going in the same direction, but they have different y-intercepts. And therefore,
by the definition, we know they're parallel. If I was to graph these two equations on the
same set of axes, the fact that they're both parallel is very obvious. They both have the
same slope of 3, but they're going to be separated from one another because their y-intercepts
are different. Now, let's look at another quick example to see if we can spot parallel lines.
Here's the example. I want you to determine whether the lines given by y equals negative 2x plus 7
and 10x plus 5y equals 12 are parallel. That's simple enough. I have two equations.
They're both equations of lines. Can I tell if they're parallel? Well, to do this problem,
I need to know the slope of each line first. I need to make sure that their slopes are the same.
Well, it's very clear from the slope-intercept form of the first equation that the slope of
that line is negative 2. We can see that negative 2 pretty quickly. But what about the slope of
the second line? I'm going to need to rewrite that equation a bit using some algebra in order to
write it in slope-intercept form. So, let's do that now. We had 10x plus 5y equals 12.
I want to write this thing as y equals mx plus b. So, I'm going to subtract the 10x from both sides
first. When I do that, that's going to give me 5y equals negative 10x plus 12. Now, I don't want
that 5 in front of the y. So, I'm going to divide both sides by 5, which, by the way, is the same
as multiplying both sides by one-fifth. So, in fact, I suggest we multiply both sides of the
equation by one-fifth. On the left, we'll have one-fifth times 5y, which, of course, is just
1y. One-fifth times 5 gives me 1. So, the left-hand side becomes y. That's great,
because that's getting me towards y equals mx plus b. Now, the right-hand side has a one-fifth
times the quantity negative 10x plus 12. That one-fifth has to be distributed into those
parentheses. So, I need one-fifth times negative 10x plus one-fifth times 12. And when I simplify
that a bit, I'm going to have negative 2x plus 12-fifths, 12 divided by 5. So, I have y equals
negative 2x plus 12-fifths, and that tells me that the second line has slope negative 2. Hey,
that's a good thing, because the slope of the first line was also negative 2. So, these guys are
really good candidates for parallel lines. They have the same slope, negative 2, and they have
different y-intercepts. The first one has a y-intercept of 7, and the second one has a y-intercept
of 12-fifths. So, by my definition, I know that they really are parallel. Now, let's transition
a little bit to another concept, this time the concept of perpendicular lines. So, what does it
mean for two lines to be perpendicular to one another? Well, from a visual perspective, it means
that the two lines intersect one another at right angles. So, that's a nice way to see it, but how
do you recognize when two lines are perpendicular if all you have is the equations? It's a little
hard to see those right angles when all you're staring at is equations of lines. Well, here's a
really nifty property to tell from the equations whether two lines are perpendicular. It says the
following. Two lines are perpendicular if the product of their slopes equals negative 1. That is,
if the slope of one of the lines is what's called the negative reciprocal of the slope of the other
line. So, those are big words. Let's just look at a quick example. Take these two lines, y equals
four sevenths x minus three and y equals negative seven fourths x plus eight. Those two lines are
perpendicular if you use the property I just mentioned. Y, look at their slopes. The one has
a slope of four sevenths and the other one has a slope of negative seven fourths. Do you see how
those are reciprocals of one another and one of them is positive and one of them is negative? In fact,
the negative seven fourths is the negative reciprocal of the four sevenths. And if I were to multiply
those two numbers together, I would actually get negative one. The fours would cancel and the sevens
would cancel and I would just have negative one over one or negative one. So, if you look at a
sketch of the graphs of these two lines, you'll actually see this nice right angle crossing
between the two and that shows us that these two lines are perpendicular. Now, I suggest we work
through an example now just to make sure we've got this nailed down. Let's find an equation of a line
which is perpendicular to the line given by y equals two thirds x minus one that has y intercept
zero comma four. Okay, so let's be careful. We want a line which is perpendicular to
y equals two thirds x minus one and we want that line to go through the y intercept zero comma four.
All right, I would suggest that to find the equation here, we ought to use the slope intercept
form of the line because we were given the y intercept. It makes it really easy. So, the line
I want is going to have an equation that looks like y equals mx plus four because the y intercept
is four. Great. How do I find m, the slope of this line? Well, the slope of my new line needs to be
the negative reciprocal of the slope of the line that was given to us. Remember, two lines are
perpendicular if their slopes are negative reciprocals of one another. The slope of the line that was
given to me is two thirds and that means the slope of my new line needs to be negative three halves.
And now I know what m is. It's negative three halves and that means the equation of the line
that I wanted is y equals negative three halves x plus four. Again, a quick sketch of these two
lines is probably a wise check of our work and if you look at those two lines, you'll see this
wonderful right angle crossing that occurs because these two lines are perpendicular.
Now, let me make a quick comment because I skipped over vertical lines again in talking
about perpendicular lines. It's also going to be true that a vertical line and a horizontal line
will always be perpendicular as well. Even though the vertical line has undefined slope,
so I can't really talk about a negative reciprocal of that, it's still the case that a vertical line
and a horizontal line will always be perpendicular because they connect at right angles.
Now, today we've gone pretty quickly through a review of the different ways that you can
represent linear equations. I talked about the slope intercept form, which is a wonderful way
to write down the equation of a line, but it has some problems if you don't know what the y
intercept is. I also talked about the point slope form, which provides us with some flexibility
because it allows us to know the slope and any point on the line in order to write down the
equation of a line. And we also talked about these very special lines that we call parallel
and perpendicular lines. And we'll try to have more practice with those in the coming lessons
in order to practice with the way these equations really look to spot parallel and perpendicular
lines. Next time I want to talk in some more general terms about some very important tools
for drawing graphs of lots of different functions. As we walk through this course,
not only will graphs just be straight lines, but we'll have a lot of curvature to our graphs as
well. And I want us to talk about some of the tools we can use to shift from the graph of one
function to the graph of another function. I think that's going to be a really interesting
and eye-opening lesson, and I look forward to talking about it next time.
