In the previous lesson, we began talking about polynomial functions in general, and we referred
to a few facts about their graphs.
In this lesson, I want to take this graphical discussion much further.
My hope is to develop a number of general principles or tools that we can use whenever
we want to draw the graph of any polynomial function.
One thing we can say is that the graph of a polynomial never breaks and it never has
a sharp corner.
The fancy mathematical phrase for this never breaking is that a polynomial function is
always continuous, but you don't have to worry about that phrase for now.
In fact, you won't really need to worry about continuity until you get to a calculus course.
So for example, here are the graphs of a few polynomials, and I want you to notice that
these don't break and they don't have a sharp corner.
For example, here's the graph of x cubed minus 3x squared plus 2x plus 1.
It's a nice smooth curve, goes up, comes down a bit, goes back up.
No breaks, no sharp corners.
Let's look at another.
X to the fourth minus 5x squared plus 2x, and again, notice that we've got some curvature
to it and so on.
We've got some parts that are going down, parts that are going up, but no breaks and
no sharp corners.
This is the important point for now.
How about another?
Let's take a really complicated looking polynomial.
1 over 200 times x to the sixth minus 29 divided by 200 times x to the fourth minus 3 over
25 times x cubed plus 43 over 50x squared plus 6 fifths x.
That's a pretty complicated polynomial.
Maybe the most complicated one we'll see in the whole course, I don't know.
But notice its graph.
Even though the polynomial is such a mess, the graph never breaks and it never has a
sharp corner.
This is important because every polynomial will have those two properties.
I think that's a pretty cool looking graph, to be honest with you.
But now I want you to compare the graphs that we've just seen with graphs of some things
that are not polynomials.
So for example, let's take a pretty straightforward function, x raised to the two thirds power.
This is not a polynomial.
Do you remember why?
The powers or the exponents as we call them on all the powers of x and all the variables
x need to be positive integers and two thirds is not a positive integer.
So x to the two thirds is not a polynomial.
Notice that sharp corner right at the origin.
If you look really, really carefully at what's happening close to the origin, you'll see that
it's not a nice smooth U shape.
There's actually a corner that's coming in, a sharpness that's happening right at the
origin.
No polynomial graph would ever do such a thing.
Let's look at another function, x squared plus one over x squared minus one.
Now this is also not a polynomial.
Remember I said in a previous lesson that almost always if you take one polynomial and
divide it by another polynomial, you will not have a new polynomial and that's the case
here.
So x squared plus one over x squared minus one is not a polynomial and notice its graph.
It's actually in three distinct pieces.
There's a piece up in the first quadrant, a piece up in the second quadrant and then
there's this sort of U shape down at the bottom.
Those three pieces are broken away from one another and so if I walked up to you with
that graph and showed it to you and said could this be the graph of a polynomial, your answer
would immediately be no because no polynomial graph will have pieces that are broken up away
from one another.
Okay, so we know that the graphs of polynomial functions are going to be nicely behaved,
there are no breaks, there are no sharp corners, everything is going to be nice and smooth throughout
the entirety, the whole graph of a polynomial.
Now let's remember what I said at the end of the previous lesson about polynomial functions
in general.
First, the domain of any polynomial is the set of all real numbers.
That by the way is part of the reason that you don't have any breaks in the graph of
any polynomial and secondly, the range of a given polynomial depends on its degree.
If the degree is odd, then the range is going to be the set of all real numbers and if the
degree is even, then both ends of the graph are going to go in the same direction, they'll
either both point up or they'll both point down and because of that, the range is restricted.
You might even look back at the polynomials I showed you just a few minutes ago to see
what happens whether the degree was odd in some cases it was there or the degree was
even in other cases.
Every real number is in the domain of any polynomial function.
You're allowed to plug in any real number you want into a polynomial.
This is very important.
It's not true of some other functions that you know.
For example, you cannot plug x equals negative 2 into the function f of x equals 1 divided
by x plus 2 because that would cause division by 0 and division by 0 makes no sense.
So x equals negative 2 is not in the domain of f of x equals 1 over x plus 2 but of course
1 over x plus 2 is not a polynomial either.
Similarly, if you want the output of a function to stay in the real numbers and you don't
want to include complex numbers, then the number x equals negative 5 is not in the domain
of g of x equals square root of x.
Why?
Because square root of negative 5 is not a real number.
So that's another example, square root of x, where the domain is not the whole set of
real numbers.
But square root of x is not a polynomial either.
Any polynomial, no matter what polynomial you choose, is not going to have problems like
division by 0.
It's not going to have problems like having a negative number under a radical symbol.
Every real number you want to plug in will be in the domain of a polynomial function.
So that's very important.
You can actually plug in any value you want.
And from a graphical perspective, for a polynomial function, that means that there aren't any
gaps in the graph.
There are no parts of the x-axis where the graph somehow disappears or breaks apart.
And that's very, very important as you get ready to graph a polynomial.
OK, what else can we say about the graphs of polynomials?
We've said several things already, but there's actually more that we can say as we walk through
these ideas about graphs of polynomials.
We can talk about the number of x-intercepts of a polynomial.
And it turns out that the number of x-intercepts of a polynomial depends on the degree of the
polynomial.
In fact, the number of x-intercepts of any polynomial you choose is at most the degree
of the polynomial.
I'm going to talk about this more in some later lessons, but for now, just trust me
on this as we want to talk about these graphs.
I want to be able to use this fact.
The number of x-intercepts never has to equal the degree.
In fact, sometimes it does, but it's not required to be equal to the degree.
It's just the case that the number of x-intercepts needs to be less than or equal to the degree
of the polynomial.
So for example, here are the graphs of several polynomials of degree 4.
I want you to notice that you could have 0x-intercepts, or you could have 1x-intercept, or maybe 2x-intercepts.
You could even have 3x-intercepts for a degree 4 polynomial, or you could have 4x-intercepts.
Here are some examples.
Take f of x to be x to the fourth plus 2.
This is a degree 4 polynomial, and it has 0x-intercepts.
The graph lives completely above the x-axis.
Take a function like f of x equals x to the fourth.
Now this is also a degree 4 polynomial, it's also a monomial, remember that language from
the previous lesson, and f of x equals x to the fourth has exactly 1x-intercept.
It's the origin.
Take f of x equals x to the fourth minus 2x-squared plus 1.
It's a perfectly gentle fourth degree polynomial.
In that case it would be a fourth degree or quartic trinomial because it has three terms.
And x to the fourth minus 2x-squared plus 1 has exactly 2x-intercepts.
Take another one.
Take f of x equals 2x to the fourth minus 4x-squared, also a quartic polynomial, a degree 4 polynomial.
In this case a quartic binomial, and it has exactly 3x-intercepts.
So now I've shown you quartic polynomials that have 0, 1, 2, or 3x-intercepts.
Now take something like f of x equals 2x to the fourth minus 4x-squared plus 1.
In this case you'll now have 4x-intercepts.
So now I've shown you some examples where you could have anywhere between 0 and 4x-intercepts
for a degree 4 polynomial that can range.
You can have any of that that you want.
But I do want to point this out.
I would never be able to have 5x-intercepts for a degree 4 polynomial.
So this gives me at least some sort of boundary, if you will, on the number of x-intercepts
I'm allowed to have.
I can have anywhere from 0 up to the degree of the polynomial, and that's helpful if I
want to start graphing a polynomial.
Now a little bit more can be said about these graphs of polynomials.
So for example, the ends of the graphs of a polynomial never flatten out.
They never go to the point where they can't get above a certain y value.
They keep going on either going up to plus infinity or going down to negative infinity.
Maybe both go up or both go down or one or the other, but the ends can never flatten out.
So they must go up to plus infinity or down to negative infinity.
Also if the degree of the polynomial is even, then either both of the ends go up or both
of the ends go down, sort of like a parabola.
However, degree 2 polynomials or quadratic polynomials have parabolas as their graphs,
and both ends of a parabola either go up or they both go down.
The upness or downness, if you will, is determined by the sign of the leading coefficient, just
like with parabolas.
So if I'm looking at say a degree 4 or a degree 6 or a degree 8 polynomial, all of which would
have even degree, the ends of those polynomials will either both go up or both go down depending
on the sign of that leading coefficient.
Now you can see why I cared so much about the leading coefficient.
If the degree is odd for any polynomial, then one of the ends is going to go up and the
other end is going to go down.
And the sign of that leading coefficient is going to tell me whether the end on the right
is going down and the end on the left is going up or vice versa.
Now it's important then that you keep in mind the degree of the polynomial, whether it's
even a rod, and you look at the sign of that leading coefficient because those two facts
are going to tell you something about what's happening to the ends.
And I have to make this point very clear.
What I just said about the degree of the polynomial and the sign of that leading coefficient
only tells us something about the ends of the polynomial.
There might be all sorts of things going on in the middle of the graph of the polynomial.
All we know from the degree, whether it's even a rod, and the sign of the leading coefficient
is what's happening on the ends.
But that's still helpful.
If you really want to know what's happening on the sort of edges, so to speak, of the
graph, those two facts will help you tremendously.
The hard part really is what's happening in the middle of that graph.
Now how is it that we really know for sure with certainty that the end behavior that
I just told you about depends on this leading coefficient in such a strong way?
Well it's because the term containing that leading coefficient is what I like to call
the dominant term in a polynomial.
Now that's not really an official term so to speak, but it's a very important idea
that I want to talk about for a few moments because this dominant term, the term that
holds that leading coefficient is really playing the role of deciding whether both ends are
going to go up, both ends are going to go down, or one end will go up and the other
will go down.
Now, let me try to explain what I mean by this dominance of that one term by looking
at a quick example.
Remember the cubic trinomial 4x cubed plus 9x squared plus 3.
When we're talking about the end behavior of a polynomial, we're talking about what's
happening to the graph when x is large, and I don't mean x equals 100, I mean something
like x equals 100 million, or maybe even bigger, like x equals 100 billion.
But for now, let's do this.
Let's plug in x equals 100 million into the polynomial I just mentioned to you, and let's
do it one term at a time, and let's see what's happening.
Now, stay with me as we walk through this.
The first term was 4x cubed.
I want to plug in 100 million.
Can you imagine how far down the x-axis we are when we plug in 100 million for x?
We're way out there to the right.
When you plug in 100 million into 4x cubed, you're actually going to get 4 times 100 million
cubed, and that's a 4 followed by 24 zeros.
That is a large number.
Imagine if you had that many dollars or pennies even, it would be a lot of money.
Now, let's take the second term in this polynomial.
It was 9x squared, and let's plug in 100 million for x there.
And there you would have 9 times 100 million squared, and if you do that, you're going
to have a 9 followed by 16 zeros.
Now that's also a pretty big number.
I'll give you that.
A 9 followed by 16 zeros, that would be a very large number as well.
Now the third term in this polynomial is 3, and of course that has no x's in it, so the
3 is just a 3.
That's what you get when you plug in 100 million.
That term is just a 3.
Now I want you to think about these numbers for a second.
I realize that the first two are pretty big, but I want you to understand that that first
number is much, much bigger than the others.
It has more zeros in it by far than the second term.
So bottom line, that first term, 4x cubed is going to dominate the other terms when
the values of x are huge.
And when you actually see what the polynomial equals when x equals 100 million, you're actually
going to get a 4 followed by 7 zeros and then a 9, and then several more zeros followed
by a 3.
You see that that first term, the 4 followed by 24 zeros, is really what made the difference
here.
Yeah, the other terms played a role, but that first term really is the biggie.
It's the dominant one.
So it's true that the end behavior, what's happening when the x values are either really,
really big in the positive direction or what's happening in the other direction, that end
behavior is completely dictated by the term containing that leading coefficient.
Now let's spend a few minutes looking at the graphs of some very specific polynomial functions.
And I want to focus some serious attention on the graphs of cubic, quartic, and quintic
functions.
So let's jump to this example.
Sketch the graph of the cubic monomial function that is f of x equals x cubed.
It has one term, that's why it's monomial, and it's degree 3, so it's cubic.
Now this is a basic function, it's just one term, but I want to talk about everything
we know that we've talked about up to this point about the graphs of polynomials.
There's just one x-intercept, it's pretty clear it's at 0, 0.
Well if you wanted to know where the x-intercepts were, and you weren't sure if there were any
or if 0, 0 was the only one, you would have to set the whole function equal to 0 and solve
it for x, that's what you do to find x-intercepts for any function.
And that means you'd be looking at the equation x cubed equals 0, and now if you think about
it for just a moment, if you took the third root of both sides and we'll talk about roots
later on in later lessons, you're going to just get x equals 0.
You could think about this from other directions as well, but bottom line, you're just going
to have one x-intercept, it's going to happen at x equals 0.
So we have the point 0, 0, we could plot that if we wanted on a piece of graph paper and
we could move on.
Now what can we say about the end behavior of f of x equals x cubed?
So if you plug in a positive value of x like something like x equals 10 or x equals 100,
what do you get?
Well f of 10 is 10 cubed which is 1000, that's getting kind of big, and f of 100 is 100 cubed
which is 1 million, a 1 followed by 6 zeros.
So you see that as x is getting large and positive, the y values are also getting large
and they're getting large pretty fast and they're staying positive.
That means that the part of the graph that's on the right side of the plane, or the right
side of the y-axis if you want to think of it that way, is going to go upward towards
plus infinity.
What if we evaluate this same function at negative values of x, in other words x equals
negative 10 or x equals negative 100?
Well let's see what happens.
f of negative 10 is negative 10 cubed which is negative 10 times negative 10 times negative
10 and notice that one of those negative signs is going to survive all the cancellation
and the output value you get there is negative 1000.
So that means that the point negative 10 comma negative 1000 is on your graph.
What if you plug in negative 100 which is even farther out?
Well negative 100 cubed is actually negative 1 million and that means the point negative
100 on the x-axis, negative 1 million on the y-axis is the point in question there.
That means that the left hand side of this graph is going to behave very differently
from the right hand side.
That the y values on this side are now going to go to negative infinity.
So one side is going up and one side is going down.
Remember I said earlier, if the degree of the polynomial is odd, one side goes up and
one side goes down.
That's exactly what we're seeing here.
Now if you just plot some points and connect the dots and this is always a good idea when
you're not sure.
Plot a few points, connect a few dots, you'll see what the graph looks like.
You could have the point 00, we already talked about that and then if you plug in things
like 1 you'll get 1 back, plug in 2 and you get 8, 3 and you get 27.
How about negative 1?
Well that'll give you a y value of negative 1, plug in negative 2 and you'll get negative
8 back, plug in negative 3 and you'll have negative 27 back.
That gives you a whole bunch of points very quickly and if you connect those dots you'll
see exactly what you want to see basically which is the function y equals x cubed just
has this nice smooth shape going down to negative infinity on the left, going up to positive
infinity on the right, makes this nice smooth curve that goes right through the origin.
Now let me share a quick thought with you about cubic graphs.
Often people think that all cubic graphs will have a certain S shape to them as I like to
call it with one hill and then one valley and then it'll take off from there.
Well it's true that lots of cubic graphs or lots of cubic polynomials I should say have
a graph that looks something like that with one hill and one valley but it's not the case
that they all have to look like that.
Notice that the graph of f of x equals x cubed which you and I just drew a moment ago doesn't
have that kind of a shape.
There is no sort of hill followed by a valley and so on for f of x equals x cubed.
Part of the reason is because that graph only has one x intercept while in some of the typical
hill and valley graphs for cubic polynomials you actually have three x intercepts.
My point is this, don't think that all graphs of all degree three or cubic polynomials have
to have the same sort of shape.
It's just not true and it's not true of all quartic functions and it's also not true of
quintic functions as well.
Now let's use some of the ideas we learned in a previous lesson to find the graph of
some other cubic functions.
Let's take the following.
What's the graph of the cubic function g of x equals x cubed plus four?
Well we know that this graph has to look like the graph of f of x equals x cubed, the graph
that you and I just drew a few moments ago.
It's just that the graph of this new function is translated by four units.
Now do you know which direction?
It could be going left, it could be going right, it could go up or down.
Which one is it?
Well if you take the graph of x cubed and you translate that graph up four units, that
will give you the graph of x cubed plus four.
So that graph is actually pretty easy to draw.
Okay, let's try to sketch a different graph of a cubic again but let's try to see it
in an intelligent way so that we can draw it quickly.
Such the graph of h of x equals x cubed minus three x squared plus three x minus one.
Now for some of you, your first reaction is going to be, yikes, that looks really complicated
and honestly I would agree with you.
But I know a little secret, not necessarily something I expect you to know not yet.
And that is this, x cubed minus three x squared plus three x minus one actually can be factored
as x minus one times x minus one times x minus one.
Which is the same as x minus one cubed.
I promise I'll show you in a later lesson how I got that.
But the point is that this function h of x is just x minus one cubed and I know how
to draw x minus one cubed from the graph of x cubed.
Do you remember how to do it?
When you replace x by x minus one in a function.
It means that you translate the graph of the original function to the right exactly one
unit.
So the graph of this h of x is actually pretty straight forward to draw once you know the
graph of x cubed.
You and I saw that a moment ago.
If we now take that graph and just move it to the right one unit then I'll have the graph
of h of x and it'll look something like this.
Okay, to close out this lesson let's look at the graph of a certain quartic polynomial.
So it's quartic, that means it's degree four.
So here's the function I want us to look at.
Sketch the graph of f of x equals x to the fourth minus nine x squared.
I'm going to use this as an example to try to motivate some of the things we're going
to do in the next few lessons.
So just bear with me as we do this.
First of all, it turns out that I can factor f of x equals x to the fourth minus nine x
squared in a nice way, right?
I see that I can pull out a common x squared from both terms and again we'll talk about
this in the next few lessons.
And once I do that, it turns out the factorization of f of x becomes x squared times x minus three
times x plus three.
For now you're going to have to just take my word that that's really true.
I promise to talk more about how to do that factoring in the next few lessons.
It really will come up.
But for now, I just want to say this is a fancy example of a difference of two squares
that we saw some lessons ago.
I promise though we'll talk about this more in detail later.
Now what does that factorization of this function tell us?
Well, it tells us where the x intercepts of this graph are.
They must be at the places where each of the pieces of that factorization equals zero.
Well, the x squared equals zero exactly when x is zero and the x minus three equals zero
exactly when x equals three and the x plus three term equals zero exactly when x equals
negative three.
So I actually know that there are three x intercepts here, zero comma zero, three comma
zero, and negative three comma zero.
Remember the rule we had a few minutes ago?
Degree four polynomial can have at most four x intercepts.
In this case, I'm only actually going to have three.
Now let's talk about the end behavior of this quartic polynomial.
Well, I've got to focus on the dominant term.
Remember we talked about this dominant term a few minutes ago?
It's the term which actually is the one of highest power.
In this case, that's the x to the fourth.
It should be clear that no matter whether you plug in a positive number or a negative
number for x, the result from x to the fourth is going to be positive.
That power of four, which is even, is going to cancel out any negative sign that's part
of the x because that four is even.
So even if you plug in negative 10 for x, when you raise that to the fourth power, the
y value is going to be positive.
And that means that both of the ends of this graph are going to go up because the y values
always have to be positive.
Now we should plot some points now just to see if we can get a picture, if you will,
of the general shape of this graph.
And this is always a good idea to do.
So maybe we could plug in x equals 1, and 2, and 3, and 4, and 5.
And maybe x equals negative 1, negative 2, negative 3, negative 4, and negative 5 would
also be a good idea.
By the way, we already plugged in x equals 0 and found that it was 0.
Remember there's an x intercept at the origin here.
And in fact you already know what happens at x equals 3 and x equals negative 3 as well.
You actually had three points already in your pocket.
And once you plot these points and you carefully draw where they are on a set of graph paper,
on a piece of graph paper, you would have a graph that looks like the following.
And to be honest, this idea of plotting points and connecting dots, it might feel a bit childish
or easy to do, but it's a great idea.
And I strongly encourage you to go through the work of plotting some points and connecting
the dots.
Now as I close this example, let me say this, you might be left feeling like we should have
had a way to do this, to find this exact graph, if you will, instead of just finding a few
special points and plotting a whole bunch of other points.
It turns out that there are many other things we could have done to find this graph.
But most of the math that you and I would need to apply these tools would actually come
from calculus, believe it or not.
Things like the derivative.
You may have heard some people talk about the derivative if they've taken a calculus
class.
Those tools are very important for helping us find graphs, and they're useful.
But we don't have those yet.
That's all right.
If you stick with your math, however, when you do get the calculus, you'll see some of
these beautiful and very useful tools for finding graphs.
And I promise you won't be disappointed at that point.
Now we spent a good deal of time talking about the visual or graphical aspects of polynomial
functions in this lesson.
Next time, we're going to talk more about the algebra side of polynomial functions,
how to combine them in different ways, addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and
something called composition.
I'll talk about that then.
