The money piece really woke up my senses to the ladder, like how exploitative we've actually
been globally and how much we are responsible for a lot of these dictators. I didn't quite
understand that until I learned about the global monetary system.
So let's move on to that. You wrote a book called Check Your Financial Privilege from last year.
And in your book, you begin by stating that anyone born into a country with a reserve currency like
the euro, the yen, the pound, or the dollar has a financial privilege relative to 90% of the world
population born into weaker systems. Can you expand on that and carry on with what you were just saying?
We often hear about Check Your Privilege, right? It's in a variety of contexts.
I think that people need to check their financial privilege. That's the point of the
book. What I realized as I checked my own privilege, as I learned about it, is that
very few people on earth have the benefits we have as speaking to Americans here.
About a billion people live in a liberal democracy that has property rights and a reserve currency,
meaning that their governments can essentially print money to buy things abroad,
like oil or industrial materials, etc. And that allows them to have cushy kind of social programs.
This is one aspect. Obviously, we'll get, I'm sure, at some point into how this ties into
fossils and access to fossils as well. But the point is that only about a billion people
live in societies where their government has a currency that's strong enough where
they can literally just print it and buy stuff. Now, the U.S. is the obviously key example of this,
the biggest example. We live in the world's first debt empire. Never before has there been a world
empire that's been a debtor empire. Every other empire before the U.S. was a creditor empire.
It owned stuff. It had a lot of assets. The United States biggest export is debt.
And it's just unique. We've never seen this before. And it definitely coincides with the
transition of the global monetary system from being tied on to gold, something that's in the
physical world, something that's scarce, to not being tied in gold anymore, to being tied
to what we call fiat money, which is issued by decree. So you can kind of see this map out,
and this is what I spend a lot of time looking at. But the point being that in this day and age,
there are a handful of nations that can sort of print these claims and buy things like oil,
and then everybody else can't. So you have the other whatever, six, seven billion people,
and we're talking pre-2022 here, pre the Putin invasion of Ukraine, which we'll get to,
which has changed a lot of things, I think, and set a lot of things in motion. But when you had
Bretton Woods and Bretton Woods II, kind of these systems, we were very fortunate. And this
allowed our countries to basically subsidize a lot of things in our societies. And think about
the financial technology that we have. It's just so easy for most Americans and Europeans to
send money to each other, to spend money abroad, to use dollars in Africa or Latin America. People
are happy to take them to access capital markets, to invest in stocks, to hedge with all kinds of
things. The vast majority of the world's population has no access to that. Their local fiat currency
sucks. Their best bet at a savings technology is usually sheet metal or cattle. I'm talking for
the majority of the world's population. They can't teleport money to anybody on earth on demand,
and they live a very different life. And I think that I just didn't really quite grasp that until
I took a look at it more closely. So there's really two layers here of financial privilege. One
is the salaries and GDP per capita and income that is the product of living in the global west
on the backs of energy surplus. There's the actual wealth and income inequality issue.
But the second is in parallel living in a country that has its own reserve currency,
which makes access and commerce and money moving and all those things
like seamless and easy, and we take it for granted.
Yeah. And again, the US and the EU until recently had done a pretty good job on inflation
for a long time. And people can't really remember. I mean, you have to go back to the 70s to
obviously write. I'm sure your listeners commiserate. I mean, it's unprecedented what we're seeing now.
Two years ago, tons of people were telling me inflation is impossible in Western society.
Like this is literally what I think the economic orthodoxy thought. And guess what? They weren't
humble enough. They didn't understand that it could happen here too. And I think it has happened
here too. And I think our financial privileges is temporary. It comes in waves. And by looking at
what happened in the 70s, I think we can learn a lot. One thing that I thought was fascinating
taking a page from leftist scholars and Marxist scholars is that there's a lot of things you
can say about just briefly going back to Great Depression and why the Western world had this
huge economic crisis. And obviously, there's a debate between the Keynesians and the Austrians
about, well, is it because we left the gold standard or did we not leave it soon enough,
etc., etc., right? There's a third argument, though, advanced by the authors of this book
called Capital and Imperialism, which is a terrific book. I don't necessarily agree with the
conclusions, but it's a really, really interesting read on history. And they quite simply argue that
a lot of the crisis that the Western world faced at the end of the 20s and 30s was because the
British Empire was collapsing. And you had the center of the Western financial system lose
access to cheap labor and goods that it had been accustomed to having for hundreds of plus years.
This just makes so much sense to me. So that's like step one. Step two is when the access to
fossils themselves decolonialization there, right? So you had oil access, which was traditionally
managed by Western powers, at least for several decades, when oil first became a thing. Western
companies, seven sisters, all that. And then you had like the OPEC nations actually take control,
you had the power shift. And guess what, that led to massive inflation in the West, right? So when
we couldn't exploit the oil, the energy for cheaper than the market value, no, any longer,
we lost the ability to subsidize our nations and to subsidize our currencies. So I think this
starts to map, you start to see this happen. Every time we pull like the West pulls back from power
over the rest of the world, we have economic crises. And this is so obvious in the 70s to me,
literally like, right as OPEC start to come into its own, they decide to raise the price of oil,
the US goes into an inflationary spiral, Nixon has to go off the gold standard.
It set everything else in motion. So I've been fascinated by looking at this,
and also by looking at the reverse, what the US does impacts everybody else. So we hear a lot
about the Fed mandate, right? The Fed has a mandate, low employment to keep inflation and
check these things. What people don't realize is what's not in the Fed's mandate is the livelihood
of everybody else in the world. So both in the early 80s and last year, when the Fed raised
interest rates really fast politically, right? To quell a domestic issue at home. In both cases,
we have inflation out of control, right? So the Fed says, okay, we're going to jack interest rates
really fast. This absolutely crushes the global south, absolutely crushes. So in the 80s, you had
the third world debt crisis, which caused the suffering of tens of millions of people, an
uncountable number of deaths from starvation, lack of nutrition, et cetera, child mental
nutrition. And now you're seeing it again. In the last 18 months, you're seeing both economic
and political collapse all across the global south, currencies collapsing, the IMF having to come in
and bail out countries, the government's being toppled. So I think what I've been really interested
in is looking at both how economic stability and our comfort and our quality of life, our way of life
in the West relies on resources elsewhere. And then also looking at how our decisions about
how to retain stability and comfort and reduce inflation for the average person
hurts other people. So it's this really interesting back and forth that I've been trying to trace out.
