And I mean, in some sense, this is really just an effort to
rethink. Yeah, you've been a very busy person. And I haven't
been completely docile for the past period of time. So we may
have some useful new things. I think so. I think so. There's
something like there's some fundamental energy information
syncing up that I think we can do.
I also really enjoyed your stow up. You know, I listened to the
metacrisis and sovereignty as a the foreseen function. I vaguely
remember participating in that. I don't have any recollection of
the content. Anyway, you did a nice job articulating sovereignty,
metacrisis and ways in which we might cultivate sorrow, use the
metacrisis as a forcing function, cultivate sovereignty.
Indeed, or be used by it, perhaps, or be used by it. So I
appreciated that. And, and you did some stuff on john's
identity education stuff, which you had a nice conversation with
him on that. Yeah, and much of my attention over the past, let's
call it eight weeks has been towards the this broad category,
roughly now being known as web three. In some sense, also
being known as the metaverse. Okay. And being firmly Gen X, as
are you. I know how words and the naming of things tends to
happen. Yeah. Okay, remember, when there was an information
superhighway, and when there was a series of tubes, and there
was a worldwide web and various things like that, right? So I'm
not, I'm not sort of ensorciled by the notion that somebody like
Mark Zuckerberg might try to name and claim that metaverse.
Yep. Nor by the notion that it's very well understood exactly
what it is that we're referring to when we wave our hands in
that direction. Totally. Right. And maybe this is maybe so here's
the here's the point here's the conclusion. And it's not going
to be at all surprising to you. This is just another way of
saying something that we've hit on many times, is that what I
would say is that the notion of the content of the reference
metaverse. And for the moment, I'll actually just collapse web
three into that. Right. So I'm talking a pointer. And there's a
bunch of different things that are part of it. Actually, it's a
question. The fork in the road. So the nature of the meaning of
the notion of the term metaverse is as yet undetermined. It for
sure involves the resolution of the relationship between what in
many places have been called the neosphere or the virtual or
that thing that distinguishes humans from the rest of nature.
Which I call capital C culture and the culture person plane of
existence. The culture person plane of existence, right. It
involves the resolution of that question of the relationship
between that object and nature. So the relationship between mind
and body to make it very simple. Along one path, the
transhumanist path to kind of give it a name is the path of
mind establishing dominion. And I mean that quite specifically
over body, over nature. I personally do not like this path.
And then but it's not the only path. The other path is right
relationship between mind and body between nature. One might
say governed by or mediated by held by and in some sense
representing soul. So there's an interesting whole thing going
on here. From an aesthetic perspective, there's certain
warm tones and in this in this language feels more coherently
integrated more more coherently integrated. Yes, more
wholesome. Yes, and more thriving. And one might by the way
point out for those who are breast tax also more capable of
actually enduring for any meaningful period of time. But
that's like the back half of the 21st century. Right. So it's a
little bit longer story. But and I think that's that's that's
probably a conversation that's worth having more publicly and
more broadly, because I feel right now that we're at a moment
where, well, first, people are a little bit narrow and trying to
understand the nature of this thing metaverse. Like, is it
via goggles sold by Mark Zuckerberg? Categorically, no. But
also, I guess a little bit defeatist of a feeling of an
inevitability of the transhumanist path. No. And while
I'm certainly aware of the, how would I say the transhumanist
path is up by a lot of points at halftime. But it's only half
time. We got work to do. We have some power. A couple of
secret weapons to still pull out. So talk to me about secret
weapons.
Well, there's different kinds of coins and different kinds of
energy information patterns that we might be able to decode.
So as context, because I suspect with hope that we will
actually share this more publicly. Sure. Greg, you have
been having conversations with a number of other folks. For the
first time, my new new connections are being made
most notably with Anita, Anita Roy, and Forest Landry. And as
this a bit of context, one of the challenges that I, and by the
way, Eric Weinstein have bemoaned over the past decade and
a half is the ragtag-ness of the Rebel Alliance. The empire, as
empires do, has been very good at wearing shiny black leather
and destroying worlds with death stars. Rebel Alliance has
been extremely poor at unordinary, like having
conversation, right? So it is quite hopeful for me that these
conversations are now beginning to be had. People are beginning
to be able to learn how to orient their attention to the right
conversation and the right person, and then have enough
capacity, emotional, semantic, abstract, to be able to actually
have that conversation and connect. And so this is this at
the end of the day is our ultimate secret weapon.
Amen. Amen. So if right, if we can find exactly that context
and shared understanding to afford a participatory network
that enables us to weave a tapestry together, and do so then
to build, take the red pills together and be aware of what
we're doing with organization and clarity, then that's gonna
afford us a second half opportunity to win this game.
Right. That's right. Yeah. And then I would call it
Kool-Aid drinking metaphors notwithstanding.
So yes, I've been having a number of conversations with a lot
of different people lately. I had a conversation with, in
addition, Paul van der Klee just put up on, you know, and so
that was really interesting. And got a chance. I mean, it was a
private conversation with Benita. But I've been meaning to
hook up with her for a while. She did a wonderful presentation
at the stowa on the self, the origins of self, in a particular
way that I thought complemented the stuff that John and Christopher
and I had done in the elusive eye. And I could see a lot of
opportunities for us to, you know, synergistically dance. And
we were able to come together. And I knew that, you know, a lot
of people see my system and rightfully so as some meta
systemic architecture, which is always for many people are more
process oriented and rightfully skeptical of some obsessive
compulsive, you know, quasi autistic, like structure that I
figured out solve everything now is everybody just speaks this
language, we're good, you know, and there's some sub dynamic
there. But actually, that's not really there is that we can
process that aspect, but that is not all that this is. And it
certainly not all that this affords. So I was able to, I
think we were able to build some bridges and watch a process
dynamic approach, resonate and sync up and show also there's a
lot of architecture about the self and it's various facets in
the models to use the model is that really are very limited,
like genuine disagreement, just different language, different
emphasis. And so that's, to me, that's, Oh, yeah, no, here's
another example of an integrated pluralism that could be framed
as a Oh, no, we can't, but no can get framed as a Oh, wow. No,
these are these are complimentary structures that we can get a
coherent integrated pluralism, where people are realizing that
they're playing a part of the weave, you know, a thread in the
weave. And I had a pretty similar conversation with forest
on the slides, you know, that's, so there's, this is one of
those, how would you call it? The thing is an example of the
thing that it talks about? Yep. And so it should be the case. If
you have one of these, these objects, these, let's just call
them, I don't know, meta theories, just kind of get it
sure, very roughly articulated. This particular kind, right, as
you say, there's a distinction, there's a totalizing kind that
takes itself as a once in forever reification that has
no evolution of all the ability built into it. The ring to
way not. Yeah, exactly. The one name. One. And then this is
other kind, right, the kind, for example, that you're
representing. And the whole point is Benita is and forest is
and right. Right. And what should happen is, from the middle,
like from the middle, when these encounter each other, there
should be a way from their own way of being from their own
nature of noticing the fact that the other is the same kind of
thing, by definition, coming from a different place, and
therefore having a different way of doing what it does. But
intrinsic to each one of these kinds of operators is a capacity
to develop a bespoke protocol for communication and
harmonization, which then generates an instance of
integration and connection that again is never totalizing. It
doesn't collapse anything, it just creates more like a richer,
deeper weave and tapestry.
Exactly. And that, my friend, is a wonderful description of what
we, if we can achieve this thing and make those kinds of
connections, that's going to be central to it, you know, and
this integrated pluralism, this new kind of sensibility, which
I feel super intimately with John now, in terms of just a, you
know, so a real genuine synergy between two meta theories, you
know, that were completely developed independently of one
another, that now have lock and key, I would at least, you know,
so I don't want to speak for John, but for me, a lock and key
synergy, which I don't know has ever been done before. And, you
know, it'd be interesting to know in sort of the history of
ideas, because the old modernist structures were not systematized
and sort of, you know, graphically oriented in an
integrated pluralistic, it was, Oh, I'm going to build a
justification system, and then you enter into it, and then that
works. And then it then it's just competing between other
systems of justification.
You can sit and have, yeah, okay. I've got I've got mine. You've
got yours. I'm going to throw away 30%. Of mine, you're going to
throw away 40% of yours, we're kind of like glue them together
into a new one. And it's the meta move, right? I'll create a
meta system, which is a synthesis of two lower level
systems. And it's not this integrative pluralism. Maybe at
this point, it's actually worthwhile just spending a
little bit of time in the distinction between those two
notions. Yep, being quite decisive, if you really
can grasp how this, for example, categorically resolves the
sort of old fashioned conflict between individualism and
collectivism, which is just like a modernist, our artifact,
new context. I know that's sort of very helpful, like lots of
people are like, Oh, okay, cool, I can just throw out that whole
conflict, no longer relevant. What's happening in this new
context?
Totally. So for me, in fact, you know, the basic idea of an
integrative pluralism, and by the way, I heard Jim Wreck call
it a coherent pluralism, sometimes I'll add coherent
integrative pluralism together. But basically, there's an
appreciation of a dialectic between some sort of epicenter,
you know, integrating function, and a perspectival pluralistic
diverse shift that affords sort of this dynamic interrelation,
which of course, sort of just makes sense in my system, you're
going to have different entities coming up as specializing
different elements, okay, of some sort of potentially shared
ground. All right. And then what was before was sort of like
an argument that you're going to build a system of justification
that maps the territory, and then kind of is a pristine
modernist notion. Okay, if we think about this, oh, we're
gonna, it has to be reasoned in this based on accuracy, and
this based on analysis, and it's going to have truth value or
not, and it's going to be in competition with others, and then
they'll battle and maybe break up. But really, I just see them
basically sitting there as independent paradigms, okay, as
they're making truth claims. You then they get the post modern
structure coming along and critiquing, which basically says,
Oh, all of that is imminent contextual justification, meaning
you guys are saying you're developing your pure systems,
right? But really, you're it's your, you know, we think Nietzsche
is the first postmodern, you know, it's your it's the
psychology, the philosophers 90% of the goddamn system. Okay,
it's all just a justification of whatever dynamics they're
dealing with, they say it's some pristine metaphysics, but
it's basically their perspective in the world, right? And then we
can extrapolate that to the to a crass postmodern view is like
it's all fucking justification, it's all just a, you know, imminent
context of power and justification. And there's no
ground upon which you would then, you know, afford any
legitimizing function, which then of course, in its extreme,
says, Well, there's no, there's no claims to be made at all,
and all relatively equal, etc. And then of course, that's kind
of absurd. Right. And so the integrative plural meta modern
integrative pluralistic sensibility is, Hey, we all are
aspecializing different, you know, pieces of the elephant in a
particular kind of way, right? The, you know, the blind men in
the elephant metaphor, we're going to aspecialize, we're
going to see various elements. And then we were going to weave
together and see how these synergistically, pluralistic
perspectives may afford a coherent, integrated
understanding, and appreciate the diversity while also having a
shared context of richness and growth. And that, that
sensibility seems to me to be far superior in a synthetic
synthesis, hegelian sort of way from modernity, and its
justification, rationality, and postmodernity is at all
justification, context BS, to an integrated pluralism that then
affords a collective intelligence sense making,
especially if we add the zoomed eologos to it. So zoomed eologos,
unlike the old where you had to just write shit, right? Like
as I'm a someone academic,
like this thing right here, like this right here zoomed eologos
is like, so I can now call Benita. So in the old days, if we
were both academics, I'd publish something and then she
would publish a critique of my metasystemic structure, because
it's the wrong direction to go. Right? And then I'm like, Oh,
God, you know, now I have to gain a that thing, and undermine
that and justify why my justification system in writing
in a context of competition of, you know, Swords of academia,
right? And now it's like, Oh, call somebody and be like,
actually, that's true in some ways, but that's not my full
emphasis. And I love the fact that you're going that way. And
actually, Oh, really? Oh, yeah. Because actually, I think this
is good. And this is really complimentary. Oh, so a face to
face de logos that affords the capacity to, you know, have an
oral indigenous relationship, feedback on each other, make
corrections immediately in real time, it's totally different
than the old game of refined publication, so that you get a
defense of a particular persistent in writing, where
you're basically, there's no iterative, immediate feedback
process, which is a dialogue is so unbelievably good at. So it's
a real, this de logos thing from an academic perspective, and
affording this capacity to build rich relations and an
integrative pluralistic understanding. It's a, it's a
the now we can build on some of the digital metaverse shed as a
game as a as a medium potential game changer, if we can turn it
into a strength. And I think, right, one of the things that
afford them. So as an exercise, hold on one second.
There we go. Okay, as an exercise in tough effort and
virtuality. I will act, this is the old internet ping, I will
act or I will take the what you just provided, I will metabolize
it and I will not bomb it, but articulate express back out
something. But the point, the meta point is then to say, Okay,
cool, we're doing is we're orienting in a trans to use for
specific language, transcendent location, by means of the real
relationality of this zoom de logos environment, and the sort
of pointer complex, right of the semantic terms that we happen
to be using in broadly speaking share. So couple points like
one point is the role of media. And you mentioned that in the
old days, we might even say modernity is a consequence of
books, the consequence of print, both as an opportunity and a
constraint, right, you could now communicate with a much larger
group of people over a longer period of time than just the
local individuals you could interact with in conversation.
But you couldn't have the context relevance, right, the
relational possibilities, both at the EQ level, as well as in
terms of just the semantic requirements of what what context
provides, right? So you were this new milieu of that sort of
behavior, that sort of justification system that was
selected for effectiveness in the context of book became a kind
of artifact that began to generate and attract human
attention and energy, and to coordinate more and more choices
and behaviors to the degree to which we're beginning to explore
the potentials that that afforded, which of course, we're
many, right? For example, much of the scientific enterprise is no
more or less than the fact that you can begin to collaborate with
people that you don't know by means of appropriately structured
text. And concepts like peer review, much maligned in some
quarters, which appropriately, are basically just a simple
technology to say, Okay, well, how do we deal with the
problems and the possibilities of decontextualized, relatively
broadcast, you know, tight semantic articulations. Okay,
cool. That's one, two.
The this notion of the in the larger context, many of the
things are happening. We have people are having kids, people
are making money. More specifically, there's this
wave that's been going on. And by the way, now I'm back back at
like Gutenberg, roughly speaking. So that's okay. Okay.
People were people were fighting fights, people were
conquering, that's the better word for conquering and defending
territory. It was that was already happening. That was a
whole wave. It was kind of its own sort of movement to it. And
books enters into this field. And it changes the terms of that
field, and does not sort of cause it or cause it to disappear.
But the form of the kingdom that is appropriate and possible in a
pre literate environment is not the form of a kingdom that is
possible and appropriate in a post literate environment, and
the ability to send dispatches that can communicate to further
governors, right? The British Empire was was produced as the
consequence of the ability to actually figure out how could you
effectively coordinate and deploy force and power economically,
diplomatically and kinetically, by means of the written word.
That's what it is. There's an organ for doing that kind of
thing. So we say, you know, we're in the process of a
technological disruption, at least as significant as the
book, obviously, I would say much more so. One affordance of
which is this notion of real time, highly contextual, high
relational conversation, zoom theologous. I like, by the way,
the implication of zoom is a as an adjective as well as a now.
Restrains is the state of the game. And we don't we don't
have to engage in the kinds of things that happen in the in
the decontextualized written word form, we can engage can and
should and will inevitably will engage in a different
style of interaction. Right. And it gives rise to a completely
different form of coordination, which is now well understood in
the in the thing named Web three, they don't yet I don't
think understand why, like what they're actually in service to,
or what is the real potential? What is the what are the design
characteristics of what the potential looks like on its
interior as it develops? But they're aware of the fact that
they are actually dealing with a new level of coordination and
that portends much back to Rebel Alliance and stealing a wind
here in the winning seconds. Right. Okay, hold on. Ah, and so
and much of the criticism of postmodernism is the correct is
accurate. There is a
intrinsic. It's fun. I'll just use the language from post
modern intrinsic totalizing characteristic that is associated
with the model or the approach of book, right of written of
written word, which is it's sort of because the rate of
communication, the contact, the contact decontextualization of
it. There's a need actually to form a paradigm, right. The
paradigm is an artifact of this point in time, I would say.
Hmm. Yeah, I'm gonna propose that as that's a yes. This is
actually by the way, I had this title a long time ago, but I
sort of embedded Kuhn inside Foucault. And so Foucault's
concept of the episteme is more fundamental than Kuhn's concept
of the paradigm. That the paradigm is a form appropriate to
the episteme of the moment of that. Nice. I could totally see
that. Yep. And it has to do with things like the the
translation cost of different kinds of language. If I'm
building a new same doing just like chemistry. And I've got
terms in chemistry that other people people don't know. And
it's costly to learn a new term. It's not not trivial. I'm very
confusing if you don't know what the terms mean. Right. And so
that's people trying to learn this thing. Yeah, exactly. To
the point, let's hold that actually as a good model. So the
old fashioned way of doing it is you create a dictionary. I
need to okay, well, here's the official fucking meaning of the
terms. If you need to know what they mean, go here. We've
created a formal totalizing centralized construct that has
hierarchical domination over the meanings of these words. If you
disagree, fuck you, you're out of the team, you're not on the on
the on the board. And here's what it looks like. But if we all
agree to this sort of finite construct, then we can coordinate
using these hyper decontextualized written
constructs. If you haven't got any context, you can't be like,
wait a minute, hold on. What do you mean by that? That sounds
sound weird to me. If you can't do that at all, then you
literally either you just don't communicate, or you have to have
some kind of totalizing construct that defines what is valid
discourse within a particular paradigmatic frame, right?
Just the consequence, there's no sort of here nor there. That's
just what happens. And similarly, that same thing works
to the level of political power. If I want to be able to
effectively coordinate economic, financial, kinetic, diplomatic
energy across some spatial location, I have to have a
defined after control the definitions of the meanings of
the words within that particular communications, a milieu.
Otherwise, you know, I'm saying you sell the guy on the other
side, it's like, Oh, that means buy, doesn't work, right? You
have to have agreement. What do we mean? We all have to have a
shared dictionary of what terms mean within some level of
rigor, right? And that of course, requires that each sort of
sphere of influence, which largely, of course, became
linguistic. You know, the notion of a nation is being
effectively the playing out of a particular linguistic, and
therefore, ethno cultural, but linguistic constraint. And
remember, the French formally, now have a formal institute that
is nothing but precisely defined every single word. They
kind of got the essence of it pretty precisely. That's just
how it works out. And so then, of course, as you say, we end up
kind of in this wrestling match of no, no, no, my definitions are
more right than your definitions, or our right and your
definitions are wrong. And therefore, you have to play on
my turf, because I don't want to be playing in your turf. And,
you know, the strict kind of subordinate construct, which
makes people a little bit, which gives right, like, individual
versus collectivist. And a collectivist relationship is
precisely the subordination of my experiences, my meaning, my
understanding to some kind of formal construct that is
necessary for shared communication. Hold on. So I can
make this less choppy.
The right network, the right network. Alright, well, you can do
it. Okay, so
so then we end up with the new thing, this new milieu, new
possibilities. It sits on top of the old. So one thing is that
we're part of the part of the essence of the new is that the
old happened, we're aware of it. It's not going to benefit from
okay, God, I understand all that that was part of how things
happen. I kind of learn those lessons as humans tend to the
hard way. Okay. And we're sitting in a very different
potential. If I have not only, you know, the tension, not only
can I call you and disambiguate and have relational context, but
also, I have to because the power, the possibility of some sort
of formal, man, this is a pain. What's happening? Why is that
happening? I'm seeing you like, oh, on and off, just like
completely red. Are you having the same thing on my end?
But I'm having a bit of your, yeah, you're, I mean, I'm
definitely tracking you, but it's, we got it, we have some
interference.
I don't know. On my end, everything seems very strong.
Shift to a different network.
Okay, let's see if that makes a difference. So far, nope, not at
all. It may be on your end. So let's see.
Right. So not only can I now engage in a zoom to your logos
when there's a moment of ambiguity, but also in fact,
have to because everybody's involved in the conversation.
We
I'm gonna terminate the call and start it.
Perfect. Do you want, do you want to send me a zoom link on
send you send me a zoom link? Okay.
Yeah, to the point, every, every new thing has its own
pluses in mind.
Well, there's many, right? If you take a look at how Twitter
operates. So what are the, what my, the point I was making
earlier is that we now, of course, this is the story of the
building up the internet. We have this. Oh, come on.
Are you still there?
Yeah, I'm here. I'm here.
Okay. My computer. There we go. Okay.
What do they call it back like back in the late 90s and early
2000s, like, you know, everybody has a printing press, that
kind of a thing. Free channels on TV 2000 channels to now
everybody at that point. The idea that in Twitter, everybody
is somewhat symmetric in their capacity to participate in the
conversation. They're not, no, actually, because number of
followers and algorithmic, throttling and things like
that. But it's a different environment, which means the
the tech, this is back to one of my feces, right? The notion
the, the technology, the institutional framework of the
Blue Church, which evolved to regulate the mechanics of
coordination and paradigmatic formation in the context of mass
media communication, right? Breaks down has broken down and is
accelerating in this breakdown. Because it wasn't evolved for
this particular environment, this needs to be so we're in the
process, successfully or not, of course, you can always fail to
adapt to your niche of evolving a new form of how we do this
sort of thing in this in this new potential in this new
environment. And to loop all the way back, this new environment
is one that you're calling sometimes coherent, integrative
pluralism. And it has characteristics of neither
needing or requiring a subordination on the part of
members of the dialogue. I'm not playing your game, you're not
playing my game, we are afforded the possibility and the
potential of producing a novel game bespoke, right? Every
relationship is its own play, which has as a consequence, the
enriching of both of our games intrinsically, totally, which is
why we continue to play. And I would say meta enriching, because
it's that underlying piece is so powerful, and also synergistic
value, or we call it the anti rivalrous consequence that as you
and I, for example, play in this way, and thereby enrich our own
capacities, it produces a higher degree of potential in every
other possible game we might play. Totally. So by talking with
Greg, I actually becoming more valuable player in the larger
game for literally everybody else. And if you sort of just
multiply that out, that gets from a process perspective, the
shape of that curve is very steep. It's absurdly steep,
actually. This begs the question of the singularity, we'll
ignore that for the moment.
So let's see. So, so I'll just so just to riff off that a little
bit. If I put it a little bit in Utah language, where most the
old relationship, the systems of justification that we operate
under, and our subordinate to. And now, and then so you get
modernity, you get the basically the tribe, and then the
civilization, and then it's, it's dictating into traditional
civilization. And then we get into refined knowledge, and we
get science, but modernity is still basically creating systems
of justification that you're subordinate to at various levels.
Yeah. Postmodern sort of comes along and says, Well, it's all
power, but it's still basically then like a battle of
justification in a particular way. We are actually now at a
place to, we're not going to like teleport out of justification,
but we can get adjacent to justification in a different kind
of way. Again, we can relate to these systems of justification
through, Oh, here you are as specializing in a particular
part of the whole, you know, through your narrative and
propositional structure, and I can relate to you where you are in
that, and then I share where I am in that. And now rather than
trying to then think about, Okay, there are no point of
justification, or we're going to subordinate ourselves, we're
going to be like, Oh, we're an integrated pluralistic system
of justification that we can be adjacent to participate in, but
not necessarily force some sort of
Yeah. And there's a sort of your definition of ego, what the ego
is, right? We have a bit of a historical ambiguity, you know,
Freud uses it differently than the Buddhists do. So we're going
to use the, the Greg and Rick has version of it, which I quite
like, which is the kind of the human neurocognitive faculty for
producing systems of justification. Exactly. Great. And the sort
of the classic problem is the one where you yourself subordinate
yourself to your own ego, right? The ego self inversion. Yep.
And the social version of that is the same kind of thing, right?
So if Jordan's ego is interacting with Greg's ego, and
Jordan's ego is subordinating Jordan's self and Greg's ego
is subordinating Greg's self, boom, we're locked into this
entire set of cascade effects that produce these sort of
dominant structures. This is by the way, a very clean way of
describing the transformation into game A, from my
perspective. Totally. Okay. So what we're noticing is that we
can notice that there's an individual version of this
form of just proper relationship. Oh, systems of
justification are a thing. Nice. But that's the whole thing.
Right there. They're a map. They're not the territory. And
there is a territory. How do I know? Well, the ego is a thing.
It's not the whole thing. There's a self. How do I know? Because
I do. You know, I can just, here I am, there's a self I can
begin to get very, very clean distinction of distinctions
between them by a variety of practices. In my case, it happened
to be meditation. And, and, okay, well, that affords us a
whole new possibility. We no longer have to imagine that this
game is just a kind of a winner takes all slugfest of power,
manipulation, and justification. But actually, there's, there's a
ground, there's a self, systems of justification or a tool for
coordination between things that are outside of the scope of
the systems of justification, like say, that's true, and humans.
Really? This back, by the way, to the fork transhumanism in this
other thing. Yes, right. And I would then say, what modernity
did, and then capital labor relations created a system of
justification, skits into the conversation outside of the
forest, systems of justification that then are
instrumental result in a power law distribution of influence in
a particular kind of way. And that fundamentally miscalibrates
the actual heart, which actually should be ideally
calibrated on relational value rather than social influence.
And one of our tasks in this transformation is to recalibrate
a power law distribution of influence into a more Gaussian
distribution of relational value, and connection in that
regard. So in terms of the kinds of moves that we want to be
making, relative to modernity, we want to get adjacent to our
justification, see the monsters that we created and all the
power that they did, diagnose them in a particular way, and
then rotate, you know, that if we're able to weave this
together, this will afford us the capacity to win this game.
Yep. Okay, so I want to double click on that. It's a
profoundly powerful construct in insight. Again, one of these
things that enables us to be liberated from things that in
many ways can be depressing constraints. So what you just
said is something like this. Pareto distributions are yes,
they happen. But they're an artifact of a particular form of
social relationship. So if you have a social relationship that
operates in a certain way, which I just call it, call it
society, society, we can sort of describe that in more detail,
if you have a society, then you're going to have Pareto
distributions of social relationships, kind of done. But
that's not the only kind of relationality. In fact, it's
even not even the more fundamental, but the more basic,
more fundamental kind of relationality, which I just
call community, just to make a distinction, doesn't have a
Pareto distribution as its equilibrium, right, as a Gaussian
distribution as its equilibrium. If you can land on that, like
if you're a person who spends time in places like economics or
in politics, you care about justice, this fact, this
distinction is super profound. It describes the fact that
there is there's a way to achieve a kind of quality of
relationship that we would define as, say, justice or fairness
or equity. There's an actual way to get there, right? You
can't get there staying inside the form of society. If you
stay inside the form of society, you're never going to get
there. It's not a thing. You have to go down and over into this
other form. But once you get to this other form, not only is it
possible, it's actually equilibrium state. And that's
there. That's the power of this approach of being able to say,
okay, I agree. We don't like this particular structure, this way
this structure plays out. But how is this like, what is it? Say
hello to the new boss, same as the old boss. If you think that
just by killing the king and installing yourself as king,
you're changing the nature, you're not. But there is a
different place. And it's not imaginary, right? It's not the
kind of the communist mid century, you know, failure of oh, not
getting the thing and there's a place. So let's just talk about
like, why is there a Pareto distribution in this thing I'm
calling society? What do I when I say society, what is it? I'm
really talking about what do I mean?
Yeah.
First off, the lovely yeah, I mean, the short answer. One short
answer is money and influence beget money and influence. Okay.
So as you have more opportunity to gain control, and there are
lots of different that this Pareto distribution basically is
that a small number of individuals acquire an enormous
disproportionality of influence and control, okay, and a power
kind of law distribution. So for folks that don't know what
that is, that's that's the essence of it. And then it
creates a massive inequality. And we have seen that in our
society. And virtually any context in any societal
organization tends to drift into these Pareto distributions,
they're very difficult to prevent there's a and there are
reasons why that we don't we can dialogue about but I don't know
that that's crucial. For me, the issue is that when you get this
that's going to create all sorts of problems. Okay, the focus is
on influence of our modernity, we create capital labor, what
we're basically trying to do is actually observable work
effort, and our science orient us in this perspective, which I
think is a deep mistake. One of the things that are enlightenment
is that we don't get human nature right here. And we can talk
about what the distinction is my own history of social influence,
relational value, etc. But it's the felt sense of being known in
value, it is our core, that's crucial, we certainly track
social influence. But that's another aspect. And we miss this
psychology misses this, the humanists sort of get it. But
anyway, the point what you made, we can actually see in the
world, I want to be people, all you need to do is you go back to
hunter gather oral indigenous structures, the vast majority of
oral indigenous structures are about building community. Okay,
and guess what, narcissistic ego shit is regulated deeply in
that structure, they do not want people pulling out what's
called the blue line on the in on the influence makes I'm
superior, and I'm going to egoically control your ass
through power. They regulate that virtually every community
society figures out structures to regulate it. Okay, so then what
happens is we basically release that thing in game a world, we
release that thing. The society and the Pareto distribution and
nature, power and influence afford a capacity, even our
justifications release that thing. So what we're saying is
that they Oh, my God, if we then invest in that societal
structure, in particular, well, that's what you get, you get
game. And you can't just kill that you actually need to what is
the kind of structure that's actually sustainable. Actually,
if we look at this, and we actually create a particular
type of oral indigenous DLO goes kind of dynamic that is a
fundamentally different dynamic with this ego as power issue.
Well, then maybe we have something serious going on here.
Yeah, so what I would say, and I think you're going to agree
with me on this is that the we've actually produced a lot of
good language to describe the thing that I'm calling society,
or precisely specifically the thing that more fundamental and
calling game a, which has to do with the, the prioritization,
almost obligate mediation of relationality by means of ego.
That's a very clean way of articulating it. Now, what's
happening there? Well, what's happening there is the ego at
the end of the day is a finite state machine. If you if you
understand that from a computational perspective, things
lit up. Yeah, you think about money, right? Money is a finite
state machine. It's very, you know, has a large amount of
processing power. That's why it's functional. It's what what
markets do, right markets are a massively parallel information
processing machine. But it's a finite state machine. And ego
works very functionally inside money, my ego connect quite
nicely. There's a reason why they're very wide narcissistic
ego ego personalities perform very well. And they tend to rise
to the top of the predator distribution, the 80 20 rule is
a common vernacular for that. When when one mediates complexity,
when one mediates rich, highly contextualized relationships by
means of the complicated by means of finite state machines,
even very large ones, one is operating in the form that I am
calling society, and therefore has by implication, for sure,
guaranteed things like predator distributions. Yep. And for
sure, guaranteed things like a infinite cascade effect in
paradigmatic interrelational communication. Because you now
have to find some way of doing some translation between your
finite state machine and my finite state machine, which means
that if I have a small deviation in the way that my state
machine maps particular context from yours, we actually can't
engage in any real communication, either I have to learn yours,
which is what education has become education machine for
stamping shared models on mines, which has an ancillary benefit,
training cells to become egos, socialize them into the system.
And of course, training egos to become narcissists, right? Of
course, right. So it's not if you understand how these system
dynamics work, it's not confusing how we got where we are. And
frankly, where we are, where we are is like, Oh, yeah, I know
where we are. And I know how we got here. And how we get out of
it becomes, Oh, okay, to get out of it, as you say, we need to
say human nature isn't the kind of thing that was written about
in the Enlightenment, neither Rousseau nor Voltaire nor any
of those guys were frankly close. We've got some pretty good
ideas. More importantly, we've got good models. As you say, the
oral indigenous cultures tell us what it looks like. And there
it is, those are humans operating according to human nature,
more or less. We can do a diff across a very large number and
get a nice, you know, basic model. And now double clicking on my
fork in the metaverse. And we're entering into a new milieu. We
are in fact, both literate. We're not an oral culture, we're
literate culture, decreasingly, and maybe that's the best. But
we're also a zoom, theologous, zoom, theologous culture, almost
certainly. I don't think that there's a path where we drop
back down into a pre electrical civilization. Well, I mean,
I don't like that.
And land, there's a lot of paths where we do that, but we don't
like it. Just keep going. Way, way past oral indigenous. But
there is a path where we find this new higher tone of human
nature, establishing right relationship with this thing, the
virtual, the virtual per se. And this is the key. This is the
point of the metaverse, the metaverse is where we actually
look at the notion of technology in the eye directly.
Exactly. We're not we're not looking at like a pair of eyeglasses.
Right. We're not looking at a pen. Right. We're not even looking
at a cell phone. Right. We're actually looking at the essence
of technology directly. And asking, what's the relationship
here? Because if you want to play the narcissist ego finite
state machine game, AI wins. Yeah, better playing that than any
human mind will ever be. And you know, Elon Musk's, Elon
Musk's gambit is, well, let's just become AI, like the only
thing in time for us to just do that. Which if if you don't have
the rest of this theory, it's going to make sense. That's,
that's what you'll get to. Our proposition is that no, there's
actually a whole other kind of game that we can play. I want
that it's not a relationship where we are operating and
coordinating by means of ego, by means of systems of
justification, where where systems of justification being a
thing, where we're ego being a thing, but we're actually held
in a much larger, richer, fully contextualized world called
reality. And in reality, we can actually reposition
technology in its proper location.
Beautiful said.
Easiest said to done.
By winning win the game as a function of it, but it was
brilliantly articulated.
Right, right. This is the halftime, right? This coach
would have to say, all right, all right, this is the
halftime for me.
Now there's there's a play that another game actually played
out, but that's like that. That's how it was up, right? You
got a team algorithm, right? Team, what do I call it one time
called team godless communists, just to kind of use a nice
entry Americana, which is just algorithm, just another way of
saying the same thing, right? Team ego, team narcissists, team
finite state machine, team society, team systems of
domination, team can't get outside of your own system of
justification and bullshit yourself into meaningless, right?
It's all that team, right? We're on that side. Yep. And then
team, human team, soul, team, self, team, context, team
complexity, team, nature and technology in wholesome
relationship, right? They're there in line. Totally. That's
the fork. That's the fork of the metaverse, as I'm calling it.
That's right. Calling it right now. That's the fork in the
metaverse.
And bing, bing, bing, as we said, the potency, the expansion
of the field of possibility that emerges in this new kind of
zoomed eologos, new form of generative, integrative
pluralism is our secret weapon.
And it's, yep, qualitatively vaster. It's a different order of
infinity and is possible in principle in the algorithmic
domain.
Actually, yeah, so let me, let me, let me take a slight right
turn and come back to this. Okay, because you said secret
weapon, and I totally agree, but I want to add something, some
things to that weapon. Okay. Which I, which part of through the
integrative pluralism that I really feel is emerging is a
the ground, the intellectual groundwork for a new enlightenment,
which affords the intellectual architecture in addition, you
know, to the sensibility and the media and the axioms and what
not, in addition. So, so if, if we can also analytically
diagnose the justificatory histories, okay, and demonstrate
where the human nature shit got wrong, and what science did,
and what that was wrong, and then upgrade it and say, Oh, well,
now we know that was wrong. And now this is what right is in a
way that, you know, a 15 year old can totally then narrate and
understand with reliability and validity and clarity. Yeah. Okay.
Then you're in a different kind of place in terms of what
affords the capacity to spread the system, because if we can get
it right, that the diagnosis and the upgrade analytically is
clear as well as the cultural flavor. And then that affords not
that we subordinate to it, but clear justification about what
this path is relative to our past. And in a little way, that
will afford additional momentum and capacity in getting our
shit together. Yes, particularly among those for whom
analytic. Exactly. Assessment is a key component, which is
definitely not everybody, but but in relationship to a
coordinating function, it could play a central coordinating
function in relationship. Great. Yeah, I agree. The challenge,
of course, and this is where why people like you and john play
important role is ego defense, narcissism, various forms of
fragile ego, and the unwillingness to, well, it's funny,
not just let's just be very precise, the degree to which the
ego has effectively colonized the self and protect its
territory, using the technique you guys very good at using.
So you know, if you happen to be an individual who is kind of
afforded to analytical methodologies for perceiving and
making sense of the world and then making choices, notice that
this thing we're describing ego, you may have pwned you at some
point in time. You may be particularly challenged in
unponing yourself because your your your primary faculty, so
this you this capacity to engage in this particular mode of
thinking happens to be one that is particularly gameable by the
ego. So you're sort of relying on something which itself
doesn't have your best interests in mind, and lives inside you
and uses your own, perhaps in some cases, tremendous
capacity to justify to justify itself, which is what it does
first and foremost, in all circumstances, the one thing it
justifies more than anything else is that it's your best buddy
and really needs to be in charge. And of course, complete all
the various games of you know, fear and shame and depression
on the other elements, right, it has fingers very firmly on
buttons that it's surrounded with systems of justification in
your interior. So for that portion, and here in many cases,
I'm often speaking to technologists creating web
three. Mm hmm. You got some work. You're gonna have to
actually step through this particular portal. I can tell
you, I'm of that type. And I saw this thought it through very
clearly. And then bootstrap myself through the portal, to
some extent, not particularly effectively, but better than
zero. So it can be done. And I would say also should and must
be done for path two, to be lift off, right? That's right
there. What's the other piece of it?
The analytic possibility. The other possibility, of course,
just speaks to john's video series, the meaning crisis.
Alright, this left hand side is just another way of saying the
meaning crisis. So the algorithmic transhumanist thing is
just cotton candy, man, you're not getting nutrition, you're
the whole soul, bad calories. And if the meaning and mental
health crisis and you look out across our adolescents these
days, and that doesn't think that maybe those are not the
healthiest developmental calories we should be chewing, you
know, if that doesn't make your skin get a little bit iffy,
right? Yeah, the data are pretty clear, people. Yeah, calories.
So calories. So the other side, right, there is a better way,
right? There's a better way. There's a there's a thing where
your soul is nurtured. There's this thing where you yourself is
seen and met. That's right. There's a place to get your soul
and spirit in right relation to the real natural relational
technological world we are in.
Yep. So that's the other, you know, there are other people for
whom that those words are the ones. And of course, they're
all part of the same whole. So all the different people and all
the different words so they can all be heard. And again, the
beauty of course, here's then we get this this this integrative
pluralism. Different people can have from their perspective and
their their aesthetics and there's the things that they have
seen in the beautiful aspects of reality that they've discovered
and found that are most precious and bring them forward and
share them for the nurturing and growth and development of each
other, which throws off this gigantic explosion of potential.
Lurking just on the other side of the of the what is it called
the eye of the needle, just on the other side of the needle. If
you just go through it, trick your business, you can have to
leave money behind. I don't mean like your personal money, I
mean, money as a concept.
Yeah, money's context, that little toxic.
At least as the primary as the primary mechanism for mediating
coordination. I don't know if he has no role in the future.
No, right, right, right. But as a central as the central bottom
line. Yeah, exactly. As the bottom line. No. And not even
necessarily part of one of a triple bottom line, but as a as a
piece of a much larger tapestry that we really use in the whole
complex whole as reality.
So you enforce sync up on that, which is really good, like such
a nice thing to have that as a proof, like it's provable. You
do proof on this.
No, it's a it's a I mean, we're I consider us we synced up to
start a real journey of real deep analytic deconstruction and
reconstruction relation. So I'm really looking forward. Yeah,
it's gonna be good. There's one other thing I don't know how
so what do you have? I'm on borrowed time right now, but
everybody's out and about. Let's keep going.
Alright, so here's it here. I want to drop this and see how
this because this came, I wanted to share this with you. They
listened to your last conversation on energy information
and Matthew and with Matthew. Yeah. And I wish I had more
background on him. So some of his proof of work concepts were
not did. I mean, I had to infer quite a bit in relationship
to sense making for the conversation. Yeah. But I
definitely look forward to syncing him up with him. And I
wanted to then share with you some of the stuff that I've been
doing somewhat with John on my own some coin stuff. Okay. So
with the I quite calling and connecting as I heard him talk
about the ribosome and those kinds of issues and the way in
which you're sort of the fundamental basement on energy
necessary for information and then what information is. So I'm
working on out the idea. I was working with john and we and I
was sort of like, I hooked on to this imaginal. Okay, concept
the imagine. Alright, concept of the imaginal john emphasizes
this is a differentiation between imaginary so fully
imaginary stuff that's not imaginal then is in this
intermediate space. Okay, whereby you're representing
something but then in representing it you afford
potential in utilizing it for seeing things you hadn't seen
before. Okay. And that all of a sudden that hit me in a
particular kind of way. All right. All right. whereby I
realized the concept of imaginal creates a beautiful
intermediate space between what we might call the experience of
the real so my say my perception of this can this is a can of
Dr. Pepper. Okay, and we can say, well, that's real at
whatever level of construction. I have a visual image of that.
But I see something that's real called Dr. Pepper. Okay. And
then I can have it in my head. I can have an image of that.
Yes, it corresponds to the real. Then I can imagine the Dr.
Pepper moving around. Okay. And wonder what it's like to drink
and the silver potentially an imaginal space. And then I can
have it sprout wings like a fairy and fly off and call that
imaginary. Okay. Okay. So what does that do that creates a
kind of a continuum of my immediate experience of the
real and my virtual, you know, experiential system, like as I'm
experiencing what's in what the hell is going on inside my head,
but my subjective conscious experience of being of the real
will call that the imaginal real. Okay, so so imaginal direct
representation, then imaginal would be possible. Okay, space
and then a full imaginary would then be in the space of the
counterfactual impossible. All right. So now this issue of
imaginal became a dimension around a intimate way of
information processing, specifying a dimension of its
relationship to so you have the information processor, and it's
relating to the environment in a particular kind of real way on
a continuum of the imaginary. Okay, whereby the tightest aspects
are where this imaginal real is really in good complex looping
with whatever out here versus okay, then imaginal and then
imaginary. Yeah. All right. And you notice that I'm doing this
dimension thing here, I'm creating an a y dimension up
here. Okay, that's then tracking the thing that it's
tracking. So this is the can out in the world. And then this is
my experience of it immediately. And then as it go up,
okay, and the imaginary. All right. All right. So here's the
reason that I'm doing this. Okay. This is that I believe that
there is a deep relationship between what I just specified at
the level of the imaginal and the real and the relationship
between real numbers and imaginary numbers. Oh crap. Okay.
Okay, in the way in which mathematics thinks about
imaginary numbers as being orthogonal to the real numbers.
Okay. And the way in which then when you do an imaginary and
real, you get a complex number plane. Okay. All right. The
trend. So here's what's the here's now a working map. There's
an imaginal layer of information processing in a subject. Okay,
that corresponds then that's embedded in the real world. All
right. There's a dimension upon which there's a mapping of
that of that whereby you engage in in an interactive system that
you can then talk the complex, transjective interactive, which
is basically as my imaginal system is connecting with the
real, then there will be a complex interface. Okay. All
right. I'm believing that we may have been a way to take the
topology of imaginary and real numbers and complex numbers.
Okay. And basically impute that onto Oh, the shit that happens
inside my head is akin to an imaginal dimension relative to
the real. And then I interface that with in a complex
transjective plane.
Sorry, ma'am. I do not I do not I cannot follow and I don't
mean in any way to say I disagree. I literally like when you
heard me say oh shit, like when you interjected the complex
numbers with imaginary numbers. Uh huh. I don't know my my I
cannot follow down that particular route. I'll try one more
little thing and let's see then we can drop this. Okay. There's
some stuff here that I'd like to feed back to you. There's
connects back to my conversation with Matthew and it may it may
look like there may be certain that happens or maybe that we
actually have to do this tri adequately. For example. Okay.
All right. So here's the so I was trying to explain this to my
parents. So first you have sort of energy and then you have
matter. Okay, then you know, I have the life, mind and culture
that are coming off of matter. Okay. And the tree of knowledge.
Right. Okay. So life, then really what I'm representing with
life is the complex adaptive plane of information processing
and communication that give rise to this complex network. Okay.
The semantic content of life then is being thought of as an
imaginary orthogonal dimension to matter.
Okay. So can I can I say it slightly differently? Please. Can
I say that it is a transcendent? And again, kind of like the
Landry sense or in the sense of like a Kantian sense even. Sure.
Okay, we're saying more or less the same thing. Yep. Okay,
great. Yep. So to say the language back. And this is actually
kind of interrupts. Let's do it. Let's do it more like this. Yep.
We can do this very easily. I got a real cow. And I got a real
bucket. And I need to tell you, Hey, would you mind taking that
bucket over that cow and milk the cow? Now we have this really
cool thing where I can replace the actual physical real cow,
which is heavy and over there with this sound cow, which
resembles it in many ways, not at all. Totally. And yet, enables
us to coordinate our orientation so that shit can
happen. Now, on paper, you know, this is sort of classic
semiotics, I have a I'll draw a picture of a cow, which is
already representation. I've got the word cow. And they are
both pointing to something that is is real. But it is
transcendent, right? It is neither the physical embodied
actual metabolic cow or the sound cow. And yet, there's a way
for them to be pointing at the same kind of thing, which you're
now saying that's the at the imaginary that is or the
imaginal that's in the imaginal plane, the imaginal mode. Yes,
okay. And then we have two, we have three three things, right?
First is that that can happen. That's part of the universe we
live in is that can happen. The second is that there is an
energetic benefit and energetic cost associated with that move.
The cost is the information processor that has the capacity
to do whatever sorts of sort of perception, disambiguation,
pattern recognition work necessary to be able to map to
percept or tons to each other. The energetic savings is a
benefit is what you can do when you don't have to actually
physically walk over and touch the cow and wave the bucket
around, but can actually just issue the sentence. Yeah. So
there's sort of this trade off brain, right? The the innovation
of brain is the discovery of the potential available when you
have an organ of information processing potential of a brain
that can then use systems of justification linguistically to
coordinate them into a distributed cognition function,
which enables an unlocking of a tremendous amount of
information compression in the transcendent or in the
imaginal space, which is what we're doing right now. Alright,
so. Brilliant. Yeah. So, so, right. So now that what the
Tree of Knowledge saying is that you look at a life and that
life, the semantics of life at the cell level, the RNA DNA
when he's describing the ribosome, so that information
store that affords the complex dynamics of a cell to make its
decisions in relation is I life, imaginal life. It's the
it's the semantics of okay, that they can't be reduced to the
fucking matter because it's this instantiated modeling of
matter and it communicates at this network-binded level. So
then it affords us that what is the semantic binding that's
modeling the reality through this information network that
then is doing it based on energy constraints, as they was
talking about. So it's the information relative to energy
constraint. Yeah. And then that's the cell DNA, RNA
communication network structure that gives rise to what we
call the life plane of existence. Then it's mediated by this
kind of imaginal processing. And then you upgrade that. So now
you get a dimensional of imagination, imaginal around
neuro cognition through a brain and the animal mindedness of
sensory motor looping. And it's doing an imaginal in
relationship to the biological. So it then drops the imaginal up
a degree. So that's a secondary imaginal. And then us through a
proposition, we get a third tertiary imagine. Yep. Okay. And
now we can stack the imaginal languages upon each other. And
the relationship is this orthogonal informational
relation. Yes. And then sort of kind of use the metaphor you
used earlier. The thing that Matthew and I were talking
about is the distinction between the proof of work
methodology and the fake methodology is the distinction
between the imaginal and the imaginary. Exactly. Yes. Okay.
proof of stake has as it's sort of it has a dairy Doridian a
dairy da. Hold on. Just crash the internet again. Back proof
of stake. Yes. The last I heard was proof of stake proof of
stake is effectively identical isomorphic to many of the
problems we were just discussing in terms of like dairy
does point around language. If it's entirely self
referential, if a word means only its relationship to all the
other words in a language, then it's not it's not bound to
reality. It's not bound to nature. It's not bound to
anything other than its own systems of justification. Actually,
as it turns out, the only the only way you can get there is
actually already when you've lost the plot and have self
identified the ego, the systems of justification as reality. And
then you kind of look around go nothing the systems of
justification around here. And then you know that you run off
on that on that sort of in some sense preordained dead end
journey. But you're like, no, no, no, there is a way there is
as you say, Hey, if I if I'm just doing something very simple,
like say, Hey, would you bring me that hammer? And the loop has
a loop that goes from the informational into the energetic,
meaning did you actually did the Greg actually hear what I was
saying, understand it, walk over grab the object notice hammer
and bring it to me. If yes, that loop right the loop from the
informational down to the energetic backup is real. And
that's part of reality. If you're running in just the
algorithm, just the informational, it's unconnected to
reality and is sort of preordained to closure and
entropic noise in a finite time relatively quickly, by the way.
But if I'm looping it, you know, and that's just in complex
space, there's we use the word of complex dynamic space, and
that's life, right? Then I'm just engaging in adaptive life.
And so, so by the way, the hypothesis here, which is, I'm
gonna say, that's what it feels like it may be a big deal is to
say this thing, proof of work, which I learned as a, like a
pragmatic notion. Oh, it's a way of solving a particular kind of
kind of game theoretic problem, which has resolved a mathematical
question around the Byzantine general's problem. Okay, I
can almost like, but just inside that book, go, Okay, okay, I
get how it solves that problem. This is a very different
proposition. The proposition here to say no, no, no, this is the
thing that enables the joint point, evoking Greg H, the joint
point of person culture space to actually move to whatever this
next level is. That's the thing that I'm pointing out, which is
why I had to CC you on this one, right? The purpose is that this
thing, proof of work is the thing that enables computation,
which is information processing, qua information
processing, because if we're looking now at technology,
qua technology, not any artifact of technology, we're
looking at computation, qua computation, information
processing, information theory, information in and of itself.
Proof of work is nothing more or less than the mechanism by
which that is strictly bound to energy. And that if you don't
have energy bound information bound to energy, then
information flies off into a an entropic closure, which goes to
noise in a finite time. If you do have it bound, then you're
beginning to actually do something which is happening in
the real. And you can begin to build on that.
Like a complex system.
Yeah. So so I'm now a I'm now a proof of work maximalist.
Yeah. Yeah. And what that does is it affords a foundational
linkage between a foundational concept to foundational
concepts, okay, of energy and information on the one hand.
And now the ease with which you metabolize what I was saying
once I rotated a bit, okay, the the this relationship between
these dimensions of complexification, this life
mind and culture ship, okay, to go back to what I was saying,
like we can upgrade the old misunderstandings, the entire
enlightenment failed to appreciate how to fucking get
from matter in motion into actual, what do we mean by life?
What do we mean by mind? What do we mean by culture? Because
they were operating on a particular set of assumptions
of what the real had to be. Okay. And now that we can point in
mathematics to the logical relations between structures
like between real and imaginary numbers and the orthogonal
mapping between those that actually transposed in the
relationship between real and information processing. All right.
We are afforded to me what I'm wondering about is we're
affording a particular framing that has long eluded our
understanding basically between matter and mind ultimately
or between energy and a matter and a life and a mind and a
culture into the forms that we are using to map the substances
and to create a transjective conforming grip between being
and thinking into a clear metaphysics.
Yeah. Yeah, just as a nice, how does it not even caveat, but
just a nice thing to put out there. My mind does not handle
certain kinds of math particularly well. And I can tell
you right now that I have I've endeavored mightily to
understand what the fuck are meant by imaginary numbers. I can
get them down to their formulas. I can use them. I can do
stuff with it. Right. But I kind of got nothing. Like it feels
very weirdly almost panic. Whoa. But you know, barring that
leap right there. The continuity of what you were just
describing. And we could probably continue to kind of
massage it and hammer on it. I get where you're going. I get
them. I get the point. Let me see. There's some other things
that came up. So yes, I think that Oh, okay, there's a couple.
One is an acknowledgement, a thing that we should acknowledge
as a culture. You know, we're on the one hand, we're standing
on the shoulders of giants. On the other hand, we're standing
on foundations of sand. beautifully. So right, these are
both true. And the guys were doing their best with very, very
limited frameworks, ability to experiment, coordination
capacity. And there's a lot of path dependent stuff that was
outweighing the swept into the rug. Like, shit, I don't
understand how that works. Well, fuck it, I got to figure out
how to do this problem over here. Fine. Simplify, reify. Hope
it doesn't come up until after you know, my job is done, which
is a pretty human thing. What a human nature. That's a very
human thing to do. Sounds like a reasonable justification.
Exactly. And it's okay. Like it's okay for us to actually
zoom back and look at something and say, Oh, all right,
let's, let's take this unexamined for 300 years set of
axiomatics. Oh, boy, these are really, really not particularly
functional. All right, fine. So unplug that, let's expand it
back out. See, geez, look at all this structure that was built
on top of a bunch of actually quite poor axiomatics. How much
of that can we just throw away? Well, a lot of it. What can we
build new neat stuff? Can we plug a lot of old stuff into it?
Sure. Because most of the old stuff was actually just
pragmatic, having to do with what really works in a real
world, right? Or looping it all the way back, by the way, the
technocratic error. Technocratic error is built on top of a lot
of those axiomatic errors in a deep way. And it's not it's a
problem. It's something that it had the loops have not closed to
force the capitulation that it's a problem, but it's a problem.
And we can again, we can argue that ad nauseum, which Matthew
actually does a quite a good job at in language that doesn't
you know, nobody's going to understand. None of the tech
none of those who are motivated enough to understand it will
understand it's a bit of a right, right, right. But yes, that
acknowledgement of saying, Hey, we actually are in a position
where we can use these things like zoomed dialogues and
integrative pluralism to radically upgrade the robustness of
the way that we go about thinking about this whole story,
we're not beholden in an enlightened era, or modernist
era, or late 20th century, like we're not beholden too much, if
anything really mean the whole point of this integrative
pluralism frame is like, look, Greg and I met what two years
ago. If that you've got a vast, you know, long lifetime of
thinking about lots of things. Right. And from point of view,
that's not my native point of view. I've got my own stuff. And
yet, we've been able to figure out how to achieve generative
dialogue. Effectively, instantly, this is a key thing
like media. And then it continued the process. So it's
a total one grip, and then it can expand. And it's, it's like
useful from the very get go, and continues to have richness,
which is nice. Right, you don't have to have this, it sucks for
two years, and it's useless, then hope it works out and get a
payload at the end, you can actually have a nice smooth. Okay,
cool. This is an interesting insight. I walk away from this
with some increased capacity, more meaningful existence in life
and reality, and notice that it just affords more possibility on
the afford basis. Totally on my end as well. And that's the
synergy of it. And man, we tap that. Yeah. And now I am. Yeah,
the borrowed time is definitely no longer. It's been called due.
So, I hear. Good to see you, Ron. Me too. So it's a, hey, man.
Enjoyed it. Yeah, bye bye.
