All right, everyone. Welcome to the stoa. Today's session is called
Consilience Project at the stoa, Bad Faith Communication. So what is the Consilience
Project for those of you who are discovering this for the first time? I'm going to put the blurb
in the chat. Zach, maybe do you want to give a little brief overview of the Consilience Project
instead of me reading the blurb? Yeah, I mean the Consilience Project is an attempt to convene
a conversation about the most important topics facing civilization and to do that through creating
insights foundational to social theory, psychology, you know, game theory, other areas
that are relevant to, you know, specifically catastrophic and existential risks. So we're
trying to kind of like, you know, begin a very important conversation. And in fact, you know,
this work on bad faith communication had to be done as a preamble before other conversations could
even take place. And so we're, yeah, in a sense, trying to publish and provoke conversation about
these topics. So there's a bunch of articles published and there's a book that's going to
be produced and then more articles to come over the next, you know, three or four years.
And the article we're reading today is the end game of bad faith communication.
And Zach Stein, who's a member of the Consilience team is with us and Daniel Schmockenberger
was going to be joining us today, but he broke his foot and he's getting his x-ray as we speak.
So hopefully he has a speedy recovery and he joins us next time. And this is envisioned as a
potential series at the Stoa, perhaps monthly. So hopefully have a general join us then.
And I'm going to take in Zach in a moment and he's going to summarize the piece and ask him a few
questions. And then we'll pivot to your questions rather quickly. So put your questions in the chat
anytime. And then we'll be heading to breakout rooms for 30 minutes and maybe rooms of 10.
As well, I sent this on email to everyone. If you'd like to put open this Google doc up and
just put any ideas you have regarding cultivating a culture of good faith communication.
Or just general thoughts you'd like to share. Feel free to do so in this document and that will be
shared with Zach and Daniel probably later this week. So that being said, I'll take in Zach for
summarizing the article. Totally. Yeah, I mean, I'm going to summarize the article, but I'm also
going to put it in context because it's actually the, in a sense, the final paper in a series of
papers on the nature of contemporary propaganda and kind of large scale strategic communication.
So, you know, many of the things that I presuppose in this paper about bad faith communication
were laid out in a series of prior papers. You know, so it began with the one on mutually
assured destruction in information warfare, right? It's a mad info war that was actually the first
in a series of papers on propaganda. The next one, we don't make propaganda they do,
where we clarify the distinction between education and propaganda,
and then move through to do very detailed analysis of social media specifically
as a kind of propaganda delivery system that's very profoundly powerful.
And so, you know, the argument fundamentally in the bad faith paper is that
we've come to be socialized in environments that have been overrun with strategic communication.
And some of its fourth and fifth generational warfare, which is psychological warfare, right,
which is what we talk about in the information war, mutually assured destruction paper,
where we say that there's been an arms race in propaganda, and that arms race has resulted in
informational weapons of mass destruction, right? So we have computational propaganda that's
powerful enough to need to be regulated to being coupled with AI. So that's occurring.
And then there's also kind of peak advertising. And of course, advertising
is coupled tightly to the history of propaganda, you know, going back through the major figures
in both of those fields. And so we're in a situation where the basic informational
surround, which is the basic kind of ecosystem in which we socialize, is overrun with strategic
communication, as it's never been before. So it's kind of like, you know, we've dropped
the the the equivalent of an atomic bomb in the informational warfare space. This happened maybe
around 2016. And now we're dealing with kind of this background radiation that's seeping into
the life world, where bad faith communication is becoming normalized, because most of the
communication we're interacting with or a lot of it, and sometimes the basic frame,
like on social media, is basically accepting the inevitability of strategic communication as the only
kind of viable form. So we fall back habitually into bad faith communication tactics.
That's going to be overarching kind of context of where this reflection on the nature of bad
faith communication stands in a broader research project, basically about the state of contemporary
propaganda, specifically computational propaganda, and the power of our phones coupled to social media
and a few other technologies to change the context of socialization so profoundly,
that we are, yeah, again, normalizing bad faith communication. And so bad faith communication
is communication where parties begin to feel that there's really no point in continuing to
communicate. There is not an actual interest in reaching mutual understanding. There's an
interest in some other strategic outcome. And so importantly, the interest in reaching mutual
understanding, which is key to good faith communication, good faith communication is where
both parties are interested in gaining mutual understanding, but mutual understanding is not
consensus, right? It's not consensus. And in fact, the most important thing to know about
this difference between good and bad faith communication is that it doesn't hinge upon
everyone kind of believing the same thing or falling into a lockstep consensus. And that's
what it means to be in good faith is that we can all basically take the same assumptions.
It's not the case. Good faith communication is a prerequisite for some kind of learning process
where you're committed to mutual understanding, even though you may not actually reach it. And
we'll talk a little bit later in a few minutes about non naive, post cynical, good faith communication.
And there's a lot to say about, you know, in the philosophy of this, right?
Danielle Allen, who's a philosopher at Harvard, has this book Talking to Strangers,
which is a wonderful book about basically, you know, using the history of racial tension in
the United States to discuss the need for good faith communication in a democracy,
and she stresses that it's not about consensus. And that it's actually about learning to navigate
loss and learning to kind of like hold a conversation in the context of disagreement,
that this is prerequisite for anything like a democracy or an open society.
And so, so it's clear that there's a difference between good and bad faith communication,
just as in the prior propaganda papers, we wrote about the difference between education
and propaganda. And the difference has to do with strategic communication versus communication
that's oriented towards reaching some mutual understanding, the commitment to stay in conversation,
where the conversation itself feels like it's worth continuing to have this conversation,
because both parties are committed to reaching and understanding, even though it's difficult.
It's not everyone sits in a circle and holds hands and says the same thing.
It's that we learn how to kind of basically argue well and keep the conversation productive.
And so, it's worth kind of noting that the, you know, there's a Habermas,
you're going to Habermas, you can't really talk about communication without talking about Habermas,
I think. And his work is foundational here. When you think about the difference between
communication that's oriented towards a strategic outcome, like an advertisement,
right? So an advertisement is a great example of a bad faith communication,
almost 100% of the time, not always, but almost 100% of the time,
where they're not really getting you to understand the situation the way they understand the
situation, right? They want you to understand the situation in a very specific way so that
you will buy their product. And so it's communication. And there's an understanding
between you, in a sense, you're getting the meaning of the words, right? But the goal
of the Speech Act is to manipulate, despite mutual understanding. Whereas, as Habermas is saying,
communicative action, which is actually action oriented towards mutual understanding in the
interest of collaboration, that's based on this presupposition that, you know, there is something
like truth, which is to say, there is something like an objective state of affairs that exists
that we can both orient to. And there is something like a better or worse action here,
like not a specified moral code, but a sense that it's worth having conversations about what's
better or worse. And there's a sense of honesty, right, that you're reaching mutual understanding,
you're at least believing that there's a shared interest in reaching mutual understanding,
that the conversation is worth having. So that's that distinction.
But what we've gotten into with advertising, and again, fourth and fifth generational warfare,
is actually really powerful forms of bad faith communication, these tactics which are outlined
in the paper, like, you know, a dozen strategies or whatever it is for carrying out bad faith tactics.
These are just like part of our kind of common sense now on social media, which is a bizarre
thing to say. And so that's worth noting that it's, I believe we've reached a point of,
you know, media technology innovation, like Marshall McLuhan, where actually we're becoming
wedded to these technologies. And those technologies functioning in such a way
that they are, you know, basically deeply manipulative. And so that is affecting the way
that we end up communicating with others, because we communicate through these technologies.
And sometimes it even kind of affects the way we communicate with ourselves.
And this is a hard emotion point that you internalize into your own self conversation.
And you can identify with in your own pathologies, like when the identity system is under stress,
you will lie to yourself about yourself, right? There will be systematically distorted
communication between your own parts. And that's internalizing the communication community
outside you, which is also mostly relating strategically rather than mutual understanding.
And yeah, so the paper lays out those strategies of bad faith that clarifies that distinction.
And it makes a kind of broader suggestion that it may be that we're so
comfortable with bad faith tactics and actually take a kind of pleasure in the entertainment
of watching them unfold, which is to say it's like a watching a war. It's like watching a,
like a shoot them out movie, you know, that, that, yeah, we have to, we actually have to
start to reflect on this difference and figure out either, okay, if we want to have good faith
communication, do we actually have to leave social media? Is it the case that it's literally
designed to create bad faith communication? Or is there a way to engage in non naive,
post cynical good faith communication, where you can actually turn this bad faith communication
against itself somehow through a higher order use of these new media? That's an open question to me.
Because the critique of good faith communication is that you become a sucker, right? These people,
the system, right, whoever they are, they've been lying to you for years, like, why should you in
any sense want to cooperate with them, right? You're a sucker, or you're opening yourself to
being manipulated, taking in by a, you know, psychopathic actor or whatever, who uses your
good faith against you to kind of sucker you into some bad situation. So that's naive good faith.
And naive good faith actually wants everyone to agree on the same thing. It's also naive good
faith, like, eventually we'll conversate and you'll basically come to agree with me. It's not
an interest in mutual understanding, but it's, it's a kind of naive good faith, which is dangerous.
And then you get burned and you become cynical. And you can only operate in bad faith, right? So
there's a post cynical, non naive, good faith communication, which I believe exists and is a
kind of ideal we need to hold. And it's unexplored in the paper. There's hints, right? I think the
is important. Context is everything, right? You know, for example,
one of the reasons people believe you should not engage in good faith is because people are bad
through criminals, right? Like they're literally bad guys, they're Nazis, you can't engage in good
faith with Nazis, right? But then you have to step back and you think, how should a criminal be
treated, right? Should you lie in order to get a criminal prosecuted, right? Should you fabricate
evidence to get a criminal prosecuted, for example, right? That's an interesting question,
because that's a fundamentally bad faith tactic. Or should you actually try to establish the truth
and reach mutual understanding with the criminal? But again, to do that, you have to have a context
in which it's possible. So similarly, if you want to engage in good faith conversation,
it may be impossible on social media. Hypothesis. That's certainly possible in person with the right
containers and settings. And this open question, which I think is worth exploring is,
what are those forms? Do we have models? Have we seen examples of non-naive, post-cynical,
good faith communication? Like, is that a political strategy?
And non-naive means it has to be post-tragic. Like, it's completely aware of how ridiculous it is
to try to engage in good faith with some types of people. But you have to do it anyway. And this
is this insight, which is a post-conventional insight, into the inevitability of having to live
with everybody. That there can't be people fundamentally outside the circle of who you
believe it's worth being in mutual understanding with. It doesn't mean we agree with them at all.
And in fact, we could so fundamentally disagree with them that we have to execute
legal procedures on them. But the legal procedures end up being good faith legal procedures, right?
Or else everything's a farce. So that's how fundamental the good faith communication is,
is that it's, it would have to characterize even the way we treat those people who, you know,
have done the worst. So we want to stay in communication with them to reach mutual understanding.
All right. And so in that sense, I think it's this open question of undercurrent conditions.
You know, how do you do it? How do you come with good faith communication when the whole
ecosystem, or at least, but you know, a lot of your, a lot of your experiences with,
is with strategic communication, like advertising and the nature of argumentation on,
on social media, typically being so bombastic and full of bad faith tactics that it's akin to
watching like a karate fight as opposed to an argument or something. So it's all positive.
They're actually, I think, and see where the questions land. I can elaborate on what I spoke
to or answer specific questions. Yeah. So start putting your questions in the chat.
And I'll post again, the Google doc, if you'd like to add anything there. And I'll warm up
doc with maybe two questions. Yeah, since writing the article or since it got released,
any like, like technologies or cultural movements you found promising or inspiring
related to cultivating a non naive post-initial communication style?
I mean, there are,
there are several groups usually coming out of the context of trying to get the left and right
to talk to one another in kind of American political space. And so there's, there are
several groups in there that I've seen the better, the better angels project is one example.
And in all these cases, the goal is actually to get people to be in like living room sized
conversations, right? Like manageable conversations and to give people reflective,
metacognitive kind of tool kits that help them kind of go in with the right frame of mind. And
so those kinds of things I think are 100% worth doing. And it's actually not a huge
difficult technical problem to solve. It actually requires a bare minimum of facilitation and
training and against certain reflective tools that allow people to pull back from the reactive,
fall into bad faith tactics and kind of remind themselves of the higher purpose of why they're
talking to their neighbors, right? You can't, you know, it's like, it's unlikely neighbors are
actually insane. Even though on Facebook, though, you'd be led to believe because they have that
bumper sticker, they're probably insane or something, right? So we have to pull back from
the reactive, bad faith tactics that have us create a circle of people it's not worth communicating
with. And the best way to do that is to rehumanize people and bring them together. And so there's,
I've seen a lot of work in that space in the political sphere. And then of course, in education
reform, you know, the teacher-student relationship, the way school communities run.
You know, this is another place where, although they're not kind of, it's not going under this
rubric as it were of bad faith, good faith. It's still about, you know, restructuring the interpersonal
spaces in school so that kids feel less coerced and that teachers feel less coerced. And that there's
actually a, you know, good faith participation in learning together. And by the way, you know,
real learning requires good faith cooperation between teacher and student. That's like a prerequisite.
So that's some like vague examples and one project. But I think it's a space of innovation,
basically, at this point, because we're, you know, we have to protect the life world from
colonization, as Habermas would say, like all the strategic instruments of the system
are colonizing the life world into the very fabric of our communication. And so it's,
there's actually almost like a green tech kind of initiative that needs to go on with the new
osphere, where we begin to try to protect the kind of, you know, exhaustible resources of the
life world. And some of the resources of the life world are things like trust, right? Like trust,
if you can actually sap all the trust out of a society. If you want, you could through coercive
strategic communication, you can just sap it out. And so it's actually we're in a fight to protect
the resources of the life world from colonization. My follow up question is, if there was like a
community of practitioners who wanted to get better at good faith communication,
what would their ecology of practice be? And this is an open question to everyone in the room right
now. And like, I'm thinking things like not only that some of the modalities that you've
gestured towards, but things like emotional agency, things to cultivate emotional agency,
how to actually like, you know, structure a good argument. Like anything come to mind for you
in that regard. The first thing that comes to mind is just that it's, you know, getting together a
small group, like a family or community, like a like a larger house of, you know, 15 people or
something. It's fairly easy to get good faith communication going on there, because they're
there, you're dealing with individual psychopathology and things like that. And so you can get a
family system working. The real issue here has to do with public communication. And specifically
public political communication or public, let's say, scientific communication. Right.
And this is where there's a whole other set of dynamics, which it's harder to know how to intervene,
because as a psychologist, I can think, okay, you're in a family system where there's
systemically distorted communication, or you're in a school where there's this incredible
competition between kids and everyone act strategically towards one another.
Let's get small groups going where you learn what it's like to just, you know,
in good faith, communicate and be interested in other people's opinions and learn to understand
them and that kind of stuff. But when you're looking at public communication, and, you know,
the things that occur between journalists and their audiences, and between politicians,
speechwriters, and the public, and in these domains, this is where the concern about the sapping of
trust and legitimacy from the system becomes so profound. And so that, so I'm saying like, yes,
we can innovate in the micro and create healthy community where there's good faith among a low
local sangha or tribe, right? And then this question of how to have, and it's probably
like a question of governance design and social technology design, how do you have a public
sphere in which public communication is felt to be and actually is in good faith?
And that's a deeper question, which I think, again, I do not have an answer,
but I know it's an important question and would love to hear people's ideas about that actually,
you know, because I think we kind of know how to diagnose, which is to say, I think we kind
of know why it is so overrun of bad faith communication, at least in part. And it's not
like it hasn't been before, you know, the history of propaganda, which is laid out pretty well in
those papers I named when I started, the history of propaganda shows that, you know, the New York
Times has been manipulating us for decades. And, you know, so it's the, you know, the
agencies of government that are funded to run propaganda campaigns. So it's not like it's a
new thing. But we have crossed some kind of a threshold, we've crossed a threshold where we
need to figure out a reign hidden and recreate the instruments of governance and communication to
allow for an accurate sense of good faith. And again, legitimacy of, you know, the worth
wildness of continuing conversation with our fellow citizen. If you have any ideas, you can put in
the Google Doc and feel free to comment on each other's shares. I'm going to take in some people
for questions now. Ariel, you had a question. Yeah, I guess I found it a little troubling that
good faith communication is predicated on a shared belief in a mutually knowable objective truth.
Like that framework is kind of considered philosophically problematic and a lot of people
that's considered passe, like a lot of people don't embrace that framework. So I'm wondering
how good faith communication addresses that. So I, yeah, I brought up Habermas's formal
pragmatics of communication, which is a fairly, you know, it's a, it's like a deep, deeply thought
out way of thinking about communication. And by his definition, just good faith requires that
presupposition. And it's not that it's even a nameable fact, which is to say it's not that we
have to agree on a scientific theory of reality. It's that they're, when we make claims like the
claim that, for example, this way of thinking about things as passe, like when you make that
claim, this way of thinking about things as philosophically passe, is you claiming that's
an objective state of affairs or not. I think you are, and that's cool. And I agree that you're
right. It is in postmodernism passe, but Habermas is saying that you can't really get communication
off the ground without at least a presupposition that there's some shared objective world. We may
not even be able to understand it well, but it's worth communicating it about it. Like if we were
fixing a shed together, we're fixing a bicycle, and we were making coreference, you know, through
indexicals in the kind of deeply pragmatic way about an object that we were collaborating to try to
fix. We would just assume that there's a pretty reliable objective reality that one could be
wrong or right about, because either the bike would run or it wouldn't run. And so in that sense,
it's like that kind of basic stuff. And if you're operating in bad faith, you won't be able to fix
the bikes, you won't be able to fix the bike together really, either be a limited like little
space where you're cooperating at least enough to agree on like how the bike works. So and then
that's Habermasian, you don't even have to go there. In the definition that's in the paper,
it doesn't really assume that there's a there's an objective reality. It just assumes that there's
enough agreement and the basic quote unquote good faith that it's worth continuing the
conversation that you don't want to cut off conversation in the interest of purely strategic
action. That there's that baseline of agreement. So that would be my answer, which seems to seem
not satisfied, which is good. I guess I guess part of my question was also about the unpopularity
of that philosophy, like it does seem like it almost seems like there's like a labeling of
everyone who has like a postmodern framework as being in bad faith, which seems like a little bit
of us. Maybe I'm misunderstanding. Yeah, no, no, I mean, it's not that's not the case. Most people
don't operate in bad faith all the time. It's not the case. And, you know, Baudrillard, like
simulation simulacra, that work is a remarkable work and offered in good faith to try to help us get
out of this simulation. It's one of the most deeply postmodern works. But you end up in a
performative contradiction a lot, which is when your your your arguments rely upon, for example,
a fact stating discourse about the world. But then you say fact stating discourses actually don't
exist. But that's right there, you're stating some kind of fact that it doesn't exist. So there's a
performative contradiction, which once postmodernism got going was pointed out by others, including
Habermas. And, and so in that sense, that's not that's not bad faith. It's kind of a it's a mistake
in the domain of pragmatics, which is a theory practice problem. And it's hard to it's hard to
name that, but that I think is what it is. And so it's not the case that all postmodernists are in
are in bad faith. In fact, most academics, I don't think operate in bad faith,
even though they're competing. But the postmodern public sphere, the late capitalist kind of postmodern
public sphere, you could argue has has mostly been overrun with bad faith communication.
If you combine all the effects of advertising, and propaganda, etc. So maybe that helps clarify
what I was saying. Evan McMullan, you got a question? Yeah, thanks, Peter. So my question is
sort of in a similar vein as Ariel's, I think, but I'm interested in a specific aspect of this. So
to me, as she was pointing out, one of the most difficult aspects of having good faith
communication involves the fact that we have very different cultural groups that nonetheless
share physical and social proximity, which seem to have adopted mutually incompatible
reality tunnels or working ontologies, with such fundamental different fundamentally different
organizing principles and assumptions that the process of reaching any sort of common ground
at all can take like many, many hours, days, even years of good faith dialogue. And this appears
to me to be the result of deliberate moves by fairly savvy political and economic actors engaging
in bad faith communication over to cause the situation. So doing that requires a lot to causing
the situation seems to require a lot less time investment, you know, than then fixing the
situation. So I'm curious about this dynamic. And specifically, you talked earlier about the sort
of re humanization step, like, okay, so I'm dealing with a guy who's got a very different
worldview, reality, tunnel ontology, what have you, then me, and this is going to make communication
even when done in the best of faith between us very difficult. So I'm specifically curious about
how this works in your view between this re humanization step. So I've got a guy who's coming
from a very different place, we disagree about some almost axiomatic things in our ontologies.
And yet I want to have a good faith conversation where we can talk about, say, a local policy
debate, like in my small town that I live in or something productively, without constantly
getting pulled off into the very different assumptions we might make about value and how to
realize value or something like that. So maybe you could talk a little bit about that.
I mean, I would actually, I mean, what do you think? Because again, it's very context specific.
So like, depending on who your neighbor is, where you live, if you're in a rural or an urban area,
if the axiomatic disagreements are in some areas as opposed to other areas. And so they know that
the post con post conventional in general tends to like constolate for uniqueness. It doesn't
concentrate for routine this, which means it's a it requires a higher degree of like consciousness
and adaptability in every conversation. That's like a very vague thing. You know, as I as with
the example with the bike, if it is possible to get down to places where as in meal preparation
or neighborhood cleanup, or things of that nature, where you're at a sensory motor and
representational level kind of conversations, and then build trust in those areas. And often also
recognize weaknesses and unwillingnesses in those areas. You know, you know, the left right divide
in the United States often is also the divide between the talking classes, and the kind of
classes that actually manipulate physical objects in space, like your plumbing, right?
And so bridging the divide between the talking classes and those classes that manipulate the
physical world requires often getting down to what they what can be shared in common, which is
some kind of, you know, radically local problem. And but yes, at the level of axiomatic abstractions,
where both parties have been propagandized since what age five,
how long will it take to actually bridge those very abstract ideological differences?
You know, that can take a long time, which is why you have to have some kind of foundation of
cooperation on a shared project that's in both of your interests to solve that needs to be
solved, regardless of those commitments, and axiomatic kind of basically, you know,
thought terminating cliches you've collected from years of being propagandized and advertised,
into being unable to think for yourself, right, which is, you know, the question of how to get
out of that simulation and into conversations about reality is a hard conversation to have,
because the simulation is deep. Right. So this is essentially the exact type of situation I'm
asking about, because I do a lot of shared projects with hands kind of stuff, right, like I,
you know, local farms, that kind of thing, like going fixing things, doing stuff for people,
building stuff that that's, I have good relationships with a lot of people who might
disagree with me pretty strongly on the higher level abstract stuff, founded on that type of
interaction. And yet I noticed that there seems to be a very sort of, you know, triggered limbic
hijack, whatever you want to call it kind of response, when like a certain barrier of
non locality is crossed, and this barrier can become crossed, even when talking about extremely
local and relevant, you know, say policy issues, right, where you essentially can come pretty close
to indexally pointing at the sort of consequences that would be had for our shared endeavors and
meat space or whatever. And yet there's there's a real hard bridge to cross there with, for example,
like I've seen this a lot over the past few years with COVID and, and how that should be
treated in local communities, despite the fact that you may have, you know, built a shed with
this dude or whatever. Yeah, totally man. Yeah. And then again, I, this is an open, this is an
open question. I mean, I think, you know, a few things worth saying is that the concept of teacher
early authority is not irrelevant here, which is to say, in both directions, both parties usually
have something to teach the other. And, you know, the question of how to arrange for contexts, again,
it's not just up to you, you need a container in the where there's an allowance for reciprocating
teacher early authority. And in those specific in the abstract, which means, you know,
agreeing to be, you know, quote unquote, exposed to ideas that you disagree with,
right? You didn't say that, but like that's one of the ways you think about not engaging in good
faith communication is to say that it's actually dangerous to be exposed to, for example, people's
conspiracy theories or something, right? So like that willingness to have some kind of reciprocation
in these asymmetric knowledge transfers, which is teacherly authority. So again, I'm being very
abstract because, you know, it's a case by case basis. I believe in warmer at this level. And
again, we're still talking about the micro, when you look at the macro, which is to say how to change
the types of media conversations and journalistic coverages and speech writing and things. So that
so that down here at the micro, it becomes less problematic, right? Because it's there's the
relation between the state of the public culture and the state of our minds as we try to speak
to one another. So I'll kind of leave it at that. But again, I don't have answers. I'm actually
interested in if people have tried strategies, you know. Thank you, Evan. Katie, you had a question.
Yeah, so when I was hearing you speak, a couple ideas were coming up in my mind.
The big issue that I see is that bad faith communication tends to be really punchy and sticky
and memeable and like certain types of it anyway. And that's kind of why people do it. Because it
resonates more in public minds. And it's easier. It's more easily spreadable on mass than nuanced
good faith communication, steel manning your opponents, etc. Another thing is that
if someone who's promoting ideas that you agree with is using these bad faith communication
tactics, it for a lot of people makes them feel good because it's like, ooh, I have the sick burn
on my opponent. And it kind of like rallies the troops. So I was wondering if in your ideas
on good faith communication, you've given thought to communicating in ways that are both in good
faith, but also still highly spreadable and like very punchy? Or is that against the purpose? And
if it is like, how can we expect it to win? No, it's a good, it's an excellent question,
because it's kind of like saying that, you know, we're so used to being exposed to
advertisement and propaganda, which is literally designed to be exciting and kind of grab the
limbic system, and to repeat in your head and to be easily repeatable to others in speech. So
the notion of what I have the thought terminating cliche, which I mentioned before, which is both
an advertising and propaganda just gives you a slogan. And it's like a mantra. And so we're used
to that form of communication. And we think sometimes, well, if you have a good message to
give, right, well, that we can use the same tactics to deliver the good message. But the problem is
that it is a medium is the message kind of problem where, you know, it's not that good faith
communication isn't powerful, it is powerful. But because it is unwilling to, you know,
even strategically, in a sense, hook you through, you know, a certain kind of meme, right? But it's
worth saying that the truth, there's a hunger for the truth, right? Now that is like, it's faked in
bad faith, right? The hunger for the truth is coopted in bad faith. But it's there. And so in
a sense, when you're in a context of totalized strategic communication, you end up wanting to
seek out sincere communication desperately. So you can be taken advantage of by bad faith actors,
it's bad, but there's also this desire and a knowing that can tell the difference. So what I
think is that, you know, the strategy isn't to compete with bad faith tactics with a similar
level of razzle dazzle, right? It's to be able to somehow create these contexts that people can
take refuge in, which are like demilitarized zones, where socialization can be safe, right?
And communication can be as in good faith as possible. And so it ends up being like taking
the battle out of the memetic conflict and into some kind of design problem for social space.
And into some kind of asking of like, how do we convene conversations? How do we
bring people into good faith communication, let's say off of social media, or in different contexts,
where there's mediation or moderation, things of that nature. So that's what comes to mind first.
Any follow-up, Kitty, or?
Well, I think that that's important, creating these contexts for good faith communication that
doesn't grab you. And I think that like, this is an example of one such space, but like, for example,
I've seen many cases of people who often like in the public sphere communicate using kind of like
razzle dazzle, bad faith tactics in the private sphere, or even sometimes just in long-form
content that they release on their same channels, communicating in good faith. So like, I don't know
like, is the hope that because of the nature of these good faith spaces, people when they see them
will naturally be drawn to them and just leave the other stuff aside? Or do you think that there's
space for meaning and idea like a thought-stopping cliche, for example?
Yeah. I mean, I think that's a great idea. Please do that. Like, I would love to see memes that,
you know, do some culture jamming in the space of like the normalization of bad faith.
And one thing I think I'll mention here, which is art, right, which comes out of left field. And
art is in fact, when done in good faith, much more powerful than any strategic meme. Now,
of course, art has in large part been not large part, but has been co-opted by advertising to some
extent, right? But the authentic aesthetic expression as a beacon and invitation into good
faith communication, the symbolic or imagistic aesthetic expression that's offered as a sincere
cry and expressive cry, that doesn't even orient towards which I'm understanding strictly speaking,
because it's an aesthetic modality. Again, this is our process thinking, right, that the aesthetic
allows for the altering of culture, changing the mood of the culture. And then you can have
a different kind of conversation. So it's worth mentioning that many of the fixes here may not
be strictly speaking, as I've been suggesting, in like technology and governance design, that there's
room for agency in the domain of the aesthetic and the artistic, I think, as well, which is,
again, a different fundamentally different kind of communicative act, which is an expressive act
of sincerity and authenticity, let's say. So I'll offer that as well. Thank you. Thank you, Katie.
This might be the last question before I go to breakout rooms, but Yuli, you had a bunch of questions
if you want to choose one. Thank you. So let me just scroll through and see which one I want to
focus on. Yeah. So I'm really curious about what a good starting model might be for ways to look
at a human system in the context of people building non naive trust, such that they can actually find
things to bond on them might not go all the way to the like ontological or metaphysics level
or something like that. So as people are, you know, in some contexts, it will emerge naturally,
they got to work together for some stuff, build the shed together, whatever. In other contexts,
we're trying to create a container, we're trying to create a context where there can be a longer
term learning relationship together, people that support each other in the practice of good faith
communication. So what are some ways of thinking about a human system, like a human,
that like a starting model that enables us to more non naively look at how do we actually
build that trust, you know, the nervous system level, psychological level. But of course, you
don't think that what we like. Yeah, I mean, that's a it's a foundational question. And,
you know, I believe that, you know, this is one of the reasons we need psychology,
sociology, and humanities, and other dimensions of kind of self understanding of the species,
or how do we deepen our understanding of ourselves, so that we can actually
build and create environments that allow us to be, you know,
I don't know if they're right, healthy, or non, you know, non self terminating, at least
at the level of psychopathology and civilizational, you know, design. So
in that sense, I think the question you're asking is a deep one, which I one can't
solve in the back of a napkin, you know, like here with you, like it's about
what do we really think the need to how to how does the human psyche work?
How, you know, which is a complex how do relationships function? Yeah, it's like,
it's kind of that simple. And now the problem is that the the academic production of
psychological and sociological research has been part of this whole fourth fifth
generational warfare that's been unfolding since the Cold War. Right. So there's like a full stop
when you do propaganda research and realize how deep and how interesting the relationships are
with some of our basic institutions. And so what we're looking at here is a situation where
though the basic questions we're asking are in psychology, sociology, anthropology, archaeology,
places like that, putting together a coherent pictures is difficult. And so, so I leave it at
that. It's like a research project. I have my own thoughts and work in meta psychology and
and have ways of thinking about the human. But, you know, it's, it's a, it's a large
project sometime under the heading of, you know, ontological design or value sensitive design,
which is, you know, think, and this is the next conciliants paper to drop, which will be
basically probably this weekend, which will be about the nature of technology.
And how does design, you know, you want to design technology that factors second and third order
effects on human minds and cultures and relationships. And so in that sense, this question
of how do we design it? Well, we have to take a step back and think, how does the human,
how do value systems work? Right? How do values interpenetrate with behavior and relationship?
And how does introducing something like a smartphone have effects on value and culture
completely unpredictable? Like you just thought you were going to get people, you know, able to
order food and like communicate. But in fact, you've changed our nervous systems to the extent
that we off board things like navigation to a GPS, right? And then forget how to find our way around,
which wasn't an intended consequence of the technology. They didn't intend to,
to degrade our spatial awareness with a GPS, but it was, it was a side effect of the GPS.
And so that question of ontological design is how does one deeply consider thinking through
sometimes we call it axiological design. Axiology is about the study of value. So
axiological design is concerning, you know, factoring human value and human nature, quote,
unquote, for lack of a better term in technology design. At least as important or more important
than like how much money it will make if you, if you, if you release it, which in many senses is
the more fundamental question guiding design due to venture capital speculation and other things
in the tech industry, which makes it have to return profit. So the concern there is making
money as opposed to shaping humanity and fundamentally shaping the presuppositions
of what is valuable, what is, where should I how and steward my attention, right? Which is a,
which is a sacred question that we've given over to these technologists. So, so you're asking the
right question and, you know, get back to me when you've, when you've gotten into the, you know,
into the research and the literature, my friend. I have one follow-up that's cool, Peter.
So I've actually gotten a lot of value from the meta psychology talks you've done here at the
Stoa and had been working on something that just sort of naturally came up for me that very fit
well with your model of, uh, installment development and transcendence, which I've been
simplifying to a think field due, um, uh, from my own sense making. And, and what struck out to me
from what you've just shared as like kind of like, well, you know, we can't predict all the outcomes
of the social systems. They're not controllable. And I'm thinking about like what, what models
or practices or processes, maybe a model as a practice or model as a process,
you know, afford the flowing with the uncertainty and the unpredictable nature of how these social
dynamics and psychic dynamics and, uh, will, will interact. What affords us ease, even though we
generally, culturally, um, have a strong desire for like, I want certainty. I want control. I want
the perfect model. I want it to be all sort of like top down of all, um, and, you know, legible
to every academic institution. So I bring that in, but I'm just going to share a tiny bit of personal
context. Just say, this is directly to me relevant. I use that. I use this thinking, this think field
due model to think about how does my system flow in a given interaction? How's it flowing right
now? Am I like feeling my words? Am I doing something from that feeling? Is there thinking
involved? Are they synergistic enough? And it's becoming a practice for me in a way that feels
relevant to cultural contexts and work and a lot of other areas. And lastly, sorry for my long answer,
from that, from saying, I got a lot out of this, it's actually also personal for me. I want to say
one, one drop I'd like to make into the collective conversation is something like,
you know, if our sense making in academia is going so fast, so fragile, so competitive,
that it can't slow down to have people come in to see what is the process? What is the
interdisciplinary communication that actually works? Can we find something that allows us to
deal with all the complexity and uncertainty as a process and not a clinging to control?
Yeah, that feels really important to me. And I'm somehow kind of asking like, yeah, how do we,
how do we insert processes that are translatable? Maybe the think field due has a,
has a, let's build a bike together equivalent of like, you know, you know, different words for
the same process that are at the object level of building a bike or at the object level of
let's get sociology and psychology and physics talking to each other or something.
So that's what I'd like to drop in as part of our ongoing inquiry.
Interesting. Yeah, so there's a lot there. So two things I'll pull out. One is that
the need for transdisciplinary work on the metacrisis that transcends and includes ongoing
academic work at universities is quite a dire need. So this notion of what are the
higher order collaboration processes that enable academics from different disciplines
to agree on a definition of the metacrisis well enough to actually create usable knowledge
that's truly transdisciplinary, which is the only way to go and international, by the way.
And so that's key. And the problems, you know, Donald Campbell was thinking about this back in
the 60s, one of my great psychologists. So there's a lot of good thinking in the field here about
transdisciplinary. But there are barriers having to do with, you know, things as simple as how
universities are structured as businesses and other things that stop certain types of innovation
to occur. But there is a lot of work going on in that area. And then the other one is a deeper
question, which is kind of like, how the hell do you get used to not knowing what's going on or
what's going to happen? Which is important, because at least you've admitted that you don't know what's
going to happen, you don't know exactly what's going on. And that's very important to get when
you're thinking about designing social spaces or technologies, is that the world is in such a
complex state right now, it's very difficult to predict second, third order effects, that there's
cause for pause constantly. And in the meta psychology, there's a certain level of complexity
in developmental modeling, that allows you to think about that complexity science, right?
Like we actually know how chaos works in a complex cognitive way. But then in the domain of
installment, there's also a certain maturity, a capacity to hold discomfort, to hold depression,
to hold confusion and anger, which comes from unresolvable problems in the noetic space,
which are, will not be resolved, sorry. Like polarities exist that are meant to be unresolved,
that create tension, that create growth. And then of course, in transcendence, that's the easiest
way to deal with uncertainty is to, you know, move into a domain of symbolic immortality,
through the augmentation of awareness, to basically hold, you know, the unchanging
underneath the fact that you have no idea what's gonna happen. And so that's emotional
self-regulation at a very basic level in the face of basically what is ultimately a fear of death,
which is what you want to control. So there's a lot in that space to think about. And again,
one of the things that kind of characterizes post conventional kind of post cynical,
non naive good faith is the improvisational attentiveness to emergent uniqueness and possibility,
which is a mouthful. But it's the refusal to put people into stereotypical categories,
and the refusal to like close down possibility in conversation. So it's this kind of like,
almost kind of outrageous opening, or kind of like irrational opening to exploration.
Which is again, needs to be done post cynical, non naive, you don't want to open yourself up to
a psycho, right? But you do want to have a change of instance, which requires not just cognitive
development, but you have these dynamics of installment and transcendence to bring it into my
model. But there's other models you could use in psychology to think through, you know, similar
problems. The think field do is, is another triple in psychology that was used by Steiner,
for example, Rudolph Steiner, that's the basis of his model. So if you want to expand your
explorations of the meta psychology to Steiner's psychology, you'd find there the think field do
triple. Awesome. Thank you, Julie. So we're going to stop the Q&A now, and we're going to go to
breakout rooms. If you have any kind of questions that you'd like Zach or Daniel to read or any
ideas, feel free to put it on this Google doc. And Zach, before we let people in, I asked you,
what kind of, what's something you might want to get from the collective intelligence here
and yourself. And you mentioned something about personal practices and how to deal with
good faith or how to cultivate good faith communication. Is there anything you'd like
to elaborate that or anything you think would be a good seed for the conversations we have in the
breakout room? I mean, we talked about a lot. And that came up repeatedly where I was kind of
trying to say, Hey, I don't actually know what post cynical, non naive good faith communication
looks like in your context on social media, where it needs to take place. So to me, that's a very
open question, like for exploration and innovation. And I even think it's like a space of almost
like entrepreneurial ambition should be put into figuring out how to create spaces where people
can actually communicate in good faith, or be trained to have certain way of relating to this
environment that's trying to manipulate them through political propaganda, advertising, etc. So
anything there in the domain of, yeah, examples from your own experience, richly textured anthropological
data would be very useful, just like stories about bad faith communication, and how one counter
did one time and it was successful, where that level of like exploring what works because the
environment is so novel. So it's quite an open invitation, I would suppose.
And I know you're going to slip out now, Zach, any parting words you'd like to leave us with
before you head out? Only just to thank you guys for the interest. And you know, this will be a
recurring, we hope thing where the Consilience Project shows up, you know, maybe on a monthly
basis and discusses one of the key thematics or essays, you know. And so this I think is useful.
And the more the breakout groups create this kind of usable knowledge, then what the editorial team
from the Consilience Project wants to learn, basically from the readership, how this is going,
and where future problems could lie, and how our current thinking could be improved.
So to that extent, we're hoping to be in a kind of learning process and good faith with,
you know, the community of the Stoa over time as the project grows and we, you know,
publish more papers and just keep the conversation going here.
Well, thank you so much, my friend, for coming to Stoa today and give Daniel our well wishes
on the speedy recovery. I'll be all right. Take care. Thanks. And if anyone has to slip out now,
feel free to slip out, but I'm going to put 25 minutes on the clock and we're going to go
into breakout rooms, maybe five to eight. And the general conversation is, you know,
how to cultivate post cynical, non-naive conversational spaces or just anything that,
you know, came alive for you today. And whoever has the best good faith communication skills
will take the lead in the conversation. How about that? So we will go into breakout rooms now.
