Welcome to the stoa. The stoa is a digital campfire where we cohere in dialogue about what matters most at the knife's edge of what's happening now.
Okay, check ins. I'm a little nervous, maybe about 28%. And there's a Jason desire not to seem nervous. And then there's this associated existential chill.
That's just writing through all this.
But welcome to the stoa. I am Peter Limburg, the steward of the store, and the store is a place for us to cohere and dialogue about what matters most at the nice edge of this moment.
Is everyone here be fine, or is there some kind of leg and
I can get some thumbs up.
Okay, thumbs up. Okay, cool. Seems to be like on my end.
Okay, let me just audio find video Langie. Okay, cool. So I'll pile through this and then hand it over to Phil.
So for those who are new here at the stowa stowa sort of like a sense making hub or node here on the little part of the internet and the nose here.
And the idea is to escape all the culture or noise and invite all these mimetic tribes in so they can start talking to each other jamming with each other and sense making with each other.
And the ultimate goal is to kind of make mimetic tribes becoming body tribes.
And we have a few sort of themes here at the stowa, we have a wisdom gym forming with such events like a relational exegesis collective presencing Socratic speed dating a metamine metagame mastermind talk about the moment.
We have a psychotechnology incubator where people can kind of test transformational experiences at the stowa and if it works, then it can be poured into a wisdom gym.
And we have sense making sessions like, like we have today, or we have someone who puts themselves at the edge of their thinking and they share their thoughts with the group.
And today we have a sense making a men's himself, Daniel Schmockenberger, and I imagine everyone here is knows of him to some extent.
And we have also have our emcee of the evening Phil Chen, Phil's a good friend of mine here in Toronto, and he's a game B superstar in the game B space.
So I'm going to hand it over to Phil right now and he's going to introduce Daniel and tell us how we're going to proceed today.
I'm just going to give the option to him gives us.
Okay, I'm here now hopefully people can hear me.
I'm a little nervous.
Open the internet can awesome guys can hear me great.
Hopefully the internet can hold up here.
We don't have that great.
My stairs.
And I feel my heart rate being a lot faster.
But yeah, I'm excited.
Really excited facilitated session with Daniel Schmockenberger today.
I first heard him about him probably more than a year ago and it changed my life.
It's one of the leading sense makers and just overall beautiful wonderful human being.
So he's here to talk to us about what the session he called converting Malak from sift to Jedi.
I'll let him explain more but I think it's going to be super interesting.
Afterwards we're going to have a Q&A where he'll be answering some of your questions.
So how that will work is if you have a question, please write in the chat and then I'll call upon you to unmute and ask your questions.
Now, this whole session is going to be recorded.
So if you want me to read your question, please indicate it and write it down.
I think that's the intro.
And I just wanted to pass to Daniel to kick us off.
Let me figure out how to unmute.
Okay, can you hear me?
Is the audio working?
Yeah.
All right.
I'm not sure if y'all can hear me.
Yeah, it is working but there's a leg in your video.
Yes, thumbs up.
All right.
Anything I should do about that?
I am seeing lag time and response also.
Should I go or wait for it to calibrate?
All right.
Thank you, Peter, Phil for having me. Nice to see everybody here.
This is, I have been adjacent to seeing the stowa emerge.
Obviously lots of people I respect been on here. This is my first one to actually get to participate in myself.
So my understanding is that it's not sharing things that we have kind of have a decent sense of having figured out,
but things that we're kind of on the edge of figuring out ourselves.
And so Peter, you had asked me what is a topic I'm kind of interested in and contemplating at the moment.
I think you phrased it as the word to a daemon.
So yeah, that's where the converting Molok from Sith to Jedi was the first thought that came up.
Or I think I also said something like how to close evolutionary niches for sociopathy and predatory predatory expressions of sociopathy.
This definitely a primary topic on my mind right now.
I'm not sure if everybody on here is familiar with the term Molok used in the way that like it was defined in meditations on Molok from Slate Star Codex.
I've talked about it that way other times. If not, I'll do a basic definition.
Anyone not familiar with it?
Okay.
Before I just kind of dive in, Peter, Phil, anything else for context?
Not on my end. What do you think, Phil?
Yeah.
Yeah, not on my end. I think it would be good to define Molok.
Molok is a, if you haven't read it yet, Google Meditations on Molok Slate Star Codex, it's a brilliant beautiful article.
It's describing multipolar traps, but in a way that gives both good grounded examples and nice poetry to it.
And multipolar trap basically is a game theoretic situation where you have a number of players where if any of them defects, it creates an incentive for everybody else to defect.
On some type of agreement that would actually create a better global optimum for the whole, but each person's own local optimum would have them defect on the whole, but then you get a race to the bottom.
And in other words, if anyone does something that is kind of really bad for the commons and bad for the whole long term, but provides a lot of near term advantage for them, they just win.
So everyone else then to not lose has to race to do that thing faster.
And an arms race is a classic example.
So if anybody builds the new type of weapon, and anyone else says no, that weapons fuck we shouldn't have chemical weapons or biological weapons or AI automated killing weapons and whoever builds them just wins everything runs the world so anybody builds the fucked up weapon and now everybody has to race to build that weapon, plus counter weapons, plus better versions of that weapon faster.
So that's a kind of arms race example.
Tragedy of the commons is another kind of classic example. Anybody does something that externalizes more of the cost to the commons they figure out some mining method that maybe leaves a lot more tailings or mountaintop removal or whatever but it increases margins and opens up new markets.
Whoever does that will economically beat out the ones who aren't doing it so then everybody races to do the more extractive polluting externalizing thing, and you're left with no forests and no fish and toxic tailings in the water and that kind of thing.
So a race to the bottom is a simple way of thinking about it.
So a lot of people when they think about what's underneath all the problems in the world. They start to think about social architectures.
And so one of the social architectures is this kind of game theoretic race to the bottom type scenario where a very small number of sociopaths or sadists or assholes can create a game dynamic that then everyone else is obligated to not just play but try to play to win.
And we see this actually playing out right like
the UN was created out of World War Two to try and prevent nuclear proliferation and then has had the primary goal of nuclear deproliferation and we have way more countries with way faster nukes now than we did then.
It's like why have we failed so profoundly at being able to get rid of nukes because who wants to give up their last nuke first like
nobody's stupid and how do we know if the other guys actually gave up their last nuke or if they're saying they gave up their last nuke and they're just hiding one.
And so it becomes very hard to share the optics necessary to get the kind of agreement so if we don't give up all the nukes then we actually say okay fuck it we've got nukes.
I can actually win mutually assured destruction if my nukes are way faster and I can win first strike so the entire Cold War was a race between Soviet and US military manufactured for hypersonic missiles to see can we make faster and faster nukes.
And right now the main one is there's massive arms races and cyber weaponry.
There's massive arms races in obviously bio but AI is the really big one autonomous weapons.
So how do we get out of that is a big question and and we can see a bunch of examples when we talk about tragedy of the commons it's not just environmental commons it's also epistemic and emotional commons some news agency figures out how to use more inflammatory salacious
headlines that hijack your limbic nervous system better and more people just open that shit because it actually worked and you're like I want to know, you know, Trump eviscerate somebody or whatever like the words that that hit some evolutionary trigger, and then
everyone is racing to have the most salacious headlines and compress the complexity into the shortest number of bullet points and whatever.
And it's not just a race for who has the most headlines will create a click but who has the delivery platforms that can micro target the most addictive ones to you personally right so then this is what Facebook and Google and Twitter and the large platforms in
competition with each other are doing is actually competing for time on site and attention across the scope of everybody's attention better.
I'm sure everybody in here knows that if you aren't familiar with work like the work of Tristan Harris, you should definitely become familiar with it.
But if you look at your Facebook feed, it's nothing at all like the Facebook feed of someone with slightly different views and aesthetics and preferences because the total number of things that you can see in your Facebook feed represents a trillionth of a
billionth of all the shit on Facebook so how is it determining what goes in your feed well it's determining it based on the stuff that will make you stay on the site longest.
Not just based on what you actually hit like but how long your mouse hovers and how long your eye hovers and whatever over all kinds of things.
So, one of the quotes that are one of the ideas that Tristan particularly likes and I think it's a very important one is that the kinds of ai's that optimize your newsfeed are higher power ai's and the ai's that beat Kasparov at chess.
And to just get a sense of how much fucking better Kasparov is at chess than you are controlling your own attention, and when he knows that he's playing right and beat him just so clearly and easily.
You have ai's better than that beating you at the allocation of your own attention, and you don't even realize you're engaged in such a warfare and it's getting to use fear and tribalism and sex and money and desire and food and every fucking hypernormal stimuli possible.
It optimizes, you know, newsfeed for those things. So the information ecology gets destroyed in those environments.
So we can say, not the Google issue, or the AI weapons issue, or the if they're going to cut the trees down there won't be trees anyways even if I don't cut them down, but they'll just have all the economics and they'll use that to attack us so I got to actually race to cut down the trees faster.
We see this happening in the Amazon right now. Amazon touches nine countries.
And if any of the countries led enough destruction of the Amazon happen it can actually be catalytic to kill the Amazon right Brazil could do it Ecuador could do it.
And no country actually has the sovereign ability to protect the Amazon. They have the ability to protect a little local region, and then the multinationals that want to do the mining and the extraction say okay, if you don't let us come there.
We'll just put all of that money into the surrounding countries, your people will protest and kick you out because of that because they aren't getting any of the economic stimulus the Amazon is still fucked.
So what's interesting is you have a situation where the president of the government of each of those countries doesn't have the authority to protect the Amazon but they do have the authority to advance it being cut down, and advance those kind of game
So that's why the Amazon is a hard issue.
So if we take all these issues nuclear disarmament and AI disarmament and tragedy of the commons writ large and we say underneath all of those is a what you could call gradient descent.
Someone does something that figures out how to extract something more extract your attention extract the resource from the environment.
While externalizing or directly causing some harm more effectively and so there's an increased competitive margin in an assumed competitive or force competitive game.
So then the iteration keeps being a slightly more fucked up and more near term effective long term destructive thing so the next existential risk is in anxurable.
So that's what we call the race to the bottom. So it would call gradient descent, and you can call it a paperclip maximizer. If you want to look at Bostrom's terms.
The idea, if, if people aren't familiar I'll do a very short version of this.
In the book super intelligence where Nick Bostrom laid out a risk. There's like, not one a risk scenario there's a million a risk scenarios because it's not just things look like Terminator.
It's also things that look like Google.
Increasing war and conflict because of polarization because of news feeds and tribalism which is stuff like Peter talks about these memetic tribes actually are getting more distinct and more separate partly because of platform dynamics.
So with the paperclip maximizer Bostrom laid out one very simple scenario where you could have an AI that kills everything.
And basically the gist is you have this AI that like being able getting trained on chess to beat Casper off there being trained on go to be the best go player.
It's trained on optimizing a supply chain.
And that's like the actual useful shit we want to do with AI is right we want to make them more efficient and be able to do shit like optimize supply chain.
So we make a AI that has sensor input all along the supply chain and say, make more paper clips and or widgets of whatever kind cars whatever but paperclip in the analogy.
It starts figuring out how to decrease inefficiencies and how to turn the lights off because it can.
It doesn't need humans in the space while it's running and the electricity cost go back to substrate and whatever. And it's that actually seems like an environmentally good thing because it's more efficient.
But as you fast forward the scenario, if it has an optimization function for a narrow metric like more paper clips, then there'll be a point at which it is made all the paper clips that can with its existing substrate and now it has to get more substrate so now it has to
make new minds to get more metal to make it and then it has to actually compete with the people that want to use that for other materials but it cannot compete them and on and on until eventually it turns the whole world into paper clips.
Because if it can, and all the paperclip maximizer needs to do this is the ability to optimize some function and to get better to get more intelligent at its ability to do that to recursive intelligence and an optimization function can kill everything.
So long as its ability to get better at it is faster than our ability. If we didn't like what it was doing to beat it. Right.
So, one can say that capitalism writ large is a paperclip maximizer.
And capitalism is obviously inanimate but so this AI might be inanimate, right, the AI is an algorithm it's not a consciousness.
But it is an optimization function with the ability to get better and and recursive veterans that meaning exponentially better. Well, if you think about capitalism.
I'm hearing comments, not too much time on all this. All right, well I'm almost framed up with what Molok is.
So, capitalism is the process of being able to take a single metric, which is a dollar, or a piece of fiat currency of whatever kind or currency of some kind, and be able to incent some kinds of production of goods and services.
And, but of course, as soon as you understand that the interest on the monetary supply requires an exponential growth of the monetary supply and to not debase the monetary supply requires an exponential growth in goods and services which requires increase in extraction and all those things.
You start to realize that capitalism as a whole is incenting an increased movement of turning everything into things that are measurable by dollars value that is metricable by dollars because let's say there's a kind of value like, I appreciate the feeling of
sunshine or I appreciate the sound of songbirds but there is, I'm not willing to pay for that in market value.
Then what happens is but I am willing to pay for something in market value that pollutes the air that makes the sunshine lesser kills the songbirds.
The value that is measurable, extractable and exchangeable ends up conferring power in a way the things that we value that are not measurable extractable and exchangeable don't.
And so all types of value get oriented towards the ones that confer power.
So that's a paperclip maximizer so we can, and when you talk about getting recursively better you have a movement from barter to some type of currency to a fiat currency to fractional reserve on fiat currency to complex financial instruments is actually the AI getting better and
better at being able to incent the conversion of more things to metricable value derivatives are converting complex future optionality ideas into measurable dollar value today.
So we can say the paperclip maximizer is Molok, and it's all this kind of gradient descent and capitalism is just one instantiation communism and other things actually were also different instantiations of the paperclip maximizer as was their competition with each other.
And so the gist as you can say unbounded rival risk game theory as a whole is the essence of Molok.
Right Molok is the emergent property of unbounded of basically game theory by creatures that have the ability to exponentiate their capacity to do so with through the ability to do tool creation.
And by tools I mean physical tools and social tools.
So, I could say that everything that I'm focused on is, is how to kill Molok, which is the generator function of all those other things.
But you don't actually have to kill it right so this was this topic of being able to convert Molok from the dark side to the light side, which is, can you actually.
Any concept that if you, if you read what Alistair Crowley got obsessed with for a while in his study of the occult.
Many occult traditions have this idea that one of the highest things you can do is summon a demon and convert it to an angel.
And we see mythos everywhere about like Darth Vader be, you know, doing the good act right at the very end.
I just, I was thinking about as kind of a fun idea.
If we just say that Molok in essence is
It is some agents, it's different agents that can optimize their own well being differentially to each other, where any innovation that any of them do leads to the other ones needing to innovate in a relevant or commensurate direction.
That doesn't have to only be gradient descent, it can also be gradient us and you can engineer races to the top, where someone can do something that is actually better for the whole long term.
And that actually creates near term adaptive advantage that creates an incentive for other people organizations companies to do things that are also following that similar trend so the question of how do you make things.
One way we can think about Molok also is the kind of near term short term schism of that what is good for the long term we can't actually do because we'll lose in the short and medium term if we do it because we don't have enough resource and that there are things that provide near term benefit.
And this is like okay so I cut down the tree I get immediate material advantage from doing so if I don't cut down the tree.
Yes, there are forests for great grandchildren, but that doesn't increase my power to do or affect anything.
And thinking about it as an individual me cutting on the tree doesn't affect trees writ large all that much, but everybody doing it and then racing to do it faster actually really does.
So the question becomes, how do we identify directions that are better for the whole long term that are actually viable in the near term in the presence of rival risk competition still happening or embedded within that context.
Now we can start to get into a bunch of examples of how that can happen, but that's kind of the inquiry.
So we'll pivot to the Q&A.
Phil, do you want to frame that for us.
Yeah, sure.
So, thank you for that introduction.
So, now we're going to pivot to a Q&A section.
How it work is please write down your questions in the chat box, and I will call upon you to unmute and ask your questions if, and just a reminder this is being recorded so if you don't want your question to be
for you to say the questions, I can read that on your behalf.
So, to get things started off, I'm going to first ask a few questions as we hope to collect that collective intelligence here in the crowd.
For Daniel, what would you say is one example that you're seeing today around upwards gradient up ascent or what are the seeds that you're seeing happening in the world in this direction.
There's some classic ones.
Musk and electric cars is a very classic one.
And it's actually very interesting to see why that's the case related to the short term, medium term long term thing, which is
because of the PayPal exit, he was, he didn't have to be beholden to venture capital or put a little bit of money that created immediate ROI on money so he could do some extended R&D.
He wouldn't have been able to happen otherwise. That was actually the key thing was that he was able to not have to use his immediate resources to just keep getting immediate resources which is the hamster wheel he had enough resource that he was able to do R&D to create a new spot on the map.
And the idea of full stack integration of can we really make a more efficient battery and a more efficient electric cars a whole.
And then once he does that it becomes obvious that it's both a doable and a desirable thing and then all the other car manufacturers realize they become obsolete unless they also do it.
And now you have everybody racing to do electric cars better in a way that they really weren't before.
Right, so that's kind of a, and that doesn't mean that electric cars don't have lots of problems with the material acquisition of the base metals needed to make the batteries and a bunch of other shit but it's a good example of a new race that is happening that is at least directionally
right in some critical ways that wasn't.
I would say that like the long form intellectual podcasting thing of which this is a derivative that let's say Tim Ferriss and Joe Rogan kind of pioneered, which was almost an a counter movement to sound bites and tweets and kind of entertainment
which is let's do long form conversation let's do low production value but higher authenticity and let's actually explore some topics in depth started becoming a desirable enough thing that a lot of people did that now you've got Eric Weinstein interviewing Roger
Penrose about exotic physics and people are actually watching and that was just not a thing a little while ago right so that's a cool example.
I'm mostly interested in examples that could be created that are not currently created for some of the worst problems where we can actually change topologies of markets to solve very large scale problems with a topology of markets are currently
causing the problems, which means being able to change the incentive landscape.
So when you think about the way that Soros shorted the pound.
He changed the incentive of an entire in.
He changed the topology of an incentive landscape because pounds were worth less relative to other forms of currency after he did that well that required him having a certain kind of Intel he had to know that there was a sustainably inflated pound valuation.
And then he had to have enough money had to be a whale right enough money under management at least that by shorting it hard enough he didn't just lose all his money he actually signaled something that made the market re correct, which meant he had to have
both enough sense making and enough actuation capacity, and the sense making could see the opportunity to correct something in actuation capacity could act on it.
Well, there's plenty of places where there are things that are bad for the world environmentally or whatever that are only barely profitable, but at scale still profitable and we could make them more expensive through a number of means.
And there are things that are not quite profitable and this is kind of what Elon showed, but if you could get economy of scale over a certain threshold or you change the narrative landscape to increase demand for it in particular ways, or you change legislation to in certain
ways, you can make those things more profitable. This is like not a new idea, but the idea of being able to use the right kind of sense making so intelligence combined with the right kind of high scale financial capacities.
Most of the time the groups that are focused on let's benefit the environment don't create massive private equity funds and hedge funds and dark pools to say how do we change the topology of finance writ large.
So the idea of being able, and the people that do that do it for almost exclusively personal gain extractive traditional Molok purposes.
But those Molok tools that can change the topology of markets in a way that then moves what everyone else is incented to do can also be used to create races to the top where they aren't currently being implemented.
This is an example when it comes to the Amazon if you want, but I don't know if there are other questions first.
Huh.
I would love to actually hear about the Amazon one, but maybe later.
If people feel called I am really enjoying the fact that the love collective intelligence happening in the chat.
So if people want to hear that and it's not just my own personal interest in the Amazon, then people can share that in the chat. I do want to let people know that we have Daniel here until 830 in case people were wondering
whether this was an hour long, I guess, session.
So just to give people some time heads up.
And I'm really appreciating all the plus ones. So it helps me choose.
I'll see what people are really interested in. So I think the first question that I want to put to the group will want to call on would be from Daniel.
Hey, thanks Daniel. I just have a question for grounding this discussion in a more personal way like I love hearing about how we can resolve things at a systemic level and obviously that discussion needs to be had but one take away.
That I hope to take is how I can take what you're saying and some of the thinking around the space and actually improve my relationships improve what's immediately at hand.
So do you have any personal ideas or examples for how this idea of malloc alchemy can apply really really locally like within your friendships or within your, your marriages and family that kind of thing.
Yes and no.
Yes, it can apply. And you actually don't want your friendships and marriages to have game theory as their primary driver no matter what even a race to the top.
I don't want to be trying to out compete my wife or who's nicer to each other. Like that's just the wrong fucking head frame. So what I'm talking about with converting malloc is in so far as there are competitive relationships there are relationships that have real kind of
competition going on. Can we make races to the top, but that doesn't mean that all action is game theory mediated. So when I'm talking about converting malloc that's actually not a game be idea it's a game a to game be transitional idea right game be ideas anti rivalress
relationships in which malloc is not actually a thing.
The underlying kind of game theory so
we say in your, in your local environment, are there plenty of rivalrous relationships that can move in the right direction. Yeah, like having a subculture define cool differently in a way that creates a gradient us and is actually a really fucking valuable thing to do.
And
and you know, and this is like basic shit but very basic principles around virtue of if there's a guy who's doing something kind of better than you and some other friends and checks and whatever are noticing it, and you feel some competitive impulse.
Don't try to bring him down ever just try to get better yourself like take it at take it as a impulse of the right kind of competition to be like oh I'm only feeling that because
and you can take this two different ways I'm only feeling this because of some wounded childhood insecurity let's just heal that that's also important. And then so, and sometimes, because there's something I actually respect there.
And it's an it's actually a cue for me to notice that there's an area that I value and desire and respect that I feel like I could step into more.
So that's an example of like positive competition or positive malloc type dynamics.
Think about the bases of rivalry from an evolutionary bio perspective.
It's, it's survival selection and mate selection, right like primarily those things. So it's, it's getting stuff and it's getting mates like that with the deepest evolutionary signal is mostly those things.
And so obviously getting stuff is the one that has this is one that has this particularly unbounded characteristic in a situation where you have, you're not just doing survival stuff but you can amass billions of dollars.
So we're talking about that. But as far as mate selection goes.
You've probably all heard various people talk about I think Brett Weinstein has probably talked about it publicly, the most in a way that's adjacent to this group of if women redefined what was sexy whatever the answer of what they defined was is what all guys would do.
Because if there was a
this is actually kind of interesting I'll digress for a moment.
One of critique that Brett gave me years ago when we met of the sexual liberation movement I thought was actually quite insightful and it was one I hadn't thought of before that was with birth control we decoupled sex from procreation.
There's a lot that was awesome about that and I don't think anybody wants to go back to a pre birth control world, but there's also some major downsides which was, it's much less costly evolutionarily for a man to have sex, then for a woman to have sex, because he possibly
can have this toxic mating strategy of spread your seed and bail, and she can't right like that's something she just physiologically can't do.
So she obviously has an evolutionary impetus to ensure a kind of bonding that can raise that child because our extended helpless neoteny and extended gestation period make it much harder on humans to raise babies than other species.
And that when we decoupled those when they were coupled. Now this is not exactly true and if we go back and look at some cultures that had polyandry versus polygamy versus multi male multi female systems versus 100 different social implementations of monogamy.
So, they'll all be different so I'm just going to say a very generalized trend is a starting place here.
So we enforce monogamy through social shaming culture, like much of the kind of Western civilization, and the Victorian age on has been, at least.
A woman didn't want to raise kids with a guy she also didn't want to have sex with him, because, especially pre birth control she couldn't guarantee that having sex with the guy didn't result in having a baby so he had to actually be good father
material to get laid.
Now good father material corresponds to good citizen much much more than just good lay corresponds to good citizen because a guy can be a good lay and be an utter asshole but he can't actually be a good father and be an utter asshole.
Good father means that he can provide and he can be tempered and he can stay in something for a long time and he can prioritize somebody other than himself.
And, you know, father and family person.
And so there was something around. So, this is then where the slut shaming thing becomes a big deal or horse shaming and like, let's make sure that no women ever fuck men outside of marriage, because we don't want to create an evolutionary niche for guys who are assholes to get laid.
If a guy wouldn't be a good father we want him to never be label so that all the men have a race to become the guy that would be a better father so women's freedom of selection is actually selecting for something that is good for the society, right.
So that's a very interesting kind of thing.
So, there were actually some people who predicted that following the sexual liberation movement we would get something like the pickup artist movement, which is a evolutionary niche that grows.
For guys who are assholes who can get laid.
So, now is this women's responsibility to say.
Now there's also multiple trap because a particular woman say okay I'm not going to fuck the guy who seems like a attractive bad boy whatever, but wouldn't be a good father, but other women still well so I didn't close the niche this is why it was not only their own behavior but the women
forcing other women type social policy. There's a lot that's tricky in here I'm not going to suggest some kind of like traditionalist regressive move but I'm going to say that the progressive move missed a few things.
And so there's a deeper kind of analysis has to happen.
So, could women start reshaping using knowing that men will become that which they think will get them the best mating selection whether they know it or not.
Could women help to reshape the topology of that incentive landscape. Yeah, of course, could men also help to reshape it.
Yes they also could so I want to say there's responsibility for this on both parts.
Could guys that because a lot of guys might hear this as.
Okay, some beta that has an issue with violence is going to try to convince women to be attracted to something they aren't attracted to so that he can get late right like that would be the argument.
So, if men started developing what would make them attractive to women for evolutionary biology purposes and what would make them a good citizen virtuously simultaneously.
So, they were actually creating an incentive for women to start to notice that new race to the top scenario you could have a recursion there.
Obviously a total tangent from the question you asked me, but it's an interesting one.
Actually, yeah, I'm curious if this is what you were getting at on the wine scene podcast.
You mean when I avoided his questions about sex selection.
Yes.
I just didn't want to talk about that topic there because it's a big ass very varied audience and I didn't think the answers were within the zone of proximal development of the audience as as a side question.
This is a central and also thorny issue.
For sure.
I just want to let people know that if your question was like really early on, I am having a tough time scrolling up so if you want to ask your question again or is more relevant now, please do so.
And I do appreciate all the plus ones.
I personally want to go back to the Amazon example and I know it's something that you've been thinking a lot about and we've had some discussions on so what to hear what your thoughts are on that.
So I will kind of use the frame of using the master's tools to dismantle the house or you know something to that effect.
Um,
a key characteristic of Molok that is actually deeper than the traditional assessments you usually get to like this late star codex one doesn't quite get here.
And that is that power seeking psychologies that don't have psychology that restrains the use and abuse of power get more power.
And the technologies that are both oriented to do everything they can to get and utilize power and don't restrain themselves and their use of it for reasons like ethics will end up getting more power, and ones who are either less oriented towards it or don't want to use it
harmfully create bases to have less of it so the world ends up being run by sociopaths.
And that's like a very deep underlying thing to address.
It's a really small percentage of the total population, but it's important to understand that power itself follows a power law distribution.
It wouldn't in a tribe where everyone is roughly symmetrical and strength the toughest guy isn't tougher than three average guys, right.
The average guy today is richer than three average guys. He might be richer than three million average guys together.
And if he has access to nukes he might be more powerful than three billion average guys together. It's like what the fuck that's so many orders of magnitude of asymmetry.
So our, you know, technology and capital have created thousands millions billions of times asymmetry and power.
It's an evolutionary thing, which means that it actually broke evolution in the way that we think of it. Evolution depends upon symmetries of power I won't get into that except talk about that other places.
But when you have a power law distribution like this of say wealth, there's, there's like only a few people in groups that have a trillion dollars, and then there's a slightly larger group that have 100 billion but still very very small and
you realize that there's a tiny number of people that have more ability to influence the whole than whole other populations combined.
And the same is true with access to military power. So,
can you say what does it take to get to the top of a power law distribution of power.
Or what what does it take behaviorally and then what does it take psychologically to this to create the disposition for those behaviors and to be successful at it.
I don't, it's very hard for me to know why someone claims to like me.
Right, or why they want to be my friend or why they want to be in a relationship, especially if people know that I have a lot of money, it's very hard for me to have a sense of trust and authentic relationship this is a psychological harm almost every wealthy person I know has in common.
That's a bunch of reasons why it really sucks to have more power.
It also means that I'm going to be forced to engage in some of these rivalrous things where it's like, doesn't matter Democrat or Republican all the presidents of the US in recent history, have used the US military to kill civilians.
That's a big fucking deal, most people on here would not want to authorize a drone strike that was going to kill civilians.
So, engaging in the game of power becomes obligated if you get near the top of the power stack.
So typically cluster B type disorders that are both oriented towards wanting power, and that are less restrained in their use of it will do better at getting it and groups that either are more considerate of the whole,
and don't want to externalize and cause harm are going to get less power which means less influence over the system as a whole which means the whole system will have this gradient towards sociopathy.
Now this, all of the conversations around theodicy and the nature of evil and power and whatever like come up here.
Why did I bring that up.
Let's put the Amazon. Okay.
If you start to understand why the Amazon is an issue, you'll realize that the people that are making the decisions to do the turn the rainforest into grazing land for cattle for McDonald's or to take the base metals or the precious metals or to run trafficking
of arms and people and drugs through it, or oil or whatever it is.
So let's share this motivational landscape.
The, the corporations have a financial interest.
The, and it's important to understand even here that the relationship of limited liability of a corporation.
The corporation is going to have to orient it towards sociopathy, because the corporation can make money pay people out that money.
Those people are really because the corporation isn't an entity it's a fictitious, it's not a real agent or real entity, the people who get paid out, the corporation is going to protect so the corporation can bankrupt and those people can do a new thing, but the
corporation is going to jail, it can only get fined.
So, it doesn't have comparable downsides relative to its upsides, and it's not subject to law, because if a corporation breaks a law you can't put it in jail and you can do is fine it.
And if the fine costs less than the money made by violating the law you just violate the law and pay the cost of the fine.
Or if the fine starts getting too expensive you pay the lobbying to change the laws that quote that dumb criminals break laws and smart criminals make laws is kind of an important insight.
The corporations have those incentives the people within the corporations and the nation states behind the corporations have the incentives they have so, you know, we have European Chinese and North American companies mostly going to the
US, they have national national security interests behind them the Chinese multinational companies also have CCP interests to have 100 year food security and 100 year resource security and corner certain markets, and have positions in the
Americas relative to the US. So, they have very serious high level interests that are not to the protection of the Amazon right now the government has to still okay certain things.
There is also a non agent run by people. And so the particular person that got to be the head of the interior or the president isn't going to be in that position for all that long, but he's going to keep being a person and having a family and having a legacy for a long time.
So, if he tries to do the thing that protects the Amazon four years later when he's out someone else will fuck the Amazon. So it seems inexorable but if he goes ahead and lets it happen he gets a bank account in Switzerland or Littgenstein filled up with a bunch of money for him and his family.
So you can see how there's a confluence of perverse and sensitive and asymmetry between the upside and downside kind of everywhere, but it's important to understand that
the psychology that are in play and making those decisions are not the ones that they expressed to be right in the news everyone's expressing certain considerations but those are not the actual ones at play.
And, but now what types of tools do they use to be effective. Well you have financial institutions that have trillions of dollars or at least 10s or hundreds of billions of dollars and assets under management that can financially manipulate a sovereign
by being able to pay off enough of the corrupt politicians being able to incentivize the government as a whole to basically co-opt its sovereign law.
Greenpeace doesn't do that, right, like the nonprofits that are trying to protect the Amazon for the most part they aren't even trying to protect the Amazon the young activists in them are the top of the NGOs the NGOs end up getting a lot of power, some of the NGOs.
This is actually an important thing to understand that I learned very much the hard way coming up in this space is
if there's a problem and you incentivize what you make a company or an organization or a nonprofit or a government agency to solve that problem and now there are people who have salaries forever and they didn't have salaries before and they have access to power and prestige.
If you really solve that problem that whole thing would go out of business and all those people lose all that stuff that was beneficial to them.
So they have an ongoing incentive to maintain the problem and maintain the legitimacy of them as a response to managing it to the incentives skew towards managing problems forever rather than really solving or obsoleting them.
So you have to really pay attention to the incentive architectures underneath all of those things.
Usually I can look at someone has a plan for how to fix the Amazon or the grid or nuclear disarmament and I just have to look at the incentive landscape of the institutions and people that are involved and will usually have a pretty quick sense of where it fails.
So, as a transition from game a to game B, where we are in the presence of ubiquitous rivalry that is both empowered with very high level national and private intelligence and the top level financial capabilities and private militias and all that shit.
We don't get to game B if we lose comprehensively in the game a thing right now so this is this question we've asked before of if the peaceful cultures always get killed by the warring cultures.
And if they don't get killed at the warring cultures because they get better at war which makes them no longer peaceful cultures that's another way to describe Molok.
How do you have peaceful cultures that don't get killed by the warring cultures or get converted into them is another key way to kind of think about this.
And another way to think about it is what is legitimate power versus illegitimate power.
And one way of defining that one way I define it is.
We have a power law distribution of power.
If I start to gain more power in that.
So I have 10 x the money of average people are 100 x or whatever it is or visibility or something.
I'm benefiting from that.
I can pay gardeners and maids and people to come do shit for me at less than I make per hour like I'm really benefiting from that power asymmetry.
And if those people who charge that rate charge the same thing I charge I wouldn't be able to do it.
So I'm maximally incentive to maintain that power asymmetry and grow it so it goes from maids and gardeners to yacht repairers and whatever else right.
Specifically, if anyone has an asymmetry of power, they have both an incentive and the capability to grow their asymmetry of power they have the capability because they have more power, right.
And they have the incentive. So I would say ill, illegitimate power is doing that is utilizing asymmetric power to maintain and grow the asymmetry of power, which then has other groups that are most everyone else isn't capable so you have the separation
between the haves and the have nots and the haves or the other ones who have power with arms races with each other and competitions for controlling the minds of everyone else so they vote and purchase in the right direction.
The legitimate power power in a game be direction is, if I have an asymmetry of power, I want to use it to uplift everyone else to have more power and to utilize it better to increase the legitimate power access of everyone else.
And, which is basically what teacher Lee authority is right teacher is saying okay I have knowledge that they don't have but I'm not trying to maintain the knowledge over my student forever I actually want my students to surpass me so how do I use this increased capacity in a
sort of intentionally developmental way.
Now what I want is people who have that orientation actually get good at power actually develop asymmetric power so it's not only that the CIA and the CCP and the Kremlin and dark pool organizations that have it and black water, but it's groups that are authentically oriented
legitimate use of power who are developing it and then utilizing it for those purposes and that power both means that they can adequately defend themselves against the attacks.
While helping to move things in a different direction so if I look at what are the capacities and what are the tools that say multinationals will use to influence sovereign governments to take their mineral rights and whatever they'll come give them a big ass loan.
That they know they can never pay back.
That's collateralized with the asset rights of the infrastructure of the country, right the World Bank has done that forever China learn from watching the World Bank they're doing it better than we are but it's the same shit.
So,
another example of a tool they'll use so that's called predatory lending.
Another example will be bundling, and we see our politicians do this all the time here's proposition a makes clean water for everybody and without it.
We're Flint Michigan and whatever and everybody's going to fucking die from hexachromate okay everybody wants proposition a but in the fine print.
This tool includes taking away some civil liberty that has nothing fucking to do with clean water and like what the fuck when your surveillance tech is implanted everywhere.
How does that have anything to do with it well because the, the person who wanted that figured out how to bundle it where you have to go for it so bundling is a game a tool that is mostly used for evil.
But it could be used for good.
Right, just like the right types of lending and indebted meant could be.
Let's say, let me give the example of Ecuador and the Amazon now I was building.
Yes, great. I was just going to jump in and ask you how you connect it back and specifically where Ecuador example.
So the, since I've got nine different countries I've got to deal with and the Amazon as a whole doesn't have sovereign law. There isn't an IGO that has any meaningful power to be able to bind predatory capitalism.
So I have to work at the level of the individual countries but we already said that if a particular country says we're not going to let rainforest extraction happen they do so much economically less well than the other countries that they get so much pushback.
So, how do we create a situation where a single country can actually do economically better and better in terms of their economics their publicity their national security by doing something that's also environmentally more friendly.
It's not a race to the top rather than a race to the bottom can we engineer such a scenario the answer ends up being yes, and this is one of the things I'm particularly interested in right now.
So let's say we take Ecuador as an example because it's the headwater of the Amazon, right, Brazil is the largest total body of Amazon Peru has some of the most biodiversity, but the headwater of the Amazon is the most sensitive area and it happens to be highly at risk right now.
So Ecuador owes $14 billion to the World Bank and $20 billion to China that it doesn't have any economic capability to be able to pay off. So those are loans that are going to default at some point.
They are collateralized with the asset rights at the headwaters of the Amazon.
What do we do with that headwaters the Amazon goes the entire Amazon goes.
Well, what most NGOs do is they just put picket signs by the bulldozers and try to like hold the frontline and maybe empower the indigenous people with some resistance to the frontline, which doesn't fucking work at all right because this way you have an indigenous person an indigenous
leader getting killed pretty much every day in the Amazon.
And they don't mind hiring private militias behind plausible deniability that they didn't do it like that is par for the course all the time.
Now, slightly craftier activists will say okay what we're going to do is rile the people up to really care well the people are poor they want economic opportunities that it seems like there's an endless amount of Amazon and it's all benefiting a few indigenous
people and not them and and they the nonprofits don't control the media as effectively as the for profits do which is what's telling everyone else hey they're trying to keep us from our own national assets and keep you poor.
Okay, so how do you actually win at the narrative game, and then
maybe even craftier ones will say okay really we have to deal with economics so we're going to bring an economics alternative to extractive rainforest stuff we're going to say hey look,
we have a common valley tech sector to keto so that you can start making a lot of money with tech so you don't have to do the rainforest stuff.
And they say awesome do that we don't think it'll work if it does work awesome and we're still doing the Amazon sales because that's money today and we know how to do that.
So you don't just have to bring an alternative you have to bind the predatory capitalism not just bring an alternative better capitalism you have to bind the other one because if you don't bind the other one both running side by side
still kills everything.
Alright well how do you do that.
So, an example in Ecuador could look like this and I'm giving it at a very high topological level but you can just see the types of thinking.
They're just like climate change has a runaway positive feedback loop, where at a certain point and climate change, the heating makes it easier to heat faster.
And this destruction has a runaway feedback loop because you have this thing called the hydrological pump or waters evaporating through the trees which makes moisture which creates it being a rainforest, which keeps pumping water because you have a lot of rain.
Now what happens with that hydrological pump is some of the water falls back over the Amazon and some of it goes into the atmosphere and goes through some convection current and that's actually where 30 to 50% yearly of North America's rainfall comes from is
rain from the Amazon. Now you start to lose enough forest cover where you get less rain, and then you get less transpiration which gets drier which makes it easier for the to lose more forest cover and fires and like that and you get a kind of runaway dynamic.
So that's called breaking the hydrological pump. So, how far are we with rainforest cover destruction in the Amazon before we get that positive feedback loop.
You know, different scientists hydrologists think somewhere between next year and 15 years from now, but both of those are really fucking soon.
And next year is really soon.
But now you think about okay.
If you break the hydrological pump, and North America loses 30 to 50% of its rainfall what's the effect on the US of that.
So it pretty much collapses the US as we understand it today we lose agriculture or agricultural production we lose our aquifers.
We that creates massive both economic hits and national security threats.
So,
does the State Department see the destruction of the Amazon as a national security threat to the US. Yes, they should do they currently know nobody's been thinking about that are putting those together.
Does the State Department have big boy capabilities to intervene just like the multinationals do with a different set of incentives where you're actually helping
where you're where you're identifying the agents that have the ability to do something and helping change the incentive that they are oriented towards.
Yeah, that's a possible strategy. So I've talked to some people about that State Department they're like yes if we can see that that's a real thing then we would ensure that didn't happen.
Well that buys some time it's not a long term solution because you can't be
keeping economic development from happening for a long time. So you also then have to propose better economic development opportunities for those countries, but that also bind the predatory capitalism parts.
So rather than say, we're going to help you Ecuador build your own mining company rather than the Chinese multinational come in and do the mining for you where they have no incentive to do environmental protection because they're going to leave and don't give a shit
and they don't even employ local people they bring their own people over and you make a penny on the dollar because you're just basically selling the asset rights.
We're going to help you create your own national mine where you employ people at a fair wage living there and it's environmentally safe and you have the right incentive to do it and you don't have to do anywhere near as much of it to make even more money because you have higher margins and can sell things on the open market.
You don't have the capability to do that up front so we're going to bring the capital and the and the contracting capabilities to help you do that.
We can't just do that because that still doesn't bind the other thing what we say is.
Can we get this if the State Department got involved and said fuck we actually have to do this ongoing Lee and we can't do it militaristically we need to get the debt forgiven.
The State Department put pressure on the World Bank to forgive the debt based on their relationship sure it could the World Bank put pressure on the Chinese government to do the same thing and not downgrade the quality of their debt.
Yeah they could there's an arrangement you could make there.
So now let's say we create an organization.
We start to talk to the State Department about that deal start to talk to the World Bank about that deal see how to kind of set that thing up.
And then we also look at how to do the mining properly that creates wealth for the people in the area.
And so we now we come to the President of Ecuador and the other people and say look we have a deal.
We can get your debt forgiven.
And we can increase the economic prosperity of your country more than it currently is while protecting the Amazon while increasing your national security while making you time at magazine man of the year and a hero to your people and internationally and then you become the leader of how to best do developing
nations in the South American region.
And here's the deal we've we've set up this whole bundle package and we'll help you with it and we'll actually help kick off the not just the mining but the schools and all these other things.
And this because the mining will be very high profit, but say schools and roads and county clinics need money subsidized from somewhere so we bundle it into a investable operating agreement.
It's net profitable and highly secure ties because it's basic infrastructure backed by their own government bonds in a world where most bonds are negative interest yielding right now so we can get massive pension funds with trillions of dollars to be able to get a couple percent return
and they like the thing so we say look here's the deal.
We will mezzanine finance this thing for you will open it up to the capital markets and get the Canadian and Norwegian and other hedge funds to come in will negotiate a settlement of your debt.
All this kind of stuff but it's an all or nothing package, like either get the whole fucking bundle or you don't get any of it.
Now can we make a more attractive bundle than the fucked up when they're getting and that's using manipulative tactics, but that are actually in the service of the environment and the people, rather than fucking the the environment and the people to extract as much as
you can in externalize that would be called using game a tools well towards a authentically game be oriented kind of purpose now Ecuador starts doing better in Brazil's like fuck we want this deal and you start to get a race to the top between the countries, right.
I learned about how to think about those complex kind of operating agreements from a friend named Nelson del Rio, who's one of the best thinkers on this topic he helped develop the p3 model the public private partnership, and then saw how that got weaponized so he moved on to a project
called prosperity of the commons and has has done really brilliant work in the space.
There's a million details of how that actually works and there's a million yeah but that couldn't work because such and such that are actually pretty well thought out from people that have had real experience working in that kind of cutthroat international
development space, but this just an example, right it's an example of how to increase actual strategic and tactical effectiveness towards different goals.
I know, giving us at overview thing I got some of it I will remind others that this is recorded it will end up going on YouTube so I know it takes me some time to go through and try and cure many many times but it sounds like a more comprehensive solution is needed in terms of thinking
about how we look at the Amazon.
We have about maybe 15 minutes left I do want to pivot to a question that's probably closer to our hearts and pass it to Peter.
I'll ask my question the moment but I just got a text I won't say who it's from but they're in the room. Oh my God, please have Daniel Schmackneburger come back on that on on the sex thing he evaded with Weinstein.
So, maybe we'll have time to squeeze that in after my question but just wanted to throw that out there.
So yeah my question was about power literacy and legitimate power. So at the store we have, we're experimenting with a lot of different psychotechs, we have wisdom gym that's forming.
And I know there's different like techniques and modalities like version mapping and stuff like that based off Samo version is technique in order to kind of get power awareness and whatnot.
Do you have any recommendations what we can do in this sort of body tribe that's forming at the store we feel kind of there's like a family there's like a loving tribe for me here.
And is there any recommendations that you can give us to get legitimate power and gain power literacy.
I remember when I first read the 48 laws of power.
And I actually, I read that and I, I had read Sun Sue but I hadn't read Machiavelli and I hadn't read Lacan and Strauss and a number of the other like source materials yet.
And it was, it was interesting I was very impressed with what he did. I thought it was the worst book ever written.
And that obviously also means a valuable thing, because he took so much of military theory and Cordier and political and like all of the evil stuff of game a, and he both said one, it's inexorable and to its virtue.
That's always the path to the dark side actually, pretty much always is power use of this kind is inexorable.
Soromon talking to Gandalf saying Soron's going to win there's no choice might as well beat us right might as well join us rather than lose right.
Like that, that story is always the case so I'll just share this because it's kind of interesting. I had a conversation several years ago with one of the most powerful evil power brokers in the world.
It was a long one on one where I was actually surprised at how much he kind of both was inviting me into his world and opening up about it.
And the way he framed it goes like this I'll just do it briefly because it's important. It's like, look, humans are animals, animals are either predators or prey.
They don't feel bad when they kill prey. If you feel bad when the prey humans die. It's because you're a prey human and you won't run the world, the apex predator will run the world they will be the thing that determines the shape of an overall ecosystem.
And whether you like what apex predators do or not doesn't deter doesn't matter at all to the fact that apex predators will be the ones who run the world so the only question is whether you have what it takes to make it into that group or not.
And so that's the inexorable argument right power in the form of predatory power is inexorable can't do anything about it's always going to win. Well, if that's the case.
And I can't effectively fight against it that just binds all kinds of moral possibilities as just stupid and naive.
The next part was power as virtue, which he said, and it's actually good that the apex predators are the ones who run the world because they're the ones who are steely eyed and real and grounded enough to understand how shit works.
And the world is actually kind of brutal and people who just don't get how it fucking works can't guide stuff they'll make it worse.
Sometimes you got to put a head on a spike in the yard to keep everybody else from being assholes. And so it goes from power as inexorable to power as virtue.
And then some people stop there and then the last step is feeling good about exercising your own power over because it says you are part of that class which becomes power as fetish, which is the movement from sociopathy to sadism.
When you actually fetishize fetishize the exercising of it.
Now, of course, everything he was saying was utter gibberish.
And it's important to know that.
And I didn't bring it up with him because I knew that wasn't relevant in that moment I was basically getting more information.
Blue whale is neither predator nor prey in a traditional sense neither is an elephant, the apex predator is lower on the food chain than a virus or a parasite or mosquito in many ways, you're pretending that there's this thing that isn't really there.
And you are not acknowledging that the arms race that has always one self terminates pretty soon.
Because when you exponentiate externalization and war it actually destroys everything and so basically it's a gibberish but it's compelling enough gibberish that if you kind of want to do it anyways.
It's plausible deniability.
So, what Robert Green did in the 48 laws of power was did the same move, right, which is these types of power dynamics are inexorable. If you don't know who the sucker in the room is it's you.
If you don't think these these games are at play, either you're stupid, or you actually do know they're at play and you're signaling naivete as a power trick itself.
Or ignorant signaling or virtue signaling as a method of power.
And so that was the power is inexorable and then the power as virtue is, since this is the only way to be effective at getting anything done.
If you have any ethic or moral or scruple at all you better become excellent at this game of power so you have a chance to affect the things you care about.
It basically tried to take whatever ethical immune system people had that would resist illegitimate evil applications of power, and say that's not possible, and then actually hook it into those evil applications of power or the only ethical
thing, which is basically trying to turn an immune system into an autoimmune disease which some viruses and bacteria do exactly that thing right and that's what's happening.
One thing that I think is interesting is
give people that book as an inoculation.
What, and oftentimes they don't get inoculated they get infected and they become worse people.
Very commonly as people really start to see how compelling it is as it tells story after story of the person you trust who, who was the most trusted fucked him over, and gives example of how the person tried to say no really I am trustworthy because and they were all examples of fucked
over it puts this little subconscious frame in the back of your head that everybody is a fucker out to get you an all trust is a vulnerability that's going to mess you up.
Either you become a worse person after you become exposed to that, or you embrace that those are real things but they aren't the only real thing.
And you decide from a deeper place that that isn't the thing you're going to do.
And you become inoculated, but now you don't, you don't, you're not naive to it so you don't lose to it so you don't set up trying to help the rainforest and lose to it, because you know that fucking shit is happening.
I actually think that there is a way to to beat it without becoming it.
So that's a very interesting inoculation so if people become literate to the game of power. Well, as a community while simultaneously becoming clear on legitimate and illegitimate uses and simultaneously clear on real versus signaling.
So if a community has practices of helping each other with it. That's what the fucking code of knighthood was right or any of those types of things was how do we develop legitimate power in the service of the collective good and hold each other to that.
And that's totally missing right now, and totally needed.
That I just want to say it's important. The reason that the biblical teaching don't let your right hand see what the left hand is giving right do your alms in the closet was acknowledging how problematic virtue signaling is.
And trying to say, if you have a, if there is something that moves in you deeper than other people recognizing it deeper than the wounded insecure child or the mate signaling impulse if there is an authentic thing that you say, this is actually worth more than me getting credit
for my life for a reason that is transcendent or spiritual, then that doesn't mean that there isn't still also wounded child and mate signaling desire in you you just have to be aware of which is which.
And one of the problems of any kind of set of ideals or developmental idea is as soon as we talk about the ideal, or talk about what development in the direction of more moral more ethical more sovereign is, then someone else can hear that and try to do the behaviors that
look like that thing without that actually being an embodied state and there's going to be benefits of signaling that even earnestly even like the kid trying to act like the parent doing the thing.
So how do we increase people's earnestness to work on the real embodiment of their virtues rather than the signaling of them.
And the signaling only where that is actually necessary and affect effective for authentic purposes.
Yeah, I love that.
What came up when you're talking in sort of this ecology of practices that is emerging out of the stowa power literacy knowing it from a declarative stance, and having an adjacent call a practice where you just have a radical truthfulness as you refer to the truthfulness.
And then you can speak on it openly amongst each other in an embodied way.
So people are privately messaging me wanting to sex question like ask them to sex question as a sex question. And we have and we have like six minutes left of the lot of time is that something you want to feel that you want to.
Can we seduce you back somehow and for the session.
I mean trying, trying to address sex and six minutes is funny and I don't know what the sex question is. It's like, it's like trying to address power right now in a couple of minutes.
I mean, to dialogue about the relationship between sexuality and power.
And the memes and cultural norms around sexuality, the different kind of options that are there and what the consequence that associated with them is is a super important and interesting topic and sure I'd be happy to do that sometime.
Cool. Phil, do you have any final things you would like to run by Daniel.
Yeah, no, I think there's definitely a lot more questions. I was trying to read through and see if we can fit another question I think I would just like to leave Daniel if you have anything else that you wanted to say or leave the audience with
I will also say there's the sex question specifically around, I guess, anti rivalrous is something of very much interest you can give us a cliffhanger on that and have as an avatar.
I have a cliffhanger.
There's a very short book that I really love that was one of the more influential books on me growing up by a Jesuit priest who is also a student of Eastern traditions named Anthony de mello the book is called the way to love.
And it's a tiny little pocketbook of these kind of reflections or meditations.
There's a lot of ideas around sex that I would talk about that if people are not familiar with the ideas he brings up in there, they won't actually have the basis for some of the value system.
So of course we can talk about it from an evolutionary bio perspective and we have to do that and an economic perspective and a child rearing perspective and all those things.
But in so far as the question around.
You know you have the, the Buddhist desires the source of all suffering, and the Western desires the source of all creativity and goodness and we're here to be creators made in the image and likeness of the creator.
Those are really different models about the nature of desire, and that's actually something we'd kind of have to wrestle with and the whole topic of are there types of desire that are more destructive and types that are more healthfully constructive.
And do they come from different places is their desire from more wholeness or less wholeness that leads in a direction of kind of increased wholeness individually and for the relationships versus addiction and whatever.
So there's stuff around that that becomes the basis to think about sexual desire and sexual rivalry and all those types of things so yeah I recommend that book, and I will be particularly inclined to come back and talk about it if I hear that a bunch of people have read it.
I can jump in here so fine.
And yeah it's funny Daniel it's like that we had a session earlier today maybe great to something on only fans and raw sexuality but need to coming on Friday doing the last field.
I'm you read my journals I'm horny all the time. So we're becoming like existential perverse here at the stowa. So I think we're all going to read that book and then get you back to talk about it.
So Phil thanks for the I'm seeing in Daniel thanks so much for coming today.
If people haven't read it.
Wilhelm Reich's work was very interesting on the topic I'm not saying I agree with it but it's, it's one of the things it should be thought about he was basically saying what was wrong with Marxism and one of the things he assessed was that Marxism didn't deal with sexual ownership and the the impulse for non communitarian things that
was actually in how to deal with that. And that became actually one of the deep intellectual bases of the free love movement, which I think is not the right answer but just to kind of understand one of the directions.
And specifically it had to do with him looking at the relationship between sexual repression and violence across cultures, which is very interesting sociologically.
And almost like the follow up to that work.
And then half a century later was sex at dawn, which was influenced by that. So it's valuable to read sex at dawn. It's also valuable to read the critiques of sex at dawn, some of which are really deep and important some of which are species.
And those are all kind of some bases to start to have the conversation a little more informally.
I think there's a book sex at dust. It was a critique. Yeah, yeah, yeah, cool.
It's like largely specious but there's a few good things in there. Yeah, so I heard and century of the self has a pretty good mapping of that documentary series without him Curtis.
Very cool. So Daniel, thank you my friend for coming to the store today.
Maybe you can stick around for for two minutes you can hear the upcoming events and maybe we can get you at some of them.
Thank you for upcoming events at the store. Raven, do you want to talk about we have tomorrow with Samo and then your event on Friday.
Yeah, thank you. So yeah we have live players with Samo Berger at 8pm Eastern time tomorrow. Samo is coming back for recurring session to talk about that which he's studying with the long, long now and this mark analysis which is institutional design succession
which is the great founder theory. He's really dense and his speaking and very engaging I would encourage everyone to come.
Then we have earth regeneration with drove brewer on Friday as well. Joe is doing a lot of important work with ecosystem restoration. So he'll be coming to talk to us about that.
We're doing an event right now which is Socratic speed dating. We're doing a game called as coal which is a social boundary breaking game. So we'd love to have you there. That's an hour long on Friday at 7pm Eastern time.
Thank you.
Great. Thanks Raven and Tyson. Do you want to go off mute and talk about your event on Saturday.
Yes, thank you Peter. Thank you Daniel. My man actually emerged right at a time that I heard this quote from Daniel which is recognizing how big of an infinity the unknowable is everyone has to make very deep friends with uncertainty to not be mentally ill.
And my event that I'm sharing is called flowing with unknowing this and we use freestyle rap and spoken word as a practice to build community toss and really participate dive into the unknown through creative self expression.
And it has been a really wonderful way to me to get to know people here in a very fun playful and musical way. And so I would invite anybody here that that is a little bit nerve wracking and intimidating to but simultaneously exciting and intriguing to come and check it out.
Yeah, it's a really, really fun and sexy way to get that feeling of community toss. And I'll use all my homosocial seductive game to get Daniel Schmockenberger at that freestyling event so we'll see we'll see how that works out.
So check out the stowa.ca to our speed of events. Check out the mailing list and the stores based off the gift economy.
Thank you for joining me. I'm reviewing it as a gift for us to freely use this time of need. She inspired to grab a gift to the stowa. Just go to the website and check out the gift economy at the bottom of the page.
Right everyone. Thanks so much for coming out today. Thanks Daniel.
