The Stoa is a digital campfire where we cohere in dialogue about what matters most at the
knife's edge of what's happening now.
All right, everyone, welcome to the Stoa.
Peter Lindberg, the steward of the Stoa, and the Stoa is a place for us to cohere and
dialogue about what matters most at the knife's edge of this very moment.
And today is Thanksgiving here in Canada. I'm from Toronto, Canada.
So I'm going to invite everyone in the chat to start.
Just write something down that you're thankful for in this very moment.
And while people are writing in the chat, I will share what I'm thankful for.
I am thankful for this community, a strange community called the Stoa.
That's surrounded with people who are not following a script and are co-writing the
story together. It's beautiful, and I'm very grateful for it.
So today, we've got Danish Machenberger,
sense maker in residence for the month of October.
And this is a digital porch, so there's no gender or theme.
We're just going to come sit on the digital Stoa and then ask Daniel some questions.
And there's a spreadsheet too. Let's just see here.
I think someone shared it already for people who just came in.
Anybody who wants to take notes, just start taking notes.
We're going to have, this is 90 minutes, and after this,
in the same link, Tyson Wagner is going to do a wrap on battles,
which you'll explain what that is at the end.
So if you want to do something interesting, just hang on.
So yes, like I said, this is a digital porch.
We're just going to ask Daniel some questions.
If you have any questions, put them in the chat box.
I will call on you. You'll unmute yourself.
Ask it to Daniel.
If you don't want to be on YouTube, indicate that.
I'll read the question on your behalf.
And as Daniel said in the first question,
I know he can talk about all this sense making type issues and everything in different platforms,
but feel free to get personal.
Have some questions that are localized to what's going on in your world
that might be related to other people as well.
An example like Hannah, when Daniel came a couple of weeks ago,
Hannah Robbins talked about anxiety attacks that she had,
and Daniel gave some excellent advice.
So feel free to go there.
And I'll curate the questions and have a bias towards those.
So that being said, I will allow everyone to unmute themselves.
Daniel, how are you doing today, my friend?
Good. I'm happy to be here.
Last time was fun, and yeah, I enjoy this opportunity to just kind of be with
the questions that are actually alive and interesting for people.
And so I kind of wanted to start at the check-in with you.
If there's any kind of questions or concerns that are alive for you right now,
maybe related to the project you're working on or something personal,
that us at the Stoa could reflect on, maybe stay with for a bit,
which in turn can serve sort of as a looping effect.
That might inspire us to ask certain questions or make comments
which assist you in your thinking and whatever is alive.
So I'll throw that as the first question.
There's certainly things with regard to a project we're working on
that could use help of people who are interested in helping,
and that would be an interesting thing to come to later.
But I don't really want to go into project or tactical direction
to begin with. I will say something that was on my mind
as I was coming into this session today.
I was reading your letter on that you posted of the chess moves
and thinking about some of the questions on power last time.
And I don't know if there are more questions that people have asked in that direction,
but there was something that I wanted to share kind of about that is
I think it gets very easy when we start saying if those who are focused on
the commons long term don't learn how to be effective at making things happen within
current environment, then they won't be effective.
And so there's a need to learn influence power, et cetera.
I think it's easy for that to be a slippery slope into getting captured
by more lock and justifying a bunch of unconscious ego things very quickly.
And most people, it actually wouldn't really benefit them to have more power
because they don't have particularly clear ideas on how to solve anything to begin with.
And so you have to say like, is there a problem that I understand well enough
and have some solutions that really need to be implemented where the key
thing is better capacity to implement?
And most people don't have that much power over their own self,
meaning that much coherence between the parts of themselves.
And so I would say like, as far as power literacy,
learn how to have power in your relationship with the Facebook feed
and with food and with the various things that you want regarding the allocation
of your own attention and time first.
And once there is some significant capacity to actually control your own attention,
then you can start thinking about power literacy more.
Otherwise, I think it's largely a wrong order of operations, a focus.
So sovereignty comes to mind and I'm curious how you wrestled with becoming more sovereign
in your life and maybe when you were doing the psychotherapeutic work,
what kind of common themes and advice did you give for people to become more sovereign?
Number one time, I mean, there's a lot of different answers to that, right?
There's everything from a meditation practice where you just choosing to do it regularly
at all involves a certain kind of commitment and discipline.
And to be able to control your thoughts to increasing degree if you're doing a concentration
style meditation, to be able to control your body, to not scratch the itch,
to notice it and to not scratch it, like these are a lot of ways to be able to notice impulses
and not have to automatically act on them.
And I mean, cold showers and ice baths where you consciously relax your body when it wants
to contract, there's a lot of places to be able to bring unconscious or automated processes under
increasing volition. And then there's the inquiry into where do the
where do the compulsive addictive patterns come up the most?
Is there some conditioning or trauma or whatever underneath that that needs worked through?
So there's a lot of answers, but the one I was about to start saying is I remember one time
I got into, you know, really looking at addiction and kind of addiction recovery
ideas in my early 20s. And so I didn't have anything that people would normally call an
addiction, meaning there was nothing that was really not overeating or drugs or
sex or relationship or anything that was really damaging my life. But I wanted to look at
damaging my life in a really overt way. But I wanted to look at all the places where there was
compulsion, where I would routinely do something that was not aligned with my highest choice
executive function for myself and values for myself. And I identified like 30 different
things that had that were subtle forms of addiction from relationship with food to
exaggerating stories to sound cooler when talking to people. And then afterwards being like,
fuck, why did I do that? It wasn't overtly lying, but it was embellishing. And then looking at what
is underneath that the food thing would oftentimes happen. Like what are the triggers happens when
lonely or bored or whatever. So what are the ways of dealing with that? The embellishment thing has
insecurity underneath it. And so just inventorying all of the places where behavior is being compelled
more than it is being clearly chosen. And then looking at why and how to work with that.
And there is some patience required in that process, because it can be very painful to notice how
much we are actually
not volitional. And yet a lot of reactions to that make us less volitional.
So if I go into like feeling really depressed about that, did I choose to go into feeling
really depressed? Or was that also an automated thought and emotional reaction?
Was that reaction at all helpful or aligned with the things that I care about? And for me,
the idea of
not actually having volition to be able to be more aligned with what was meaningful to me
was more painful than anything else. That's not true for everybody. We have different things that
kind of move us. But the idea that there are some kind of just automated patterns
that would predict my behavior and my life
was just such a dreadful idea, that I really wanted to be able to notice wherever those occurred
and at least be able to stop. And then say, if I wasn't being controlled by some patterns,
what would I choose? And then that gets into the existentialism of what is my basis for choice?
And what is fundamentally meaningful and why? Those kinds of things.
Were you always so clear on what was most meaningful for you? And was it like the articulation of it?
I imagine it changed throughout the years. And how did you have like a system or mechanism in
place that updates it? There's a long time where
my felt sense of what was meaningful and my cognitive understanding of
the existential basis for meaningfulness writ large or objectively or something like that.
Would come into conflict. And there was a point at which I got resolved.
Because whenever I would see an animal hurt in front of me, I didn't have to ask any questions
about meaningfulness to just be completely clear that I wanted to help them. Or when I would see
a person in need or hurting, there was an eminent or an embodied sense of meaningfulness that was
prima facie. But then in being able to reflect on it and say, well, why is that thing meaningful?
And the answer is something else. Well, why is that thing meaningful? And which always gets into
a question about Big Bang and the second law of thermodynamics and whatever. And fundamental
randomness and determinism. I would get challenged.
So one thing that I remember really helped me was starting to recognize the actual eminent
felt sense of meaningfulness and purpose beyond my understanding of it.
I remember there was a quote by somebody I don't know who it was. I think it was misattributed to
Rilke that said, the heart knows reasons that reason knows nothing of. And I
Thurman, I think. And I thought about and reflected on how kind of true that was for me.
And then, oh, it was Joseph Campbell said something to the effect is paraphrase that
searching for the meaning of life is what we do when we are disconnected from the actual
experience of the meaning of life. But what people are actually seeking for is a feeling of
aliveness. And that very few people when they actually feel actively engaged in life or asking
the existential question around its meaningfulness. It wasn't till later that I got and got
Girdel's incompleteness theorem and Tarski's incompleteness of formal logical systems and
started to be able to make sense of what that meant with the first verse of the Tao Te Ching
to be able to get that. I wasn't going to have a semantic framing of the meaningfulness of all
of reality that was somehow outside of reality and could ground it. And so logic is able to
understand the bounds of logic, both the utility of it and the bounds of it. So I think the question
is, was it always clear to me experientially? Yes. And cognitively, I was progressively trying to
find coherence between my intellectual understanding and my experience.
Awesome. All right, let's pivot to the chat. It's going crazy right now. Okay, I do. You had a
question on children. You're going to meet yourself and ask it to Daniel. Are you there,
Yep. Yep. Okay, I'm here.
Can everyone hear me? Sounds good. So Daniel, thanks for being here. My questions. I wanted to
know what are your thoughts about having children? And, you know, given how hard it is to be happy,
even in the best of circumstances, you know, being in the first world country, having all the
financial resources, being relatively safe, you know, that plus exist and it's really difficult
to be happy plus the existential risk that you bring up. Plus, you know, like the resources needed to
raise kids, you know, and the opportunity cost to use those resources to help other people.
How can one justify having a baby or bringing a life into existence? And, you know, I might just
a depressed anti-natalyst for asking that question. Thank you. Yeah, I think that's an increasingly
common question. And I don't have anything like an algorithm for how to answer if you should have
children or not across the board. I can tell you a few considerations that come to mind for me.
And it's tricky because there are considerations that are a bit conflicting. There's at the
micro level of the way I would answer it, if we weren't thinking about population resource issues
and future catastrophic risk and the opportunity cost of what the person who's a parent could
be doing with their time and just focused on their own learning and quality of life and experience
versus kind of a macro way of answering it. And they're both important.
There are plenty of people that are just bad parents and being a parent doesn't make them
grow up all that much. But in general, becoming a parent is the most emotional maturity developing
thing for people. And that doesn't mean that can't happen other ways. But if someone really
wants to be a good parent and they are a thoughtful, committed person,
there's a bunch of things that happen. They start putting someone else, the consideration of someone
else in front of themselves because they don't want to wake up in the middle of the night to feed
the baby, but the baby needs fed. And so there is a movement out of young person, childish,
narcissism being the center of the universe thing that starts to happen that is extraordinarily
maturing and valuable for people. And then there's thinking about this little person developing
into a person and who they're going to become and what their, what is nature and what is nurture and
how they're being conditioned that has people start to reflect on their own conditioning and
how would I want this child to grow up and where am I not aligned with it? Where would I want them
to be different than me? And then can I actually help them be different than me based on what I
said? Are they going to imprint watching who I am? So how do I have to actually become more to be
the kind of parent I want to be? I watch people grow a lot and then I'm more invested in the
future because I really care about something that is going to live beyond me. So I get more
invested in the future and how do I create and leave a better place for them and start to have
long-term thinking. So there's a lot of very good things that can happen for someone's mental,
emotional, philosophical, spiritual growth and becoming a parent and things that can actually
make them a better citizen because being aligned with a longer term future and being a better
citizen can be very aligned. That said, there's plenty of people who have kids who don't spend
that much time thinking about how to become, how the way that they are and their being is
influencing this child and aren't that philosophically reflexive or that disciplined or have that much
time allocated. It's always tricky because most any kid who grew up with say parents who didn't
want to be parents or who were absent or whatever is still like, well, I'm glad they chose to have
me because I'm glad that I'm here and I went through whatever difficult processes. And had the
person not been born, had the parents not chose to have kids, there wouldn't be a person saying,
I'm really bummed that I'm not here. It's always easy no matter which path we go down to say I'm
glad that we chose that path. So I have chose not to have kids and well aware of
the developmental possibilities in being a parent and well aware of being able to
help develop people that can be not just happy people but also good citizens into the future.
I had a very strong paternal instinct since I was young and I was, and a lot of people have this
thought and most people grow out of it, I didn't, where I was aware of how many people and how many
people and how many animals and how much life was unstewarded, untended. And I felt
the calling to have that paternal instinct and drive tend to the life that currently exists that
is untended rather than bring new life because for me the way I would want to be a father
involves an amount of focus and dedication and time that there is a real opportunity
cost on time. I think people have different callings. I've seen some people, like I said,
do better work in the world and become more efficient when they have kids.
I think carrying capacity-wise the planet would be better off with a lot less people
than we currently have. That is not me promoting eugenics or catastrophe, it's just saying
we're utilizing resources faster than the reproduction rate of the resources currently.
I think that we see that while there has been a lot of concern about overpopulation, we also see
that Japan's birth rate and some Nordic countries' birth rate became set to the populations actually
start declining and some people get concerned about collapse in population. I think collapse in
population matters for the current economic system but it doesn't actually matter for civilization
unless we're talking about massive infertility because otherwise there will be correction
dynamics and the economic system that was predicated upon and needs continuous population
growth has to end. That's not a long-term viable economic system.
So what would I say about having kids?
There's obviously a default impulse to just reproduce that every animal has.
I don't think that's a good enough reason to be the best choice for how to live a life and to have
kids in the current context. So rather than the default assumption of I'm going to go to school,
I'm going to get a job, I'm going to get married, I'm going to have kids and it's like that's just
the thing that plays out. I think if you, if someone feels that it is essential to their
Dharma to raise the future generations of civilization that they're, that they feel a
profound calling in that way. They're very called to childhood development theory. They're thinking
about what would be a conscious enlightened way to raise people. They are called to family and
creation of family and community. If someone feels that it's central to their Dharma then
they should do that. And if they don't, then I would like to see what they do feel essential
to their Dharma and then answer other things in light of that. Those are my initial thoughts.
Any follow-up question? Do? No, that's all. Thank you very much.
Tyler, you got a question on psychedelics. You're going to unmute yourself.
Okay, since we must escape from algorithm manufactured realities in order to do proper
sense-making and since we must change our relationship to each other, the world and
ourselves to move from game A to game B, what role do psychedelics have to play in this transition?
From personal experience, I even find, if I'm microdosing, I find it much easier to put my
phone array and recognize it as a stupid damaging thing. So I was just, I know the answer is something
but I was just wondering what you had on that. It feels like a couple different questions put
together because psychedelics can obviously have a role as they have historically or plant medicines
before an algorithmically mediated digital environment and there are answers to the algorithm
digital environments that don't necessarily involve psychedelics. So there's how do we,
how do we deal with hypernormal stimuli is kind of one question. What is the therapeutic
developmental evolutionary role of psychedelics and then is there an intersection between those
two questions? If I, let's talk about hypernormal stimuli first. I haven't noticed that people who
chronically are checking their phone looking for notifications don't at Burning Man and Burning
Man's obviously its own hypernormal stimuli but not just at Burning Man, they don't when they're
camping with friends. If they're in an environment where that's closer to the evolutionary tribal
type environment that we developed and where there's kind of a rich field of human interaction,
they're less susceptible to addiction at large. One of the things that I think about
hypernormal stimuli is that we're more susceptible to them in a hypernormal environment of the healthy
evolutionary stimuli that makes a healthy human social primate. So when people have more contact
with nature that's bringing them into all of their senses, not just a kind of 2D screen,
when they have more contact with other people, I see that they're called to go to the fridge
and just look at what's in there less often. They're called to scroll the phone less often.
Gabor Maté's work on that the biggest predictor for addiction is how lonely someone is
and the biggest kind of anti predictor for addiction is the depth and connectedness of
the relational field. I think there's something very deep to this. So that's not the entirety of
the answer of how do we deal with hypernormal stimuli but I think a lot of hypernormal stimuli
is an impulse to fill a certain kind of emptiness that most people's modern life has and I think
it's why there's so much call for people wanting to move to communities and back to the land type
movements and things like that. So I think that we need to develop some resilience capacities to
hypernormal stimuli in addition but the foundation of it is do I actually have a healthy full life
of the types of stimuli that make a healthy human being. Now psychedelics can obviously bring you
more into your senses and into kind of rich experience where in the fullness of that kind
of rich experience you're on the mushrooms and the tree looks way more beautiful and the sky
looks way more beautiful that there's less of the kind of wanting some dopaminergic hit that the
notification will give you. I'm not really oriented to a future where somebody needs to be
continuously on psychedelics even micro doses to have enough presence that they aren't susceptible
to hypernormal stimuli though. Now what is the role of psychedelics? We'll answer just kind of that
other question. I would say the role of psychedelics I'll describe as a subset of the role of state
induction processes. That's not the only thing they can do when you're micro dosing and it's not
necessarily state induction but for the most part if you kind of think in an integral psychology
term in terms of the difference between state induction and stage development and kind of shadow
integration psychedelics can induce experience but that are temporary right they can induce very
profound states then they're going to go away then the question is what is the persistent or lasting
role of that state and that is meaningful and if there isn't some developmental process to
integrate that state into stage it can actually become kind of addictive. If the only way I have
to have an experience of the beauty of life or the numinous or great insights is through psychedelics
and I don't that doesn't start to become more of my baseline or have other ways of getting it
then I probably need to do psychedelics all the time. So I think psychedelics or breathwork like
holotropic type breathwork or tontric type processes that use sexuality as a method of
state induction. I think the state induction can be very powerful if it's part of a more
integrated human development process. So the psychedelic assisted psychotherapy where you're
for instance some of the way that trauma work has been done with MDMA where if someone's chemistry
works with MDMA well they kind of chemically go into a place where they kind of can't feel bad
they feel so good at an experiential level then let's say they have a PTSD trigger about something
every time they thought about that thing they feel really bad. So now the person's on MDMA and
they're getting facilitated to go think about that thing that always makes them feel bad and they
can't even access feeling bad now but a new neurological association is happening with
feeling this kind of blissful ecstatic state and thinking about this previous situation
where the next time because we know memory consolidation is that we don't remember the
original thing we remember the way it has been reconsolidated each time we remember it
and the kind of Pavlovian association can change then the next time I think about that
thing I don't have the same immediate set of trauma patterns that are associated
sometimes in like a single session someone can have a enduring change for that kind of work.
I had a in in my exploration with psychedelics I had a general rule that
I would have some clear intention whether it was a ayahuasca journey or a peyote journey or whatever
and then as soon as I would start to come down from the experience where I was still altered but I
was capable of thinking in full sentences and writing I would start writing and I would start
writing all the insights because what I found was especially if you go into deep journeys the
states are so different that like dreams you kind of end up losing most of it like you can't even
remember most of the actual what did that feel like and most of the details and the insights
and so like dreams if the moment it's there you capture it you can start to build a bridge
between your normal state and that state by being able to access the content of the dream
or the psychedelic state in your normal consciousness you start to be able to to access it more so as
soon as I would start to come down from the journey I would just start writing all the insights and
sometimes it was just an insight about like what the world is the beauty of it the nature of my
experience sometimes it was specific insights about philosophy or psychology or whatever relationships
and then I would a couple hours later come back and reread it and as I was rereading it and I was
now coming down even further I was experientially further away from those experiences but I was
remembering them I'm like oh yeah and then what I would do is try and re-feel what I felt right
and as I was writing I knew I'd be coming back and rereading it so I was setting this anger
of really noticing what I felt as I was describing it so I was kind of linking a felt state to those
words as I was writing them so then I come back and a couple hours later and then the next day and the
next day and I remember how I felt when I was writing it and remember how I felt when I was in
the journey associated with it and so then I had this kind of that was a huge part of integration
and then I had this general practice that whatever the insights were I would do the practices I needed
to integrate those before using that medicine again so I didn't just become dependent on a
bunch of external stimuli I was using the external stimuli to gain insights to then actually do
development work that became internalized and so I think they can be extraordinarily powerful
psychotherapeutic developmental tools used rightly I think they can be damaging used
wrongly like any very powerful tool um if I go into a so I'll give you a couple examples
if I go into a more neural plastic state one of the ideas is that there's increased plasticity
and so I can make new associations for the psychotherapy or the learning can happen better
if I go into an increased plasticity state and have a really bad trip and just kind of
run a bunch of neural loops on some very negative stimuli I can actually come out kind of traumatized
and I've seen heaps of people do this and I did this before I in my earliest experimenting before
I kind of knew better um and so this is another thing is that the the experience itself while on
the psychedelic with the entheogen or whatever you want to call it ends up having less enduring
effect than the meaning you make of it and how you internalize it and how it ends up changing
behavior and practice and so the meaning making process is really key and a good facilitator
will make a big difference to this so um let's say somebody's on a mushroom journey on a high
dose and they start having a very clear hallucination of demons chasing them and they're freaking out
about demons chasing them I've seen this many times and someone uses a particular kind of
metaphysical interpretation and I'm giving I'm actually quoting an example of something I
witnessed many times um someone gives an interpretation that
those demons are in the astral realm and they really are chasing the person and the mushrooms
are helping that person see into the astral realm and it's because of bad things they did in the past
life so now in order to fight that demon they need to have a circle of salt and wear a feather and
whatever um the person can come out believing in demons in an astral realm and bad past life
stuff where now they get scared anytime that feather that protects them isn't with them and
they're like thinking about demons um and they actually get messed up because of the cognitive
interpretation of the experience now let's say that same person's going in they see the demon
and someone who has kind of an archetypal symbolic framework psychotherapeutic framework is working
and says hey in this journey whatever's arising in your mind is images in your mind and it can't
hurt you can't hurt you so turn towards the demon rather than run away from it and ask it what it
wants and they turn towards the demon and the demon that is scary becomes their dad yelling at
them when they were a kid and then they continue to be in dialogue and then it becomes their dad
when he was a little kid being beat by his dad and then they see a lineage of past on trauma and
they see how they've embodied it and now they have a meaning making that is very different and they
can actually really uh maybe walk away with a very empowered set of changes so I think um people
having the right cognitive frameworks to interpret the experience is really important um and like
I said I think it can be damaging if done wrongly um I think the right medicines the right dose the
right pacing the right set and setting the right interpretation the right facilitation all those
things matter cool any follow-up uh no great thank you Dana so uh I'll pivot to dreams now uh
Randy you had a question on dreams hi can you hear me yep yeah okay great um so yeah this is
perfect transition from what you just said about uh confronting the demons in your mind um
so I'll try to keep this brief um I'm curious about the role that dreams might have to play
in relation to problem solving creativity and potentially to our collective sense making practices
um so just to throw out a couple stimulating tidbits um have you heard the story of the brilliant
Indian mathematician uh Ramanajan born in 1887 he stated that the insight for his work came to him
and his dreams on many occasions uh Ramanajan said that throughout his life he repeatedly dreamed
of a Hindu goddess known as Namakal she presented him with complex mathematical formulas over and
over which he could then test and verify upon waking similarly the melody to the Beatles song
yesterday uh came to Paul McCartney in a dream he woke up and stumbled at the piano by his
bedside to work out the chords he says I just fell out of bed found out what he I had dreamed
it in and I played it um and just to give a quick personal example I wasn't going to say this but
what you said about the the demons so when I was like five years old I had a nightmare um in which
I encountered a monster in a cave and I woke up and crying and telling my brother about it
he said if it was me I would have kicked out monsters but and wouldn't you know at the very
next night I had the same dream and I went lucid I remembered what my brother had said
and I confronted the monster and since then dreams have always felt very important to me I learned
to tie my shoes in a dream okay so after all that um I'll give you two questions one personal one
less personal um uh the first question is given that uh your mind Daniel uh contains such rich
detailed models of reality and the fact that you are so driven to solve some of the world's most
perplexing problems I'm curious if your dreams play any conscious role in this process have
you ever done any lucid dreaming or had any insights in a dream to problems that you've
been working on um or on a less personal note um are you aware of or have you ever considered the
role that shamanic dreaming aka lucid dreaming and the shared interpretation of dreams could
potentially play either in therapy or perhaps even in collective sense making uh for example
while lucid dreamings you can face your fears phobias etc like I mentioned thank you for your
patience and listening I appreciate it yeah when remonogen um got kind of found by littlewood
and hardy and the rest of math community a lot of people got very interested and if they could
figure out how to have remonogens dreams and have dorgocumbring them um infinite series math
equations and so far unfortunately nobody else seemed to become remonogen um what made him develop
that way and is that developable is a is a very interesting question um I have done some dream
interpretation and lucid dreaming work not nearly as much as many people have so I'll say the few
thoughts that come to mind if someone starts thinking about something consistently enough
it's very common that they'll start dreaming about it there's that whole thing when you're
learning a language especially an immersion when you shift to start dreaming in that other language
you have a sense of like okay now there's actually in a deep immersion happening someone who's playing
chess all the time will dream chess moves um and so of course a musician who's immersed in music
or a mathematician who's immersed in that their subconscious is going to be processing things
that their conscious mind is processing and so the idea of this is one of the things that um
actually in the startup world there's a famous kind of thinking about this which is um
people who are investing in a startup and venture capitalists want whoever's doing the startup to
be so focused on it that they dream about it right that idea that you have enough focus on this
thing that it is what actually engages all of your discretionary creativity and that sometimes
means sleeping dreams sometimes it means daydream sometimes it means what pulls you out of reverie
or meditation or whatever it is um so there's definitely something to being intensively enough
focused consciously that your other than conscious mind is also processing those topics
um and I have definitely had my life experience whenever my focus becomes pretty intense on
a certain set of problem solving I dream about that and we'll have you know interesting kinds
of insights in the dream space I find that the insights are for me better in the thoughts that
take me out of meditation so if I'm thinking about a problem and then I go meditate where I
stop thinking about the problem and I'm using a breath or a mantra or something that clears
mind then there'll be oftentimes a solution to the problem I was working on or an insight that
kind of emerges out of that quietness but I'll remember more of it because I'm not transitioning
from uh sleep state but I know some people who practice lucid dreaming a lot who have that
same experience there but I would call these similar right they're just altered states of
consciousness where the other than conscious mind gets to process the stuff the conscious mind has
been processing um I and when we look at scientists who have dreams like the snake biting its tail
giving the insight to the benzene ring or a monogen or whatever there's really never stories
like that where the people were not fully engrossed thinking about the thing who had the insights
um and so if there was a talk once between the Dalai Lama and Eckhart Tolle on this topic
and I'm only vaguely remembering it but it was something to the effect of somebody asked
I think Eckhart uh when you access the power of now whatever you want to call it when you
access present silence um do you have the ability to do anything coming out of that space that that's
a space where kind of all possibilities reside um like could you get the kind of math that Einstein
would get in his reverie and that both Eckhart and the Dalai Lama agreed that despite all of
their meditation they never got math they never got physics and they didn't get the ability to kick
the um key soccer play but the soccer player who takes a moment and drops into deeper presence
does kick better than if they don't drop into presence and so does the mathematician that it's
basically taking the input that that being has into a state that processes the input differently
which can then give new outputs from that kind of input um I did some study of psychics and
channels in my early 20s and what I found was that when I asked them objectively true and false
questions like somebody's social security number and things like that that the channel or or math
questions or chemistry questions it should be true universally the pleiadian should know or whatever
caustic record should have but where the channel had never been exposed to that knowledge they never
got it right um not one time in hundreds of times asking it but that didn't mean it was pure gibberish
oftentimes these people when they were talking to someone about their family or divorce or life
said profoundly insightful things the person's like how the fuck did you know that and the way
that I interpreted it was their degree of insightfulness was proportional to one how much experience
they had of that domain um so if they've paid attention to humans and relationships their
whole life and really kind of paid attention they have a pattern matching capability for something
that they have a lot of pattern around and then it was also proportional to how much they could let
go of their assessment models and go to an other than conscious place where you've got kind of
conscious these pieces of data these axioms these logical steps rational process then you have other
than conscious lots of bandwidth I just took in a set of inputs and now my other than conscious
mind is pattern matching this across a whole bunch of stuff and something pops out so you get an
intuition that seems to be a aha out of nowhere and so when the person would ask the Pleiadians
a question or ask the angels a question or whatever it was they were going into a quiet
receptive place that was whatever the cognitive mechanism they needed to use was and so what I
would find is that they would actually do good pattern matching and they would say to the person
in front of them more often than statistically random such and such is happening for you you're
going through a divorce or this then the person like how the fuck did you know and it's like well
there are patterns across people who are going through similar experience this person has been
with tens of thousands of people in their life they're they're kind of getting a gestalt and
then there is a pattern recognition on that gestalt so I think intuitive space meditation
space dreaming space that kind of process can happen so I'm not saying that it is accessing
things from the akashic record I'm saying that it is accessing things from our own mind brain being
through different processing different kind of processing that takes those inputs and
processes them differently now am I positive that no one accesses things from the akashic record no
of course not it's a kind of an unfalsifiable proposition but I don't have any evidence to
believe it either the other thing I'll say about dreaming is
I don't think it's very I don't think it's good to think in terms of dream interpretation
that a particular dream interpretation model is true like objectively that snakes always mean
this and water means this and whatever or that everyone in the dream in a Jungian sense is an
aspect of you like sometimes that's the right model sometimes it's not sometimes the dream is
clearly just kind of a smorgasbord of gibberish of whatever stimuli you had that day sometimes it
feels like it's processing old trauma or whatever it is so with dream interpretation I think rather
than say what did the dream mean as if it has an objective meaning for you to say did this
interpretation give me insight was the interpretation clarifying insightful useful if so awesome and
sometimes I've seen 10 different interpretations I'll be insightful so if you take it as fodder
for a inquiry process where the real benefit is happening through your own inquiry and that is
that's a starting point I think that can be quite valuable in the same way that I think
uh tarot can be valuable if you take it that the cards are being magically pulled for a specific
reason and that they mean a specific thing it's going to be nonsense but if you take the cards
as representing archetypes that you can interpret a million different ways which happens right in
different contexts the same tarot readers interpreting that card in a different way
and so you're really using them as archetypes for the exploration of something to see what fits
I think there's a lot of things like that that can be sources of insight but one needs to be kind
of grounded in how they're processing it and last thing on the lucid dreaming the intentional
bringing things into dream space and trying to develop some volition I have friends that are
very deep practitioners of this and do like have a lot of personal growth and insight happen
in the space I have done some of it I won't go into what the practices of how to lucid
dream more effectively are because that's kind of common knowledge and well written about but
I think lucid the things you can do in lucid dreaming and the benefit they can have for you
psychologically are a lot like psychedelic assisted psychotherapy possibilities in the
psychedelic assisted psychotherapy I can see like that demon feels very real in a particular way
or I can visualize the event that happened in my childhood or whatever it was in a deeper richer
way the same is true in the dream space it's almost like I kind of get to go into an immersive
experience place in my psyche and so where somebody goes and confronts the demon like you
were mentioning and sometimes all that happens is they confront it and the demon dies or runs away
but what that person needed to do was learn how to stand up and get courage or they find out what
the demon really was it becomes them their own self-criticizing voice or their dad or
their whatever it was like really powerful insight and healing can happen in that space
okay
and if anybody learns how to get Ramanujan's dreams to happen on methodology then I want to take that
course future session at the stowa all right there's a culture we're happening in the chats right now
some people want oh let's talk about system change let's talk about inner work
and so uh Aaron is doing some emetic mediation with his question uh so Aaron if you can unmute
yourself and ask your question to Daniel hi Daniel thank you um yeah someone made a comment
in the chats um that the session seems to be steering towards inner work instead of a more
kind of external systems change uh and so I respond to that saying what is the proper balance of
inner work and activism uh sort of the internal motivation for change and the external
motivation for change and does one precede the other yeah it's a good question um and I will
just say for context we can talk about um whatever here and I think last time there was a combination
of inner work and call it systems questions um I don't really talk about psychology or personal
philosophy in other public forums so I told Peter I was quite happy to have this one go in more of a
kind of personal philosophy psychology orientation because I don't really um there aren't other forms
where I do that and I don't know if any I mean it's kind of strange having people ask me my thoughts
on these and I'm not an expert on all these topics so I don't know if it's useful but um
but answering the question of is there an order of operations between personal inner work and
dharma I think the right way to think about it is kind of as a virtuous cycle or a reciprocal
process where as I develop myself like my obvious capacity right my my cognitive capacities to
understand the problems my uh social capacities to communicate effectively towards organization
and problem solving my um my psychological disposition to be clear and not you know being
taken off by um disruptions obviously as I'm developing myself I have more capacity to do
things in the world but it's also true that as there are things in the world I really want to do
it's the best motive to develop myself and to develop myself in a more focused less naval gazingway
and because if if I'm just wanting to develop myself because because I have some generalized
goal of enlightenment or whatever it's endless right like I can keep finding new little patterns
that I have and little traumas and areas to grow forever and new states to reach and new
methods to inquire into and I stay basically self-focused which is kind of narcissistic
in its focus and oftentimes that impulse is actually the expression of it of trauma itself
it's the expression of I'm not good enough and the way to become good enough sometimes is get
really buff sometimes it's get really rich sometimes it's get famous sometimes it's
really do development work on myself um or become really smart but it's actually an
expression of I'm not enough coming out in that way where you're actually healing some things
and doubling down on the core trauma um whereas if I have a sense of I'm going to die and all
my development will kind of not matter anymore like I take my development with me when I die
right my the things that I learned don't stay in the field outside of work that I produce in ways
that I touch other people and touch the world so if my life is pretty short in duration but life
is going to continue and my life isn't the only thing meaningful to me life with a capital L is
meaningful to me and my experience but other people's experience is meaningful then I want to say
well in the short time that I'm here what is it that I really care to how do I want to touch the
world that ripples on beyond beyond me and scope to other people and beyond my life and time
and as I really think about that and I think about what actually is meaningful to me what is sacred
to me what what is worth allocating the finite bit of my life energy towards then that that can
inspire a kind of development in dharma right development in a sense of meaningfulness purpose
mission and capabilities but also it will show me the personal work that I need to do of what's in
the way of me being good at that and so let's say I notice that I'm there's my work would be really
benefited by public speaking but I'm too afraid of public speaking but like what I feel is mine to
do here and that matters to me in a way more than my own life would be benefited by that then I
fucking do the work to get over the fear of public speaking not just because of some generalized I'm
growing myself in all these different ways but because I'm not going to let some lack of skill
or some trauma or some disposition given the way of me and what I'm here for
and so there's a deeper motive and more focus of what to focus on if I find that
I can't actually empathize or tune in with other people enough that they like working with me so
everybody quits and I'm like okay there's interpersonal work that I need to do because
otherwise I can't be effective towards the things that matter to me so I think
one's focus on what they feel called to contribute to can be a context setting for
their own personal development in their skills and their psychological work and then of course
as they grow in their psychological as they grow in their skills they start thinking about the
things that they could do that they didn't even know they could do before they had that skill
and as they grow in their psychological work they have more insight about oh that thing I
felt really called to do was actually me just projecting my trauma on the world
I needed to protect everybody because I couldn't protect my mom when I was little or my
kid sister or whatever it was and so there's this reciprocal relationship that as my skills develop
as my own internal awareness develops and as healing occurs and as my experience of trying
to benefit what I care about in the world develops they can all enter and enrich each other
cool aren't any follow-up
there's always infinite follow-ups but no that's no I think anyone appreciate it great
so we're going to go with Margaret then Evan and Amber so Margaret if you can unmute yourself
my question is Daniel do you have a method for organizing your mental architecture
and how do you personally store and access various types of information and memories
say a little bit more about the context of the question
I'm curious to hear it's a question I've asked to many people I'm just curious if
I would assume everyone's mental architecture is different and unique I guess I'm curious about
if you have a process for how you work with yours or restructure as necessary as well as
in this context you are um you know accessing a lot of information about different subjects and
actively listening to the questions and drawing out pieces of it and you're managing to
weave together very complex answers across many domains which I would guess speaks to in part your
experience in investigating those domains but also something that's happening within your physical
and mental structure to allow for that like network yeah yeah yeah I get the question now
so
having a knowledge and experience that that is
very interconnected and very flexible in terms of what things might be relevant
what things might be most relevant because like for any of these questions we I could
answer them a hundred different ways and you know we could take a very long time so there's
a question of like and I don't know that I'm getting it right but what seems like the most
relevant way for this particular question this particular context and the amount of time that
makes sense somebody asked me earlier today whether they should go back to graduate school
or what the right process was to learn better analytical skills and they they ended up asking
questions very much like this of how do I learn many different analytical processes and connect
them together and know which one to apply how to how to know which epistemologies or methodologies
would apply well to which domains are you saying that's not the question yeah that's not the question
but I'm happy to hear an answer to it but yeah it's not the question but I think it's the answer
might be related what I shared with him is that the learning process that I'm mostly utilized
I mean I had some time where I took college courses and learned like fixed curriculum
but even when I did that when I was taking in the curriculum I was thinking about how
the knowledge in whatever field related to everything else that I knew and how I would
apply it and how I would apply it to all different kinds of problem sets but for the most part my
study happened in the context of trying to figure out specific problems I was interested in that
so the example that I gave him because he had been interested in like what actually happened in
9-11 which is a very interesting and tricky research topic and I said so if I was studying that
you would see a group like architects and engineers for 9-11 truth talking about
uh the temperature of jet fuel and the melting temperature of steel but I would need to get
into what kind of steel so there's some metallurgy I would need to learn and there's some kind of
construction structural engineering around the kinds of steel that went in there and the temperature
of weld joints and um and then is it a there's some kind of thermodynamics and chemistry regarding
jet fuel if does it always burn at the same temperature or what if I have a strong kind
of chimney effect or draft so there's like a bunch of different domains and then the impact
of the plane there's like classical mechanics that I need to do to be able to factor that and
how would that correspond to Richter scale for how the building was designed to be able to impact
stuff and and then thinking about the claims of what NORAD was doing that day or what the CIA
knew or what the FBI knew then I'd be like do I actually understand how the branches of government
work and what each of those groups do and how they're connected so my study would be there's a topic
I want to figure out and if I really pay attention to as I'm trying to make sense of it what other
people are referencing I actually don't know most any of what they're talking about like I don't know
that the metallurgy I don't know the burning temperatures I don't know the structures of
government well enough to know if NORAD said that versus strategic air command what that means
so I would just it all seemed relevant it all seemed interconnected and relevant because otherwise
I'm like okay well I'll just take their word on that and they really don't know what I'm talking
about but now I'm building a logical model based on something I don't really know what I'm talking
about and so then I would go down Wikipedia rabbit holes or whatever in encyclopedias or
university sites I would find to try to study that stuff and I wouldn't actually have to make a rigid
taxonomy because it was connecting based on authentic curiosity and I was thinking through
how all these things connected so there was a natural kind of synaptic taxonomy that occurred
where everything was connected to everything else through the process of even how it was being
studied and then what happened was those same topics were just as flexibly interconnectable
not in that initial point of inquiry but now in the other point of inquiry because everything I
learned happened that way so I think how someone is learning originally is are there these separate
subjects with clear divisions or is there the study of how reality works and the interconnectivity
between all the domains so I think it wasn't until later in life I started thinking in formal
taxonomies and taxonomy theory and where a kind of bottom-up folksonomy or where a top-down taxonomy
works best different ways of taxonomizing things and why those would be useful and then
there were meta
there were meta taxonomies based on deeper ontology this was actually something that
specifically for a seminate metaphysics created a formality for me that I had not had before
was this idea in the metaphysics that any of a way of defining a domain of inquiry what the
boundary of inside and outside the domain are and then the three axioms that there are these
three orthonormal ontological bases in each one and that there's a relationship between those
between those ontological axes that are defined by those axioms and so then when I'd be looking at
any domain I'd be converting it into that as a kind of meta ontology just like some people
do with integral I just integrals are much less formalized and so I I kind of got into different
meta ontological models that was the most formal and fundamental one I found
and then that took the organic way I had learned and started reifying it and allowing me to navigate it
more precisely and consciously
and even just like I like taxonomies just even formal ones knowing everything that's wrong with them
I like being able to take a paper before writing it like typically if I'm working with a team and
they're going to write something I always ask them to do an outline first to see are we clear on the
main concepts before we flush them out the questions or whatever I like taxonomies of question
but I also know that I could do that taxonomy a bunch of different ways do I have three fundamental
categories do I have five how what is the benefit and damage of doing it different ways
so there was also just playing with mappings of different kinds of taxonomies and being and this
is where it's like no models true they're all useful where then I became very unattached to
any particular taxonomical models but quite comfortable with being able to use them and do
mappings between them so am I I guess what I'm hearing is that this is not like I guess I was
trying to ask a question about direct information encoding and I'm hearing that your chosen method
is using these taxonomies and meta ontological models in order to map that information to domains
which then have connections and can be restructured at will yes did you mean more like how do I
actually store information on my computer well your your human computer perhaps very like
whatever you may view as your consciousness in mind
yeah I think the answer I gave is the is the clearest answer but if there is a follow-up
question on the part I didn't address let me know that's good thank you okay thank you so I got a
follow-up question on like cognitive organization um how do you get shit done like like what's your
time management system and how do you negotiate between all the shit you have to get done in
orientation to what is most meaningful um you want me to do like
productivity principles basics that I find useful sure like could be anything from getting
things done by David Allen anything that you apply or a bespoke system that you use that you
think is can be generalizable yeah I did uh David Allen and Franklin Covey and Tony Robbins
time of your life system and a bunch of those and they're all like there's valuable stuff in all of
the David Allen kind of brain dump everything in a place you'll keep coming back to so your
mind doesn't keep looping the thing to kind of free up cognitive space that's super valuable
um
I'll tell you I'll tell you a few of the kind of productivity practices that I actually use
regularly which is different than all the ones that I know that I don't end up actually using
regularly but probably would be good if I did um
I'm I make sure in my work that I have very clear outcomes so I know the theory of it right
I know the philosophy I know the values but then it comes down to clear outcomes at a particular
time and the outcomes that I'm responsible for are less than five usually three but never more
than five and so they're everything has to chunk that way so that I don't have to go reference it
to look those up those those can be clear and top of mind like I know the outcomes that I'm
moving forward towards and then every possible um call or engagement or email has to be in
light of which of those outcomes isn't moving forward and is it the most effective thing I
can do to move that outcome forward and then of course when one of those outcomes is completed
and a new one emerges like the five can change and they should change over time but uh that's one
thing and then there is a above the line practice that I actually find quite useful
which is towards the one or two or three outcomes that is most meaningful critical
timely and leveraged current today um there's one to three things that I am for sure going to get
done before I go to sleep that are the highest leverage things towards that and then there might
be 50 other things on my to-do list that I'd like to get done that are below the line where
I make sure I get the above the line ones done first there's a few things that does
it actually allows someone to be able to rest when they need to rest because they know the thing
that they really needed to get done got done then and as opposed to the general sense that I never
got enough done um and it makes sure that the highest leverage things get first priority
and it makes sure that you're thinking about priority clearly enough um
um also if I say I have 20 to-do items that have come in through
conversations I had with the team and conversations I have with external people and
emails and whatever and they're chunked under an outcome it doesn't automatically mean I look
through those 20 and put them in descending order of which one's most important towards the outcome
there might be a way to move the outcome forward that's more effective than any of those so I look
at all those to make sure I know what they are I look at the consequence of not doing them in a time
that was said but I also give myself some time to think about strategically is there a higher
leverage thing I could do to move that outcome forward in designing these I do use theory of
bottlenecks of saying for the overall project to succeed what are the bottlenecks and then is
there an order of operation of the bottlenecks sometimes there's more work to do than the
team can do and human resources are really a bottleneck I need more people and sometimes
capital is the thing that is the bottleneck to that I need to raise money to be able to get
those people on and maybe the bottleneck to that is I need to put some uh fundraising materials
together so I get very clear like fundraising materials close funds but I'm closing funds for
people so I know exactly how much fun I need and don't keep raising beyond to then start to get the
people on and which people first so um theory of bottlenecks and also just general considerations
of leverage which things that I do leverage the existing team and other people's work and the rest
of my work more effectively that's all just kind of like strategy and planning but then the tactics
is things like making sure that it's not too many categories at once for a given month or quarter
and that you're clear for that particular day um daily planning is obviously not enough because
you need to book appointments and so you're also going to be looking at kind of weekly and monthly
planning and having some regular process to do that planning aligned with what the strategic
objectives are now I'm also talking about if someone is in a position where being responsible
for the strategic objectives is their role if I have a job at a company I might not do any of
this stuff that I'm talking about because someone else might be setting strategic objectives and I'm
focused on doing a really great job executing um I think that's actually one of the problems
is so many of the not all but a lot of the kind of current productivity tip books were written by
entrepreneurs and then everybody has like some assumption that being an entrepreneur is a better
thing and I actually think for most people having a job is better than being an entrepreneur because
uh being able to stop work at a certain point and not being responsible for everybody's payroll
and all like that but just being able to go and do good work towards an organization they believe
in like is awesome um and for most people figuring out how to be responsible for the outcome of the
project and everybody's payroll and like that is just stressful in a way that is typologically not
fit um so I I think it's important to not have this idea that everybody should be an entrepreneur
or like if you're reading Robert Green the idea that everyone should be a general like it just
life doesn't work that way not supposed to work that way so there's different there's different
tips based on the type of role that you'd be in for productivity um and honestly the most
effective thing I have found for my own productivity by far is having someone good at it help me with
it regularly um so it's kind of like why some people who are bodybuilders still take a trainer
to the gym um or at least a workout partner that's focused on the thing with them is not
necessarily that they're missing the knowledge or the fundamental capability but if I'm wanting
to go to failure in my sets then all of my attention and energy is in that rather than
paying attention to how many seconds I was in time under tension and if that's progressing
from the way it was previously and how many seconds between this set and the next set so
having someone else hold the context so that I can be all the way in on the the process like
anytime someone wants to go all the way in that that decreases their need for task switching between
different types of cognitive functions so this is where having the right kind of executive assistant
or um chief of staff or somebody like that if someone is in one of those positions can be
enormously helpful so um when when I have someone who knows what my strategic objectives are and is
holding all of the inbound requests and all the things that I'm saying I'm wanting to do they're
holding and organizing the whole GTD thing and then checking in with me to make sure that it's
optimized that means that I get to stay in the optimization I get to stay in doing the optimized
tasks outside of the time that I'm doing strategic planning not continuously moving back and re
um redoing organization and honestly with all of the organizational tools I learned nothing
was as effective as having someone tell me awesome all right so uh we'll end with one more
question uh it's a juicy one uh Evan and Amber you're up uh you're gonna unmute yourself hey um so
my question and I wrote it as the top three but feel free to change the number um given the time
and and where you want to go with it so I'm I'm wondering so what questions do you have right now
Daniel which um you a believe are answerable and not just by some super intelligence or something
but practically speaking um and uh you don't know the answer to these right now and you think would
be most valuable to you or yeah to say to you personally to know the answers to these things
um
there's a set of questions that are more theoretical um and then there's a set of questions that are more
tactical um
I'm very much actively asking questions around things about
um
faster processes for being able to help certain types of human development at scale
people's development in their epistemics in their emotional maturity in their interpersonal skills
and what is the what are the upper bounds of how effectively we can do that
what percentage of the population needs to have what amount of developments
within what different types of governance systems to to be effective
what love what type of development can we what is the kind of Gaussian distribution on human
development in different ways that we can expect from raising humans differently different models
of kind of how we could do development at a at a longer term civilization scale
I have a lot of questions in the space right now um
that are more kind of theoretical terms of more tactical things um
um
working on for the this kind of sense making
project um the conciliance project is going to have sense making content it puts out
but it's more focused on how does it actually facilitate a cultural movement towards better
quality sense making and better quality um dialogue so that our capacity for problem
solving together actually emerges and the so the products we put out the kind of news and the
kind of meta-news analysis is actually to be an attractor for people to come to where there's
better more in a sense making but also to be a place where we're doing open source prototyping
of what it could be and encouraging people to copy it and innovate and utilize these things
we're gonna the project's gonna have a five-year time to live and so its goal is to catalyze
basically to take care of stewarding the information commons and the epistemic commons while trying to
catalyze the commons to steward itself um through a number of things number of different ways of
doing that so uh how so how how we best do the kind of innovation prize and innovation environment
what the categories of the innovation prizes would be and how we bring together the right sources
of capital the right sources of distribution with the right projects and the right talents to be able
to facilitate um everything from the best projects in civics education for high school
students to the best projects in creating web browser plugins that automatically fact check
and look for lake off frames to the best projects that correct bias and journalism or peer review
like all of those that are part of the info and epistemic commons so how do we facilitate the
movement how do we design the prize how do we design the forums such that the best sense making
and the best good faith dialogue or what emerge and how do we engender the most effective types of
collaboration and not the dysfunctional types of competition in that environment
um these are probably some of the questions that i'm focused on having good tangible answers quickly
too any follow-up uh evan no thank you that was wonderful beautiful all right so uh we're going
to wrap it up now um before i close out uh daniel any kind of closing thoughts any
any like to summarize or anything that came to life today yeah i think um the the question of
are we addressing more personal philosophy psychology topics of um systemic topics
maybe you have some way of getting people's input on what they are seeking and what is
useful i don't know if this is useful and i don't want to make a poor use of anyone's time um
um and so before the next one i would i actually have this is an interesting thing about convening
i have a very strong value around giving people good calibrated expectations when inviting them
to something of what the thing is so as a way of respecting their choice is this the thing i want
to come to and put my time into or not um so i wonder if we can clarify what people would
really find useful and then clarify what our intent is so they can come or not based on
whether or not that resonates though i would like that cool cool yeah i will um i'll do that i think
i'll probably do a survey or something after i launched this video um on my mailing list and see
see what happens and the frame is digital porch so it's like it's open-ended thing
about that we can kind of firm it up for the next session um so that being said daniel thanks so much
for coming to the store today everyone thanks for coming um couple announcements before i close out
i shall take in tyson right now uh tyson so we're having a rap on battles event on the same link
right right after this in about like a couple minutes uh so tyson could you uh plug that
yes thank you peter thank you daniel this is awesome and i look forward to the next couple
so rap on battles we are practicing freestyle spoken word and rap so we play some beats
and we talk with one another to practice sharpening our thinking challenging one another's
ideas and beliefs and ways of thinking and engaging in some good faith dialectic through
freestyle and so the beats and the freestyle sort of forces us to speak into unknowingness
and not prepare what we're going to say and practice getting into that group flow together
last week was a lot of fun like i had a really good time so i look forward to seeing many of you
there you can participate or come prepared for unbattle the choice is yours but no previous
experience is required so see you soon thank you tyson uh and we're launching a new series at the
stowa called communitas club um margaret uh and i are gonna uh run it and it starts tomorrow and
margaret do you want to unmute and just kind of give it a plug and give people an understanding
what to expect uh sure so we're hoping to create a space where we can explore different relational
and intersubjective modalities um and kind of create a bridge between uh propositional and
participatory learning so tomorrow to set your expectations in case you don't want to attend
it's going to be more of a design session to kind of hear what's alive for the community of the stowa
and what people are interested in focusing on and to get your ideas about how to structure
sessions in a way that will give the most to the community so tomorrow five thirty come share your
opinions thoughts all are welcome beautiful and we're going to look at different modalities like
circling uh nonviolent communication uh verbal a keto um for reflective structure dialogue force
landers even kind of come in to do is a femoral group process uh and the idea is just to kind of
like talk about it test it out and maybe port it into the stowa's wisdom gym and kind of create
some bespoke psychotechnologies um so that being said uh you can go rcp to everything on the website
the stowa.ca you can also check out our patreon uh and our sub stack um so that being said everyone
thank you so much for coming to stowa today and just hold on tight we'll play some music and then
i'll tag and tyson in the moment
