The stoa is a digital campfire where we cohere in dialogue about what matters most at the
knife's edge of what's happening now.
So when you suggested you want to talk about stoicism, you're kind of take on it and what
you see what's representing stoicism and maybe kind of have a metamodern developmental lens.
What kind of sparked that?
I guess maybe just rifter for your associate on your thoughts in that area.
I think it'd be curious if I could know a little bit more about for this group of people
that are assembling here at a place called the stoa, what in terms of stoicism is familiar
and kind of shared and also in terms of metamodernism so I can have a sense of how to relate.
So I can kind of speak on the behalf of maybe the stoa group or the regulars, but in the
meantime there's a lot of faces I don't recognize here so you can drop them in the chat box
and just say what you're familiar with, stoicism or metamodernism.
I would say that more people, at least the regulars, are more familiar with metamodernism.
There's book clubs on Hansi's book and stuff like that.
Then they are with stoicism because we hardly have any events on stoicism here, sort of
like a space that's stewarded by a stoic, but we don't really talk about stoicism.
And I don't know how sophisticated the understanding is of metamodernism.
As you can see from the chats, there's a bunch of people already dropping down there
familiar with metamodernism, but I also imagine there's some people that are just coming in
that might have heard the terms but don't know much about it so you probably have a
mixed bag of understanding here.
Yeah, so I'm definitely not a scholar of ancient stoic philosophy.
There's a number of stoic philosophers that I have read and appreciated, I actually read
them later in life.
I grew up more on Eastern philosophic traditions and got into the Western traditions later.
But when you're studying Vedant or Buddhism, there are ideas that are very similar to stoic
ideas.
There's some things that are quite different, but some things that are similar in terms
of what is virtue, how do you cultivate it, how do you cultivate increased strength and
resilience of character under adversity, how do you become at peace with death and those
types of things.
And the actual word stoic, I didn't even know there was a Greek tradition until I was a
bit later.
And the way that I heard it was actually a very kind of simple cartoonish version that
I think a lot of people have heard that just meant like have a stiff upper lip and don't
show emotions.
There was something as I got into psychotherapy in that community was actually completely
rejected as this is a way to fragment yourself and spiritually bypass and repress emotionality
and emotional intelligence.
And so I think it's very important in this way when we talk about metamodern stoicism.
If you read Marcus Aurelius or Seneca or whatever, they're not just saying that simplistic keep
a stiff lip there.
They're inquiring into how do we relate with our emotions and our desires and our thoughts
in a way that moves us in the direction of what is meaningful and what is fundamentally
meaningful.
And so specifically the idea that there is this relationship between logic and virtue.
And so it was both epistemology, how do we do better clear thinking about the nature of
ourself and reality in the world and how do we cultivate the qualities of virtue in
ourself and the positive relationship between those.
So the idea that the true, the good and the beautiful were actually facets of an integrated
reality was a emerging from an intuition of an integrated metaphysics.
And I think that's actually something distinctly different in the Greek enlightenment than
in the later European enlightenment is in the later European enlightenment, not as much
early in the Renaissance, but later the epistemology section, which got reified with the methods
of science became very much about what is, but in a way that was seen as fundamentally
incommensurable with what ought.
And now of course, lots of people had a sense of an ethics, whether it was the founding fathers
being deistic while being, you know, focused on science.
But ultimately the philosophy of science grounds itself in repeatable measurements.
We measure something, we repeat the measurements, we come up with a, you know, predictions based
on the hypothesis.
And so science formally exists within to study the objective in the domain of the simultaneously
measurable and repeatable.
And that gives is, but ought doesn't doesn't exist there yet to make some value statements
about what if we okay, a measure can show, are we moving towards or away from but what
should be, which is why the the philosophy of science by itself tends to orient in a nihilistic
direction.
Big bang happened because who knows why no particular reason, random combinatorics, you
know, et cetera.
And I think we can actually see a lot of the problems in the world through the lens of
the is ought distinction, where science is a has become an incredibly powerful epistemology
for studying what is objectively that can then be applied via technology to changing
what is right.
And obviously if my, if my choices are leveraged by intercontinental ballistic missiles as opposed
to arrows, it's a much more powerful leverage to be able to change reality.
But then there's this question of, well, what are we applying the technology towards
what is the world that we actually want what is worth wanting.
And science's opinion is we formally have no opinion on that, and any position on that
is equally ungrounded because it's not emerging from something that the methods of science
themselves can validate.
And so then, well, what ends up funding the research is what's going to have return on
investment so basically capital returns, and more generally game theory ends up being
the thing.
So then the nihilism of social Darwinism becomes the, because good basically becomes what wins
at game theory.
And that's a very, not only superficial, but eventually self terminating definition
of good.
So so yeah, when I think about stoicism, I think about deep contemplation on what is
actually good what is desirable what's worth desiring, basically a reified ethics, and
a reified epistemology and is there a unified metaphysics from which those can both arise
as a basis of how do we do choice making.
And ultimately that's the thing is how to inform human choice towards an effective life
individually and collectively at different scales.
Something that I'm focused on a lot right now is the collective scale.
Since the beginning of what we call civilization, like early Egypt, Sumeria, whatever, a tiny
percentage of all the people that have ever lived lived in democracies or republics lived
in a system that had any kind of participatory governance almost everybody lived under feudalism
or monarchy or some kind of autocratic control.
And the few times that democracies or republics occurred, they occurred following a cultural
enlightenment.
And it was a cultural enlightenment that had to do a couple things.
It had to do something in both is and ought.
And specifically in the is space, it had to get objective and intersubjective.
So I'll say what I mean by that.
We see the Athenian democracy coming out of kind of a Greek enlightenment.
And the Greek enlightenment was everybody should learn logic and learn history and learn
math and learn rhetoric and learn the arts.
If you have a high value on education where everyone can assess base reality on their own,
not just say what someone else said because the great authority in the past said it, but
everyone can actually assess base reality on their own, then you have the unifying nature
of reality itself.
And the other key part was the Socratic method, the Socratic dialectic where everyone could
take everyone else's perspective and position.
In the European enlightenment later, it was the Hegelian dialectic and the kind of methods
of science.
But if everyone can assess base reality on their own and they can take each other's perspective,
they end up being like, we don't need rulers, we can actually have conversations and be
able to bring about self-governance.
But there also did have to be a shared culture.
They all emerged that cultural enlightenment valued those things, right?
And it also had some other ideas of what is good that it values.
Same with the founding of this country.
And notice I got some feedback.
All right.
And so most everyone can sense that the US has been undergoing radical decay and it feels
like it's kind of near the end of the public being much of anything.
And democracy's never made it past 300 years, we're at 250 years currently.
I think it'd be good if everybody was on mute.
Yeah, I'm just going to force everyone on mute.
And then I'm going to ask you to unmute yourself.
There you go.
All right.
And so the cultural enlightenment, I'm going a bit off topic but it tells you how I'm thinking
about it.
George Washington in the founding of this country said that the number one goal of government
should be the comprehensive education of every citizen and what he called the science of
government.
Basically everyone needed educated about how humans work and how human coordination works
well enough that they can really participate.
And Jefferson said, if I could have perfect news and a broken government or perfect government
and broken news, I'd take perfect news because if people understand the world they live in,
they cannot overthrow the corrupt government and make sense of things and coordinate.
But I think the key thing there is that collective choice making requires collective sense making
and collective perspective taking.
I have to be able to understand how other people are seeing things to then be able to
work on strategies that are effective together.
So I think either kind of the decay that's happened in the US and other places continues
and many areas of the world have already moved back to more autocratic governance.
We see that happening in Brazil and Venezuela and Turkey and all over we see it's already
happened largely in Russia and China.
If we want something other than autocracy, an autocracy is easier because it's easier
for a small number of people at the top to coordinate than for a large number of people
to coordinate.
And I actually don't think it's possible for a very large number of people to coordinate
without something like an enlightenment at the basis where those people can all actually
make sense of reality well.
They can regulate their emotions enough that they're not just being limbically hijacked
and they can take each other's perspectives and do higher order synthesis.
And so now when we come to the concept of metamodern, so there was kind of the Greek
enlightenment could be thought of as a pre-modern enlightenment.
We could think of the European Enlightenment as modernity and it was an epistemology that
allowed us to actually produce and build things better.
Newton's calculus caught on not because people aesthetically liked it, but because it aimed
to cannons much better than pendulum dowsing did.
So those who took it on actually game theoretically won.
So modernity brought the capacity to build the world, but it also brought the ability
to destroy environments and oppress the world more effectively.
So then post-modernism, of course, was a bunch of largely valid critiques of the problems
of modernity, but without, it was deconstruction, but without a new reconstruction for how to
build.
So then basically the only thing it can do is critique building, which is an entropic
direction.
So the metamodern idea, which I'm sure everyone's familiar with is, is there an epistemology
that can take the relevant critiques of post-modernism and actually factor them into a better modernity
or metamodernity that has to be an integrated epistemology of how do we do production and
building and towards what ends are actually meaningful?
And so when I think of metamodern stoicism, I think of both it to be able to solve any
of the problems of the world right now, we need better participatory governance that
can understand the problems and work on solutions at all.
And the basis of that will be people that can make sense of reality better, make sense
of each other's perspectives and actually coordinate.
Those are some initial thoughts since we started from a random place.
So maybe, maybe I'll start here.
And for people listening, if you have questions, start throwing them in the chat box, have
like a question so I can, I can fish with them, there's a lot of comments in the chat
box.
You mentioned something when we were chatting on WhatsApp about what your current take was
on how stoicism is being presented today in, you know, the popular culture and how it's
being kind of repurposed by certain, I guess maybe masculine or self help, help kind of
grid it out type, type folks.
So the question is, do I have a critique of the modern presentation of stoicism?
Do you have a critique on how modern stoicism is presented or just what your thoughts on,
on how it's currently being presented?
I don't have that many.
I don't feel like I know the current modern stoic authors very well.
I know a few things that seem like they have some elements right and some fairly superficial.
One thing I'll say is that the superficial understanding of stoicism that looks a little
bit like logic over emotions and a kind of decrease of the value of emotion or emotional
intelligence on one side and then the kind of, let's call it trauma aware perspective
that pays more attention to what the effect of unexpressed, unfelt, unintegrated feelings
are shadow work, gestalt work, whatever.
I would say that's a fake dialectic or a fake dichotomy.
The two things that you don't ever want to do with emotions is immediately act out on
them or repress them, right?
And those are both dysfunctional activities.
You want to be able to notice them arising and recognize they're arising for a reason
that has signal for you to understand.
There's actual intelligence and signal in every emotional response.
So I want to be able to see it and really be with it and look at it, which I can't do
if I'm shaming it or wishing it wasn't there.
But for my own internal inquiry into my own wholeness, not immediately acting on it to
then see what is the right response.
And sometimes the right response is to say that thing to that person.
Sometimes the right response is to change the meaning I'm making, CBT style.
Sometimes it's to recognize that an old trauma keeps getting triggered and being projected
on current events.
And I actually have to go work with that.
So another part of how I think about the valuable thing that we can associate with stoicism
is a philosophy that asks, how can I relate to this in a way that increases my empowerment
to relate to life with more agency?
I think empowerment is, we can think about ennoblement, right?
What are my virtues and how do I, if I wasn't just asking what's in it for me, if I wasn't
asking what is easy and I was asking, how would someone that I respect the most behave?
What would that look like and why is it that I respect that?
So I'm mining my own value system and then I'm noticing the delta between my value system
and how I'm kind of conditioned to show up and I'm asking, how do I close that delta?
That's a very deep, interesting inquiry.
But as much as there is the kind of deepening virtue in ennobling, there's also the, how
do I relate to this in a way that empowers me, that I can continue to relate to life
with more capacity to be in service to what I care about?
And I think it's a very important question when it comes to emotions and difficulty of,
there's a kind of intelligence that is different than cognitive intelligence, which is kind
of power intelligence or agentic intelligence.
And if those aren't bound together, you can develop power that is not bound to virtue
that ends up being quite destructive.
But if you develop virtue that isn't bound to power, it's basically impotent.
So how you have virtue, wisdom, power all co-developed in, so you're capable of service
and know what you're in service to is the thing that I think is actually interesting
and worth exploring.
Cool.
So we have a lot of questions now, so I'll pivot to the chat box, and I'll give everyone
the opportunity to unmute themselves so we use this power with wisdom.
Pranab, you had a question, if you can unmute yourself and ask it to Daniel.
Yeah.
So thanks for this talk.
It's awesome so far.
Yeah, so basically, what are some ways that you think metamonetism, or at least the epistemology
of high metamonetism, can be taught or kind of encouraged within oneself, within dialogue,
within other person, or within scale, like at a community or society basis?
I'll share a few things, but it'll be more like a couple random smatterings than a comprehensive
addressing of the pedagogy, because how I would answer that for kindergartners versus
high schoolers and for people with different levels of investment and existing familiarities
is obviously going to be quite different, but a couple things.
In the academy, there has been this major divide most of the time between the liberal
arts and the sciences, between something that orients more towards interpersonal intelligence
versus or intersubjective versus objective empirical.
But to make sense of society, you deeply need both working together.
You need to be able to understand what other people believe, why they believe it, and what's
the actual signal in that, and what base reality regarding objective things are.
So to be oriented to both empiricism and being able to understand other people's narrative
simultaneously is a key part.
So some processes for how to do that.
Make anything in the world that you're trying to sense make, or that someone's trying to
sense make and then trying to help them with it.
And one thing I would have them do is say, okay, find all the narratives that make sense
of this that are out there.
What are the primary narratives?
It's like the memetic tribes or kind of narrative generating clusters, right?
So if I'm trying to make sense of the India-China war, or I'm trying to make sense of the BLM
protests, there's obviously conspiracy narratives, far right, moderate right, and Tifa, whatever.
So I would try to generate the narrative landscape.
So I say, what are the ways that different humans are making sense of this?
And then I would try to steelman all the arguments.
I would try to actually find the very strongest version of each of those narratives and make
it as reified as possible so that I really understand why they're understanding that
and that I can look for the signal in it because there's never no signal.
Then I would use some propositional logic and break the narrative into individual propositions,
right?
So a narrative is always that.
So the bricks were put there by this for this purpose, the cops did this, whatever it is,
break down the propositions.
And then I would look for what evidence do those groups give to support each of the propositions
and what sense can I make of that evidence and what additional evidence can I find and
I would seek to both try to verify and falsify each proposition.
And then stepping while acknowledging that I might not be able to verify or falsify,
I might just be able to say this is a proposition for which I can't really ground it one way
or the other at all.
And all I can do is sit in some uncertainty and ask questions around where the burden
of proof should be.
So this is why Peter was talking about comfort with uncertainty earlier.
If I'm not comfortable with uncertainty, then I'm going to rush to premature certainty
and just be wrong about stuff.
I have to be comfortable with uncertainty to be able to do the epistemics necessary to
come up with appropriate certainty.
But the comfort with uncertainty doesn't mean that I don't want increasing certainty, right?
It doesn't mean that there isn't curiosity in an epistemic drive that wants to figure
shit out.
It's that I don't want to believe shit without having gone through the appropriate process
to have the right calibrated confidence margin.
It also means I never make what is most sacred to me attached to that belief system where
now I can't change it, right?
Because the confidence margin will always be less than 100%.
This is the way I interpret the first verse of the Tao De Ching saying, the knowledge
that's knowable is not the eternal knowledge.
The Tao that is speakable is not the eternal Tao.
Your best, I might have a high confidence margin on something, but there's some shit
that's in the unknown unknown that I'm not even aware I don't know about that could
change the framing or the context of the whole thing.
And if I make what is most sacred to me or my identity based on believing this thing
because I have high confidence, I just became biased in a way that keeps me from being connected
to life or learning.
So I might have a high enough confidence to inform action, which I need, but I also need
that I can ongoingly be able to change my mind.
This is also how I take the Judaic doubt shall have no false idols and that every model of
reality is an idol, right?
Every model of reality isn't actually reality.
So I'm going to construct a model that is a radical information compression and reduction
on the actual reality that hopefully will be useful, but it's never actually true.
And when I know that I'm, I don't ever make my model sacred, right?
So I can always change and update my models.
And I don't ever become destroyed when that happens because I actually have a relationship
beyond cognition with myself and reality, right?
What is sacred?
What is the doubt?
And the reverence for reality that if I'm ever wrong, I fucking want to see it, right?
Because I want to be in the intimacy of being with reality as much as possible.
So teaching people how to make sense of the current world by being able to see how everyone
else makes sense of it, to really seek to take their perspectives and make their arguments
well, and then to seek to do analysis on each of the parts, to calibrate confidence appropriately,
to both, to not pretend to have no bias, in which case your bias will just be hiding
from you, but to take all the biases, I'm going to try to falsify this.
Now I'm going to try to verify it so I can do both sides of a dialectic.
And then to step back after the analysis and be able to look at the whole thing and say,
what higher order perspectives are possible from looking at this whole thing?
And what additional information would we need to be able to go further?
This is one way of being able to help people learn how to think better.
I could give lots and lots of examples, like this becomes a very rich topic and we start
to get into what should the future of education look like, but also what should the future
of a civilization, imagine that we built a civilization where the goal of it was evolving
the humans in it maximally, right?
And we had some congruent sense of what that was, where the nature of how work happened
and how information was shared, how the algorithms on the internet were structured was towards
that.
It would be very interesting.
Nora Bateson's warm data stuff is very good.
I know she's coming on for helping people be able to understand complexity in a relatively
simple way.
Forests EGP, Forest Landry's EGP, if that comes on, is a very good system to get people
to ask much, much better questions, including questions that they didn't even know were
things.
Thank you.
Just to piggyback on that, I'm designing a session for Rebel Wisdom on Friday, Thursday
about memetic mediation, and we're going to play different videos of Trump, AOC, all these
political memetic tribes, and then process it emotionally first before we inquire into
the propositions.
Do you think the exercise that you mapped that would about looking at the narratives,
do you think that could also be repurposed for some kind of emotional integration work?
So there's a few ways that I would, I mean, noticing the emotions and giving some space
to process them means that they won't be covertly hijacking your sense making because
you've made them overt.
So that's awesome, right?
If I know that I'm angry or I know that I'm scared, I can actually look for how that's
affecting my sense making.
And in complex scenarios, it's very rarely like a simple equation how anything works.
And all societal and ecology and psychology things are complex.
It's usually that there's 100 different causal factors that are changing and nexus causation.
Enough stuff happens to move something across a threshold.
So what happens, why two people who both have expertise in climate change and are earnestly
trying to figure it out can come to such different senses or on immunity or anything complex
is because they weight the variables differently intuitively without realizing they're doing
it.
They recognize these are all variables, but their life experience has them weight some
of them more than others.
And so to notice our own weighting, that's where bias usually shows up.
And the emotions are a very interesting way to start to be able to look at it.
So if I'm looking at Trump and AOC and whatever, I might have emotion come up because of having
adopted enough in group out group type of stuff that I'm just responding within group
out group group think triggered kind of stuff.
And I want to be able to, and this is why you actually have to have a virtue, the stoicism
kind of idea.
You have to have a virtue that has you not just think that's a good idea, right?
Because lots of people would be like, yes, I've accepted that in group out group because
my side is right and the other side's are wrong and fuck them and like, this is time
to pick sides and be strong and be at war.
So to be able to say, hey, before having high certainty in anything, I want to actually
make sure I'm taking all the biases and that I actually have clear understanding of the
thing.
I'm willing to take a stand on shit, but I want to make sure that I'm actually thinking
and seeing clearly first.
And I can't do that if I only have pejorative strawman versions of the other people.
If I've never actually been able to sense why they would come to that in a way that
isn't pejorative.
So if you have a value around that, around St. Francis's seek first to understand before
seeking to be understood, then you will do the work towards it.
So I might be emotional because of those reasons and I get to see, oh, wow, I have bought into
a particular chunk of rhetoric, right?
Actually there's a narrative warfare happening and it won and it captured me and made me a
narrative soldier and I thought I was choosing a free will and not really, where those people's
perspective strikes me as existentially risky so much that I can't listen to them, right?
Them not being willing to wear masks means that they are science denying flat earth grandma
killers and they're going to ruin everything and or whatever it is, right?
Them wanting to wear masks means that they've bought into the pedo deep state and want to
RFID chip my kids and so I can't actually hear anything outside of that narrative frame
that I've already accepted.
So that's one thing the emotions might give me.
Another thing they might give me that's even deeper is, okay, so I'm looking at homelessness
or Amazon destruction or whatever and I feel really fucking sad because the sadness is
showing me something that's actually sacred to me or I'm angry or I'm afraid any of the
negative emotions are actually showing me something sacred to me.
The anger is I'm seeing something sacred and I'm looking at who's who's violating it.
I'm focused on the blame side but what the basis of it is, is there's something I love
and care about that if I didn't, there would be no emotional energy of anything I wanted
to protect or that I cared was being harmed.
I'd just be like, yeah, fuck it.
Cut the Amazon out.
I'm going to shit.
I'm only angry because there's something I actually really care about.
So if I trace the fear or the anger or the sadness back to what is it that is actually
sacred to me that I'm trying to be in service of, that's a helpful piece of intelligence.
Then I can say, okay, so I know what is sacred to me.
I want to be in best service to it.
Do I understand what is harming it or could harm it well enough that I can come up with
solutions?
If not, can I seek to understand better that I can actually be effective and what way of
relating to these emotions helps me be in most service.
So if I hold the sadness in a way that decreases my agency, I just get overwhelmed and depressed
and crippled.
I'm actually not in service to what I care about.
And so the stoic, what is it that empowers me is to say, if I actually care about that,
the care can't be impotent, right?
The love can't be impotent.
It has to actually be able to act and be in service to what's cared about.
So how can I relate to this that most empowers me to be in effective service towards what
is sacred to me?
Yeah, yeah, that's really good.
I dig that.
Okay, whoa, whoa, man, so many questions.
Benita Roy, you sent me a question privately.
If you can unmute yourself and ask it to Daniel.
Hey, Bonnie.
Hi.
See you.
So thank you for for being you.
My question is.
Where does this kind of analysis and epistemic precision, where does this, what is the boundary
of that?
Does that fit?
Obviously it fits in this world situation, but does it fit in your personal life?
Like, like, like, and how does that meld through?
Because most of us don't have the kind of mind and the kind of capacity you have.
And we want to take that part of what you're offering and meld that into our personal lives.
Is that is that a question that you can understand so far?
Yeah, it's a great question.
Yeah, I think it's most important for most people there and actually easiest because
our personal live situations don't have the same level of complexity as all the things
connected to climate change, fortunately.
So we don't have to have expert level skills and 24 different fields to understand why
our partner feels the thing they feel.
Yeah, so my personal life.
Seek first to understand before seeking to be understood is as deep a piece of wisdom
as anything I've ever heard.
And it's not complicated, it's simple, it's only hard when the ego gets hijacked and really
fucking wants to say what it wants to say.
And so there has to be a value around, I actually don't want that hijacked ego place to get
to run me.
Now, I'm not going to, in order to be effective towards it, there are certain ways of repressing
it that just make it worse.
I want to actually be able to understand how it arises, why it arises, what its hooks
are, how I work with those so that I can actually become more empowered.
But ultimately, that's the place that when it talks, I feel regret and shame afterwards
and need to apologize.
There are other places that I feel the deepest kind of pride afterwards because I feel that
I lived aligned with my own deepest values and there's more integration.
I want to pay attention to which of those places is actually growing in its empowerment,
which ones I'm feeding.
And so like my wife and I have a few guidelines that are very helpful.
One is both people are never upset at the same time.
And if so, we take a break.
So that if she's upset, I don't go into my own emotional reaction on her emotional reaction
where we're just spiraling and no one is actually clear to be able to bring it up where then
I'm not able to hear her.
I'm just hearing how what she says is wrongly blaming me and what it means for me and whatever.
There's no capacity in the relationship in that moment for good things to happen.
So if she's bringing something up, I want to be able to come from enough wholeness that
I don't instantly have to make it about me and I can actually hear her experience.
And then I can help find out what does she need to be able to feel better to feel heard
to return to center.
And then if I have something I'd like to process afterwards when she's clear and has
capacity, I say, hey, can we talk about this?
She's like, yeah.
And oftentimes the thing that I wanted to say before seeking to understand after I seek
to understand, I don't even want to say it was wrong.
Or I understand where they were coming from enough that I have a different perspective
on the thing.
Being able to notice the place that wants to speak when out of center and the addiction
that it is to want to do that.
And to be able to just witness it.
When you meditate and your nose itches and you don't itch it, there's this very helpful
thing of just being able to say, I don't have to act on every sensation that arises.
I can witness it.
And I don't have to act on the sensation of I need to fucking be right and tell them
why I'm right and whatever right now.
I can just, if the thing I'm going to say is really true, it'll still be true tomorrow.
If it is emotionality that will kind of blow over, well then I can say, but only when I'm
angry do I have the courage.
We'll just choose to have more courage so that in a centered place you'll still say
the thing that is true.
So for me I'm wondering, I mean actions just came up now, it's like, I wonder if we could
take what you just said, which was beautiful, see the pattern in it and say that's the same
pattern practically at this larger scale, because it has deep feeling in that pattern.
I have no idea what I'm saying right now, but like, instead of like over here I'm like
this and over here I'm like that, does this pattern somehow, I don't know.
No, no, I like it because there's a question of, is the thing that I'm describing at the
macro scale kind of dry and sterile, because in my relationship it's not dry and sterile,
it's very...
Yeah, I wouldn't say dry and sterile, I would say it's hyper-informed, so I'm not trying
to be pejorative, it's hyper-informed, that's important, that's important.
We need that, and I'm wondering where like the dance is between, like because in you
it's coherent, we know it's coherent because it's coherent in Daniel Schmottenberger,
there's the evidence, you see what I'm saying?
I think in terms of the significantly informed, like one way that I, I'll tell you an epistemic
tool that I use to calculate confidence margins where it really matters.
And this is like a set of formal systems from information theory.
So I look at the situation and try to say how many orders of magnitude of interactions
in the network diagram are occurring.
If it's an ecosystem maybe, you know, we have some basis of being able to say at what level
of action, this is always hard because the question is where is the boundary, because
I could say it's the whole fucking universe for everything, which is ultimately true.
But I have to say at which nexus causation is being very significantly informed, I'm
looking at what, 10 to the 12 orders of magnitude of complexity in the situation or whatever.
Then I want to look at the various hypotheses, narrative as a set of hypotheses, I want to
look at the various hypotheses and be able to say what data do I have that supports it
and what do I have that either supports a mutually exclusive hypothesis or directly
refutes it.
And I want to take that down.
I want to use information compression to say what is the least number of bits in which
I can represent that.
So then I get to see the total unique pieces of the unique bits of information supporting
the hypothesis the unique bits of information refuting it but also the total number of bits
of information I have relative to the complexity of the scenario.
So even if I have 10x more supporting than refuting but the total amount of info I have
is tiny relative to the complexity, my confidence will be low.
So this sounds like a very logical process, which isn't necessarily what it feels like
when I'm talking with my wife.
But that's because the total amount of complexity in the situation with my wife is just not
climate change.
I actually want to be hyper informed there, it's just easier.
I want to understand what is she thinking, why is she feeling that way, what brought
it about, what needs feel unmet for her, what would actually feel meaningful.
And so I'm seeking to be hyper informed there and it's not hyper informed, I'm seeking
to be adequately informed that I'm in touch with reality.
And then once I'm like, oh, I get it, I get where she's coming from and I get why she
feels the way she is and why she's expressing that, then I feel like I can start to navigate
but I can't navigate when I don't have the map at all yet.
Yeah, so it's just so we're on the same page, hyper informed is not a pejorative, I think
that's like, well, it could be, but for you, you're like hyper informed, you put that book
aside and then you act in a feeling sense.
So I'm going to say something really crazy, like I don't even, I don't even like what
I'm going to say.
Okay, so what if we take that kind of action logics with your wife and put it to like ecology
in the earth and have the ace in the hole, a hyper informed reality, which I actually
think you do.
Like, there's a kind of loving of the earth and the life force, that's more like the action
logics you have with your wife, and then you have this hyper informed, what if we could
communicate that?
I think, I think that's the point, right?
Yeah.
So I see that all in you.
Well, I mean, in all of us, when we were talking about binding wisdom, virtue and power, we
can, that's almost like three chakras, depending upon how you want to define it, right?
And you could take the chakra system, or any ancient system that was trying to explore
this as like, if I think about the piece of Hindu artwork, if I think about the Hindu
chakra system as each of them representing a different type of intelligence.
The growth of the person was to develop all of them and all of them in relationship with
each other.
So the whole being could be in a full relationship with the whole of reality.
And so there's a different kind of intelligence, like the, and whether they actually have any
relationship to parts of the body because of endocrine glands or nerves doesn't matter to
at least have it be a metaphorical system.
But the, the will or the power, there's a kind of intelligence to say, what way of me relating
to this most increases my capacity to serve what I care about.
Right.
There's a kind of intelligence that's asking that that is different than asking, what is, what am
I able to falsify or verify about objective reality, which is also different than the kind
of intelligence of asking, or here, how would I communicate this in a way that would land
for someone and in order to have it land for them, I have to actually be them.
Right.
There's a kind of empathy built in that have to be them to know how it land or try to, which is
different than what is most sacred to me.
And so I think what we're, what we're interested in is how do we develop whole people that have
all of their intelligences online and all of them working together, analysis and synthesis,
logic and intuition, and then that are in relationship with all of reality.
There aren't race issues and environmental issues, economic issues.
There are reality issues where all of those things are inextricably interconnected and
interconnected to the being of all the other people.
And when we have an increasingly whole people and in an increasingly
integrist relationship for the wholeness of reality, we start getting much better processes.
I think that's related to what you're saying.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Bonnie.
That was very fun.
Thank you, Benita, as always.
Um, David, you had a question that got a lots of plus ones if you can unmute yourself and ask it.
Hi, Peter.
Hi, Daniel.
Um, I wanted to give this question kind of a little bit broad and vague, uh, and that is just
around, so Daniel, you had an experience being psychological, uh, guide and support.
And you saw these people presenting their view of their small world and the big world.
Uh, and that sounded like that informed your own growing awareness and investigations at
the time.
And I'm curious if the neurodivergence that you would have seen in your patients or just
in friends, um, informed you in any way.
And if you could speak to that.
The neurodivergence in particular, as opposed to, uh, yeah, yeah.
So, so in, in the sense that I imagine someone can come across stoicism at an early age and
develop with that framework in mind, and then someone might be further along the spectrum.
And that might also influence their, their information uptake or whatever you want to call it.
So are you asking how much people were able to grow and change and develop based on
uh, what types of previous experience?
Yes, to that, but also more to the point of in the case of, say, autism or something like
that, where we have this, this awareness of a spectrum.
Um, how much did you see that impact their awareness of this reality that you personally
also see, uh, and then also their ability to latch onto different information as well.
Yeah, clearly not everyone is equally capable of every kind of process.
And there is development that everyone can do and everyone is not even equally capable
of every type of development, right?
Like Down syndrome is a real thing that affects, uh, capability in, in certain ways.
Autism is kind of interesting because autism is not the, the spectrum that we have now
where such a high percentage of people are considered somewhere on the spectrum as a
relatively new evolutionary phenomena.
I don't think it's evolutionary.
I think it's, um, cultural and environmental.
Um, and in some ways it just represents lack of development, like not having, uh, like
we can look at all the physiologic dynamics, right?
We can look at ubiquitous sugar and, um, psych meds starting early and things that
damage the microbiome and glyphosate and ubiquitous mold toxins and whatever that are
the results of post industrialized life and say, uh, there's actual physiologic elements
that have happened, but there's no one for one thing.
It is basically a much more complex set of dysregulations of homeodynamics that express
in a dysregulated nervous system.
That's true.
There's also, um, let's say it's people growing up as digital natives with a lot of
screen time where they're getting much faster, dopaminergic hits from activities that are
decoupled from the movement of their body and decoupled from accomplishing things in
an evolutionary sense that starts to actually mess up the nature of the dominance and process
of neurotransmission.
There's a lot of things that go in.
There's also like that, like that's actually an example of things that would develop certain
capacities just being underdeveloped because we're not actually having a, uh, a culture
or an upbringing that develops some of those things.
Um, so for instance, if I have, like this is a common understanding, but if I have toys
that do fucking everything and I'm not making a stick into certain toys and a rock into
certain toys, there's certain kinds of creativity that don't develop because I don't
actually have, I have so much external other market creativity that it's just creating
dopaminergic response.
I don't have to do curiosity, creativity and exploration to find my own.
So there's a lot of places where the world structure is simply not developing shit and
people that it needs to.
Um, I also think that there's, you know, we can think about development from an
individual perspective and also from a group selection perspective.
And the idea that everyone is going to evolve to the highest stages of development on all
lines of development is just silly.
This is not going to happen.
And in the same way that not everyone is going to be come masterful at every language and
every scientific discipline and every musical instrument.
And so, um, there's also a question around like, what is the minimum competence of certain
kinds of capacities that are needed to engage as a citizen, where then I can be part of a
collective intelligence that orients that the people who are best at different things
are able to differentially contribute to those things.
I don't know if that addressed the question because the question, as you said, was kind
of broad, I'm happy to take another step at it if you want.
I think that did address the question.
I mistakenly forgot to include, um, how something like stoicism might impact, um, the
path that these people might take and, and your own thoughts around that.
And, and maybe if you could speak to your own experiences in, I can't remember if it
was counseling or more clinical psychology.
The people that are obviously clearly functional and just define themselves as mildly on the
spectrum or mildly ASP, which is an, it's basically an increasingly large identifier
for things that really should not be considered a disease diagnosis.
It's just people who kind of suck at certain things or who never learned something or who
just are introverted or whatever.
But the, the patterns that we think of as kind of mildly ASP, one way you could think
of them is, um, low, low capacity for nuance, uh, we can talk about it as low empathy and
interpersonal recognition, but a major part of it is for nuance.
So they usually end up becoming very good at things that are black and white.
So, um, we can talk about it as low empathy and interpersonal recognition, but a major
lack of black and white, like whether it's computer programming or mechanical engineering
or things like that.
And so stoicism implemented without nuance, uh, can, can be pretty clunky and messed up
just like any, like any, because the, the eternal Dow cannot be spoken, the version
that I speak will be wrong.
And so, uh, I can write down here, here are the virtues and here's the code of behavior.
And then someone else who doesn't really get the spirit of it, they're getting the letter
of the law without the spirit of it, will implement it in a fundamentalist, righteous
kind of way with, without being able to understand and Ecclesiastes when it said there's a time
to kill and a time to heal and to show and to reap and for every purpose under heaven.
Well, how do I know which time it is for which of the things?
Well, there is no absolute algorithm for that.
That's being able to use all of those types of intelligence with full presence and discernment
to a set of values that can't be formally explicated.
There's a Girdel's theorem here where what is meaningful is beyond formal explication.
But there, if I have a formal explication, it'll work lots of times, but then there'll
be a place it was, I'm like, no, that's actually wrong.
What is it in me that can recognize when the code is wrong?
That's the thing we want to be developing in people, which is their actual capacity
for discernment.
And where people don't have that as much, we want to be developing it where there's
upper bounds for physiologic reasons.
Then we would want a good society that puts them in roles that get to or supports them
to be in roles that get to utilize the capacities they do have well without being damaged by
the ones that they don't.
Thank you, Daniel.
That fit with my thoughts around that as well.
Thanks.
All right.
Hannah, you had a follow-up question.
I will paste it again in the chat box.
Yeah.
So I wanted to look at this topic from another angle.
I am an anxious person and I have panic attacks.
So hearing a lot of language that I think has developed from looking at things like
triggered and limbic states and so on makes me wonder, will it be more challenging for
me to learn these sorts of skills or maybe will my familiarity with things like panic
attacks actually be helpful here and what is going to be a good way for people like
me to approach this?
Beautiful question.
I used to have panic attacks.
Had a period where that was quite debilitating and didn't sleep for quite a long time.
So I understand.
Early I had a completely debilitating fear of public speaking where I just couldn't.
I would pass out if I tried.
I only found one thing that actually really worked for panic attacks.
And by worked I mean actually changed the underlying reality fundamentally as opposed
to managed it.
I didn't find that CBT did or DBT or hitting pillows or emotional release therapy or Gestalt
or hypnotherapy like those were all cool or breathwork or meditation.
The only thing that I found worked was there are different ways of doing it but there are
ways that go into the panic attack as opposed to away from it.
And so I'll explain the mechanism here briefly.
A panic attack is different than just generalized anxiety.
It's generalized anxiety that turns into a feedback loop.
And so let's say that I'm anxious about some shit.
I'm anxious like that fear is a natural part of life and we'll feel some adrenaline happen.
And we know that that's because in evolutionary environments the fear usually needed a physiologic
response.
So some adrenaline would come so I could run or fight or something.
Now most of the things I'm afraid of don't actually need adrenaline because I'm not going
to have a physical response to if the teacher likes my report or if the person on the date
wants to respond or not.
And as a result I don't use up that adrenaline.
There isn't a kind of adaptation to just feel shitty.
And so maybe I'm in a situation where I have a relationship that's going bad and I'm not
sure if it's going to work or not and I'm not sure if they're being honest to me and
then finances are also tight and then something else and I start to have more base anxiety
so my base anxiety gets high enough.
And then maybe at a certain point something happens and my base anxiety is high enough
that the sensation of it inside of me, the fluttering in my stomach or the like hotness
in my ears or in my face all of a sudden is a sensation that I'm unfamiliar with like
it's at a higher level and all of a sudden I get scared of that sensation because I'm
like what's happening?
Am I dying?
What's like am I going crazy?
What the fuck's happening?
Now when I get afraid of my own experience of fear now I'm in a feedback loop because
I'm not afraid of reality.
I'm afraid of my own experience of fear so my body produces adrenaline to the symptoms
of adrenaline.
And that tight feedback loop is a motherfucker because sometimes it'll just produce adrenaline
to the symptoms of adrenaline so then the symptoms get worse so then you get more scared
and it does that until you just run out of adrenaline and eventually pass out or you
go get a benzo or an alcohol or something.
If I try to do breath work to comment, which of course to some degree I can because I can
take breaths that stimulate my parasympathetic nervous system and are inverse to a sympathetic
drive and if I try to distract myself with bunny videos or whatever I would do to try
to create a different response I'm still affirming that I'm scared of that sensation
and that I don't want it to happen and that if it comes I'll be scared of it so my sympathetic
adrenal complex is still oriented to produce adrenaline to my symptoms of adrenaline.
So I'm always scared of that thing happening so there are processes where you get facilitated
to go into the panic attack fully and so you start to think about things you're anxious
of you start to feel the symptoms and then you start to say it's important to know that
it can't kill you even if you feel like you can't breathe that worse you pass out the
panic attack is gone and your conscious mind isn't there you start breathing again so you
know this is just sensations and as uncomfortable as they are they can't actually hurt me they're
just bucked up feeling the sensations and you're like ultimately I want to understand myself
I want to understand what's arising enough that I can actually be with myself and and
have more wholeness so then you start to go into a process where you say all right and
typically I would say this should be facilitated and I can recommend processes to do that so you
go into a process where the you're being facilitated to notice the symptoms the the
rapid heart the flushing face and rather than want them to go away welcome them say I welcome
all of this I want to feel it in fact I want to feel the fullness of it I want to understand
all of it and be with all of it so not only do I want to feel it I want it to get as intense as
it can so you actually welcome it to let the heart racing get more intense the difficulty
breathing getting more intense and you can't say it while actually really wishing it goes away
you have to really lean in as an explorer as a curious explorer to be like what is this
when that happens there is a clear signal to your adrenals that you're not afraid of the thing
you're leaning into and it stops producing adrenaline in response to the symptoms of
adrenaline you're there is a kind of hpa access neurological reset psychological reset as well
and then once you've done that several times you start to be like actually I'm not afraid of
this thing I can lean into it I'm not gonna die I'm not gonna go crazy I can and and the
feelings are actually whatever right they're not that terrible and then the key becomes well
you'll be afraid for it to come on at certain times like I okay I don't want it to come on when
I'm having to give my talk or with my work or whatever it is so then you actually have to
welcome that it can come anytime because otherwise the time that it isn't welcome is when you'll
still be in that response and be like okay if it comes at that time I'll be with it I'll go into
it I'll be with it because what the fuck else am I gonna do like I don't really have much any other
good choices and this is the process of leaning in and actually befriending the fear so fear stops
being a self-reinforcing loop anyone who goes through that and actually goes through it will have
both a level of compassion and humility plus a level of strength that is not really available
if people haven't gone through it any follow-up question Hannah uh many follow-up thoughts uh
that I will process slowly over time uh thank you Daniel that was really useful
anikaway.com is a site that has some good information on a process like this
um and that they may even have a list of uh practitioners
and this is a big part of stoicism of wanting to really be with reality and lean into it so
contemplating death leaning into anxiety um but it's not to just feel shitty all the time it's
that you actually stop feeling shitty when you stop running away from parts of yourself
one good way to talk about healing is increasing wholeness and the dis any the dysfunctional ways
that some people interpret stoicism are things that make them actually fragment less whole they're
ashamed of a part of themselves without knowing why that part's arising no I shouldn't feel angry
I shouldn't feel jealous repress that and so as a result they're actually stuffing shit into the
shadows and they're becoming more fragmented and less whole a healthy relationship with
a healthy relationship stoically is to say I want to understand why that's arising what it is so
that I can incorporate it into a wholeness of self
all right um we're approaching the allotted 75 minutes um do you have time for one more
question Daniel or yeah cool um so who was that one they got a lot of plus ones Alex uh you had
a really good question uh if you can unmute yourself and ask it to Daniel uh yeah hey everyone um
so the question is Daniel I've heard you speak about how those with the greatest steps of care
often are not good at or not interested in impacting the world at scale or sort of doing
what's needed to accumulate power could you paint a vision for how a wise empathic person
might orient to accumulating power in the world
when uh I'll share how this first occurred to me was when I was a kid
I was engaged in part of the homeschooling thing was I kind of got to do the things I was
interested in I was interested in all types of activism so I was doing animal rights stuff with
PETA and environmental stuff with Greenpeace and human rights stuff with Amnesty International
because it seemed like a meaningful life was in service to all other life was pretty straightforward
as I was trying to figure the philosophy out that part seemed clear and so all of the different
types of suffering bothered me and injustices and whatever but I was also studying the sciences
because I wanted to understand reality better and so I would have conversations with scientists who
would work at military industrial complex type places and I would get a sense of the types of
technology and sophistication they were working with but then advancing what types of agendas
and then be with the protesters who were willing to undergo great harm to themselves to stand up
for what they cared about whether they were handcuffing themselves to an old redwood to not
have it cut down or whatever but I got to see that like picket signs and handcuffs were the
extent of the strategic capacity that they had compared to NSA being the largest employer
of mathematicians and supercomputing technology and whatever and I was like 10 or something when
I'm like this is the head-heart divide at the level of humanity and we go extinct as long as
those who care the most have shitty tools for actuation and those who have the best tools for
actuation are doing it for narrow and divisive ends and then a little bit later I started to
think of it as at least three things that it was kind of mind-heart will and that any two of them
didn't really matter that there was the development of will and I feel like I can do something and
I'm willing to work hard to do it and values or care or compassion together that led to
an activist who really cared about stuff and was totally willing to work effectively
but didn't have good strategy and would just basically fail at scale every time
then there were people who had development of mind and heart more but with less will
where they felt like they understood the problems they really cared but they were kind of like
overwhelmed crippled academics or at best could be advisors to powerful people that would never
actually take their advice and then there was kind of will and mind together but without
development of compassion and virtue and those were the very effective sociopathically oriented
people that ran the world and it was clear to me that you had to have at least all three of
those well-developed plus the interpersonal capacity to find other people that had those
developed and coordinate together to really be able to change the trajectory of the world
and so this comes down to this whole thing of not being willing to suck at being in service to
what I care about if I really if I see the amazon burning or north northern california
burning and I see the redwoods burning and that really bothers me and I am willing to
continue to be useless towards it then I have to be like does it really bother me do I really
care what is the fragmentation inside of myself what does my care mean if it doesn't predispose my
the behavior of my life what is my life in service to it's not what I care about
oh distraction or money or whatever else I don't actually even care about what I care about I'm
just full of shit okay that's the internal fragmentation what does it mean to care about
what I care about it means that my dollars and minutes will express what I care about
then I'm acting on it but I keep failing well then I need to look at my strategy and say why
do I keep failing and unfortunately a lot of times people will work hard fail and just assess
that goliath is too big or there aren't enough people helping or whatever and are happy to come
up with excuses why they aren't effective rather than really say what would it take to be effective
because neither the ccp nor the cia nor the kremlin just give up and say oh I guess we're
not effective the other guys are bigger they like keep figuring out how to be more effective
towards their ends and so and they can move trillions of dollars in standing armies in
the mindsets of people and technology as a whole if we want a better world we have to be able to
affect the world at that level aligned with a different value system so what I would say is we
aren't in like game b isn't a thing really yet it's at most kind of an idea we live in a world
that is dominated by power and the transition from this world to a different kind of world system
that might have a very different culture and governance is only going to happen if some people
who are authentically oriented to a different world system learn how to effectively move this one
and move in this one effectively
Thank you and I realize we're past time so you could either not answer this or be brief with it
but I think a follow-on question that occurs to me is I read your piece about the sort of
the polymath bodhisattva world creator and sort of archetypes that represent
mind-heart will and I feel like I have a sense of sort of characters or developmental pathways
that correspond with becoming a polymath becoming a bodhisattva but I think what's less clear and
what's kind of relevant to this question is this notion of the archetype of a world creator
what what does that mean and what kinds of development developmental pathways or traditions
are relevant to that so look at people who were not born into great wealth or power and
became very powerful and study their biographies specifically the biographies of their psychology
and the steps they took and what'll be interesting is you'll be studying Genghis Khan and Alexander
the Great and Napoleon and Carnegie and Elon Musk and whomever and you'll be like how the
fuck would I apply some of those actually kind of dreadful game theoretic tactics to something better
but that's just a kind of a very superficial assessment as you go deeper you're like
how did they empower themselves not coming from it what were the things that did that
and what would it look like to be able to do that towards a different set of goals
there's a whole big conversation here but yeah look look at people who increased their agency
radically and then look at the commonalities of what is involved in increasing agency
thank you cool so we're gonna end it here that was a really awesome session
someone wrote in the chat that the session really feels like the stoa and I totally agree
so yeah thank you Daniel for coming out today talk about metamodern stoicism
any kind of thoughts you'd like to share before I do some announcements
I just love that there's a space where these conversations are happening
and I'm glad to have got to be here and I know we have another one coming up soon
yeah yeah so uh we'll start plugging the the upcoming events so the one next Monday at the
same time 7 30 p.m eastern time is Daniel's coming back to do a session on dharma inquiry
so he had these like freaking awesome questions and I was like what is this and then all these
people that I know are doing the questions like you know by themselves I'm like you know what maybe
Danny would like to do a session so would you like to maybe speak on that a little bit to get
people have a sense of it I wrote the questions because they're questions that come up when I'm
talking to people all the time where people have a desire to have to figure out what their path is
what a more meaningful life for them is and so there is no again algorithm for it but these are
questions that help me kind of get a sense of that for people um and so anyone can just look
at that and do it on their own but what we're going to talk about is unpacking like when I look at
those questions what why those questions what is the generator function that leads to the questions
to be able to have a sense of other questions and like what am I looking for and interpreting to
get a sense of the uniqueness of someone's path very cool so people are asking where they can
find these questions if you go to the website thestowa.ca and you go RSVP to that event the questions
are linked in that and I think you know there might be sessions that come from these these
questions because they're so rich and it takes some time to get through them okay so tomorrow we have
some cool events uh Jeremy Johnson is coming in tomorrow uh to do a session critiquing let me
do it for you transcending the cancel culture critique an integral left response so I released
this this this piece on the cancel god and uh some integral leftists were critiquing it so I'm
inviting and Jeremy Johnson in for a good faith critique on that that's 12 p.m eastern time and
then Travis Macy an ultra marathon endurance athlete he's coming in to talk about the ultra
mindset think of like David Goggins but like a more indie version so that's going to be pretty cool
that's at 6 30 p.m eastern time um you know we have some facilitators here uh Benita Benita's back
do you want to plug your the the hollow uh sense making a residence series that you have coming up
in October maybe she didn't hear okay let me be putting her spot um Benita can you can you hear
I was asking you to uh plug the your hollow sense making sense maker in residence okay
sorry I was I was out and I just came back um so the hollow the hollow is the word hollow
like the legend of sleepy hollow is like a riverine place where people gathered in secret
to talk about changing the world and for me it's also about hollow in the sense that uh the
zhejiang or the buddhist notion of emptiness like we're hollow we're participatory in hollow
and also hollow we uh and the the other worlds we can we can access so yeah I don't know I really
like that notion of hollow um and uh yeah this sense of this movie from campfire like which is kind
of jovial to the hollow which is secretive and dark and riverine uh that's kind of like what we
want to we want to launch and you're talking to Nora Bateson and area back to on this Thursday
yeah we're going to talk about um I think the energy there is like can people stop like stop
thinking in terms of linear cause and effect like and then how does that
percolate into personal life like like no if than thinking and how how can that inform
uh emergence and yeah so uh this should be really exciting yeah yeah it's going to be
a lot of energy a lot of energetics there and so that the hollow series uh Benita is a sense maker
in residence at the stoa for October we have uh John Robb uh Dave Snowden Zach Stein Peter Wang
Daniel Gertz is coming in as well to be a sense maker for residents for the months of
September October those are four sessions throughout a month so you can go on the website
rsb there uh Rachel Haywire maybe we'll let you plug the last event you got the philosopher queens
maybe you and Raven can both plug it if you guys are here
Rachel Haywire
Raven Connolly yeah yeah hi okay ready you did you go first
you Rachel you want to go for it talk about philosopher queens
yeah okay so philosopher queens are the dark powerful feminine force that is resurfacing
as a new current I felt a little bit of that energy just from what Benita was saying when she
was talking about the depth and the hollow and the expansion I definitely felt a little bit of that
energy there so Raven and I are hosting a series here at the stoa and which we engage with one
another and the people that come to the panel and we talk about this current we talk about
other women other philosopher queens of history and of the present and we bring in people to
talk with them so we're unifying the the dark goddesses
cool and Raven you want to plug your sarcastic speed dating real brief
so uh yeah so it's a kind of speed dating happens every Friday at the stoa the tradition that
peter and I started way early back in the beginning of the pandemic where people can come
from all aspects of the kind of stoa ecosystem and talk in breakout rooms that go for about 15
minutes and it's all spurred by a collective intelligence of question generation that we do
as a group so that's um yeah every Friday come join if you want to have some personal conversation
with all the stoa faces thank you very very cool thank you um so if you want to continue this
conversation we we finally have a discord you can go there that's the invite the post sense
making session that's the channel to do it and if you'd like to support what the stoa is doing
we've done about over 300 events uh since the the pandemic to address
a mental health crisis the the metacrisis the mini crisis so you can do that on the
patreon page right there um that being said we're going to stop recording uh we'll have a
moment of bio break and then our boy Tyson Wagner is going to get some freestyling on so if
you're interested in that you can just stay on this link uh so thanks everyone and thank you uh Daniel
