Okay, all right, thank you for inviting me.
And it's my first time to come to UCLA.
I said, well, there is not very nice.
So today I'm going to talk about, well,
I was told that like a half,
more or less half of the people here
work on scattering absceses
and more or less half of the people
who work here work on not knowing what was symmetry.
So I thought it's a good topic to discuss today.
So today I'm going to talk about my upcoming work
with Christian for Patty,
with a postdoc at Oxford
and at Lucille Kordovic with a postdoc at CERN
about some interplay between
no incredible symmetries, anomalies and scattering absceses.
So let's start.
So as we all know, symmetries and anomalies
are basically two important fundamental concepts
in quantum field series.
And for example, you can consider, well,
for example, like both of them are very useful
in most training, the dynamics of your STP.
For instance, well, we know that like, for example,
if you want to build some kind of effective use theory,
we first try to understand what is the underlying symmetry
and then write down all possible terms in effective use theory
which preserve the symmetry of this area
we want to analyze.
So that gives you kind of organizing principle
of like what kind of terms can appear in the Lagrangian.
And also like there is a famous story
about anomaly matching.
So if you know anomaly in the UC,
then often times you can say something non-trivial
about like that IR dynamics of the series.
And furthermore, those symmetries anomalies
are not just abstract theoretical concept,
but it's also relevant for collider experiment.
And well, as we all know,
that the symmetry gives you the organizing principle.
For particles and resonances,
for resonances that you observe in the particle experiment
and the collider experiment.
And there is also a famous example
of like a pi zero to company K which was beautifully explained
by the what's called ABJ anomaly.
So these are kind of like a very basic example
in which symmetries anomalies are relevant also
for analyzing and understanding the particle collider experiment.
And more recently, these notions of like a symmetry
and anomalies are generalized in various ways.
So also the recent generalization.
And for the case of symmetry,
I guess like many of you heard about it,
there is a now critical tire from symmetry.
And furthermore, and this is a topic of my talk
which there is also a new generalization
or like a different generalization of the symmetry
which is often called non-periposimetry.
I'm going to explain what that is just to remind you later.
And also for the anomaly, the original ABJ anomaly
or other anomalies that people knew in the past
are kind of like something that you can even see
in the perturbation series and over one loop diagram,
but there are more non-prodivative anomalies
that people often discuss in nowadays.
Or maybe like it's often called like a global anomaly
that you cannot easily see just doing the perturbation series
and or more precisely like a global food anomaly.
So let me already just give you like a one explanation
of what I mean by the food anomaly.
So the food anomaly is generally a concept
which basically says that symmetry of some QFT cannot be gaged.
So symmetry of the QFT is not broken.
So in the case of like ABJ anomaly, the symmetry is broken,
but in the case of in the context of food anomaly,
symmetry is not broken, but cannot be gaged.
And in particular, today I'm gonna focus
on the global food anomaly,
so which whose presence cannot be seen easily
in perturbation series.
I'm gonna explain a little bit more about it
in the case of Z2 anomaly later.
Okay, so now the big question that I want to pose
for like addressing in this talk is a question.
What are implications
on these new concepts of symmetry anomalies
on SMR places, which is more or less directly related
to what we also observe in the flight of experiment.
Okay, so this is basically the big question
that I want to understand.
Great, so but before explaining the details
of what we are doing and what we did,
let me just say right away that the understanding
that consequence of these new refined concepts
of symmetries anomalies doesn't seem so easy,
especially for the case of global food anomaly.
So let me just briefly give you an idea
why it seems not so easy.
So I believe this is a harder.
And the reason is, so it's related to the fact that
usual ABGN, for example, let's take the anomaly
as an example, the usual ABGN anomaly,
we know that there is one particular diagram
and then you can even see it in the one of the computation.
So if you imagine some, so let's,
some, I'm giving some scattering here,
I'm giving some scattering here,
I'm giving some scattering here,
I'm giving some scattering here,
I'm giving some scattering as which is using
perturbation theory or like considering
some scattering experiments.
Then if there is this like a triangle diagram
which is responsible for the ABGN anomaly
shows up in the, in this process,
then you immediately see the consequence of ABGN anomaly.
However, the food anomaly, especially the global
food anomaly is actually harder to see
from this point of view.
So what is the typical way of kind of diagnosing
the global food anomaly?
So the typical way of diagnosing the global food anomaly
is you first couple to the,
so you start with some theory with symmetry
and you couple to G, H, U,
so this is not a dynamical gauge field
but it's a background gauge field.
So once you have the current and current or symmetry
you can couple the theory with symmetry G
to the background G gauge field.
And then, and then you ask whether the partition function
is invariant or like a behaves nice way
or expected way as you do the gauge transformations.
And in particular, in the case of global anomaly,
and this anomaly can only be detected
by doing the large gauge transformation.
Obvious background gauge field.
And this obviously tells us that like the property
that we are detecting here by global anomaly
is not a local property.
Because in order to say whether the gauge transformation
is global or local, sorry,
in order to make sure that the gauge transformation
is like a large gauge transformation,
you really need to look at the whole entire configuration
of the gauge field.
You cannot just say that it's a large gauge transformation
just by looking at some local value of the gauge field.
Okay, so this already tells you that like a something
is harder if you want to generalize this concept
of anomaly and try to explore the implication
of the anomaly in the context of scattering amplitude.
But fortunately, we have one diagnosis of anomaly
or no importable symmetry in some simple examples.
And let me just give you the punchline of the talk.
So the punchline of the talk is the following.
So if you have some theory with no importable symmetry
or anomaly, global anomalies,
then that these manifest themselves as the modification
of the expectation of cropping symmetry.
And I should also say that the example
that we analyzed is a kind of very specific example.
So it's the one plus one D integrable RG flow.
So that's the context in which we discuss the connection
between these concepts and the cropping symmetry.
So in the hindsight, it kind of makes sense
that only the cropping symmetry can detect,
for example, the global anomaly,
because in some sense the cropping symmetry takes,
like, well, it's a kind of like very large operation
that you're doing in the scattering averages.
You take it in going particle
and then move it to the outgoing particle
and then take outgoing particle
to the moving to the ongoing particle.
So from what I just said here,
it kind of makes sense that cropping symmetry
can detect the global anomaly,
but of course those are just words
and I'm going to explain how the cropping symmetry
can detect those anomalies.
And so let me also add some clarification.
So as I said, the example that I'm going to talk about
is mainly about some specific one plus one D integrable
renormalization group flow, which flows to the gap phase.
But I should add a clarification
that integrability is not crucial
for this connection between knowing about a symmetry
and global anomaly and modification.
Yes.
You're claiming it's completely general, but...
Well, yeah.
So...
Okay.
I wouldn't say it's like it holds in higher D
in the same form, but in one plus one D
integrability is not crucial and it's rather general.
And so let me also address the point about higher dimension.
So what I'm going to describe today is most likely
and generalizable
to two plus one D as well.
And indeed, there have been already some words
which pointed out some violation of the cropping symmetry
in trans-slimo matter theory,
although trans-slimos.
Which was done by meanwhile learning collaborators.
So that discusses some specific example of trans-slimo,
like a matter coupled to trans-slimo theory,
and then they observed that there is a violation
of the cropping symmetry.
So the language that I'm going to use is slightly different
from the kind of like an argument I gave.
But in particular, like they don't really talk
about the connection with anomalies,
but we believe that something like what I'm going to talk
about can probably be generalized,
but at least two plus one D.
So three plus one D might be also possible,
but yeah, at this moment, I would stay agnostic.
And at least I don't see immediate pass,
but maybe if you think harder there,
there's a way to generalize it.
And, but one thing I should also mention is that
as hopefully will become clear during my talk,
this modification of the cropping symmetry
and the mechanism that gives rise to this modification,
you can actually think of it as some kind of toy model
for IR effects that's present or like IR divergence
or IR effect that's present in gauge theory and gravity.
So this exists, of course, in three plus one D as well.
And so let me just say a few words already now.
So the IR effects that I'm talking about here
is basically like I've seen like soft photons
or soft gravitons.
So if you scan our hard particles,
then like it also produces some bunch of hard particles.
And then on top of that, like those hard particles
are dressed by soft photons or soft gravitons.
And similarly, in this example,
what happens is that like the particles are dressed
by some kind of like a long range degrees of freedom,
which are actually topological quantum fields here.
And the existence of those topological degrees of freedom
is actually what gives rise to the violation
or modification of the cropping symmetry.
So some of the lessons that we learned from here,
maybe I'll again draw some lessons
through more realistic situation,
which we have like a soft photons and soft gravitons
in three plus one D.
Okay, so having said that,
so let's just write down the plan of the talk.
So the plan of the talk now is to first explain the,
well, first to give you the kind of
where you all of you
flash forwards on non-invitable symmetry and anomalies.
Just to make sure that everyone is on the same page.
And then I'm gonna discuss S-matrix
from RG clouds from three critical minimum model.
So this is the next simplest,
that's like a minimum model.
So the simplest is of course that using models.
And this is the next in this series of minimum models
and which is three critical using model
to simply try this seven over 10.
And I'm gonna explain how the crossing is modified.
And then I'm going to explain
like give a physical explanation
why the crossing symmetry is modified in those examples.
And then I finally conclude.
Okay, so those are.
So let me first give you start with the overview
of the non-invitable symmetries anomaly.
Okay, let's start with that bullet point one.
So let me first review what I'm gonna do.
So let me start with the overview of the non-invitable symmetry.
So let me start with the overview of the non-invitable symmetry.
So let me first review what the non-invitable symmetry was.
But before doing that, let me just write the one sentence
about what the standard symmetries in QFT was.
So in quantum field series,
the symmetry, the usual symmetry is implemented
by basically the four dimension one topological operator.
So this is basically what I'm drawing here
is like a exponential that in the really like the usual
you want a symmetric point of view,
like it's basically exponential of the charge operator
where in charge itself is the integral
of the current on a four dimension one surface.
And this called dimension one topological operator G
which is a group, which is an element of the group.
And so if you have like a two of such
quantum one topological operator
and then you bring them on top of each other,
then that basically kind of those operators fuse
according to the group multiplication flow.
So if you have two of such put a mention one topological operator
and bring it on top of each other,
you get some another one,
which is labeled by another group element.
And importantly, that also is inside this group G.
Okay.
And in particular, if you have,
in particular, this also implies that there is always
a group element, which is the inverse
of the topological operator,
which is the inverse of the some topological operator.
Okay.
And now, so then only variable symmetry
is a generalization of this concept.
And instead of having like a G one times G two
multiplying into G three,
what we have is something like this.
You have G one and G two,
which are elements of this,
what people call like categories.
And then what you get is not just one element
in the category you actually have oftentimes
like a sum of the element.
So I'm actually specifying already specifying to one
plus one D.
So then this is a C number in the case of one plus one D.
The sum of the element.
So this is a kind of like a generalization
of the usual symmetry.
And most, and furthermore, most importantly,
the inverse may not exist.
So this is a concept called non-invitable symmetry.
And so the examples of those symmetries
are already like a known for long time
in one plus one D one of this area,
especially in the context of one plus one two DCFT.
And furthermore, as you probably know,
as you know, like a many examples
are being found in higher dimensions as well.
Okay.
And so let me just now discuss a simplest example
of this symmetry, which you can see in the...
2D easing CFD.
Okay.
So what we know about 2D easing model.
So we know that 2D easing model,
as you vary the temperature,
they're the critical temperature
and above the critical temperature,
the system is in the disorder phase.
And below the critical temperature,
the system is in the order phase.
Okay.
So this is just this kind of thing
that you learn in statistical mechanic course.
And you probably also learned
that there is a kind of transformation,
which called Kramas-1A transformation,
which basically maps the high temperature phase
to the low temperature phase.
Or like this is often called Kramas-1A duality.
And in particular, this duality becomes a symmetry.
So like if the temperature is not at DC,
it's generally a duality between different theories.
But it becomes a symmetry of the theory
when T is precisely at DC because it maps to itself.
So because of that,
you can think of it as the one of the symmetry.
However, there is something weird going on
in this Kramas-1A duality,
and which you can already see in this phase diagram.
So we know that the high temperature phase
and low temperature phase
are both given by some massive quantum,
like if the continuum description
is given by some massive quantum fuse theory,
but there is one crucial difference.
In the disorder phase, you have only one back row,
whereas in order phase,
because the symmetry is spontaneously broken,
you have two back row.
And then actually what Kramas-1A duality does
is to map a theory with one back row,
to a theory with two back row.
And this already suggests that this transformation
has some kind of kernels,
because like a two is not the one and one is not the two.
And there is remnant of this in,
or also in critical points,
which is described by like a 2D-easing CFD.
And that is precisely the reason
why it is called non-embodable.
So like the action of the symmetry generator has some kernel.
So let me just first write down
the algebra of the symmetries,
a symmetry generator in this 2D-easing model.
So 2D-easing model,
famously have three different symmetry line operators.
And one is just identity operator that you do nothing.
And eta is the usual z-tis symmetry generator.
So eta, if you put it on top of each other,
then eta squared to one.
And the last one, n,
is precisely the parameters one-eat value defect
that I was talking about.
And then this obeys interesting algebra.
So if you square n, then what you get is one plus eta.
So this is an example of this algebra
that I already showed here.
And it also satisfies n eta equals eta n equals n.
So these basically uniquely specify
the algebraic structure of these symmetries.
And here already, you can see something weird is going on.
Suppose you take some z to odd state,
then an act on it, this right-hand side.
So obviously, like this right-hand side annihilates
the z to odd state.
So this also already tells you that this n
actually has kernel.
Because if you do it twice,
then you annihilates z to odd sector.
So this is basically the reason why n,
this no-invitable defect n is, sorry,
if a defect n or symmetry generator n is no-invitable.
Okay?
So,
so now,
now let's also talk about some RG flow.
So in using model,
as I said, you are sitting exactly at a critical point
is described by CFT,
but you can also put away from the critical point.
So you start on 2D using CFT.
And the perturbation is described by what people normally call
like the energy operator or temperature perturbation.
So you turn on,
like what people call gibstone.
And if you perturb it,
if perturbation model is plus sign,
then you basically land on the high temperature phase,
which consists of one vacua,
where if you perturb it by minus epsilon,
then you get this symmetry,
this like the order phase in which you have two vacuos.
And however,
as I said,
original 2D easing model using CFT has like a three symmetry lines.
However, this perturbation actually breaks and defect
the n symmetries and then along the flow,
you only have one and eta.
And that you can see by
seeing by checking the action of n on the epsilon perturbation.
And that is actually precisely n eta
is minus eta.
So which basically means that this ipson operator
is not invariant under the symmetry n.
So that's why if you perturb it by the ipson,
then you break the n symmetry.
If you're slow, okay.
Yeah, okay.
Sorry.
Right.
You mean this one, right?
Or yeah.
But the point is that this is minus,
it has minus, sorry.
Okay.
Right.
So now, so this is not a good example
of the RG flow with annoying variable symmetry,
as you can see because it like a basically breaks n symmetry
and what remains is basically just a usual symmetry.
And however, if you consider
the next minimal model,
which is called trick critical is a model,
then there is actually a flow
which preserve
this no invertible symmetry.
So, so trick critical is in CFT.
As I said, it's the next in the
in the minimal model.
And
and if you perturb,
there is like a famous perturbation,
which people often call pi one, three perturbation.
So pi one, three basically refers to this operator
that you perturb it.
And this is the kind of standard notation
people using that to DCF.
And it is known that if you perturb it with plus sign,
this trick critical is in model basically
close to the critical is in model is in CFT.
So in this side of the flow,
like it's a flow between two different CFT,
whereas you've a perturb it minus sign,
then it is known that it goes to the gap phase
with three vacuum.
And furthermore, the trick trick critical is in CFT
has like a many more symmetry lines,
but you can also check like what parts
of the symmetry line survive under this deformation.
And if you do the analysis,
then it says that it preserve precisely
these three combinations,
which are basically the symmetry of the is in CFT.
So this does make sense, especially for this flow,
because the IR is in CFT,
which does have these three line defects.
And here, because we are all only changing the signs.
So the symmetry preserved by this perturbation is the same.
And this gap flow also preserved these three line defects.
Okay, so this is the example that I'm going to focus on.
Also one of the symmetries that is
that is the vacuum.
So, yeah, that's a good question.
That's basically all the symmetries
are spontaneously broken.
So Eta, for example, maps this vacuum to this vacuum,
whereas like leaves this vacuum in barrier.
Whereas N is like you take this vacuum
and then map it to the middle.
And if you take this vacuum to the map it to the middle,
and if you add N on the middle vacuum,
then you get the linear combination of this left and right.
So that's the action of the symmetry.
And as you can see,
like basically most all the symmetries are spontaneously broken.
I mean, because I can't do this in my head,
what's the dimension of five, one, three?
For this here, I don't remember my heart right now,
but must be relevant of the formation, but yeah.
Is it one?
No, it's not one.
It's not, yeah, I don't think it's one.
Okay, so.
Yeah, okay, so because I already spent 30 minutes.
So let me now go directly to the point too,
about like I'm talking about S matrix of this flow.
So postponing the discussion of anomaly,
Z to anomaly two later.
But now, so this is the system that I want to study.
And then now let's discuss that.
What's known about this argue flow?
So one thing I already said is that this flow
reserves no invulnerable symmetries.
But on top of that, people also argued
or like there was a paper by the logical
and people also found that this flow
also preserves integrability.
More precisely, what people did is that like in the CFD point,
you can have like a many high spin conserved currents
because you have your algebra.
And then you asked like what parts
of the highest spin currents survive
under this deformation.
And then you can actually show that like
under this particular deformation,
infinitely many highest spin currents
are still conserved even after deformation.
And that basically guarantees the existence
of the integrable structure,
even in this like massive phase, okay?
And, all right.
And then, so as I said, it flows to the,
so that actually the flow that I focus on is this one,
which is to the gap space.
And as I said, in the extreme IR,
all these symmetries are basically broken.
And it has a non-trivial action on the vacuum.
And the action of the vacuum is rather simple.
Like let me just like a write the action of the vacuum.
So this is just like a rewriting
of what I just already said in the wars.
So we have three vacuums.
And then the vacuums transform if you act
with a symmetry generator in this way.
So this is basically just telling you
that this eta z to line defect
does not change the middle vacuums,
but like exchange the left and right,
whereas the end defect basically takes left vacuum
to the middle one and right vacuum to the middle one,
but middle one to the linear combination
of the left and right.
So this is the linear combination.
And you can also see that then of course,
like identity line is 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1.
And you can already see that like this representation
of these matrices indeed satisfy this important relation
n square is 1 plus eta, and eta equal eta n equal m.
And eta square is 1.
Okay.
And furthermore, one comment I should say is that,
here I already told you that like this flow
gives you the three vacuums in the extreme IR,
but you don't even like you can actually like deduce
that the vacuums needs to be degenerated
just from the structure of this invulnerable symmetry.
So unlike usual z to symmetry
in which like you can have two choices,
like either spontaneously broken or non-spontaneously broken
and a non-spontaneously broken case,
you only have one vacuums.
If you want to construct representation of this algebra,
you are forced to consider more than one vacuums
because there is no like a good representation
of this just one vacuums
which satisfies this algebraic relation.
So this is why the non-invulnerable symmetry
is like a little bit stronger
than the standard non-anomalous symmetry.
Sorry, when you talk about this matrix
around which vacuum is the spectrum sculpting, I think.
Okay, yeah, that's a good question.
And so that's the next point.
So now we talk about this one.
I said like there is an integrablity,
so you can in principle talk about like exact as much.
And that's what people determine actually
in the literature by the module.
And then the first question we ask
is like what are the particles?
And the particles or more precisely
or the low energy excitation,
and this is actually the crucial point in my talk
are actually kinks.
So the stable particle in this area
are all kinks between different vacuums.
Okay, so in some sense,
like we need to talk about all the vacuums at the same time.
And using that, the mollusks are basically derived
exactly as matrix.
I'm going by imposing a set of consistency condition.
And because these particles are kinks,
so normally we describe the scattering process
in which like a two kinks scatter
using the support labels,
which basically labels the vacuums.
The particle interpolates between.
So this means that like you are scattering particles
which interpolate between the vacuum and the C vacuum.
And then this right particle is like the particle kink
that interpolates between C vacuum and the particle.
And of course it also depends on the sensible mass energy.
So it has like a four indices
together with what people call rapidity
and where rapidity is related to the total mass,
total center of the energy in the following way.
So this is the Mandelstrom variable S
and the Mandelstrom variable is related
to the C divided by the whole in this way.
So in higher need, you have SMT,
but in one plus one D you only have S
because of the simplicity of the kinematics.
So this is basically like the labels
on which S matrix depend.
And the mollusks basically determine that
to be of the following form.
So there is an oval factor,
which is independent of all these like ABCD indices.
And then there is this DA to DC, DB,
DG to the power I, theta over pi.
And then there is some index structure showing up with DA, BC.
I'm going to explain what this DA, DB, DC, D, D are
in a second,
theta over four, delta AB,
plus sinh pi pi minus theta over four, delta CT.
Okay, so this is the structure
of the SMT examinological determinant.
And the way he derived it is basically important
while doing the bootstrap.
Okay, but okay, so before talking about that,
let me just like a clarify that this,
so we had three vacua, as I said,
and I'm going to label this vacuum by zero
and then this vacuum by one top and this vacuum by one.
And the D zero and D one is one
and then D one half is square root of two.
So for those who know through the CFD well,
this basically points sides
with what people call quantum dimension.
Okay, and then the logical basically determine this S
matrix by imposing a set of consistency condition.
And the first one is a unitarity,
which is basically said that if you multiply
S theta and S minus theta, you get one.
But it's like considering this process of scattering
and then this must be the same as doing nothing.
And the second condition you can post
is the crossing symmetry,
which basically says that if you do the crossing symmetry,
then it's equivalent to viewing this diagram
in this direction by doing this at the time.
And more precisely, the crossing symmetry,
if I take this form, S, B, C, A, D,
I pi minus theta.
So in that rapidity coordinate,
the crossing transformation corresponds
to theta going to I pi minus theta.
And then like at this, the indices are slightly swapped
because you need to view this diagram in this direction.
Okay, and the final one is the ambassador equation
because we know there exists an integrability
from the consistency condition.
These product of S matrices need to satisfy
the non-trivial relation for the ambassador equation.
It's the relation which involves three S matrices.
So by solving this, the logical determine
that this is more or less the same answer.
Okay, so far so good.
And of course, like as I said,
this flow preserves both integrability
and a non-invitable symmetry.
It is also natural to expect.
These S matrices, the logical of computed
should commute with the non-invitable symmetries
preserved along the flow, okay?
And so that was, however, that was never really studied
in the literature because some logical
of determining this S matrix around 70s and 80s
and around that time, there was no concept
of non-invitable symmetry.
So this is like the first conversation we tried to do.
And hoping that of course we will be able to verify
that we get zero.
And the result was actually surprising.
And if we did the analysis, then we found that
the commutator between the non-invitable symmetry
especially N defect.
So it was perfectly fine for one and eta,
but for the N defect, if I take the S matrix,
determine by some logical, it was non-zero.
So this is a little bit puzzling.
So this basically says that if you add yet another condition
which is basically non-invitable symmetry,
then actually it seems like there is no consistent S matrix
which satisfied all these four properties.
So this is a bit like that, paradox.
So let me face it, can you explain what that means?
Yeah, so the N, that's what it swaps some A's and D's.
Right, so basically the action of N is like a,
can be, well you can, yeah, derive the action of N
basically from the action, from its action on the background.
Why is the inviolability different, like?
Why is non-invitable, inviolability important?
At a technical level, like it maps one vacuum
to a linear combination of vacuum.
So the relation that you get isn't like a more non-trivial
than the relation that you get from eta, like a Z defect.
Because Z defect just says that like one component
of S matrix is the same as another component
of S matrix which are related by zeta symmetry,
whereas like this kind of gives you the word identity
in which the one S matrix component
is equal to sum of S matrix components.
So it's kind of harder to verify, harder to satisfy
and indeed like it is violated in the theory.
So now we have a paradox.
So we have four relations that we want to,
that seem natural and there is no compatible answer
among these four.
And so we need to give up something.
So there are like a multiple choices,
but of course like we probably don't want to give up
the unitarity because we know that the theory is unitary.
And we also know that the flow is,
that preserves the integrability
and non-invitable symmetry.
That almost automatically says
that we also need to preserve these two.
So then as a logical consequence,
the only possibility we are left with
is to give up gross and symmetry.
So now the question is if there is any S matrix,
new S matrix which satisfies these three conditions
but not gross and symmetry.
And that's the problem we analyzed.
And we found actually a very simple answer.
So if you look at this solution,
the logical road, there is some complicated factor here.
So this is precisely needed
in order to satisfy the gross and symmetry
because as you can see inside the square bracket,
it doesn't look symmetric
because one comes with this ratio
and the other doesn't come with ratio.
And in order to compensate that,
he needed to put this extra free factor.
And what turned out is that this extra free factor
is precisely the one which screws up the commutative
with non-invitable symmetry.
So the simple answer is that you just don't get it.
So this is the answer for a proposal that we are,
our proposal is basically this one.
And, but because as I said this free factor
was important for the gross and symmetry.
So now the usual gross and symmetry is not satisfied.
Okay, so instead it is satisfied,
it satisfies the modified gross and symmetry
which is of this four.
So this is the answer.
Which is kind of easy to see now
already from the structure of this matrix.
But the ambassador is okay.
Sorry?
The ambassador is okay, yeah.
Yeah, it's actually not so obvious
that the ambassador is okay even if you drop it
when you do the ambassador, you need to something this is.
But surprisingly, the ambassador is okay as well.
So this is the basic proposal that we are giving.
And so as you can see, there is some extra free factor.
So this is the answer.
That's forced upon us just by analyzing
some logical possibilities because I kind of argue
that this is only possible consistent answer
because we don't want to give up unitarity ambassador
and no importable symmetry.
But at the same time, like this logic doesn't immediately
tell you what is the physical meaning
of the extra factor.
So then in the remaining 10 minutes,
let me just explain the reason, physical explanation.
Are you saying that the original aspect
is just the wrong answer or the theory or are you?
The original answer matrix, yeah,
we would say it's a wrong answer.
But I should also say that like many people
did many different computation
using this homological pass matrix.
And people even like I tried to do
what's called some dynamic beta and that's,
and then flow up to the UV to check if the energy
of the finite volume state matches the dimension
of the operator that you see in the CFD.
And indeed, like people found the correct answer
using this S matrix.
But what we found is that we also reanalyze
that computation using new S matrix.
And that also gives a correct answer.
So actually like this, if you carefully look
at the computation, actually this factor
cancels out in the computation.
Okay.
Is there not discussed for some observable
that would be sensitive to that?
Yeah, that's a good question.
And I think if you look at the dimension
of the state in the twisted sector,
especially like if you insert end effect
and then look at the dimension of the energy
in the twisted sector,
I think that can be sensitive to this factor.
And but nobody has some computation yet.
All right.
So what is the physical explanation?
So the physical explanation is,
well, let me just say that,
so that they are the physical explanation.
So it basically comes from,
okay, so what's the best way to explain that?
Let me just write down several parts
that's important for this physical explanation.
The first part is that IR is a non-trivial
logic monofuse theory.
I'm going to explain a little bit more soon.
And basically,
and the second point is that T2FT degrees of freedom
changes the normalization.
So I'm just first write down some summary
and then I explain what I really mean by this.
Normalization of the in state and out state
and the normalization
before between S and T channels.
So here I just gave a summary
and then I'm going to explain the detail,
but the point is that there are some kind
of long range modes that are propagating in this theory
and then that long range mode changes the normalization
of in state and out state.
And furthermore, that normalization
is not invariant under the growth of symmetry.
So that's basically like one line
or actually three line or a pipeline summary
what I wanted to say from now.
Okay, so now let's discuss it in more detail.
So how do you define S matrix?
Like normally people define the S matrix
using for example, LSE,
but alternatively one can think about defining S matrix
in the following way.
So let's define S matrix,
but first doing the path integral
on a big disk.
So you draw us very big disk in flat space
and then you specify the boundary condition.
So because we want to scatter kinks,
so we need to specify the boundary condition
so that this vacuum is A and this vacuum is B,
this vacuum is C and this vacuum is B
and then do the path integral.
So this is just a purely Euclidean computation
and the path integral.
And we also want to make sure that this is big enough.
So MR must be much larger than one
where R is the size of the disk.
And now, so this is a Euclidean computation
and as you can see, you can just rotate this circle.
So like this computation is in some sense
well crossing invariant.
So there is like a no preferred S channel or a T channel.
So now the question is like what happens
if you start doing analytic continuation
and going to Lorentz and spacetime?
Do we see some kind of preferred direction?
So now the next step is to do the analytic continuation
to the hyperboloid.
So because we want to view this as a time.
Now I have A here, D here, B here.
I still have to see here and then D here, B here.
So this is some passing to grow on the hyperboloid.
And then you basically push this line
to future infinity and past infinity.
And furthermore, so like this partition function
depends on the position of the insertion.
But you can balloon this insertion
with some wave function, plane wave wave function.
And by doing that,
you can basically recover the S matrix.
So this is not like a standard textbook way
of like a getting S matrix,
but basically like this idea was actually already discussed
in one of the section of Isaacson super QFT textbook,
although it's not like about people normally learn these days
but there is also a way to recover the S matrix
from this point of view.
So now, so after doing that,
basically like in this picture that I drew over there,
this part of the picture becomes,
you can think of it as a pin state.
And then the part of the picture
after doing all the manipulation,
you can think of it as an out state.
And then like this pass integral basically complete
and then overlap between out and in.
And that gives rise to the S matrix.
Now, but of course, like we also need to make sure
that these in state and out state
are normalized in the correct way.
So roughly speaking, we need to put this factor as well
because of course, like if I multiply some arbitrary number
to in state, not easily if I don't put this factor
then you change this matrix,
but that's certainly not what we want.
So although of course like a little bit schematic
because technically like open up between in state
and in state gives you some delta function.
So, but what I really mean is that we need
to normalize the state correctly.
So now we can start seeing the problem
or in the presence of,
some in the presence of long range degrees of freedom.
Can you do it?
Why?
So this in in basically
is the overlap between this configuration
in which like you have some vacuum
and then you the vacuum emits some soliton.
But here like we really like
I want to kind of compute just the norm.
So if you look at the topological degrees of freedom
because it's insensitive to the precise topology.
So you can actually come back to the sphere
and then compute this normalization using this
where these lines are kind of soliton lines.
And this you can actually compute using the TQFT language
because the soliton line,
the action of these soliton lines
is precisely the same as action of N
because it interpolates between neighboring vacuum.
So, and then this,
there is a way to compute this expectation value
of this network using TQFT
and that gives you this answer.
Okay.
And the same is true for out, out.
Now, instead of C here, I have A here
and that gives you actually the same answer.
Okay.
Now, so this basically gives you the following
like a heuristic or schematic definition
of this matrix using this Euclidean parcel to go.
Analytic continuation of the Euclidean parcel to go.
So schematically, if you want to compute this S channel,
S matrix, and that is given by analytic continuation
of the Euclidean parcel to go,
analytical continue.
Divided by precisely,
by square root of these normalization factors.
So, and then this one,
these ones can be computed by using the TQFT technology.
However, like, so this, as you can see,
like this one sitting in the numerator
is actually crossing symmetric
because you just started with,
you just started with the Euclidean parcel to go
on a disk and then just did another definition.
But as you can see,
like this normalization factor actually has a preferred
direction and if you want to do the same thing for T channel,
then what you have is the same thing here.
But now we need to, the definition of the in state
and out state is different
because I need to cut the diagram in this way.
So, I get this expression.
So here I get DDACBAC.
And now, this already like actually gives you
the necessary modified crossings and factor
that we observed in the three critical using model flows.
And more precisely, using this, I can show,
we can show that this is basically given by ratio
of these lines, TQFT factors,
times S, oh, I find that, and if you compute explicitly
this factor, then you precisely recover
the factor that I will be found at the point.
Sorry, but this one doesn't use the existence
of going back to zero to the point.
So this one, indeed, that, right?
Yeah.
It's very strong that if you want to,
you're really proving that the crossing symmetry
should have required is the one that is actually satisfied
by going back to zero.
Right, right.
So this one is kind of like a general indeed, yes.
Sorry, I'm not sure if I understand your point, but yeah.
Yeah.
But for example, like you can also use this argument
to show that the crossing, there is a modification
of the crossing symmetry in the usual Z two symmetry,
but with anomaly.
So in the usual Z two symmetry with anomaly,
like the value is simple, just plus or minus.
But now we need to take this ratio, but like this,
but in the case of usual Z two anomaly,
this factor and this factor is the same.
So you can remove the square root
and then this factor and this factor is the same.
You can remove the square root,
but there is still this factor like this.
And then soliton lines are basically like
from the point of view Z two line effect.
And there is a famous fact that this ratio is minus one
in the theory with Z two anomaly.
So the claim is that in the theory with Z two anomaly,
the S matrix is anti-crossing symmetry.
And we also found that it is in the case
by analyzing the integral by example.
Okay, so this is basically a punchline on my talk.
So let me just conclude by saying,
giving a summary by words.
So the punchline is that in the presence of anomalies
or annoying variable symmetry,
especially at least in the one plus one D
leads to modified crossing symmetry.
And then this modified crossing comes from the fact
that IR has multiple vacua
and there is some TQFT structure, some long range modes.
And second, the important ingredient was a particle,
our kicks.
And then they can also view as some kind of like
a TQFT line defect.
If you just focus on long range modes.
And the third neat necessary ingredient
for deriving this was that TQFT degrees of freedom
actually changes some normalization
of means state and out state.
And if you correctly take into account that,
then that leads to normalization,
leads to the modification of the cross and symmetry.
And then of course,
like there are a bunch of interesting questions,
like if there is some generalization to higher D,
especially in three plus one D.
And also like this multiple vacua
and some long range degrees of freedom
are also even presenting like a D series or gravity in four D.
So one can ask like whether there is some less
is what we can learn from it.
Yeah, so finally, like it might be interesting
to do some S matrix boost drop
in the presence of no importable symmetry
because now we know what boost drop condition
we need to impose to analyze series
in only possible symmetry.
Okay, maybe let's finish here.
Can you comment more on three plus one dimensions
so like where do you even begin to,
what do you want to begin?
Where would you start?
Yeah, that's a good question.
Right.
So probably at the starting point will be
some theory with two form symmetry.
So in this story, especially like in one plus one D story,
it was important that particles,
work line can be viewed as some kind
of like a symmetry generator.
But of course, like the work line is still one dimensional,
even if you go high in D, high dimension.
So you cannot just use the usual symmetry.
So you need to use a higher form symmetry.
And in two plus one D,
you need to use one form symmetry.
In three plus one D, you need to use two form symmetry.
And, but there is a one problem in talking
about two form symmetry in three plus one D
because we know that there is no usual anomaly
in no usual anomaly in three plus one D.
Unlike like zero form symmetry is one plus one D
or like one form symmetry into plus one D.
But there can be some situation
in which like there is some kind of complicated mix
anomaly with some different symmetries.
So maybe like those exotic theory
might be the kind of first target
to understand the analogous plug.
So actually here, like I mean, so,
so you said like, I mean, you didn't really need the,
or you thought that you could also,
you could also work with a company.
Right, right.
Yeah.
So we did like,
the higher dimensional correlation
of this would be like a tool for such an input.
Right, yeah.
For instance, two group might be,
yeah, indeed, like input and what's it like, again.
Right, and the two plus one dimensional story,
I mean, how much of that,
how do you tell that story?
Right, so the, I think basically like many
of what Miwala and his collaborators did probably
can be interpreted in this language,
but so far we haven't been able to kind of translate
what they did into this kind of language.
But they did that as computation, right?
Yeah, they did the right direct conversation
and also more recent, in more recent paper,
they kind of like a user structure of writing
and fusion of trans-simons theory
to kind of conjecture the finite and finite k
modification of the gross system at true.
But what you just said, you were suggesting that somehow
I want you to only focus on the things
that are actually exact one form symmetries of the theory.
And I think their example is not of any.
Right, so, okay, good point.
So because they have matter.
Does it matter, yeah.
Right, so.
This is sort of an emergent thing.
Right, so actually their example might be telling us
that like a one form symmetry might not need to be exact.
As long as you have some like IR one form symmetry,
it might be okay.
And then, again, it might be worse in the sense that
if you have a TQFT at long distances,
it might get much more complicated, braiding.
Mm-hmm, yeah, that's your idea.
One form symmetry.
Right, so the two plus one D is certainly more complicated
because braiding is going to play probably more important role.
Right.
Here, like basically there isn't nothing like braiding
and everything was just braiding and braiding.
So I think that's a good point.
Yeah, I think that's a good point.
Yeah, I think that's a good point.
Yeah, I think that's a good point.
Like braiding and everything was just a guidance
or down to evaluating this network of line difference.
So in the two plus one D example,
there is no TFT in the IR, right?
It's just a CFT because they have a much less water.
I know they have massive,
but in the case they analyze it,
the massive matter, they perturb it.
They perturb it, like they analyze massive matter.
Okay, okay.
But because they have matter
that actually drags the one form symmetry.
Right.
But still, like because the mass matter is massive,
but in the IR, there is one question.
Is failure crossing something
you could see in perturbation theory?
Or is this you don't have to do?
Because I'm not fit to be able to see.
Hi.
I would guess in the example that I described,
it's for the heart to see it in perturbation theory.
Yeah.
For sure, as example, they were privileged.
They kind of resumed like a large
in perturbation theory, I guess.
Yeah, I think it's up here, like they have,
in their example, like they have like a U and Gage,
like a trans-Simon Gage theory.
So I guess the presence of some topological degree
of freedom was kind of more obvious in UV description.
Or in the perturbation theory here,
like the TQFT degrees of freedom
is more like a Z2 Gage theory or a Z2 symmetry.
So I think that's harder to see in perturbation theory.
