Okay. So, okay. So the presentation today as he mentioned is going to be about, you know, a paper that I've been working on with some colleagues over a few years now, and as he mentioned already is going to be related to this idea of the free energy principle active
conference, and especially we're going to focus on a construct that seems to appear regularly in the literature of these two frameworks.
That is something called the Markov Blanket. I will go through say the formal definition of a blanket, and then try to say unpack, I guess the main argument of the paper which is basically what it is not
is going by the definition. So in the literature, we will find that there are different things that people mean by this word.
I will try by the end of it to highlight that there are some things that are, you know, not as simple.
They are not just coming from the maths and they are not just coming for free, they will need like to be further discussed. And then by the very, very end of it I will try to flesh out a few things, like a few
opinions, basically on how to move forward and what I actually believe is needed for a thorough and proper discussion of these frameworks.
So, this is the team. Honestly, I would recommend to you to talk to each one of us, because we do have different backgrounds we do have different opinions about some of this stuff we did agree on, you know, the paper as a whole.
Honestly, always a great experience to be able to, you know, have a debate with each one of them because well it is really, you know, they're really great people so I can only but recommend to, you know, have them also give a presentation at some point.
We also have a reply to, I think it was like 35 commentaries we received to the paper, the thing is kind of there but not really available yet. So, you know, I might mention something during the presentation but I will not be spoiling too much.
Okay, so this is an old meme that I prepared, I think, I don't know, last year, a couple of years ago, and basically it's a bit of, you know, a personal take on the landscape of papers about active inference it goes from, you know,
I'm joking to really, really joking. So don't say this too seriously. But I think it is a good starting point to really say what I want to focus on. So basically, I want to focus on claims about active inference free energy principle being a framework of everything and I will try
to unpack what the difference is between these two words, these two say concepts actually are in my opinion, and then I will try to say something about the ways people, you know, are working around these two frameworks trying to fix some of the current shortcomings.
So, to start off, you know, very, very general perspective on what I mean by free energy principle and what I think people should actually recognize as the free energy principle.
Basically, this is a foundational theory of agents, leaving systems and more recently things, and I will try then later to say what I mean by thing by foundational I mean that this is supposed to tell us what a thing is what a living system is it is not supposed to be assuming
that is supposed to be telling us what it is.
And I think it's a thing, only if you minimize this variation of free energy. This is the main claim.
I think it's appear there because they tell us that there are two things. Well, I shouldn't be using the word thing now so easily. There are two, say, partitions of a system, one that is called internal what that is called external and the internal is the thing doing inference about external
and I'll come back to that later.
What do I mean by active inference well basically I mean, taking a state space model.
Say structure or, you know, partial observable mark of decision processes on the piece that's wrong.
And basically try to use a specific cost function which, you know, in active inference is this expected free energy. And, you know, what I believe is really important to focus on is that this is a framework that I believe can stand without the foundational
right to other free energy principle this doesn't have to tell us what a thing is it doesn't have to tell us what our agent is, we can just assume that they exist, and we can just say that we're going to model them as some partially observable market decision
process, and then doing friends according to a specific cost function. These two, I think can exist independently, and this thread will come, you know, useful by the end of the talk.
This is a very long slide I really hate slides with a lot of text but I thought that this one is the only exception. Okay, there's another one later on but that's more, I guess, you know, I will go less in detail about the following one.
This is really important because I'm trying to, you know, fix a few concepts what I think the free energy principle is this is going to be what I'm going to talk about at least portions of this for the rest, say, of this 50 and something minutes.
The free energy principle says that you need to start with a system that can be more than some random dynamical system.
This system needs to have Oh, and make sure this is in the title, this is something, you know, around early 2021. I know that there's something new but for now let me fix a few concepts.
So a random dynamical system. This system needs to have a unique steady state distribution.
And the flow of this random dynamical system can be decomposed into two components of a quasi potential, one that is divergence free meaning that is just you know something rotating around the steady state and something that is curve free, which is basically something
that goes directly down to it's basically a gradient component of this quasi potential is quasi potential because it's not a proper potential in the sense that it's not just a gradient of something because there's a curly part.
At steady state, the free energy principle claims that we can basically partition a system into internal external and blanket states, and this is an assumption that comes say on top of everything else is not derived from everything is not implied from everything I've said so far.
So one is to select some specific variables and say well this will be my internal this will be my external everything else will come, say, because well from the complementarity basically all the system as a whole.
And then there needs to be a special say assumption regarding how to connect what I just said about the partitions of internal external and blanket states at steady state, how to connect these partitions to the dynamical say representation of this
dynamical system so how is this steady state telling me anything about the the flow so this random dynamical system.
A Friston has something he calls a conjecture a sparse coupling conjecture that is basically saying that yeah if you knock out some of these divergence free components you're going to be able to do something about it.
And I'm not going to go too technically into that it's something we can discuss at the end.
You know after the talk.
On top of that, we need something that Friston calls a synchronization map that is saying well, again, another assumption that is saying well now that I have internal and external states, I'm going to say that there is some non trivial map between the sufficient
statistics of internal and external states and I'm going to say that this is what allows me by the end of this free energy principle to say that there is a sense in which one partition models the other partition.
Not problematic but yeah I will leave you to Miguel Miguel's paper Achillera 2021 was discussing quite a lot of the possible implications of this assumption in particular.
Okay, now that we have all of these assumptions lined up the claim that the free energy principle makes is that we can describe internal states as appearing to do approximate base and inference on external states
or they call the approximate base and inference lemma.
Importantly, I will only be focusing on point for everything else is does not I'm not saying that everything else is I'm problematic I'm just saying, you know, every other point could be a talk in a by itself.
I will be focusing on for which is basically what we wrote about in the paper, I might be mentioning something about five but yeah don't get too carried away hoping that I will go technical about that because well.
This is already quite a handful, trust me on that. Okay, as I was mentioning, I'm aware that there are more recent developments, especially you know trying to relax some of the assumptions that I mentioned earlier so the fact that we don't need weekly mixing systems
we don't need our courtesy apparently anymore we only need stationarity to be fair this is claimed in a paper but the system that they are using as far as I can tell is still our Gothic.
So, you know, I live it at that I might be wrong but yeah I haven't seen this actually proven.
In which we have, you know, multiple definitions of blankets and I will go through what I call the zoo, and later on the other slide I mentioned that is quite handful.
And I'm aware that there's also an attempt to develop a free energy principle for no stationary processes that would be pretty cool. And this is say where the graphic on the right actually comes from from a paper actually claiming to, you know, work in that direction.
But as far as I can tell, and you know don't quote me on this I know it's a pretty long paper and I haven't had the time to go into full detail.
But I guess that the graphic is pretty clear basically if you don't assume stationarity so this next non equilibrium steady state that we see on the left.
Then basically, we don't really have a proper definition of blankets, and we don't really have the approximate basic inference lemma which, in my understanding is the whole claim behind the free energy principle so if we don't have that, I'm less sure, you know what exactly
I'm talking about. Okay, so now I'm going to really start from the basics and I'm going to try and you know tell you a story about these blankets and where I think, you know, things have started to change.
So I'm going to use a graphical language on the right which is hopefully something you've seen before and hopefully something that is slightly more intuitive, but bear in mind we can do this completely analytically with the things saying the middle.
The graphical language is a nice decoration, I think because it helps grasping an intuition but you don't get to carry the way, thinking the market blankets, as I will define them on the exist in graphical models because that's not true.
You know, we can use a different language like you know factor graphs or whatever else and we can still define something. So, joint probability.
What do I mean by that well by that I basically mean that we have some variables and we're just looking at the system as a whole this is the distribution of X and Y joint.
I know that you know there are a lot of things that I will, you know, not covering terms of you know theory of probability distributions and you know measure theory because this is not the right place and time.
Conditional probability what do I mean by that well I mean to know what the probability of a variable X is given that I know something about why.
By marginal independence by marginal independence, I mean that the probability of X, for example, does not depend on why so if we look at the at the graphical language, we don't have an arrow between the two.
By conditional independence on drawing an example here bearing in mind there are more but you know it's not important to go.
I'm not going to list them right now. I mean to say that if I have a variable X and a variable why, and in this case a variable Z in the middle I can say that X and Y are conditionally independent given Z.
So, X does not depend on why if I know something about Z.
And I'll leave it at that. So,
you know in all of this. Well, if the whole model I had was actually you know this, why is that X that I drew earlier, then I could say the Z is essentially the markup blanket for X or for why so it's the thing that makes X and why conditionally independent.
And that's about it. That's what a markup blanket is. Now, to give a full story, I guess I should say that, you know, if we have a more complicated model than saying that, you know, Z makes X and Y conditionally dependent will not be the full story.
I would just be saying that, you know, it is something that helps making X and Y independent but there are other variables in the middle. So in this case I should say that TZ and W are the thing that makes X independent conditionally independent from why.
So Z in this case is part of the blanket but it's not the blanket.
It's not the form of definition that I could give but yeah I think this is probably more than enough to grasp my intuition. This is Marco blanket as defined by Perl in his book 1988.
Okay, so
now what I want to say is that, you know, the definition of this markup blanket is pretty clear. You know, it's like three lines in the book by Perl and you know this thing, you know, has been used for about two decades.
Successfully, I would say, for people by people trying to do inference on different problems in machine learning, you know, this is a definition that is, say, quite recurrent in standard textbooks from Bishop to, you know, what's the name of the other one.
Murphy and you can pick up your favorite like, say inference machine learning book and you will find the same definition of Marco blanket.
Now what I want to point out is why this is also what this has been applied successfully machine learning that has been a point saying time where, you know, things actually changed and this is basically what I will use to explain the turn.
In the same in this history of Marco blankets and the need that we saw to actually have two different names for two different things.
So, at the same time, say what people are using Marco blankets to do inference in machine learning models people started wondering okay, can we actually say that the brain is system doing inference.
And then you see all of these books and you know 20 years or say literature on predictive coding base and brain hypothesis, early stages free energy principle, etc, etc.
What I would say is a big, you know, turn of events, as I mentioned earlier, is happening someone time around 2012 there's a paper by freestone an hour where they mentioned where they start talking about Marco blankets as being something the separating
internal from external and freestone being a neuroscientist mentioned something about the brain, basically being the internal and the environment being the external and probably the body being this Marco blanket.
But I think it's kind of say out there is not really neither here nor there, I guess by 2012 things however change I think more drastically when we get to 2013 does this paper like as we know it by freestone.
That actually starts to make big claims about you know origins of life and how Marco blankets apparently are a, you know, a special structure a very important structure fundamental structure that we should study to understand the origins of life.
And only that you know this later gets pushed into you know studying origins of agency origins of different systems.
More importantly, however, I think this is where things actually start to change because after that we see, you know, around nine years, yeah, 2022 of you know Marco blankets of life, mind cells sex agenda pain experience religious practices climate and ecosystems, etc, etc.
So I'm not making them up. These have all been coming out in the literature, same spider freestone's work. And more importantly, I'm not trying to make fun of these of these ideas I'm just trying to say that there is a big difference a big shift in the types of claims that have been made
before, say freestone started to use Marco blankets in his work, and after. Again, make sure you know this is just to say that there is something that has to be unpacked there needs to be unpacked.
Okay, so what do I actually mean by things that I believe needs to be unpacked.
Basically, here is where I will start talking about per or freestone blankets by per blankets I will need the initial definition of Marco blankets, the one that we find the purse book 1988.
For freestone blankets, I will mean what actually happens once freestone start to say well okay this thing might actually be important to understand, you know, origins of life and perhaps like you know definitions of different things of importance to neuroscientist biologist social
So, what do you actually mean is happening well, I would say that in the literature we often find that people.
Well there's some papers actually claim well you know freestone blankets are just stochastic processes version of per blankets this is something that will unpacking a couple of slides is basically means that we move from a time independent definition of per blankets to something
that we work in for time series. And this is great.
You know, if true this will be already like a big advancement, something that you know is already like doing a lot of work.
But what I would say and what we say in the paper is that essentially there are other changes happening at the same time. So there is something that has to do with modeling.
There are blankets and inference happening with a model within a model and I will unpack that later.
And there is something to be said about the metaphysical or epistemic status that is attributed to this blanket. So in my opinion, you know freestone blankets actually are somewhere in there, they are not really saying much about stochastic processes because
they need to assume that they are stationary. So, you know, time is really not a variable there at the end of the day. And, and I would say that they are pushing quite into the metaphysical realm, not always but you know, more often than not.
And I would say that they make this big change between with the within the model which is, you know, the thing that actually got me and got us like to make a big points about this in the paper and you know you also seen the title inference with or within a model.
Okay, so starting from random variables or stochastic processes. Okay, this is where, you know, I will try to give an intuition for what I think some of the parts, some of the working parts of this idea actually are, but it is not something that I
can fully unpack without, say, doing a lot of maths then there's not the goal of these of this talk at least. So, so far I've been talking about you know Marco blankets as you know a bunch of variables that make another two bunches of variables
conditionally independent so TZ and W are shielding people like to use this word for blankets shielding why from X or X from Y.
Now this is fairly intuitive and the definition as I said is like a three lines.
The thing is less obvious when we had time series. So here read like three time series XYZ going left to right different time steps.
This is also not a really nice one in the sense that we have time in.
This is not time homogeneous in the sense that we have different connection at each time step. And in this case, I guess that the main question that people are asking is what exactly needs to be conditionally independent from everything
The thing is, if I choose a single variable, why one, it is pretty easy to just apply the same thing the same rules that we have for random variables for the per blanket 1988.
The thing, however, is that people usually use this same time series model to say that we have a system that is evolving over time. So why two is the same why one but at a different time step and why free is the same as why to but at a different
different things might have happened, but we have a concept of identity over time as you know, as weak or as strong as you would like that to be that needs to be some concept of identity for this thing to be used for example in biology or neuroscience.
This is a specific say, you know, recording of a brain area over time or this is a specific something else.
Okay, now, if I want to say that X is independent from Z in this case what I need to look at all of the possible connection between, say, X and Z through Y at different time steps.
In that case, the definition of a blanket is much more complicated because we need to consider different time steps.
In that case, are you saying that the thing needs to be the whole history of a system needs to be independent from the whole history. Sorry, of a partition needs to be independent from the whole history of another partition do you want to say that it's just that a particular
time stage you want to say that it's one time step independent of all of the history of the other partition. The thing is not obvious. I think I'll leave it at that.
And it is not obvious to an extent where you know different papers have tried to unpack how different assumptions have very different implications. If you assume some things you will not be able to do a lot.
If you try to be more general you will not get a good definition and if you try. It's a long story. It's something we can discuss later, but otherwise I'll leave it at that.
So what I will try to say, you know, at least poke at is the idea that we don't have a clear definition of crystal blankets like you know I tried to give you different, say, possible intuitive assumptions we might use to model
the line series of stochastic processes.
And, you know, different assumptions have come out like in different parts of the literature. And basically, by that I mean that there seem to be some inconsistency.
And this is the other slide I said I don't like walls of text but I thought that this was actually important to really highlight what what the literature actually looks to me.
So we have the initial definition of, you know, per blanket. That's fine.
1988. We have market blankets that could be simply interpreted in terms of market chains so you know the future of something is independent is condition independent of the past given the present.
And this is something the Perlin cell was using as early as 1989 for some work in there.
And this is also something that freestyle in 2021 finally make clear this is not what I really mean by a first time while Marco blanket, what I call a first time blanket.
Now this is clear in a paper 2021 after bill.
And others actually try to ask for some clarifications.
There is a Marco blanket in the 2013 life as we know it.
And that basically is a per blanket of the stationary distribution and then this is claimed that somehow it's also prison blanket for dynamical for the flow terms but it is never clarified why.
And this is what ignited like the need for the paper by bill and others bill and others actually come up with a counter example say well you know I can have something like a per blanket but that doesn't say anything about the dynamical the
definition of dynamical flows of this dynamical system, and then freestyle after that says oh no no okay it's really not what I mean because you're making extra assumptions and we don't like that is, you know, outcomes razor extra assumptions
they're kind of useless. Okay.
And then we have freestyle actually giving a full definition 2021 saying well, you know if you knock out some of this divergence free components, the solenoid components of the decomposed flow, then you're going to have that a free that a per
blanket a steady state is has direct connections to a decomposition of flows.
Okay. So is this the first a blanket I'm not sure I put in a question mark there because you know, it is still a bit unclear to me.
Why is it unclear because then we have another definition again 2021 if we look at one of the appendices, we see that there is some linearization process happening and something.
There are definitions that the non equilibrium system is actually really close to equilibrium which means that all of them also and all of the solenoid components are disappearing blah blah blah.
So is that what is actually meant by a freestyle blanket, not sure this is something that Aguilera is actually you know discussing in their paper.
We have attempts to actually create a definition.
That is perhaps useful to the free energy principle but that starts from different assumptions.
The course of blanket by roses starts from computational mechanics and doesn't need to assume stationarity and has a lot of other nice properties.
So definition in one of the commentaries to our paper coming from Virgil and others where they try to basically unpack what I was mentioning earlier so how do we ask, for example, the two different
variables that are specific pointing time are actually conditional independent give it the whole history, so that we don't need to assume stationarity something again we can discuss at the end.
In our reply to the commentaries we also found like two or three different definitions that were already in the literature they didn't call it blanket of anything, but they are definitions of conditional independence that apply to stochastic processes and they are already out
Okay, all of this to say, there is a reason to talk about Pearl and freestyle blankets, it is not a clear map as some, some words try to drink blood.
It is really not clear I'm not saying anything does anything needs to be wrong, but I'm saying it is not by any means clear.
Okay.
So let's get to the main point.
Inference with or within a model. So,
the main idea here is to say that per blankets are usually claim, and usually, I would say probably, and they are always claim to be a tool that a modeler.
Crazy scientist on the left uses to make inference about a system, for example, brain on the right, using some kind of model.
So the macro blanket is some is some property of a model that a modeler uses to make inference about a system.
Great. This is inference with the model there is a scientist making inferences about a system with a model, the thing in the middle.
The inference within a model is a bit different, because in this case, we don't really have a modeler.
The model is supposed to disappear from this picture. Well, we have happening is that the model itself is partitioned in what I said at the very beginning so internal external Marco blanket states, and then the claim is that internal
inferences are making are doing some inference about external ones through the blanket.
Now, I'm leaving a bunch of question marks here because, well, you know, you'll see in a couple of seconds but the whole point of inference with the within a model is that there is no modeler.
Now, the inference is happening within the model. There is a model that can be partitioned in one part of one of these partitions is the one doing inference.
This is the cool.
You know, the cool part, to be honest, like you know if this works, you know, this is a really cool, you know, perspective on what is actually happening.
Okay.
So, you know, the things that I was mentioning at the very beginning like you know we see things actually coming out quite a lot when people now talk about this free energy principle.
These things are supposed to be, you know, the internal states of a particular model so if I start with some graphical model and remember I don't have to but it's a really nice tool.
So, you know, it's nice to actually try and explain what I really want to say. If we start with some, you know, graphical model after choosing a particular target variable.
I can find the blanket for the target variable and say that everything that is not part of the blanket then is external in say in purple on the right we see the say the thing.
In green and red we see the blanket that is organized by sensory and active stage sensory being well active being all of the nodes that are directly influenced by
the target variable and the co-parent of the other active states, hence why this is actually active. And the sensory states are supposed to be all of the other ones that are still part of the blanket but are not active.
The thing is the internal thing. So this is supposed to be your microorganism and the origins of light. This is supposed to be your brain doing inference about the environment. This is supposed to be your mind, whatever that is.
This is supposed to be your agent. This is supposed to be, you know, a bunch of things.
Right. So, to, I guess, recap this point, you know, this is a picture that probably you have seen quite a lot in the literature that we reproduce from some of the active inference, but I should say free energy principle papers.
So, internal, as I said, might actually be your brain external might be the environment and sensory states are the ones where you're getting, say, your information from the environment and active states are the ones where you're giving some of your information to the environment.
Okay. Now, the question marks from earlier were there for a specific reason.
I left some question marks because essentially what I'm asking is, once you tell me that you're doing inference within a model. So the model of disappears from this picture and now we're left with the model and a system that this model is supposed to refer to.
So, are you actually saying that the market blank is within the model are actually telling me something about the system that I'm trying to model. Are you trying to say that they are exactly a feature of the system on trying to model.
Are you trying to say that the system and trying to model is in itself some sort of graphical model.
You know, there are different positions, and I think I'll leave it at that in our reply we're trying like to flash out a spectrum of different positions taken by different authors, and you know, just argue that these things actually need to be clarified.
Some people actually use freestyle black is in the literature, they might still mean different things.
Because some people interpret that literally some people interpret that as some sort of nice metaphor and some other people are a bit less the more ambiguous about that.
Something we, you know, argue and, you know, and, you know, something that we believe begs for, you know, clarification is whether some people actually believe that these blankets actually are properties of the system we are trying to model.
And we did find that a few papers actually equate a blanket a freestyle blanket with a cell membrane, the equate a freestyle blanket with whatever separates the mind from something else.
They actually do say that there's a direct mapping they are not specific like in terms of whether they mean identity whether they mean isomorphism whether they mean some other like you know, a more exotic type of relation but they are quite specific
to being a very, being there a very strong relationship. And you know, here I'm just highlighting a few say examples of what I mean by that.
It is not trying like to call out anyone specifically is just trying to say that yet there are, you know, different positions being taken and some of them are pretty strong some of them say well, these blankets are actually fundamental properties or a system.
So, you know, some, um, some people have actually told us well you know you're taking things a bit too literally.
And you know there's a paper now, basically calling us and other people are saying well you know you actually fail, you know, for this.
You fail for this and now you you actually believe that people, you know, think that the universe is just a big graphical model and that's why you're claiming that freestyle blankets have this sort of very, you know,
challenging status to be explained. And to that I just want to say with that.
I guess no, not really we are not trying to claim that anyone believes that although we did have probably some commentaries that actually pointed at that so in the same way we have you know,
people arguing for the universe to be a big cellular automaton, we have some people that might be arguing that yet the universe is a big base and network.
And that's, that's a position that people could take. We are not accusing anyone of doing that but we're just pointing out that the connection between, you know, a property of a model and the thing in the environment is really not clear you have plenty of
blankets that are not cell membranes and conditional independence is between things that are really not that interesting to model.
In this case, it's quite clear if we, for example, bring in an example from the literature of artificial life and I thank you for, you know, mentioning that at the very beginning.
In Rwanda Beers has been studying gliders in the game of life for the best part of the last two decades, and has been, you know, trying to model a lot of places in the, in the game of life and different aspects of a lot of places.
Now, does that tell us something directly about biological systems. Well, not really we're not going to find that anywhere claimed in Rwanda Beers work.
His work is actually focused on the game of life and, you know, it's supposed to give us a series of toy models to start to study all the places.
The connections from that to real auto poetic systems is not something that comes for free. The game of life is lacking a lot of features that are pretty crucial to actually model biology.
The claims there are a bit weaker, you know, since compared to what the free energy principle, for example, at times claims.
Okay.
As I was just mentioning, you know, claims. Well, you know, if we have to compare the claims made by Pearl and freestyle blankets, you know, they, they fit quite nicely, I guess, even in a single slide.
Pearl blankets focus on random variables as opposed to stochastic processes in freestyle blankets. So the time variable is not really, you know, crucial or part of the definition of per blanket is supposed to be somewhere in the
version version per blankets are usually epistemic. I'm sure there are people that are taking them more ontologically than others but usually they are more epistemic than not freestyle blankets at times they are really you know the cell membrane they are really
like the skull around your brain they are really something or they they are read as really being something.
So if you want to use a blanket, you know, to use bird blankets you actually need to assume, which, you know, variable, you want to do inference on, and then you know find the blanket for this so that you can just consider a subset of the other variables of the system.
And, you know, the whole inference process starts from the assumption of a variable of interest.
The freestyle blankets on the other hand are supposed to be part of a theory that tells you what the system of interest is. So it's supposed to be able to tell me that there is a cell as opposed to, you know, half a cell.
If I cut a cell in a half, the thing is going to dissipate whatever something about the freestyle blankets thing is supposed to be part of a system that tells me well this is a thing cell, this is not a thing half a cell.
And finally then, you know, once we assume a system of interest like per blankets become part of a of an inference process.
You know, and the inference process is actually done by a model on a system with a model.
So some blankets on the other hand, take away the scientists take away the modular and they tell us that within the system we are looking at there is something doing inference about something else so it's a very different perspective, honestly a very
interesting one.
Question, I guess, is whether that is really what is happening. And now for those of you I mean I'm hoping I mentioned that in the right way. So, you know, if I'm right you should be able to go back to the recording.
Like the second point of this, or the three dimensional spectrum of blankets, where, you know, I tried to explain how freestyle blankets actually work and if, you know, if I'm right you should be able to say, you should be able to see that I mentioned something
that you know is really not fitting comfortably with the claims that that we found in the literature and with the claims that I summarized just in the previous slide.
What do you mean by that. Well, the thing is if I give you a graphical model.
You know, that's great you know that helps us understanding you know what is actually happening with some bunch of random variables.
Or stochastic processes.
The thing is, when we use a freestyle blankets.
We still need to assume what the thing, what the internal variables actually are.
This is, you know, something that you can see in basically all of the papers. They actually use this freestyle blankets in the life as we know it paper. Yeah, they take like eight variables and they say yeah this will be our internal
stage then we'll find the blanket and external one.
The thing is they could have chosen 12 and the thing will be different so actually believing that those eight variables actually representative of something like a proto cell is honestly a bit hard to follow hard to brass because you know you could have chosen
eight, six, 12 and the thing will still work like this framework is not telling you how to find the thing you need to say what the thing is and then actually find the blanket for that thing.
When we look at some of the analysis that were done on brain data, well, in that case, the conditional independence is are not really present due to say noise in the recordings that do and due to some of the modeling being done like before inference can
actually say be applied to the mother. And in that case, we see that, you know, there is a thresholding happening and this is you know very openly say expressed by for instance so I'm not accusing anyone of hiding this.
I'm just saying that this is happening like there is somebody thresholding conditional independence is a say oh okay below zero point something something.
This is like conditionally independent. And that process, you know, as far as I know could be done postdoc so you look at the data and you say oh okay there's this area of the brain.
And I know there are some constraints like you know topological constraints about this, say, all of these brain cells are in the vicinity of each other that is a specific there's a specific neuronal group that I'm aware of that is a specific something something.
So, you know, what you could be doing is just thresholding all of the conditional independence is from, you know, neurons part of this group and everything else.
So, you kind of have to assume that thing to begin with. Then you can do all of your nice analysis and, you know, tell me the story about freestyle black it.
The thing actually there is assumed and the sensory multi interpretation that is now applied even to neurons and neurons are sensing and acting and doing stuff which I think is really cool is still done by actually making assumptions about you know what the thing of interest is.
If you cut a new year and a half. Well, you know, in theory you could still run the same type of analysis, but it would be much less interesting.
So, you know, I'm approaching the end. And, you know, here I will be stealing very opening a title that I found absolutely great as in one of the commentaries to our paper, and the basically summarizes.
I guess the thing that I called the elephant in the room just in the previous slide, who tailors this blanket.
So in per blanket we know that there is a modular choosing the variable of interest, find the blanket, and then we apply our, you know, inference algorithm and then we do all of our cool analysis, and you know we can start claiming stuff.
Say freestyle blankets. Well, the thing is, we are still doing the same thing we still need to choose a variable. So even if the model it disappears it cannot disappear before a variable of interest is chosen.
So the part where I said oh yeah the thing is happening within a model well it's happening within a model once with once we chose the variable of interest.
Then we find the blanket and then say we start doing inference, but in this case, you know this claim that the inference is being done by the thing we are choosing.
And in that case you know the claims honestly are being more ambiguous because you know if you chose the thing and you're saying that that thing is actually doing inference.
It is less clear, I guess what the, what the final claim really is.
There is another possible issue that I will not cover it somewhere in the paper but you know, it might seem minor but it's really not something I was mentioning earlier about co parents what are co parents.
So in this case, let's see, let's look at these different graphical models. If I choose a specific variable of interest s.
m is what is called a child of s and it's part of the blanket, because it's supposed to be a variable that is influenced by s.
Now K is also part of the blanket is something called a co parent so it's basically another parent of m, and it is also something that is directly influenced by having or not having knowledge about s.
The thing is, it is probably quite trivial to imagine that if we choose a specific variable of interest, although the children of that variable of interest are kind of like you know actions in a sense they are things that are directly influenced by our
thinking of interest. It is less clear why K is supposed to be an action, I guess, of this s, because it's not really an action in fact in this model is basically, you know we are looking at a, at a patella reflex on your knee, and K will be if I'm correct
say like a hammer coming from a from a doctor and you know in that case you know it is really not clear what is an agent in this picture like is it the internal thing is it internal thing plus the blanket, but if you include the blanket then you have these sort of you know strange situations where co parents are
things that are not really part of the internal that are not really directly influenced by the internal thing, so you know it is probably a big deal, but it is also something that yeah it is not central I guess to to the main point of this
presentation so you know there's a section in the paper I'll leave it at that or for discussion later. Okay, so that brings me to basically the end, where I have just a few slides where I try and like to picture what I think should be happening or what we should look forward to
happening.
You know, given the type of context that I set up. So,
basically, in the reply to the commentaries we commentaries saying being, you know, spread over a different range of positions with respect to this freestyle blankets and the free energy principle.
We basically try to condense what we believe are four possible ways forward.
The first one is pretty simple. We're just saying well, you know, we just need some clarity.
We need people to actually tell us what they mean when they when they invoke a blanket in their words. The second one, you know, argues that we might actually look for a free energy principle without blankets and see what that means.
And even as a third one consider, you know, what I mentioned at the very beginning so active inference has been some sort of you know alternative framework to reinforcement learning different cost function, different perhaps inference algorithms or whatever.
That is in a very strong sense independent from the claims of the free energy principle, whereby we actually don't need to assume that we are defining an agent we just need to assume that there is an agent.
The fourth one is something that I will call something that I will call like beyond the free energy principle and you know I will unpack in just a few seconds.
So, by more clarity, you know, you can actually probably imagine the point I was going to make anyway.
It is not a single axis we're looking at it is not just a move from random variables to stochastic processes we're looking at.
And, you know, not only the movies not trivial and probably and probably bring some problems already but you know we have different moves and you know to that I tried to summarize so with to within a model, and perhaps epistemic to metaphysical.
You know, these are free access but probably there are even more things happening and these are not say cheap, you know, shots that honestly just a way to say that this is not that this is something that needs to be unpacked.
I will actually talk about Marco blankets in the literature of free energy principle, more often than not they mean one of the 10 different things that I listed in the zoo of blackheads.
And it is not clear which one people mean at different points and different parts of the literature. So clarity, pretty simple.
If we consider the free energy principle without freestyle blankets well, you know, my first need to look at what happens when we had them so you know we need to have an assumption of stationarity as the latest paper still seems to imply.
And the inference learning that we might be talking about very crucially and this is something we can discuss later is only happening away from the blanket like if you're in a stationary stage you know there's no real learning that is happening there's no real inference.
I guess at least in, in a trivial sense that is happening. So, you know, in a paper where people start like to say oh you know but this is really actually not true like you know, we don't need stationarity.
So I think they do this is you know show show simulation where they just bump, which is bumper system auto stationary state, and then they let it relax to stationary state again and say oh you know, see during this relaxation inference and learning are happening.
Well, yes, that's the whole point, they cannot happen if you are in a stationary state.
Say, do away with them, then you know it is less clear what the partition between internal and external will be there are other definitions but it is less clear whether some of the claims made by the free energy principle will actually stand anyway.
Crucially, I think that the main point made by the free energy principle so the presence of internal states doing inference about external states, say, captured by this approximate base and inference lemma.
It is all but obvious without blankets. So, if there is no approximate base and inference lemma is there still a free energy principle. I don't know. I actually don't know.
Third point so active inference without a free energy principle. I guess that you know usually people see just you know a single spectrum of development for free energy principle and active inference.
They say well you know it started in 2006 or what if the brain was a thing doing inference about following accounts of predictive coding.
And there's about you know seven years of, you know, models of brain activity cognition learning perception action agency attention, etc, etc.
In the 2013 life as we know it paper where things seem to move from just neuroscience to the whole field of theoretical biology.
And then there's a big paper in 2019.
The so called monograph by first and where he where he tries to say that this principle may actually apply to all non equilibrium.
All out of equilibrium systems in a thermodynamic sense so not only biology but also say physical systems out of equilibrium with some specific say extra constraints for biological ones.
You know, I'm leaving their match because of some recent work that has been done in terms of especially category theory.
And even like some of the recent work in differential geometry, where the free energy principle is being laid down like in a specific, and I guess more precise mathematical form that could actually tell us something else.
So, as I said, like, you know, some people see this as a, as a single spectrum. I honestly tend to see this more as a branching process, where at least since 2013.
We had, you know, active inference doing stuff with per blankets, you know, just normal inference with a different cost function.
We had the free energy principle with freestyle blankets. So all of the stuff that I've been talking about during this presentation, and we had an attempt to explain active inference with the specific choice of a cost function derived from this freestyle
assumptions that I had at the very beginning. And I think these three can work mostly independently. So, you know, we could do all of our cool active inference models without actually having to explain the origins of things agency minds and life.
And, and I think this is a viable, a viable option.
Beyond the FEP and this is really the last line, which probably brings me to the 60 minutes that was given. This is something you know that I largely under development and you know that I'm shame, shamefully advertising with some
people on the right that I think are doing some really cool work. So Nathaniel Virgo, Martin Biel, Simon McGregor, trying to say, capture some of the main ideas of the FEP in a category, theoretic, say framework.
And based say on
yes, synthetic probabilities, Markov categories, and, and all of the cool stuff happening there at this point in time, and not the right like something that I'm trying to work on.
Well, actually not working honestly, but when I'm trying to study. Yes, some of the stuff. Some of the claims made by the free energy principle and actually inspired by cybernetics, and all of the other cool stuff in control theory back in the 70s.
Through a also category, category, theoretic lens, and no pun intended for those of you who know what a lens is.
In terms of double categories, and yeah lenses and charts so trying to understand how different systems can actually be connected to each other.
And say like different lenses, blah, blah, whatever, we can talk about the later and how, especially their behavior is related so if I give it to dynamical systems. And if I study their behavior so their inputs and outputs, what can I say about those dynamical systems
especially if I cannot see their state.
And this is the stuff on the right is working the stuff on the left is still not working but it's something that I believe could be, you know, a good avenue for people still interested in claims made by the free energy principle.
And with that, I'll leave it to hero for the second part.
I guess of this event.
Thank you everyone.
