Thank you for the introduction program and thanks for the invitation.
So everything I want to discuss today is for this.
So I realize, given the audience that what I prepared for the long time is a bit of a stick to my original plan.
I'm going to talk a little bit about a series. So let me first try to explain what the general context is.
So I want to very briefly recall what the statement is over the complex numbers.
Let me state the serum.
So we fix compact.
And then we have an example of the category.
So between on the one hand, the category of presentations of the topological fundamental ethics, so basically fixing the base point here on a dimensional.
And on the other hand, so my stable.
So I'm going to close on this.
With vanishing.
Rational challenge.
We not record precisely what these conditions mean, but maybe just it's one of me.
So the boundary is a pair.
E, comma, sit off where he is on the room of the background.
So it's what is called the X field so it's an original map from the two.
It's invisible.
It's going to be answered with a shift of differential so on X.
So, as I said, it's going to be.
And it has to satisfy the X field condition, which is.
So, another way to say this is, if you fix local basis of the shift of differential, then you can look at these bases as a coordinator.
And we are just requiring that this community.
And such a guy, this kind of statement is called not a video series equals.
As a generalization of the composition in degree one.
So, each one of the super shift which over section is a shift of differential.
And singular code is also the same as morphism from.
I want to see.
So I think of the statement or some kind of generalization for the case of the additive of G a to G a.
Okay.
As you can guess, I'm serious about finding the key and a lot of these statements.
I would like to replace my compact.
And proper.
We're seeing the right team.
We're seeing here is a complete.
Close.
For example is a few.
So, for example, my work of show so that the host of arms the consequence degenerates for such smooth property spaces, which provide some kind of partial justification for this being among analogous this condition of us.
So if you can already observe is okay and the right and the left hand side.
No, we will be like, consider the other fundamental group.
Of course, it where our presentations to be continuous.
So if I, at least if I know all these adjectives, the notion of this bundle still makes sense.
If I seem to have a bundle has been direct a bundle for the United.
Before fully switching to the piano setup, let me observe that first step.
I think that seems a construction of this equivalence over C is to use them and need that to.
We can replace.
So presentation of the fundamental book.
So if you have hope, which is our presentation.
We can attach to that connection.
And as the underlying vector bundle.
We take the product of the vector space V with the universal cover.
And you move this out by the diagonal action.
So this is some good connection.
But already this first step is a period problematic in the analytic setting.
So,
as a rigid setting as a universal cover does not really make sense as a rigid space.
But what you can still do is embed your category of smooth spaces over C.
Inside the bigger category in which taking such a limit of our own possible.
And in this case, we can embed will facefully inside the category of diamonds.
And in this category, you can make sense.
As ships.
You can do a text either as a limit.
All possible 50
We can look at the corresponding vector bundle w.
And since it's not a rigid space.
The thing you get this way is not a vector bundle for the analogy topology. So what you get is an example of the following
definition.
So, this definition makes sense for any X space.
So let me know it's being
an X space.
Then you can consider the inside of this.
It's a certain site so as a category.
The category of all
perfect to its basis.
And you need to undo this because that's an important topology and you take topology
generated by
a subjective map
of affinity perfect.
So it's a very fine topology.
Basically, it's a text.
Some kind of fun.
In this context, the only condition you put is certain quite a capacity assumption on the cover.
And
I could also actually have work with support.
But since this is this will define a cover.
So let me define a perfect space.
And the object that I just defined is an example of a shift of modules which
will become by construction.
So let me
introduce a site I can also introduce the corresponding shift so let go.
So the shift on the V side, which says some perfect to its best to just bring your functions on S.
So that's what I defined to be the structure shift on the V side.
So I can define the V vector bundle.
Thanks.
Sometimes I will just save it on that. Yeah.
Sorry.
When you say surjective you just mean surjective on like sense of points.
Yes.
It's not as much of a space.
Yeah.
On.
If you have any specific to its best.
Yeah.
Cover is just
cover will be a family of
I between perfect to its basis of a fix with the properties that whenever
for any whether compact open
you in S.
I can find
subset of I which is finite.
And
for each
I'm J. I want
I inside the S I which is quite a compact open
and the judge you is a union of the images.
Please.
Turkey's objective map of adding spaces that any product open can be covered by finding many products.
Okay.
Well, if you were just in question.
No, I think I want to.
I think I want to.
Okay, so, so let me finish this.
Sometimes I will just say.
This is a finite look at the free ship.
I don't want you on these.
Maybe I should have said you put this quite a capacity condition in the definition of the color just because you want to avoid.
Like, if you have say something with this.
But the origin into it and consider it's open complement.
Okay, so
I have a space X that the two maps consisting of X and the identity map was any point with the inclusion would be a cover.
I think that if you try to imitate what you would do overseas.
So I guess I'm confused by what be means that.
Just as a vector space.
So anyway, let's make use of this construction it was more to try just to materialize why one may in this setup be led to consider.
So the question I'm trying to address is not exactly trying to answer another to find a pediatric analog of this.
I think some serum but rather to try to go and we need to try to relate.
So this notion of be bundled is due to five things, which gave it another name is for five things for these objects that generalize our presentations.
So it's definition looks a bit different but it's actually equivalent to this notion of the bundle for his proper.
So it contains pretty facefully the category of representation of the by one like this, which someone justifies his name.
He observes that somehow, instead of finding you can see so you can try to answer.
More general but sometimes easier question, which is instead of relating representations of the fundamental book to some expounders with this some adjective which should somehow replace the one we had overseas.
So if you can do that, then you can wonder what is the expounders which come from our presentations instead of generalize our presentation, but this is a question I won't discuss today.
The focus will be on relating this to much. So you can see to this as trying to describe vector bundles for this very fine to put it in terms of data which are more only involved the analytic or a type of.
In fact, there is no reason to restrict to the character as a base is a completely divided by extension of two people.
And what follows, we will also consider other kind of things.
So maybe one.
So continuing about the bundles is that if this is a not a space but more perfect space.
The question of you.
And anything with the bundles are the same.
I don't really gain anything but considering the topology instead of analytic topology.
But in general, in the case of spaces, these two notions are very different.
And maybe I can give two facts which show this is different. So let's say that instead of being over so much like a little speed or a little bit.
You put yourself in the simplest possible situation. So that is just the other spectrum of case, okay.
For me means that it's a complete discreetly valued with perfect.
Then you can compare.
The bundles.
So I claim that this contains strictly the category of analytics.
So that's a vector bundle of the analytic topology and I'd expect them to feel it's just the same thing as a case of space.
So if I look at the vector bundles, I can put it back to the point and also which is given by adding spectrum of the completed algebraic closure of K.
And this is a perfect to it. So by the theorem of you after this pullback I get something which is just an analytic vector bundle.
This is a complete algebraic project. And then I just need to remember how to listen. And so the category you get is just the same thing as a category of finite dimensional.
See.
So my linear continues.
So I'm going to look at the computations.
We'll see is
which
is bigger.
The other illustration of this difference between the numbers.
The computation of shops so that if you have mixed to be which is a smooth grid in space.
Back to my original setting.
Space of us see us passing.
So we have a morphism of site from the V site.
With a site with any title cover defined in particular.
And shows the computer's higher direct images of the suit your ship on the V side along this one.
And when you look at what you see in the AI.
So in some sense, this structure shift on the V side.
See some information about differential.
Somehow.
Maybe to describe the bundles will be able to do so on the Italian side to fix by using some information involving the differences.
Please welcome.
For increasing the window.
So for which case this is the same these two.
Yeah.
I mean,
I
don't know.
I don't think though.
I think the arcade.
For me, it just means.
Let me just say, sorry, but then they're not the same right.
There will never be the same.
Okay, like how about this case.
Sorry, before you.
Yeah, let me assume.
Okay, so.
So this question of creating the boundaries on its own has been studied quite a lot since almost 20 years and started with five things.
And I won't try to survey all contributions.
But let me just say that in all, almost all situations, almost all cases where people have studied these questions, the features are always the same that locally on this.
Usually one can find the correspondence.
It's between.
Small B bundles.
Small B bundles.
I don't know if you find I mean small has really depending on the authors, different technical meaning.
Small means that you are close to the unit object.
And this is okay this correspondence really work very nicely but only between these small subcategories and usually, and then some strong assumption and picks, and then you can try to you can localize this statement so removes this assumption that you work locally on it.
Again, between small objects.
And there's some assumptions.
For example, assuming that.
This is a generic fiber of a smooth form of skin.
Also.
Which has a lift.
You can go from this local statement to next to a global state, still appearing only between small objects.
So this would prove our similar kind.
But some of the.
So, they are not really new, but the goal is somewhat to provide a perspective on this question which hopefully explain a bit more clearly, which part of the construction are coming from which part of the construction of this correspondence
of these sculptures, some of these stories is fun to reality and make this kind of globalization and not fail.
Already the case of.
Show you that one cannot be too optimistic because in this case this category on the left of gamma representation.
This is the original work of said, not to be equivalent to what is the role in this setting of the way of it, which is the category of same.
So we see that origin is very simple cases when cannot really expect an equivalent of categories between all of them.
Any questions.
Could you maybe comment more on that assumption, sort of like a.
I will try to come back to this assumption.
The main tool we use is the whole state stack of as introduced by Greenfield and battery.
I wanted to give some reminder on this prismatic stats, but maybe I will for some reasons make it a bit shorter.
So,
the formalism and notations I will use are the ones of that.
So what they achieve is the following so let's know.
Let's see if you can format scheme.
It's not assumed to be to be smooth.
To the subject.
To search a format scheme but only we are able to attach.
We have a certain stack.
On the category of rings on which.
So it's a stock for the PQC topology.
So it's defined as certain device stack.
So it's counting devices.
Satisfying.
Let's see.
If you have any.
Object on the prismatic side.
So what you get is a map from which I will call a whole a bar.
From the formal spectrum of a bar which right.
To the hotel stack.
And what they call is a point.
Your format scheme X is fine and perfect to it.
And this morphism. So you can, since you have a perfect way to ring, it corresponds to a certain perfect prism.
A comma.
So that a comma.
Which is given by taking the usual contents.
We have that.
Then the map.
For a bar.
Is actually on the morphism.
So this will be more generally too.
For any.
What is called a regular.
If you replace.
Okay.
So in fact, you are in the setup work.
So now we work with formal schemes instead of pretty spaces and locally for.
And this property of the stack is a perfect way to allow us to do the main construction.
Again, it's.
Yeah, I also forgot to say that this construction of the stack is.
Covalently.
You have a map of the format schemes, X to Y, you get a new smart from George takes that of X to George takes that of.
And this is what we will use together with this fact. So whenever I pick a perfect way to be.
S, together with a map.
So here the format scheme.
Then by funerality is a map from the corresponding on state stats. And by the fact, I recall this way.
To mark.
And so in particular, if I have a perfect complex on George takes time.
I can just pull it back to perfect complex and this font.
So this way we get a font up from.
Perfect complexes on.
The whole state start with this.
To.
Perfect complex on the category of all perfect spaces.
My link to my key format scheme, but then I can further pass to the generic fiber.
Then I get a perfect complex on the V side of the generic file.
I can pass to the generic category on the left, and I get a function which I want to call alpha.
So this is the main player of this talk, it will be to understand the property of this construction.
So this is the main.
One of the main results.
So this construction is completely general.
It works for any.
But now I want to specialize to a situation where I try to understand the.
So let me from now on assume that X.
Is either a smooth.
Okay.
Well, K can be.
These are.
Perfectly.
In characteristics zero.
Oh.
Okay.
Then I claim that the font of.
Alpha.
So, something I also did not say about the project stacks is that it sends.
So given that you only care about like, okay, we care about smooth for my schemes.
So in particular, they are seem to me and I've already mentioned.
So this is, as I said to me to put it here, I can cover them by such was a little awesome.
So one would try to somehow pull.
So here it is perfect.
That's right. Yes.
Yes.
But, okay.
You could try to find a, I mean, you can find a product that we cover of your smooth for my scheme by something perfect to it.
But then when you look at the church now, so when you look at the fiber products.
You will get something which is not necessarily perfect to it.
But only with our glass.
So you still have some good control on what the watch takes that look like in this case.
But for general,
you can't really try to pull this by some kind of decent argument.
You have to argue directly using those systems.
And the way we do it is by we're using the fact that I did not tell you yet that in the smooth case you have a very nice I mean in this particular situation have a nice description of this specific description of this.
This.
Which is also due to.
So the description will be a little different depending whether you are over the ring of integers are perfect to it.
The situation which I will call the geometric situation.
And if you are in the case of other ring of integers of the field, which is what I want to put the risk.
But in the first case we can even allow the base to be any perfect to be the ring of integers.
The baby for time reasons that we just discussed the geometric case.
So in this case you have the following description so
as a fact.
So this description is only localities, but this is good enough for this statement.
I think that it's.
Smooth, I find for my skin.
This.
Then in this situation we can leave.
In this case we know that there exists a present.
A comma.
It seems over.
It's a perfect prison associating to okay.
The subject.
A comma.
Isomorphic to our.
And then the news map.
The format spectrum of up.
Use on isomorphism.
Between.
State.
And the classifying stack over.
So this is just.
The classifying stack relative best thanks to over X of something which is constructed out of the dungeon bundle of X over okay.
So let me decorate it so I have a shot on the twist.
So here.
Okay.
So it's the.
The completion of the divided power envelope of the zero section in the dungeon bundle of X over okay.
It's a format spectrum of.
It's a format spectrum of X over okay.
So, for example, in the one dimensional situation.
If we assume that this module is treated.
Then we what we are basically doing is we're just looking at.
And we are just adding divided power of the quality.
And then this twist is a bit of a twist.
For what.
To do is.
Not so important.
Okay, I'm.
So then to put this fully face when I statement.
We can argue locally on X so we can reduce.
Okay, just only discussing here the geometry case.
We argue locally on X, and then the state stack.
And then you need to do some explicit computation, which ultimately reduces to a gamma homology computation of a certain parent ring to obtain this free face from my state.
But maybe let me.
More about the proof of the serum and rather tried in the five remaining minutes, try to explain how is this.
This is related to my organization.
And once again, let me focus on the.
So, we see that in this position to alpha X as a target is exactly the kind of things we care.
One of the two categories we care about except that I replaced the category of McDonald's by some derived announcement, which is a category of perfect complexes.
So it's such a free face when I say not to be an exception it remains to understand why the source category hasn't to do with it.
And, again, the relation will be given by the explicit structure of the state stack locally.
Let me maybe first observe that some.
Look at what we have in this local situation.
The argument tells you that the category of.
Chips on the classifying stack.
The classifying stack of X.
So it's not going to be any.
It's going to be a common scheme of okay.
And then you can compute the card to draw under the relation between a category between divided powers and formal completion values at this category is actually equivalent to the full subcategory.
Okay.
The category of what I call around shifts on.
Was a dungeon bundle.
With a twist minus one.
With the following topological nipotence properties are formed by complexes.
And then you have the same.
Open.
You have your forms to mix.
You have a pitch element, each section.
And then time.
Omega one.
That's an important key.
The corpology of them on you.
Okay, so.
Because everyone chips on this classifying stack are exactly the same as.
This is just for my spectrum of us or if it's just a fine as our modules together with an action of the symmetric algebra, such that the action of each of the symmetrical about the dungeon.
So it's more important.
This is exactly the same as the level of the format scheme so far as a expander.
Are we looking towards an expander?
I should.
It was the one condition was this condition that CTA which doesn't.
with each other, is exactly the same thing as saying that you have a natural of the significant
algebra of the terms of model on your module. Okay, so the output of this is that apparently we get
locally on X, so when X is assumed to be alfine, we get a fully faithful factor from
the other category of fixed partners on the formal scheme, which are topological importance
to the example derived version of this because we care about perfect complexes
towards the category of perfect complexes on the list. So that's exactly the mechanism I was
trying to highlight before that this factor alpha X is canonical, but it's when you try to make
excuses in the source category that you need to work locally on X and that you get some
explicit description. So now how to just already be finished by saying how to
like try to globalize such statement because apparently so far we only get something in the
alfine case, which is a very stronger section. So as I said, the usual condition one puts
to globalize is we assume that we have a lift of our formal scheme to a module of size square.
And in the context of the hostage stack, how does that show up? Well, the hostage stack is
always a jail for this
locally when X is alfine, it does speak, but in general, it's still a jail. And this maps to the tangent model.
And the push out of the real estate jail along this natural map is exactly the stack which measures
the obstruction to lift your building formal scheme to edit when you look size square.
So this means that this assumption of liftability does not really tell you that the hostage stack
itself splits, but that it does after this push out.
But so that does not really tell you that there's this liftability assumption that you get a
factor from all topological input on fixed bundles into B bundles. But since after we
playing by Y minus data P, so you also have a map like this, which suggests a composition is just
multiplication by one minus data P. So this tip tell you that to the up to the price of imposing a
stronger topological input of conditional new x field under this liftability assumption, you can
still get a fully faced from some smaller class of X bundles, which is exactly the one part
that's considered towards the bottom. So
this might be my ignorance of what's happening in this area. But if you just did this entire talk,
but you didn't work with the formal scheme, but just something to find over the special fiber, right?
It seems like you should get some kind of relationship between them.
I mean, it should be essentially what's in this oldest Walidovsky paper, right, somehow.
There's something going very close to it. Maybe that's actually in the
I guess so, but I don't know much about this.
I mean, this conditioning right down is also just the Lino-Lose type condition.
It's like sort of a delinear Lose type condition, but deformed others.
So again, what this bogus will respond to relates its bundles in characteristic P2
to module-specific connection to the module, relates its bundles on this type twist
you know, potential P-1 to P-1.
And characteristic P, I'm not sure what would be the order of this formula, which I could
if you want to. Oh, yeah, yeah, I guess we can
I think you can we can recover, like we can recover slightly a weaker version of
Walidovsky by somewhat similar arguments, but slightly different, because I mean
it wasn't characteristic, but essentially by the same argument, let's say.
Okay, I'll just I'll ask you that.
Sorry, did you explain the arguments in the, or you sketch the arguments in the geometric case?
What are the additional inputs in the arithmetic case, if any?
No, I mean, it's essentially just an interesting story.
It shows that the structure of the off-state stack is also a bit different, but so the kind
of structure we get are a bit more involved, because you see both in the three-dimensional
right now. But I mean, both from that, but you don't need to, if you have something which
is supposed to form a scheme of a okay, like this, no PSG, we don't need to impose this
which obviously involves, I guess, of a uniformizer
Okay, I wanted to ask about this last step, particularity.
So am I correct that you don't expressly require
That is here, everything is for the performance scheme, so something I
cheated with it, I did not really explain how you go from such statements to
like, expound those into the geometry. Oh, okay, sorry, you need to say something.
So generic vibration, Chris, what was the sentence that you have about the likeness
that's brought to you, or are the systems of the likeness that you need, actually?
Right, yes. Well,
I mean, I'm not claiming that there is originally technically
an autistic person. I think what you can check is that if you, okay, we look at this
Isogene category, at least in the orphanage case, then I think this you can check to be,
maybe if you decide on what information
stuff you can see to be the same as really expound of some
so generic fiber of the performance scheme, such that, I mean, you can formulate a condition
which is seen out here, which are really involved in the choice of your performance model.
But in fact, if you look at
like omega one,
in fact, this lattice you can describe purely in terms of the generic fiber using the decalage.
So the condition you get is you have
you have a X field here, and you require that for each element coming from this
integral structure, the action is input on point P.
And this actually may look like this condition looks on the, of course, it requires good
direction to be formulated, but it actually does not depend on the choice of the
because you can recover these in terms of decalage from the type.
Sorry, but an element of this module is acting importantly on what
the same conditions. Oh, sorry. So you start off with an object of the Isogene.
Sorry. I'll just give you a X bundle on the generic fiber. What is the condition?
Is that for, okay, so the condition is, so you have an X bundle. So
maybe
n and maybe you can
for any
spa cc plus, which are not to the generic fiber.
So, you want that for any element delta
omega one of
you
it
The claim is that this actually does not depend on, this condition does not depend on.
And it means you are expunged.
I'm going to give you this condition automatically implies that you have matches for access.
I'm not sure it immediately.
But I'm going to drive it like in this case on your category somehow by definition, each one.
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah, but then what we check is that if you have such an M on the genetic fiber, maybe it's not too late.
I guess that it extends to the former steam but at least M proceeds shipped by one.
So if you're faster, if you look at M plus M 51, then it actually is.
So maybe it's only going to be a virus locally.
Yes, I guess so.
This is what this category should be either for the completion of just the future of it.
So it's a target for points.
Questions.
Questions.
