All right, so today I'm going to move on to talk about computing gravitational observables
using amplitudes.
So the two lectures in this one and the next one will be about two observables too, yeah,
two related but different observables.
There's a basic idea that I'm just going to use throughout both lectures.
Let me write what that is, well, sort of either a basic idea or a three-step recipe.
Okay, so the first thing I want to do is to pick an observable.
So just some observable to talk about.
Now, I want an observable which makes sense.
Classically, classically, and in QM.
So in other words, classically and in quantum mechanics.
Why? Well, it's because I want to talk about classical physics, but I want to talk about classical physics using the language of scattering amplitudes.
And scattering amplitudes are things that we know about in quantum field theory.
So I have to start out with a quantum mechanical formalism so that I can use double copy and amplitudes.
And then I need to take the classical limit.
So I want to have an observable that I can talk about in quantum mechanics.
And then I want to take a limit to get a sensible observable in the classical case.
That's the first thing.
Two.
Okay, so the second thing to do.
Oh, let me give it a name.
The second thing I want to do is to pick a state in the quantum mechanical description.
Pick a state side.
And I don't want to pick just any state.
I want to pick a state that has a sensible interpretation in the classical theory.
In other words, I want to pick a state which happens to describe a situation that's in the domain of validity of the classical approximation.
There's a quantum field theory.
That's the underlying thing.
And then there's a classical approximation to the quantum field theory.
So I want to pick a state that has a sensible classical description.
And so pick a state psi in classical approximation.
Let me write it like this.
In the domain of validity of the classical classical approximation.
Okay.
And thirdly, the third thing is, is just the basic idea really.
The third thing is that the final state.
So this is an initial state.
An initial state psi.
So the final state.
The final state is obtained from the initial state by acting with the time evolution operator over all times, which is the S matrix.
The final state is si.
So for that reason, it's inevitable that the change in the observable is going to come out in terms of amplitudes.
So delta observable.
Okay.
So that's a, that's a basic idea.
And I'm going to go through these three steps.
Now for one observable.
And after the break for another observable.
And now let's see.
Yeah, so I thought it might be no harm to give you some references to a little bit of literature here.
So sometimes this story goes into the name of K mo C or K mock, depending on how you think that should be pronounced.
And there's a review, which I wrote on this topic, 2203.13025.
Now, this is one prescription for getting classical physics from scattering amplitudes.
There are other prescriptions.
So this is, this is the way I like.
But so other approaches.
So there are some reviews about other approaches.
So I'll just give you two more references to read about.
All very similar references.
13013.
And 2203 Josh, 13024.
They submitted one before us.
Sometimes you win, sometimes you lose.
Okay.
And this isn't exhaustive.
There's another approach, which I wasn't able to find a review about, which involves using world line theories and methods of quantum mechanics.
There are exponents of that method in the audience with this, for example, and it's so if you want to know about that, then you can book them.
Okay, just another way.
All right, so the observable I'm going to talk about in this lecture is called the impulse.
So this is step one, I have to pick an observable, right?
I'm going to talk about the impulse.
So this impulse, well, it's just a name for the total change in momentum of a particle during a scattering event.
Okay, a total change in momentum of a particle.
So, um, excellent.
So I am then going to define delta P mu of this impulse to be, well, I'll compute, first of all, the expectation value of the momentum operator, the big P mu is a momentum operator, the expectation value of this momentum
operator on a final state.
All right, so that's going to be P final.
And I'm going to subtract from that the initial momentum.
This is definitely low-brow stuff.
So you only got the final momentum, you subtract the initial momentum, it's a change in momentum.
The initial.
So that's the impulse, it's a pretty straightforward thing.
We can rewrite it and, well, sort of helpful to rewrite it a little bit.
So if I insert here S dagger S, which is unity, then I can rewrite the impulse like this, S dagger commutator of momentum operator.
All right, so I chose to insert the S dagger S there.
You could also insert it in the other place.
There's some choice.
We'll play around with these things.
You get fun expressions out of it.
And yeah, yeah, so that's just a choice.
Okay, now if I use S equals one plus I t.
So, S is one plus I t.
Well, obviously the commutator of P mu with one is zero.
So there will be two terms.
There is a term where I pick out the, I fish out the one from the S dagger.
And then there will be commutator of P mu with I t.
And another term was P dagger commutator of P mu with T.
Okay, so that's the impulse.
Now more generally, if you have a different observable, well, you know, just follow the same reasoning, but just shove in whatever that observable is.
So let's say more generally delta O, it would be psi S dagger commutator of your quantum operator for O S.
Sorry.
Okay, so we'll see another example of it like that after the break.
Okay, so that's the observable.
Any questions about that so far?
Also, I'm either incredibly clear or you're tired because it's four o'clock on the fourth day.
God, I can't count.
Okay, very good.
So that's the observable.
Now let's go to step two.
I want to talk about the initial state.
Because I want to arrange it in the domain of legitimacy of the classical approximation, so that'll take a little while to discuss.
Okay.
Now, first of all, I'm going to restrict to a situation where I have two different particles and I'm going to scatter them.
So I'm going to restrict to scattering.
You know, restricting to scattering is a bit of a minus, particularly when we want to talk about say LIGO physically in LIGO, obviously it's bound by cold systems.
But there's a clue in, there's a clue about why I'm making this restriction, you know, this is scattering amplitudes.
I'm going to talk about scattering scenarios.
It will be nice to talk about bound state scenarios and there are some methods to do that.
They're not completely satisfactory.
They work up to certain orders of perturbation theory.
They're sort of good enough at the moment.
But in future, it will be really great if I could start talking about bound states from the start.
It's a bit of a machinery to start talking about bound states and say it's not completely satisfactory.
Anyway, so in these lectures, we're just going to scatter things.
Okay, now, moreover, I want to scatter two different objects.
This is literally supposed to be the picture of scattering billiard balls in classical mechanics, right?
So the particles are different.
I don't want to have a situation where I'm summing over identical particles and finite state or something.
Not for my massive particles at least.
Okay, so in other words, take two different particles.
So to make them as different as possible, I'm just going to make them be quanta of different fields.
So I'll make my particles out of quanta and I'll take different fields with different masses.
But I will assume that my particles are stable.
So the action will be something like, well, I guess there's gravity, right?
So there's a root minus g, g mu.
So I've got at least two kinds of particles because I want to scatter two different particles, g mu nu, g mu.
So some scalar field i, some other scalar field i, and have some mass phi i squared.
So they're just interaction gravitation, right?
Okay, good.
Now, so thinking about the state which should be in the domain of validity of the classical approximation.
Well, in the classical approximation, I'd be able to say that my two particles have well-defined positions and well-defined momentum, right?
So I could give these with exact precision.
Classical, exact positions.
Now, in quantum mechanics, obviously, we can't do that, right? There's this uncertainty principle, you know, I'm starting an important thing.
So I can't specify, you know, give you a state which has particles with exact positions and exact momentum.
What I can arrange is to have particles with positions that are reasonably well-defined and momentum that are reasonably well-defined, right?
And if that uncertainty in the position and the momentum is small compared to other scales in my problem, then I can neglect it.
So that's the idea. I'm going to take the particles and put them in wave packets.
Well, they're in plain wave states, but then put in wave packets such that they have positions, you know, reasonably well-defined and momentum, which are reasonably well-defined.
So in QM, in quantum case, I can have negligible uncertainty.
Okay, so the picture then will be something like this.
So I'll have particles which are in wave packets, so they'll have some uncertainty in position, right?
So let's say that the wave packets have some spatial spread, Lw, which is supposed to be small, and they're separated, they're going to be separated by some big distance,
so a big classical distance, which I'll call b, b is supposed to be, b is going to be the impact parameter.
And so the impact parameter is the distance once you separate particles in a scattering experiment.
In other words, if I have particle momentum p1, particle momentum p2, they're going to be separated through some transverse distance b, the impact parameter.
So the idea then is going to be that Lw is going to be very small compared to b, right?
Okay, so let's say the wave function is spread then.
Wave function spread will be, say, a distance Lw in position space.
So let's have in mind something like a Gaussian, right?
So, you know, a wave packet, a wave function looks like e to the minus x position minus some fiducial position squared over Lw squared.
So that would be the Gaussian describing the position space wave package.
Well, then the wave function spread will be in momentum space.
Momentum space will be h bar over Lw, right?
So that just happens because of Fourier transformations.
Okay, so the wave packet in Fourier space and momentum space will be some p minus, again, there might be some p star.
And now the Lw pops upstairs and there's a h bar squared downstairs.
I'm going to keep the h bars in all the formulae in this lecture.
Well, I say that with a lot of confidence.
I plan to keep the h bars in all the formulae in this lecture.
If you spot any that's missing, yeah, you should let me know.
All right, so negligible uncertainty then is going to mean negligible uncertainty.
Well, very good. So I'll definitely want this Lw to be very small compared to the impact parameter.
So the impact parameters is this transfer separation.
Now, when the particles scattered, they don't always stay, you know, a distance b apart, you know, they will get closer, you know, and there will be a distance of closest approach.
And that distance of closest approach, we might call that Ls.
A scattering like this isn't going to be super important, right, but there's just a distance of closest approach.
Now in perturbation theory, which I'm going to do, then this distance of closest approach is going to be roughly of order b.
Right, but I don't have to make a big difference between.
But you know, in principle, you know, indeed they get closer, but it's just, that's a perturbation away from the, from the b.
So, yeah.
Good.
So that would be one requirement.
But there's another requirement.
And the other requirement is about the momentum space, you know, uncertainty.
So I will certainly want the mass of the particle to be well defined.
You know, I mean, the particle mass is clearly a meaningful thing, classically.
So I'll want the uncertainty in the wave packet to be small compared to the mass m.
So that means that h bar over Lw.
h bar over Lw is going to be very small compared to the mass of the particle.
And I'll make another definition here.
So I'll call m equal to h bar over Lc.
Lc here is a Compton wavelength.
It's technically to reduce Compton wavelength or something like that, but it doesn't matter, right?
So it's just some measure of the Compton wavelength.
So putting these things together, that means that the Compton wavelength is going to be very small compared to the size of the wave packet.
And that in turn will be very small compared to this impact parameter, this Ls.
Maybe I'll just go with b.
Okay.
So this is a set of inequalities that we need to impose on our state.
And that's more or less, you know, that's it in terms of the requirements on the state.
But there's another perspective on this, which is useful.
So let me just spend a moment more on this.
So another perspective.
I suppose the thing about this series of inequalities here is it's very intuitive, but it's all written in terms of position space.
And, you know, we tend to compute in momentum space.
So I actually want to figure out what this looks like in momentum space.
And we can do that by the magic of inverting these.
Let's see.
So that means that 1 over Lc is very much bigger than 1 over Lw.
And that is very much bigger than 1 over b.
I'm remarkably bad at inequalities.
I'm going to do this in very step by step manner in the hope that I don't mess it up.
And now I'm going to multiply it across by h bar.
I told you I'm going to do it step by step.
Okay.
Good.
This one here was the definition of the mass.
So the mass of the particle is very big compared to h bar over Lw and compared to h bar over b.
Now this quantity at the end is the interesting one.
So h bar over b, one way to think about what this thing is, is this thing is border.
So the definition I guess q.
q here is the momenta of the particles that are mediating the interaction.
So h bar over b might be useful for you to remember that the dimensions of h bar is mass times length.
So when I divide by the b, I get a mass.
It's a momentum.
So this q are the momenta of the mediators of the interaction between the particles.
If you think about it in Fourier space, this might make more sense.
This is the wave number, or whatever it be, is the wave number of the Fourier modes of the interaction.
Anyway, so these q's are going to be the momenta of the particles mediating the interaction.
Notice that q then is very small compared to the mass, m, and in particular compared to the momentum.
The momentum is the mass times some velocity.
So q is small compared to p.
And that's actually a very useful thing because I'm going to be working in momentum space.
I'll encounter these q's, I'll have p's, and I'm going to expand.
And, you know, anytime I see a small q, I can dump it compared to a big p.
It's also true from this inequality that q is small compared to h bar over l w.
And we will use both of these inequalities to simplify the expressions of the observables in the classical domain in a little while.
Okay.
Yeah, so there's a couple of remarks one can make about this before moving on.
So I'm working here in, obviously I want to talk about classical physics,
but I also want my particles to be point-like.
So I'm going to be, I'm going to, you know, imagine they're very small.
No, the classical particles are small compared to other scales in the problem.
So you can view these inequalities as being two inequalities, one for imposing the classical limit and one for imposing a point particle limit.
So this one here is more to do with classical, let's see, classical, and here point particle.
It's a point particle part.
So I'm going to neglect any finite size effects.
Classical objects can have various finite size effects.
Simone already mentioned love numbers.
That's a particular kind of finite size effect.
While I've been neglecting that in these lectures, it's possible to include them.
That's very interesting.
But, you know, the simplest thing to do is just have a completely structuralist situation.
Okay.
Excellent.
Now, to write the state, I need a little bit of notation.
Okay.
So I want to write the state in terms of wave packets.
I'm going to work in momentum space.
So I'll be writing an integral, all right, side, as an integral over suitable momentum.
Let me just integrate it over DP1, DP2.
I'll say more about what this measure really is in a moment.
But I'll just think of it as an integral over suitable momentum.
I'll put particle one in some wave packet, particle two in some other wave packet.
You know, in momentum, you know, there'll be wave packets that impose this set of inequalities.
By the way, I might fall into old habits.
We used to call these the Goldilocks inequalities.
Or I think we're just right for the classical limit.
Anyway, so these wave packets will impose those inequalities.
I'm going to translate one of the particles with respect to the other.
So I'll translate particle one through this impact parameter B.
That's where it comes in.
And then I will put two plane wave states of these different fields.
DP1 is going to be a quantum of field phi one and P2, you know, quantum of field phi two, so it's different part.
Great. Now, so what do I mean by this integral here?
Well, I'm integrating over states, on-shell states.
So this integral will be over the phase space, you know, the on-shell phase space of these states.
So, so the measure, I'll write the measure as D phi.
Well, I'll define a D phi of P.
So this is going to be the integral over the on-shell phase space of a particle.
So the definition will be, so an integral over four momenta, D4P, I'll say with these little hats are in the moment.
A delta function with a plus setting the particle on shell.
So here DP with a hash is just DP over two pi, just tie these up, these two pi's.
I really have to worry about the two pi's, but I have muscle memory for keeping them along, so I might as well.
There is a delta plus of P, that is defined to be two pi delta of P.
And finally, delta plus of P squared just means delta of P squared theta of P0.
So I'm integrating over on-shell momenta delta P squared equals M squared with a theta function setting the energies positive.
And then there are various hats that gobble up the two pi's.
Okay.
Very good. So the wave packet then, or the wave, the state.
So we can write the psi as an integral D phi P1P2 pi P1P2 e to the i b dot P1 over h bar P1P2.
This phi here, this is just 5P1, 5P2.
You know, it wouldn't really be necessary to put them in different wave packets.
You could entangle them if you want.
Okay, so that's our state.
So any questions about that?
Fantastic clarity. Excellent.
Wonderful. Alrighty.
So let's then move on. So now that's step two.
We've discussed the state in sufficient detail.
So now let's go on to actually expanding the final state in terms of amplitudes and we'll get an expression for the observable.
Okay.
So, well, from over here, you know, we have an expression for the delta P mu in terms of common.
Maybe this is a question about the phi one P one on five to be two. Are they like Gaussians?
Yeah.
Well, they're Gaussians. You know, you should have in mind that they're Gaussians, but there is a little trickiness, but this measure here has got, you know, it's a non-shell measure.
So if I integrate over the energy, the P0, to get rid of that delta function, the delta of P squared minus m squared, you'll get a one over two energy downstairs.
Yeah.
Right. So, so that's a little bit weird, you know, if you think of ordinary quantum mechanics, we don't have that weird denominator.
So, big deal. So you just multiply the phi by a root two E, root two E, by a two E. Yeah, actually it's probably better to make a root two E.
So you need to put something there that will handle these energy denominators, actually square root is a better option.
Then when you take expectation values of things, we've got two root two E's, one two, they cancel off, and now you've got it.
That's the simplest thing you could do.
Okay. Thank you so much.
Okay.
Good. Okay, so there is an expression for the impulse. Let me just write it down again.
So I'm going to talk about the impulse on particle one. So I should really talk about the momentum operator of particle one.
P one mu T plus T dagger P one mu T psi.
So the point here is this is the operator, the momentum mom up of particle one.
If you were to put the total momentum, the momentum of all of the fields in the problem, you know, particle one, particle two, and the gravitational field, that will commute with T, right?
The total momentum commutes with the S matrix.
That guarantees conservation of momentum.
It's a bit of a triviality in quantum field theory, but in the classical case, that's actually remarkably important.
Classical dynamics often have some problems with conservation of momentum, radiation reaction is the issue.
You're guaranteed from the outset that radiation reaction will be incorporated correctly in this approach because you're doing quantum field theory, which is, you know, satisfies conservation of momentum.
So that's a nice aspect.
Yeah, maybe I'll talk about that more tomorrow.
It's kind of unlikely. I keep sort of, I've got a long list of things I'd like to talk about tomorrow and I only have one hour.
Anyway, you can also ask me about your favorite topic.
Good. Okay.
Now, so let's expand the stage here.
Do I have space here?
So now, so expanding this thing with this notation.
So I have a phi.
I have a psi, you know, a bra and a cache.
So they all have two momenta.
So I'm going to have four on shell momenta.
Yeah.
So the question is, why have I just put a P one here and not a, not a P two, right?
So, yeah, so I've translated particle one with respect to particle two.
So I could indeed translate particle two, you know, particle one and two together.
But, you know, all I really want is that there one particle is separated from the other by some distance.
B.
And this just stops me writing e to the I B one dot P one e to the I B two dot P two.
It's a bit of a cheat.
Actually, in many ways, it's nicer to keep it going on, but there's a finite amount of space on the blackboard.
So I just said P, P two to zero.
I'm choosing a, yeah, I'm choosing to place particle two along the origin.
Yeah.
So it's a choice of choice of coordinates.
That's exactly what you're looking for.
Yeah.
I'm choosing to place particle two along the origin.
Yeah.
So it's a choice of choice of coordinates.
That's exactly what you're looking for.
Yeah.
The physics won't care about this choice.
I mean, ultimately, what the physics cares about is B one minus B two if you have an arbitrary origin.
Right.
So I've said B two to zero and then B is the irrelevant quantity.
Is B a three vector here?
Or is it a four vector?
No.
B is a four vector.
I have in mind that B is a four vector.
Okay.
But, you know, really, you know, and it's maybe sort of indication in this picture here.
Really, there's only two components of B that are physical.
You know, there's some trans separation and the transverse plane.
So for that reason, you can impose useful thing to do in many cases, you can impose a condition that B dot P one equals zero and B dot P two equals zero.
So that removes the two sort of irrelevant components.
Thank you.
Excellent.
Sorry.
Oh, one quick question.
Just to make sure that things didn't go off the rails yet.
I mean, when I'm thinking about these states, these are still like, can I think about them in terms of a Wigner classification of one particle states?
Yes.
So it's still the usual quote unquote.
Yeah.
So I've hit the vacuum with creation operator for field one to make the P one creation operator from field two to make P two.
Yeah.
No funny business.
Nice.
Thanks.
They're kind of trivial particles.
Excellent.
So here I am.
So I'm expanding this expression for Delta P.
And I'm going to write out what the state is.
So now, so there's going to be two momentum in this psi and two more in this size.
So I'll call the final stage if you want, or this, this is an expectation value.
So nothing is final state here.
Well, I guess that's science.
I'm going to call the left thing P primes and the right piece.
Okay.
So now I'll have a wave packet from each side, five star P one prime P two prime five P one P two.
And there is the, this little translation operator e to the I B dot P from each side.
So e to the I B dot P one minus P one prime over h bar.
And yes, and what's left.
See, I'm going to try to squeeze this in.
There's P one prime P two prime.
So now I just expanding the actual, you know, the field theoretic part of this thing times I commutator of P one and T plus T dagger commutator of P one U and T P one P two.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
So this is one of the reasons why it's nice to have this notation for the phase space.
It's nice to have a place to put all of these, these things that you're integrating over, you can get more and more of these.
So you don't want to have too many.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
So we'll just stick.
Excellent.
So now there's two terms here.
There's a term which has a commutator.
Well, I guess the both of them.
There's a term which is one T and a term which is two.
There's a P mu T and then a T dagger P mu T.
So the first term.
So the first term here is going to involve the first term.
So I'm just looking at the matrix element here is going to involve P one prime P two prime.
Yeah.
So there is a factor of I will be right like this.
I guess the point here is that this momentum operator, it can act on particle P one prime and will bring out a factor P one prime.
Just right like this.
There's the I P one prime minus P one.
Mew right.
So this is this commutator in one side is the P one hits the P prime is that it's the P prime there.
And the other term this commutator, the momentum operators on the other side and it hits the cash and it brings up P one.
So we got this term here.
And everything else is just P one P two prime T.
So that's a four point amplitude.
So this is just a four point amplitude P one P two P one prime P two prime.
And then there is going to be the usual momentum conservation condition.
Let me just to breathe it like that.
Now that's true to all orders right.
So this first term just always gives you a four point amplitude.
So it's a four point multi loop amplitude.
No restriction on the number of loops here.
So good.
You know, this is coming out as promised in terms of scattering opportunities.
The second term is a little bit more complicated.
So the second term here involves T dagger P mu and T.
So now the second term.
Sometimes people give it a name who will call this the K mock push.
Maybe it is a useful thing to have a name for that term.
Okay.
So to simplify this term, the convenient thing to do is to insert a complete set of states.
So let me write this term.
So is it the second term is T dagger P one mu T.
So it just comes from the second term in the top of this blackboard here when I expand at the state.
So to simplify this, I'll insert a complete set of states here.
And I'll write this complete set as a sum over some states X and an integral over some phase space.
So you'll see why in the moment, the twiddle one, the twiddle two.
This is just some phase space integrals.
I will get a factor P one prime P two prime.
So here T dagger and now I'll insert my complete set.
I'm putting a complete set in here keeping my particles one and two in the game, right?
They're exactly stable particles.
So they've got to be in the complete set and the T dagger doesn't get rid of them.
X is some sum over any other thing.
Now I want to be in a region where my momentum transfer is small compared to masses.
I can't per-create particles.
So while all this X is going to be are a bunch of graviton states.
Well, there can principle be a bunch of gravitons in there.
You know, one, two, I don't know, a bunch of gravitons, right?
Now, so then continuing, oh dear.
Good. So now I'll have this commutator here.
The P one momentum operator can hit this state P twiddle one and give me some contribution to momentum.
And the other side of the commutator will pick out a P one.
Otherwise, I'll have a T P one P two.
So now I need to multiply. Sorry.
So when I write these X's here, let's just multiply by.
So P total one minus P one index mu.
Yeah, so this term here.
This was an amplitude P one P two four point amplitude.
This term is more complicated.
So it is a product of amplitudes.
There could be many other particles in here.
So it's not necessarily, and this isn't necessarily a four point amplitude.
This isn't necessarily a four point amplitude.
But this thing is a cut of a four point amplitude.
I waited cut because you have to multiply by this P one tilde in here and P one tilde is the momentum of that particle there.
So there's some stuff in the cut that you've got to throw in there.
And then you do your face base.
Anyway, you can extract the information from this for this from a four point output, a cut of a four point multi loop amplitude.
Good.
Sorry. Can I ask a question?
Yeah.
So the two terms, they have different.
So the second term is two T and the first one is one T.
So in perturbation theory, there is a mismatching coupling in order.
Sorry.
Well, you know, perturbatively lowest order thing is just one T.
It's next to leading order, then you need the one with two T's.
Okay.
So does that have a meaning like the second terms fixes something at the starting from the second order?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's right, actually.
It probably fixes up a couple of things in second order next to leading order.
But yes, yeah, that's one way of thinking about it.
Okay.
So when you inserted a complete set of states, you're, you're assuming that there's always two massive particles.
And that like takes into account like the, the, the golden locks approximation that you're not forming black holes or like,
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's that's right.
I mean, clearly in a quantum mechanics process, you could have a hard process of pair creation.
That's not classical.
And so here at the classical domain of religion, the classical approximation, my, my massive particles, you know, I think of them as billiard balls.
You know, they're scattering often another, you know, you don't create billiard balls in a classical scattering process.
You definitely don't create black holes.
Quick question.
So when you resolve the commutator and like act with the P on the left and the right, how do you pick which momentum you pick out of the multi particle states because like it's not clear to me there's prescription for which part of the Fox space the P acts on so you have like the
difference of two momentum on both the first and second terms.
Why not the other choice of initial or final momentum.
So maybe this is the most confusing one right because so from here, you know, there is a there's a this started out life as the commutator of this P on this T right.
Now it is the momentum operator of the quantum field one.
Right.
So, now the stuff in this state that involves quantum field one by hypothesis is only one, you know, there's there's this, and there's that.
So the X's here are all like, you know, massless particles, gravitons, photons, you know, whatever stuff like that.
And I'm not allowed to create new particles of quantum field one.
That wouldn't be a classical process. And it violates my conditions that the momentum transfer is small this q, this momentum is small compared to the masses of the particle.
And where in the setup is it implicit that it's the P is picking out the momentum of the first particle then I'm sorry just a little bit.
Yeah, it's just when I said it here.
So here I put in momentum operator particle.
Okay, thank you.
Yeah.
So I mean if you did, it's actually very interesting to put in other momentum operators to be honest.
So, but in this, you know, the theory I have in mind just has my two massive particles, one and two, the quantum fields for those two massive particles, and then gravity.
So the total momentum operator is momentum operator of one momentum operator to a momentum operator in the gravitational field.
And it's really interesting to see what happens when you put the momentum operator the gravitational field in here.
But yeah, let's fill in this left.
Okay, cool.
Okay.
Excellent. So, now, what I'm going to do in the rest of this, this lecture at the moment now is discuss.
The lowest order approximation to this impulse.
On my laundry list of things for tomorrow is the next leading order or approximations the impulse.
But today, let me just talk about the lowest order.
The lowest order that means I get to ignore the second term, get to ignore this cut term.
So I'm just going to talk about this first term and I'm going to talk about this first term and the lowest order approximation.
Okay, so good.
So I will therefore be looking at this term, inserting it into this expression here.
And I want to make some simplifications to deal with these face face integrals and get formulae which are a little bit more explicit, but we can go ahead and look at and hope I'm planning to give you some homework to keep you happy.
I'm sure you've got plenty of time for homework.
Yeah, maybe next week.
Okay.
So good. So I'm going to think of the process like this. So I have particle one and particle two scattering.
So particle one comes off with the final momentum, which I'm going to call P one plus two.
Particle two is going to come off with the final momentum, which I'm going to call P two minus Q.
Right.
So good.
I'm going to simplify.
So, so there's going to be two steps in the simplification.
So the first thing I'm going to do is in this phase space integral here, I'm going to integrate over the momentum of particle two using the momentum conserving delta function.
And the second thing I'll do is I will make a change of variable.
And the change of variable will be to set P one prime equal to P one plus Q.
So this P one prime here, it'll become D phi of P one plus Q, right.
I'll think of Q as being the variable of integration.
Okay, so now, so now is when I get the lengthy expression.
So let me rearrange these blackboards for a moment.
Let's see, honestly.
Oh, I do like that.
Okay.
Okay, oh, can we see this?
Yeah.
Okay, so delta P one at leading order is going to be so from here, I'm going to get some bunch of integrals will be an integral D phi of P one P two.
Okay, so those are the phase space integrals that I haven't touched.
I've integrated over P two prime using the delta function and I've made a change of variables for P one prime.
But I have to remember that I've got these delta functions here.
So there will be a delta function.
It'll be an integral first of all involving D for Q.
So these are the variables for particle one.
Now these delta functions, so there's two delta functions for particle one and particle two.
Their job is to enforce the on shell conditions for particles P one prime and P two prime like outgoing particles.
So that on shell condition is going to be delta P one plus Q of P one dot Q plus Q squared to P one dot Q.
So I'm just squaring P one plus Q there subtracting m squared because I know that P one squared is m squared.
D phi. There's another delta function of particle two.
It's just got a minus sign because it's P two minus Q squared.
There are theta functions.
So those are the data functions that set the energy positive.
These data functions that are here so on that delta plus.
Okay, now there's other stuff coming from here.
There are wave functions.
Phi star P one plus Q P two minus Q.
So that's P one prime P two prime by P one and P two.
Okay, the translation operators.
Well, this one simplifies up a bit already because P one prime is P one plus Q.
And this is e to the minus i e dot Q over h bar.
Now, so what's left is the sort of first term stuff there.
Let me say times come down here.
There's not much more.
So there's a factor I a Q mu because P one prime minus P one is Q and then the four point amplitude.
Let me write it just a four zero.
So that is the four point amplitude at tree level.
All right.
So it's quite a lot of writing, but I haven't yet made a taken advantage of these simplifications that are present in the classical limit.
So let's use those now.
So the first classical simplification is that the Q Q is very small compared to the P to both these PI.
In particular, that means that in these delta functions, the Q squared is a very small shift compared to the P dot Q's.
So I approximate delta two P one dot Q plus Q squared is approximately delta of two P one dot Q.
That's something that we need to be careful about.
It'll be fine at tree level.
And it's sort of generally fine.
However, one does need to take care about that.
It's something that you need to be particularly careful of at higher loops.
So let's discuss that tomorrow.
But for now, we don't need to worry and this is fine.
Similarly, these data functions are always unity, right?
Because that amount of energy is very small compared to that amount of energy.
So these tatas are just one and you don't need to be careful about that.
That's just fine.
Excellent.
The second simplification involves these wave packets here.
Now, so a way to think about this is, you know, let's just think about, let's say, phi one of P one plus Q.
So that's just the wave packet for particle one.
So I need its conjugate, but let's not worry about that.
It's a detail.
The next thing is to say, you know, up to some square root of energy.
And we like this, this thing looks like e to the minus P one minus, you know, some classical momentum squared.
And so it's P one plus Q minus the classical momentum squared L w squared over h bar squared.
So we meet this quantity here, Q L w over h bar.
And while you see from the inequality in the bottom of that board at the top, that Q L w over h bar is very small.
So I can dump the shift here.
That shift is just zero.
So this is approximately phi one of P.
This makes intuitive sense.
Well, physics shouldn't be able to look inside the wave packets.
All right.
So then delta P one mu at leading order becomes.
So there's this integral over P one and P two.
There's, there's an integral over the Q's to P one dot Q.
And the Thetas are one by P one on P two.
Quantity squared e to the minus I b dot Q over h bar times a four zero IQ mu.
Okay, now we have a bit of a notation for this.
You see this wave packet now is just something that steeply peaked at the classical momentum.
So when I do this integral over the phase base of P one and P two, its job really is just to say, ah, those moment you should evaluate them at the classical moment.
So we write this thing as, so there's a stubble angle brackets that was useful to introduce.
It takes care of the phase space integrals.
And that goes wave packets.
e to the minus I b dot Q over h bar IQ mu a four zero.
So the meaning of this is place P I equal to their classical values.
At the end, basically, and impose P I q equals zero.
You should do that at the end.
There's certain classic cancellations, which occur at loops at loop orders, which you need to take care of before you can actually do that.
Okay, how long do I have left?
Should we break now or I want to give the homework and it's just a question whether I rise it up now or whether I rise it up during the break.
It's, it's fine.
We can go a couple of minutes over.
Okay.
Awesome.
Okay.
So, yeah.
Okay.
So I do have one quick remark.
Well, actually.
So if you think of this, this tree amplitude as some number over Q squared plus a constant plus a polynomial in Q squared, then it is worth noting that the integral delta two P one dot Q delta two P two dot Q.
So I can integrate to the minus I B dot Q over H bar.
Q mu times these C zeros plus C one Q squared plus dot dot dot.
Well, this thing is going to involve you see the Q mu I can trade for a derivative with respect to be.
So then it's gone.
I can integrate out two of the components of the Q using these delta functions so that I just have a two dimensional integral and all that's left is well times the C zero is just an e to the I B dot Q.
That gives you a delta function, the delta function impact parameter space delta two B.
Right.
But this whole setup is designed so that B is large compared to other quantities which I'm not computing.
B not zero.
Right.
This delta function only goes off when B is zero.
So it's zero.
Right.
So you get to throw away this term contact terms that are irrelevant.
Well, these kind of contact terms are relevant classically.
Similarly, these Q squares here.
Well, they just give you del derivatives of delta functions.
So they're even more zero.
So the only thing you care about is that one.
Right.
You just care about the pole terms.
So that's why yesterday I chucked away any contact terms.
Okay.
Now.
Yeah.
So the homework.
Well, the homework is sort of two steps.
You can compute compute delta P mu in G or we worked at the relevance gathering amplitude yesterday.
So that's step one.
You'll need to do some bunch of integrals.
Right.
Yeah.
They're not so hard.
And step two, compute the delta P mu for two black holes category in G or from the geodesic equation.
You should get the same answer.
Yeah.
You'll in doing that, you'll see why I was so careful about the sign of a four.
If you get the sign of a four wrong, the black holes repel one another instead of attracting.
That's bad.
Those two attract gravity is attractive.
Okay.
It's good place to break there.
So, yeah, we can meet again soon.
