Well, thank you very much, Avi.
I know it's very unusual maybe for
this seminar to ever talk about infinite sets
and extrematics of set theory and so on.
So please feel free and there will be
a lot of controversial statements here.
It will be semi-mathematical and semi,
how should I say, political talk.
So please feel free to object or to,
if there will be a lovely fight here.
I'm just going to enjoy it.
But if you don't understand any of the terms I use,
please ask, I'm not sure I'll be able to get
you all the technicalities, but still,
I hope you get a feeling about what's going on.
Okay, continue problem was
the center problem of set theory from its inception.
The question that Kantor,
the founder of set theory phrased in 1878,
actually the version of the question appeared before that,
was you talk about sets of reals, the real numbers.
You prove that the real numbers,
you definitely got countable sets of real numbers,
that the reals are not countable.
In some very strong sense,
the reals are, it's a larger set than the integers.
Though you got sets which are much larger than the integers,
like the rationales, the algebraic numbers,
and so on which are countable,
but the reals are not countable.
The question is,
is there two possibilities for a set of reals?
A set of reals, basically you have,
let's say R, you have N,
the natural numbers,
is there anything in between?
This conjecture was that that's the case.
If phrase what we call the weak continuum hypothesis,
in a minute I'll say why it's called the weak continuum hypothesis.
It says that every infinite set of
reals is either countable or
equanimous with the all real line.
By the way, when I say countable,
I include finite.
Countable is either countable infinite or finite.
So basically, are you talking about
real dichotomy as far as sets of reals?
A little bit later,
Kantor developed a theory of cardinals,
and we're talking that there is
a kind of well-ordered structure of cardinals
where Aleph 0 using the Hebrew letter Aleph.
Aleph 0 is the first uncountable cardinal,
the cardinality of the natural numbers,
but then you can form an hierarchy in which you
can go to the next cardinal, next cardinal, and so on.
And when you exhausted all the Aleph Ns,
you reach something called Aleph Omega and so on.
So really, the real continuum hypothesis,
or full continuum hypothesis,
it says that the real numbers are
exactly this cardinal,
exactly Aleph 1, the very next cardinal after Aleph 0.
The reason that it's not exactly the same statement
that there is no intermediate set,
because it requires something else.
It requires the fact that every two sets
can be compared as far as the cardinality.
And that by itself is not an obvious thing
that requires something that you,
I'm sure, heard about, the axon of choice.
So it's only at the axon of choice
that the two statements are equivalent,
but both of them are meaningful question.
Because for instance, this one, Aleph 1,
is a cardinal that automatically can be well-ordered.
That's by its definition,
and we'll not get to the technical definition.
So the fact that it has the same cardinality like the reals,
2.0, of course, is the cardinality of the pointer.
Is there a laser pointer?
Yeah.
Maybe this one?
Yeah.
Oh, okay.
Okay, so it's said that the continuum
is, can be well-ordered, and it's the very next cardinal.
He also conjectured that for every alpha...
Yeah, yeah.
He conjectured what we call the general S continuum
hypothesis, namely that for every alpha,
aleph alpha is equal to the next cardinal.
That for every...
By the way, there exists also the weak version,
namely that there is nothing between...
That for every set A, there is nothing between the A and the power
set of A. There is nothing in between,
that every subset is either less or equal than this one or this one.
By the way, but that's, in this case,
for the general S continuum hypothesis, it's equivalent.
It does imply the X of choice, the generalized,
this version of generalized continuum hypothesis.
Okay, now, that's equivalent to the following statement
that if you, at least under the X of choice,
if you have a function from the reals into an ordinal,
ordinal is something that represents a well-ordered set,
then the cardinality of that ordinal is at most alephine.
You cannot map the reals onto the second cardinal here.
So that's the continuum hypothesis.
Cantor spent most of his...
The rest of his life trying to prove it.
It may cause this nervous breakdown down,
and it become a very central and very annoying problem.
It was, I'll go back for a minute,
in the famous list of problems of Hilbert
from the Paris Mathematical Congress of 1900.
That was the first, the continuum hypothesis was the first problem,
actually, on the list of problems of Hilbert.
As probably all of you know,
the problem turned out to be unsolvable on the basis of the accepted axioms of set theory.
To use the terminology of Erdesch, it's the monster of independence.
Erdesch used to talk about whenever a problem he was working on
turned out to be independent, and there were many.
He would say the ugly monster of independence raises its head again,
and they're very frustrated by that fact.
So anyway, the continuum hypothesis turned out to be another case of the action
of the monster of independence.
Geddel in 1938 here in Princeton proved that the continuum hypothesis
is consistent with the axioms of set theory.
You cannot disprove it.
You cannot disprove the continuum hypothesis.
Paul Cohen in 1963 proved that the continuum hypothesis is independent.
You cannot prove it.
Okay, technically, there is always an assumption that set theory is consistent.
As you may know, it's something that you can't prove the consistency,
or I think it's one of the Geddel's incompleteness theorem from 1931.
Okay, so the problem is independent.
Now, the fact that there is an independent problem in the theory
should not be too surprising, because there is the Geddel incompleteness theorem.
It tells us that any mathematical theory which we work with, or reasonable theory,
to be at least strong enough to get some of the basic facts about arithmetic,
any such theory contains a statement which the theory does not decide.
So the fact that there are independent problems, problems are not settled by the axioms,
is not surprising by itself.
What's surprising is the fact that such central problem of the field,
something which is the most important problem of the field,
turned out to be independent, and that was quite a shock.
Now, it's worse than that.
The independence turned out to be that if you talk about, for instance,
what is the difference between the cardinality of the natural numbers
and the cardinality of the reals, actually, there is very little that the axiom really tell you.
You can have as far as the axioms of set theory are concerned,
you've got many, many different possibilities, and all of them are consistent with the axioms.
So if you like, you can have that the continuum, the set, the size of the reals, is,
sorry, you can have 2.0 equal Aleph 2, you could have it equal to Aleph 17.
It cannot be, there is one small limitation that it cannot be Aleph Omega,
it cannot be the first cardinal after these cardinals,
but it could be the very next one.
It could be Aleph Omega plus 1.
It could be, again, now getting technical, Aleph Omega 1,
namely that it's the first cardinal having uncountable many cardinals below it.
So almost everything, almost everything goes,
and almost everything is consistent with the axioms of set theory.
Now, it was worse than that.
It's not just that the continuum of policies turned out to be independent,
once the wonderful method invented by Cohen forcing,
you could show that many, many different problems are independent of the axiom.
Problems that mathematicians in different fields were looking at turned out to be independent.
For instance, another interesting example is the whited problem for a billion group theory,
which was proved by Schellach to be independent.
If you want a topological group statement of the problem, the dual by Pondriagin duality,
the problem is really, suppose you have a topological abelian group,
which is compact and pathwise connected.
An example is the circle, of course, is compact, pathwise connected topological group.
If you take product of the, as many copies as you like of the circle,
that's again compact, pathwise connected topological group, but abelian topological group.
The question is, is that all?
Is every compact pathwise connected topological group a product of copies of the circle that's independent?
This is exactly what the Schellach argument shows.
Namely, you can't, on the basis of the axiom set theory, if you like, you can assume that it is true.
If you like, you can assume that that's false.
So that was rather a shocking example.
Yeah, the proof can be, well, it's not completely, it's not forcing-free,
but you can kind of hide or delegate the forcing part to some kind of black box.
Really, what the Schellach proof was that there is a canonical model that Geddel introduced,
L, Constructible Universe, we'll say something about it maybe later.
And that was the model in which Geddel uses to show that the continuum hypothesis,
the generalized continuum hypothesis, is consistent.
Now, in that model, the white conjecture is true.
That was done by, that was Schellach-proofed.
So it is, the white conjecture is true in Geddel's universe.
It's, on the other end, if you want a model in which it is false,
if you, yes, Martin Axiom, which will, I'll say something about later,
which is a kind of general axiom, some motivation that I'll talk about toward the end of my talk.
But Martin Axiom, which is, so once you've got the black box and
tells you this axiom is consistent, this, the Martin Axiom implies that actually to tell you
a really historical thing, Schellach was done, a wonderful work while forcing, at that stage.
I knew him, of course, very well, he was a friend and students together.
He didn't, at that point, he really, when he proved it, he knew very little about forcing, really.
So he was using both, you know, the Constructible Universe L and the Martin Axiom as a black box.
You really got into forcing and invented the thing which would turn out to be very useful,
things like proper forcing and so on.
That was done because he was trying to settle, you see Martin Axiom implies the continuum of forces is false.
So you've got the situation is that L, V equal L implies GCH plus, of course, white conjecture is true.
Martin Axiom implies, as we'll see, GCH is false and white, so the question he was trying to settle
is the GCH and white are consistent with the generalized continuum hypothesis.
And for that, you needed to get very deep into forcing it.
That's why you really started learning for forcing it, to a large extent, made a rather deep transformation of the film.
Okay, but anyway, some of the shock of this independence, I'll give you two quotes of many, many passages about
that it really shakes the claim of set theory to play a central role in the foundation of mathematics.
For instance, Mostowski in 1967, such results show that the axiomatic set theory is hopelessly incomplete.
If there are a multitude of set theories, you've got all kind of combination about, you know, what the size of the continuum
and whether this conjecture is true, that conjecture is true.
And it's not all these problems are independent, but also many of them are mutually independent.
You could have all kinds of combinations of continuum is this size, and the thing about white conjecture is this.
The truth of white conjecture and the truth of something else is that, and you could have many different combinations.
So a kind of really a jungle of possible set theories, then none of them could claim the central place in mathematics.
But somehow, maybe, luckily, it kind of turned out that a lot of mathematics did not tell about this.
The issue is, it's true, but sociologically and historically that's true.
The problem is that we're going to stay and forever.
I mean, definitely more and more problems turn out to be, and I'll try to think about it for, you know,
whether that will stay and forever, maybe simply, you simply didn't run into yet into the problems of independence.
And, okay, did you know, for instance, behind classical analysis, there is infinitely of different mathematics,
mathematics in the plural, namely that different possible mathematics and for time being, no definitive reason,
competitors will choose one rather than the other.
You see, it's very different.
Of course, if you think about, for instance, groups, you've got all different kind of groups,
a billion groups, non-a billion groups, simple groups, non-simple groups, et cetera.
So you're used to the fact that there are mathematical creatures of different size.
But you're talking about your framework in which you work.
There are different rules of the game.
It's as if almost you have a country with many different constitutions at the same time,
conflicting constitution.
It's not as a fact that you've got diversity in the country of different kinds of people,
but you've got different rules of the game, which is very, very annoying and very, very frustrating.
So what is the meaning of that?
What do you do about it?
Well, one way of doing it is to say, okay, that means that all these problems are really meaningless.
It's a formal game.
Choose whatever rules of the game you like.
It has no meaning for anything to do.
You make a random choice.
I once talked to Erdos about it.
And Erdos said that when he will meet God, if you know, he's termed from the SF.
I hope I'm not insulting anybody.
Religious sensitivity is the supreme fascist.
That was the term for God.
But anyway, when we go, I'll ask him about the continuum, is it true or not?
And then he was speculating what the possible answer would be.
So my answer would be, God will tell him, well, the continuum is true, false, and give him the reason.
Another possibility, God will tell him, this is the answer, but you cannot understand why this is true.
Another possibility is that it's not, it's completely meaningless.
It's a formal game and I don't care.
So he was speculating about possible results.
And I don't know what happened to him now, but okay.
But anyway, so definitely you can say that the problem is completely meaningless.
All these problems, which are not to be independent, are completely meaningless.
And there is no one answer which is better than another.
Gettel, for instance, has got very deep conviction that that's not the case.
For instance, in his famous paper of 1947, he writes, the paper was republished in 1963, right, Juliet?
Contrast conjecture might be either true or false.
And its disability for the axiom can only mean that this axiom do not contain a complete description of this reality.
And such belief is by no means chemical.
This is possible to point ways in which a decision of the question might nevertheless be obtained.
Namely, Gettel's conception was that there is some real, a true answer.
It should be either true or false in some, I don't know, metaphysical or physical or I don't know what sense.
And the fact that you could not decide on the basis of axiom, simply the axiom do not exhaust everything that should be true about this universe of sets.
And we are able to find the right axiom that the thing will be settled.
Now, let me say something from the beginning.
I'm not going to talk about what's really true because that runs into a very difficult, which I'm not sure exactly what my position is about ontological or metaphysical, what is really true.
Try to stay on some more pragmatic, more pragmatic level.
So Gettel's, if you follow Gettel's thing, you say, okay, if we are not ready to live with such a multitude of different sets, we want to decide what are the rules of the game.
So we have to set, we have to expand the axioms.
We have to expand the axiom to make decisions about all these independent problems.
Now, of course, you can make a decision, you can decide the continuum of all this because both the continuum of all this is negation or consistent.
That means you can choose to be true or to be false.
You can use an axiom, but that's too, too ad hoc and too arbitrary.
So when you look for new axioms, you try to, the axioms will satisfy some, some requirements.
Now, for instance, the axioms should be strong enough to decide the large class of statements which are undecidable on the basis of the accepted axioms.
You can't decide all questions because of Gettel's incompleteness theorem.
Suppose you had, you expand your axiom system, there will be an independent, independent problem, but you try to something that, that a relatively large class of statements is decided.
Taking, for instance, the continuum hypothesis by itself, let's say adopted as an axiom, that doesn't satisfy exactly this, this requirement because there are so many things which are independent.
Even if you assume CH or assume the negation of CH, for instance, if you assume continuum hypothesis is false, what is the value of the continuum?
What, there's so many things which are still in the same domain, which are still independent.
So you try to look for something which is more.
If you don't lose, so I suppose you, you decide that you believe in the continuum.
Yeah.
You don't lose anything, but you don't lose as far as independence, but, but maybe it depends on what type, what type of mathematics you get.
And you do get some results.
And the issue is that, that result that you like or don't like and so on.
And I'll say something about it later.
That's what that, that's a position.
Yeah.
That's what that, yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
No, because it was, it was eager to solve problems.
So if you, if that helps you to solve the problem, fine.
But, but, okay, now the axiom should be riskier and elegant theory.
Now comes the very vague term of elegant or beauty, beautiful theory.
And the question is, does, does it give you an elegant, elegant theory?
And for instance, take the Gettles universe.
Suppose you assume that the universe is Gettles, Gettles universe.
Let's decide the continuum hypothesis, generalized continuum hypothesis.
It decides many different, many different statements.
It's a relatively reasonably complete, complete theory.
But for instance, is that give you a elegant theory?
Well, in some sense, it does not.
Because if you assume that the constructable,
axiom of constructability, Gettles, the universe is Gettles universe.
Then in some sense, sometimes I heard the term used that L is the,
the, the paradise of counter examples.
Namely, if you try to prove some kind, usually when you try to,
if you have a problem, you have the, the more elegant solution.
You think about the two possibilities, there is a more elegant side and
there is the one which is less elegant.
It's very rare that both answers to the problem would be as pleasing or as desirable.
So, sorry?
Not exactly.
Yeah, but, but, but not exactly because L, for instance, does satisfy the first one.
It, it decides the last class of statement, but usually it's everything you try,
there is, there is a counter example.
But one of the very few examples that, that it's give the more elegant direction
is the whited conjecture.
The whited conjecture, you know, for, for the groups, it is the more elegant
solution and for a change, L gives you the more elegant direction.
But in most cases, it gives you the, the, the counter example.
Okay, so now the axiom should have some intuitive or philosophical, philosophical
appeal.
I, I sometimes called it the, the axiom.
The axioms should have a good slogan, a good propaganda that you can make for it.
And I'm not, I'm not joking.
I mean that, that, it's something that, that fits certain intuition that you
rather, you rather like it.
Okay, now if possible, and I'll say about that in a minute, I'll say something about
it, should have a testable, verifiable consequence.
Something that, that you like the consequence, there's some reason why,
why you like the, the consequence of the, of the axiom.
That I'll say something about even testable in a, in a physical sense,
which is a very wide speculation.
Now, the last one is a little bit more technical.
You know, the standard way in which you decide, in which you show independence is
by forcing.
You start from the universe of set theory, you do a forcing construction of
coin, and you get a universe which, which its properties are different,
satisfy different things.
Now, the best if you can have that the axiom is resilient under forcing
extensions, namely, if you do forcing, that if you have the axioms,
you don't, you don't lose it anymore by, by forcing.
For instance, consider Gettel's vehicle L statement.
Vehicle L is very, is very non-resilient, namely, it's very easy to do.
Any kind of forcing construction would kill the fact that, that the universe is
Gettel's universe.
But on the other end, once you, it's not Gettel's universe, that's, that's it.
It's almost like trying to take a, and we'll go back to this analogy,
which is by closure of a field.
Once, once you got the solution for, for equation, the solution is there.
I mean, if you make further extension of the field, you don't lose the, the,
that solution in a minute.
But, so if possible, you would like to be as, as resilient under forcing
extension as possible.
The only one near trade-list criteria that seems to be about addressing
whether we should believe an axiom is number three.
All the others are saying whether it'll be fun to have the axiom.
That's, that's true to a large extent.
That's true to a large extent.
That the, the third one is the one that, that really talks whether there are
some philosophical or, or some motivation that you can give for what,
why, why do you want to adopt, adopt the axiom.
So, basically the, the, the other four items here are more as to do with
the consequences of the axioms rather than the intrinsic value of the, of the axiom.
And in some sense, Gadel was saying that that's, that should be a main,
a main criteria.
I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll give you a quote from, from Gadel.
That even disregarding the intrinsic necessity of some new axiom,
a probable decision about its proof is possible.
It didn't mean proof, I guess, by its adoption, by starting its success.
Success here means fruitfulness in consequence.
There might exist axioms so abundant in the verifiable consequences,
shedding so much, so much light upon a whole field in yielding such powerful
methods for solving problem that no matter whether or
not they are intrinsically necessary, even without, if you don't have that
motivation still, they would have to be accepted at least in the same sense as
any well-established physical theory.
You've got something that you give you so much consequence.
Maybe it, it, it doesn't look, you don't have very, initially,
very good motivation.
But if you study the consequences, you, you like it.
You like it, it's useful, and so on.
Let me say something about one, one class of axioms which turned out in some sense
to satisfy many of the, of the requirements, which is strong axioms of infinity.
Strong axiom of infinity, one of the axioms of set theory tells you that there
is an infinite set, axiom of infinity.
Now, it's really the axiom that makes set theory more stronger than number theory.
So, basically, if you drop the, the axiom of infinity, then set theory is
byinterpretable with, with the usual piano, piano axiom, right?
Sorry, replace it by, yeah, but without it, it doesn't give you more power than,
than, now, the axiom of infinity says that, so, you've got a kind of jump from the
finite sets to your jump to the infinite sets.
There is a major, a major jump, some people say unjustified jump, which is
something that, which should not be, be taken if you are, definitely if you are
a finiteist, that's, that's the case.
So, stronger than infinity in some sense says that there are more jumps like, like,
like that.
There are more, more jumps that, that, that tell you there are some sets which are
much larger than, than smaller, smaller set in the, all hierarchy of such, such axiom.
Roughly, most of them are the stronger ones.
At the feature, roughly, they say that if something happens in the universe of set
theory, then really, it happened before.
There was some kind of reflection character, namely, if, if you have a structure with a
certain property, then there exists a sub, a small, smaller sub structure.
The universe of set theory is so large that, that if something happens, it really
happened before, that, that, so you got points where, where you start repeating
yourself in a way.
So, that's a very vague way of describing stronger than infinity.
I will not get, maybe you heard about measurable cardinal.
There are other notions of strongly compact, super compact and, and so on.
You know, just one example of a, a strong axiom of infinity.
You know that product, of course, Ticano theorem, product of, of compact space is,
is compact.
Now, what about Lindelof spaces?
You know, that Lindelof is, of course, generalizing compactness.
Namely, every cover got countable sub-cover.
Lindelof space do not have, the product doesn't have to be Lindelof.
But could you bound the level of Lindelofness of the, of the product?
Namely, suppose you take a product from Lindelof spaces.
Is there a cardinal kappa such that you are sure that every cover by sets has got this
sub-cover of cardinality less, less than kappa?
The product of an arbitrary number.
Or arbitrary number, yeah.
Could you, could you bound the, the covering, the covering that you can, you, you can do
it.
That's a strong, that's a strong cardinal assumption with many, many consequences.
In fact, there exists something like that.
Okay, so large cardinal hierarchy, interesting thing, by the way, there's a form in hierarchy
that you try different kinds and they all turn out to be comparable as far as they're.
It's an excellent of, of exomes that satisfies, I wouldn't say all, maybe I exaggerated here,
but many of the requirements of the choice of new exomes.
Unfortunately, exomes of, of strong infinity do not settle the continuum hypothesis, the
problem we started with.
There is a kind of general method of Levy and Solovey that shows the continuum hypothesis
is independent.
Even if one adds any of the accepted exomes of strong infinity, you can, almost the same
freedom you have as far as the size of the continuum is still, still true even if you
add the existence of the cardinal levels taking over the linear left or measurable cardinal
or super compact cardinal, whatever the terms are.
It's a very general way of showing that it really doesn't, doesn't settle the problem.
No, it uses forcing, no, it uses forcing, but it shows that the point is how do you
do it with preserving the, the strong exomefinity?
Yeah, I understand, but the size of the success, the new theory does not prove continuum.
It does not prove and does not prove.
Yeah, no, so both are.
But both.
Both are.
So, it really doesn't, it doesn't settle the continuum.
Let me do a small, a small direction and here I'm, I'm making a very wild, very wild speculation
and if you, if you'll be, a very powerful consequence could mean that new exomes of mathematical
consequences cannot be derived without them.
Even finitary consequence and seems highly unlikely to be falsifiable.
By the way, because of Geddel's theorem, every, each, each strong exomefinity gets
you new arithmetical statements which cannot be proved otherwise.
And I'm talking about something which is called pi zero one statement.
A pi zero one statement is, in arithmetic for instance, is a statement equivalent by
Matiassevic to something that says that a certain polynomial, you got a certain polynomial
integer coefficients and it says it doesn't have, it doesn't have a root.
For every n one, nk, pn one, nk is different than zero.
Look, look at the statement, simple statement like that.
Each of these strong exomefinity introduces, and you can really write the polynomial that,
that the, this action proves that this polynomial has no, no integer, no integer roots, but
you cannot prove it without, without the exome.
So, so there are finitary consequences.
Are they interesting?
Did, did it, anyone came up with an example of a polynomial that people really looked
at?
Not quite, but to be, to be quite honest, but, but in principle that could, that could happen.
As usual about natural numbers that we believe are not provable.
Usually it's a statement, the Geddel's statement is a statement that something is consistent
with, with ZFC.
So now if you look at the pi zero one, you look at the pi zero one statement like this,
then in some sense it's verifiable, it is falsifiable.
You know, if it's, if it's wrong, then if you keep trying, you know, the, the roots,
if there are roots, well, it depends how much time you have to look for it, what the amount
for the roots, but you're going to run to them.
So, so the, it's, it's falsifiable.
And the fact that you didn't find a, a counter example may mean that probably you want to
believe the statement.
It's not an argument by itself, but, but, but this is something that, that, that you
might say that almost a physical, it's, it's almost a physical statement about the universe
which, which you cannot prove, which you want to assume it's true, but you don't want without,
without the statement.
Let me skip the, the next, the, okay, is it conceivable different set, you can compare
different set theories by fields outside of mathematics, let's say physics, is it relevant,
for instance, for the physics, what type of set theory your theory is?
Now think, think, think about physics, you have a certain mathematical structure described,
the Hilbert space, the, the, the many faults that, that appears in the strings and everything.
So is it possible that, that a different set theory will give you implication which are
relevant to physics?
I don't have an example.
There is no, there is no example like that, but the fact that there are things which indicate
that it's not completely, not completely outrageous.
It could be that a certain scientific theory, if you embed the mathematical structure inside
one set theory is more simplified, it refer one set theory over another.
On impact, the impact could be that one could derive some experimental testable consequence
that, that you cannot be able to derive from other set, is that completely outrageous?
Now I don't have an example, of course, but let me give you something which touches on
the, on the, on that possibility which, a physical example.
Now let's take the, the, the famous theorem of Kochan Specker that, no hidden variables
in quantum mechanics, the Bell theorem and the Kochan Specker theorem.
Let me, so here is a paper by Lady Tomarpitowski that, the reason I picked this paper is about
the only paper in physical review letter that mentioned continuum hypothesis in the paper.
Actually it mentions martinexium, belongs to a family of strands in Minipada, martinexium
should appear here somewhere, yeah martinexium, yeah.
The second phase validity of strictly, okay, so let, let me very briefly say what, what
the story is, this, you know, you got the spin of a particle with spin one, boson.
The spin could be measured along any axis and possible values would be 1, 0, minus 1.
Now if you got orthogonal system of orthogonal axis, then you could not measure simultaneously,
you got the, the corresponding operators do not commute, but the squares do commute and
you can determine the squares of the, of the thing and you know that always the sum of
the, the squares is true.
So just exactly one of the x, square x, y and s value one, two, I'm sorry, the indenverable
assumption claims that the particle carries, the indenverable, the one that is refuted,
some predetermined values of these values, which the values is what, what we measure.
The Kochan Specker theorem claims that this is impossible.
There is no way of to assigning values to the coordinates on the, on the different possible
orthogonal systems that will satisfy the sums is, the sum would be 2.
The sum of squares should be, I'm sorry.
It could, there is no way of assigning values such as sum would be 2.
Now on the other end, the theorem that I showed you showed that assume the continuum hypothesis,
then you can do it, almost do it, in the sense that for every x, the, the, you can make the
assignment, but for every set x, the, the pairs which, which violate, I'm sorry, which
violate the, the, the equality is countable.
There are only countable in many, for every fixed x, there are only countable in many
counter, counter examples.
So it doesn't mean you should start believing in indenverables or some sort of indenverables
in quantum mechanics, but it tells you, it's an example that the set theoretical assumption
could appear in some sense in, in, try to analyze the physical, the model of the, the
physical, the physical model.
This is a function of the sphere, or some sort of sphere, and you can assign for the.
You can assign, you can, you can do an assignment of the values.
Actually one, I misstated it, zero one minus one, so the squares, such that the, the failure
of the equality that you expect happens only for every fixed x, it's only for countable
in many pairs of y, y and z.
Sorry?
No.
No.
Okay.
That's, that's of course a good point, no, I'm, I'm not saying it's a very convincing
example, but I said it really touches on the, on the, on that possibility.
Let me give you another example which touches on the possibility of, that set theory might
be relevant.
For instance, consider a separable Hilbert space.
You consider the algebra of bounded operators, and H definitely represents something that's
meaningful physically.
You talk about the idea of compact operators, and the Calcine algebra is the constant algebra
of the, it's a sub-algebra, if you think about the c-star algebra, and you consider the constant,
consider the constant algebra.
Now consider the problem are, consider the automorphism of the Calcine algebra.
You got inner automorphism, namely that you, you take some unitary transformation, and
you, you apply it, and so the question is, are there automorphism of the algebra which
are not, do not, which are not inner?
This problem is independent shown by Phillips, Weaver, and Farah.
Phillips and Weaver showed one direction, and Farah showed the other direction.
That, that, it's independent of set theory.
Now that could be, that touches on things which are relevant to physical models which,
again, not I'm saying that it's got physical meaning, but it potentially can have, can
give you a more nicer or smoother physical theory if you assume one direction rather
than, rather than the other.
By the way, this is an example where the continuum hypothesis give you, give you the, the bad
example, that there are pathological automorphisms which are, which are not inner.
On the other end, some of the axioms we'll talk about in a short while, give you that
all automorphisms are inner, give you a kind of smoother or nicer direction.
So, you know, a very wild, very wild shot of the thing.
Okay, are, are we taking a break or?
Let me see what's, what's, okay.
I think, I think now it may be, may be a good time for, for a short break.
Ten minutes, fine, fine, okay.
Okay, so Noga, we follow your, your lead.
So, let's try and see what, you know, if you search for new axioms, now forget about
the speculations and, and let's see what, what could be the, the kind of axioms we
should look for.
So, one, one, and I said that slogan or motivation could be, could be an important
aspect of it.
So, one slogan could be that Noga, that's exactly in the spirit of what you said.
If the continuum of what it says, then it should be a simple, definable evidence for
a failure.
There should be something that really you should know.
Now, what, what is a simple definable?
A counter example could be, a counter example to the weak continuum hypothesis.
Namely, a definable set of rules which is neither countable nor the cardinality of
the continuum.
Namely, you, you define, you describe a set.
You say this set is not countable and not, that's a possibility.
And it could be a counter example to the full continuum hypothesis.
It could be some simple map.
I phrased the, the other continuum hypothesis that whenever you map the reels, whenever
you got the map of the reels onto some, some ordinal, that ordinal would have to be relatively
small.
It can't be past LF2.
So, there, it could be some, some definable map of the reels onto ordinal cardinality,
less or equal LF2.
Okay, now, now that, that actually gets into an interesting historical, historical line.
Kantou, when you try to deal with the continuum hypothesis, you really started by something
which later became known as the Kantou-Bendixon theorem, which said that if you talk about
a closed set of real numbers, it's never a counter example to the continuum hypothesis.
A closed set is either count, open set is definitely the case.
Open set, if it's not empty, then it is size of the continuum, contains an interval.
A closed set is either countable or size of the continuum.
Really, the closed set, if it's uncountable, then it contains a perfect, a perfect subset.
A perfect subset means no closed subset which is no isolated points.
An uncountable, actually the Kantou-Bendixon theorem says a closed uncountable set contains
a perfect subset.
A perfect subset means closed, perfect means closed, no uncountable.
No isolated.
No isolated, I'm sorry.
Now, the advantage of containing a perfect subset, perfect subset, you can prove in a very effective
way that it's got size of the continuum.
It cannot be a smaller size.
So that means that, so Kantou looked at his proof as a first step in proving the continuum.
He was hoping to prove the continuum.
He was saying, okay, let's try the simple sets and hopefully we'll get to more and more complicated sets.
It did not succeed very far, but Hausdorff, Alexander of Independently,
showed that every Borel set, Borel set is the collection of sets you get by closing the open
and the closed sets under accountable unions in sections or compliments.
It's either accountable or contains a perfect subset.
And Borel set, this is again an example of something which is more effective or you can describe,
can never be a counter-example of the continuum.
It's always either accountable or contains a perfect subset.
Now you can continue from the Borel set to more complicated sets.
Losing 1917, every analytic set is either accountable or contains a perfect subset.
Analytic set is a thing that you get by continuous image of a Borel set,
or typically think about that as a projection.
It's the same thing.
Namely, you've got a Borel set.
Here is a Borel set in the plane.
You look at a projection.
That's what you call a set that you can get as a projection of a Borel set in the plane.
That's an analytic set.
It doesn't have to be Borel.
By the way, it's a famous mistake of Lebesgue that at some point,
he assumes that projection of a Borel set is a Borel set, and that was wrong.
But it's empty for...
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, but there is something interesting,
which is that one of the beautiful theorems,
if an analytic and coanalytic, then it's Borel,
which you would love to have.
But anyway, so an analytic set is either countable or contains a perfect subset.
And then, what happens to coanalytic?
That will be the next step.
And Gadel, the same universe of Gadel-L,
shows that there exists an uncountable set, which is a coanalytic, with no perfect subset.
Now, if you combine it with coins proof,
the universal continuum of this, you can have a coanalytic set,
which is a counter example to the continuum of this.
It will be of size Aleph 1, where the continuum is large.
So you can't push this thing in set theory in general.
You cannot push it too far.
Okay.
Is that the end of story?
Well, not really.
Because, for first, let us introduce the following definition.
The class of projective sets is the smallest class containing Borel sets
and closed under continuous images and complementation.
So really, what you're talking about is you start from Borel sets.
Now, I'm introducing the modern terminology,
very close to notation that you use, I'm sure,
that the set is Sigma 11.
Analytic, if it's a continuous image of Borel set,
we already introduced that.
It's Pi 11 if it's the complement of a Sigma 11 set.
In general, the set is Sigma 1 and N plus 1.
If it's a projection or the continuous image of a Pi set on the previous level
and a Pi N plus 1, if it is a complement of Sigma N plus 1.
And projective means that it's at this level, at this hierarchy somewhere.
That's analogous.
That's for the normal time.
Yeah.
Probably.
Yeah.
So is the upper index here?
The upper index here, it's because you can think about it in logical terms.
It really means that you quantify over real numbers.
Zero means you quantify over natural numbers.
One upper index means you quantify over real numbers.
There is two also, which you quantify over sets of real numbers.
I don't know about much use.
For two, there are some interesting theorems.
For three, I don't know any sets of reals.
I don't know any case.
Anyway, Pi 11 set can be a counter, for example, to CvH.
But here, the strong X of infinity suddenly kicks in.
A theorem of Solovey in volume dedicated to, I think, the 60th birthday of Geddel.
You go to a theorem that says that if there exists a measurable cardinal,
then every Sigma 1 2 set is either accountable or contains a perfect subset.
Namely, if you think about the levels of the hierarchy,
then you're trying to see whether you get a counter example to the continuum.
Namely, you talk about Borel, like the recursive thing, or the polynomial,
and then Sigma 11, Pi 11, and then Sigma 1 2, Pi 1 2.
So you know that no counter example to continuum is a theorem of set theory here.
But here, you could have a counter example.
But if you assume the strong X of infinity, the existence of a measurable cardinal
is certainly not just the Pi 11, but even this level.
Each level of the hierarchy, of course, is contained in the next.
It's an hierarchy.
It's either accountable or contains a perfect subset.
And it's got other nice aspects.
It's the big measurable and so on.
But you can't, you can push it one level up.
You can't do it for measurables, too, for this level.
The counter example of Geddel is being pushed up one level.
The result of Lucid is pushed up one level.
The result of Geddel is pushed up one level.
But you can't, from strong X of infinity.
Okay, which, by the way, was a fascinating result,
because here is the existence of some large cardinal up there.
The large cardinal suddenly has got an impact on sets, on sets of rules.
It's got a result about sets of rules, which was very surprising, in a way.
Is there a way to understand in layman terms what this action says,
the existence of measurable cards?
What this action says, it's...
Can you understand what this action says?
Oh, you can.
It simply says the following thing.
It simply says that there exists a set with a sigma-complete measure,
a non-trivial measure on it, which...
I'm cheating a little bit, I'll tell you what it is,
which says that every set is measurable.
Namely, you...
Is there a set of rules?
No, no.
Is there a set?
There exists a set.
Where is the set?
It's measurable.
Now comes the following dichotomy, also due to Soloway,
but it really doesn't matter for the purpose of this theorem.
But there is this dichotomy that tells you that either...
Suppose you look for a set and you've got a measure on the set,
real-valued measure, right?
On the set, which every set is measurable.
Okay?
Now you've got a clear dichotomy.
Either the set has got size, or the minimal set,
either it's size less than the continuum.
And in that case, that measure can be assumed to be measure on the reels,
such that it extends the Lebesgue measure
and makes every set measurable with respect to the measure.
That's one dichotomy.
So another possibility is that if the continuum is less than that...
Sigma negative.
Sigma negative.
Sigma negative.
Sigma negative.
You always have...
Sorry?
It's not translation invariant,
because the Vitaly account, for example,
of course, shows that you cannot have a translation invariant.
But if the continuum is less than the size of the set,
for the minimal set having that,
then the measure can be assumed to be really a zero-one measure,
namely a measure that gets only the value zero and one.
It can be assumed to be a very simple as far as the values of the measure.
But anyway, it doesn't matter.
The results of Solovey applies to both definitions of measure.
But if there exists a measurable cardinal,
then every sigma on the set is either countable
or contains a perfect subset.
No, Solovey has got the following result.
By the way, it's an interesting curiosity.
Solovey proved something else.
Solovey proved that without the axon of choice,
you can have a model in which all sets are the big measurable.
Very soon after coin.
Actually, using the...
With the axon of choice, you could...
In the usual sense, in the big sense,
you can have...
Without the axon of choice, you can have...
All sets are the big measurable.
You must need the axon of choice to produce a non-measurable...
Not the big measurable set, for instance.
So Solovey proved that.
The issue is that Solovey used...
For the model, he needed to use inaccessible cardinal,
the consistency of a large cardinal to do that.
And the issue was, is that necessary?
And what Shalach did was that was necessary.
The curious thing, when he published it,
there is another property, which I'm going to talk in a few minutes,
which is the bare property, which is a little bit like measurability.
Namely, a set of wheels got the bare property,
if it's equal to an open set up to a bigger set,
up to a set which is the union of nowhere dense.
That's a kind of measure in a way of the set.
So the issue is, in Solovey model,
every set of wheels has got the bare property.
So the issue is, Ados did the same thing.
So Shalach initially thought that's the same,
and then he had to retract it.
So he published a paper which was called Going to Canosa,
which had to retract the claim, but that was quite going to Canosa.
In the same sense, almost like the historical case
when the emperor went to Canosa,
and that was actually a very clever political move eventually.
So going to Canosa was also a very shrewd move.
But anyway, it's a different thing.
Now you're talking presence of choice,
and okay, so you couldn't push it.
Okay, so the expectation was for a long time
that this is, if you use stronger large cardinals,
the same counter example could be that there are models
that look like the model of Gadel,
and you could not push it farther.
It was part of a team that was able to get
from a supercompa cardinal that every single
on three sets is either countable or contains a prefix.
Namely, if you take a larger cardinal
and suddenly, even at this level,
there is no counter example to the continuum hypothesis.
The result didn't survive very long
because Shalach and Woodin improved it,
that every projective set from the same cardinal,
every projective set is either countable
or contains a perfect subset,
and much more applied to not just two sets
which are a projective, but every set
which in some sense depends only on the real.
Technically, we talk sets that belong
to the minimal model that contains all the reads.
All these sets can never be a counter example
of the continuum hypothesis.
A set like that is either countable
or contains a perfect subset.
Actually, the large cardinal was reduced,
but the cardinal that become known as the Woodin cardinal,
so the theorem is infinitely many Woodin cardinals,
which is measurable, then every set in LFR
is either countable or cannot be a counter example
to the continuum hypothesis.
Actually, something else happens.
You see the large cardinal has got many other applications
for sets which has got concrete description in a way
that belongs to LFR.
One of the results is something called determinacy,
which by the way implies the big measureability,
implies many of these.
I'll show something about that.
What is determinacy?
Determinacy, suppose you consider an infinite game.
You've got two players.
Player one, player two.
And suppose they pick natural numbers.
They pick three and so on.
And suppose that before the game starts, of course,
you pick a certain set which is subset
of the sequences of natural numbers,
and you decide that this is the set of sequences
that if that's then the result of the game,
then player one won't.
If not, then player two won't.
And the issue is this is a game with perfect information.
If the game would be finite, then the famous theorem
of von Neumann Morgenstern, again here at the institute,
shows that finite games are always one of the players
as a winning strategy.
We're playing a guarantee success for him.
The issue is, is it true for infinite games?
And for infinite games you can show that,
using the example of choice, you can have a counter example
where a game which is not, which is not determined.
But the issue comes again.
Can you have a simple, is simple games determined?
So there was a whole class of results.
I don't have the time to go over the history.
But anyway, it ended up in a result that shows
as a theory of set theory that every,
every, there is a natural topology on this one.
Of course, the product, think about the natural numbers
as the discrete topology, think about the product topology.
The every boreal set is determined in that sense.
One of the players has a winning strategy.
That's the result of Martin following some other results.
This, by the way, has got a very,
philosophically very interesting aspect of that proof.
Because this is a proof about sequences
of natural numbers or sets of sequences of natural numbers,
relatively small.
But in some sense it's got a flavor of,
it doesn't use any large cardinal in that sense.
But the proof uses sets of relatively large cardinality.
And you know, that's a result of Friedman,
that you cannot do it without using some relatively large set.
Not large cardinal necessarily, but roughly for the boreal sets
of level alpha in the boreal hierarchy,
you need to take the power set, the power set of the power set
of the power set alpha times.
And that's necessary, you know, to prove the determinacy.
It's a theorem of set theory, but it requires iteration
of the power set, and that's necessary.
You know that in a set theory where you bound how many times
you can apply the power set, you cannot prove it.
So it's a beautiful theorem, and so it's a kind of reminiscent
of this kind of thing we're doing.
Here is the use of sets which are relatively large.
You use it to prove something about relatively small set,
and it's necessary.
You can't do it without.
It's not so surprising that you're talking about itself
because alpha level of the boreal hierarchy.
Alpha level of the boreal hierarchy.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And then you need that many operation of the pass and runes.
Anyway, the result here shows under the same assumption
that all the sets in L of R, all the sets that you could
describe are determined.
It's a kind of very strong case in which all the
describable sets are determined, and that follows them.
For you, assuming the wooden column has a satisfied list
of options.
Yeah.
Yeah.
For instance, one thing is that you can have a motivation
for that.
And in some sense, the motivation comes from the fact
that the wooden cardinal is much weaker than...
I don't want to get the technical definition of supercompact,
but I think you can have a slogan or motivational thing
why you want to assume the existence of supercompact cardinal.
Supercompact is much stronger than this assumption about
the wooden cardinals.
So this is the right assumption, the better.
But as far as the axiom, this is more natural in a way.
But it has got this result.
Let me put in a little bit of perspective this result of
wooden.
You're talking about sets which can be described or sets
which are nice in a way.
What do we have here?
That if you assume the stronger axiom affinity, then a set
which is relatively nice, a set which cannot be a counter
example of the continuum hypothesis, the relevant set
is determined, and many other, the beg measurable, and so on.
I want to put it in a little bit broader perspective.
So a subset of topological space is said to have the bear
property if it is equivalent to an open set up to a set of
first category.
Namely, a set is first category.
Here is the set.
Here is the topological space, X. Here is the set A.
And if you can find a set U, an open set which is almost A,
what does it mean?
Almost the difference, the symmetric difference, is
MIGR.
MIGR means a countable union of nowhere dense set.
So if it's almost an open set.
So that's a relatively nice property of sets.
Okay, so a set of wheels is said to be, now, you could have a
set which is nice in that sense.
But I want to have a little bit stronger property.
The stronger property is the set of wheels is said to be
universally bear.
If whenever you take a function from any topological space
onto X, and you look at the pre-image of A, it has got the
bear property, I'm talking here about the wheels, or a set of
wheels.
Okay, so I'm talking about, let's consider it a set of wheels.
So whenever you take any topological space and you map it
continuously to the wheels, then the pre-image has got the bear
property.
It's a very nice notion of, a very nice notion of a set.
Okay.
Now, the theorem is that UB, universal bear set of wheels,
must be set of wheels.
It's a big measurable, as the bear property, this is a theorem
of set theory.
If it's universally bear, then it's a bear property.
This results are not necessarily very deep, or even the next
one is not very deep or very new, because here you're talking
about the following thing.
You talk about infinite subset of natural numbers.
You talk about the Ramsey version for infinite sets of natural
numbers, namely, you color infinite sequences of natural
numbers, and you want to have a set of natural numbers, so that
every infinite subset of it is in the same color.
And so if the coloring is universally bear, in natural sense,
then you can find, this is a generalization of the result of
Galvin and Prickley, then there is an homogeneous set.
If, with the axle of choice, you can prove an account
example, you can get an account example, but if the set, if
the coloring is universally bear, then there is an homogeneous
set.
What about the properties that we are talking about?
If there is a wooden cardinal, then every universally bear set is
either countable or contains a perfect subset.
It's not, then these universally bear sets are not counter
examples of the continuum of these.
How does that connect with the previous results?
It connects with the previous results in the sense that, let's
see, that every, okay, that actually the assumption that
Wooding made, they put it, if there are unboundingly many
wooden cardinals, then every set in LFR is universally bear.
So the result of Wooding can be a fact or true that the
statement about universally bear.
Actually, if there is even one wooden cardinal, the
universally bear set, that's a result of Fittai and Eman, that
if there is even one wooden cardinal, the universally bear set
is automatically determined in that sense.
So universally bear sets are the ultimate nice collection of
nice sets, and the large cardinals get you even nicer
properties of universally bear sets.
By the way, universally bear sets has got also another important
features for us as the set theorists.
In some sense, you could almost define them like that.
You see, when you take a set of rules, and you talk about
changing the universe of set theory by forcing, then what is
the meaning of the set of rules in the broader universe?
Are you talking about literally the same set of rules?
Probably you don't mean that.
Suppose the set of rules have been you're taking an interval.
There are new rules, new members of the interval.
You probably mean the interval in the big universe.
If the set was Borel, you probably mean that the interpretation
of that Borel set in the bigger universe.
Universally bear set has got a very natural way of reinterpreting
them in a bigger and bigger universe.
You've got the set.
Then there is a natural way of, when you do forcing extensions,
you can reinterpret them in the bigger universe,
and it's one of their features.
And you keep many of the properties like a set being equal
to another.
You've got two universally bear sets.
You describe it in a particular way.
This is equal to this one.
Then their extension are equal.
One is included in the other.
So it's a very natural way of having an ocean of.
So in the presence of wooden cardinals,
UP set cannot be counter example to continue a poor disease.
So without large cardinals, suppose we forget about large cardinals.
What do you know about the cardinality of universally bear sets?
Together, in the generic extension of L,
you can have a universally bear set,
which is cardinality Lf1, and the continuum is large.
So we know that the values which are possible are either Lf0,
Lf1, or continuum.
We know that these are possible values.
Conjecture, I've got some reasons for believing the conjecture.
I don't know the proof.
Even without large cardinals, that's the only possibility.
Remember, with the large cardinals,
there are only two values, either Lf0 or continuum.
Now, I said without the large cardinals,
the conjecture is that only three possibilities,
either Lf1, Lf0, or Lf0 finite, I mean,
or continuum.
Okay.
Now, if the conjecture is true,
then that's an evidence that probably,
if you talk about the size of the continuum,
then the continuum could be, if you want to have
an effective version of the size of the continuum,
then probably a natural value would be, if at all,
suppose you don't want to adopt just the continuum of all this,
then it could be either Lf1 or Lf2,
only possible two values for the continuum.
Which one you want to pick?
There could be other consideration.
Okay.
I want to still have some time to exhaust your patience.
But I want to take another line of,
I'm presenting several lines of ideas of axioms
or considerations that you might adopt in order
to decide what would be more natural value for the continuum.
So I want to pick another line now.
And the line is line which is called forcing axioms,
which some of you may know,
as Martin Axiom is an example,
we'll talk about it in a minute.
So the slogan and the motivation is that an object
that can be imagined to exist,
a set that can be imagined to exist,
there is no obvious objection to its existence does exist.
The universe of sets is rich, is saturated.
It's a little bit like, again,
I'm going back to an analogy of a algebraically closed field.
I mean, you got a field, you got the equation.
You can definitely imagine,
you can extend the field that it has a solution,
then why it shouldn't have a solution?
So that's the kind of thing that the universe of sets is rich.
Now it's not that simple.
The issue is how do you formalize
what does it mean to imagine to exist,
what has been obvious objection to its existence,
what do you mean by that?
Okay, so let me be for a minute a little bit more technical.
So in some sense, it's a crash course about forcing.
So suppose you want to introduce an object
of a certain kind.
So one way of doing it, what you do with forcing,
is that you live in a certain universe,
you miss a certain object,
you want a new object in the universe.
So you talk about approximations to the object.
You try to get some, I'll give an example in a minute,
an approximation to the object,
and approximations are partially ordered by a better,
one is a better approximation.
So you think about a partially ordered set,
partially ordered set p less or equal.
Now it became the tradition that actually
whenever you got q less or equal to p,
you mean q is a better approximation.
It's a smaller error or less possibilities and so on.
By the way, here there is one place in the world
where this tradition initially when
it was the other way around.
Jerusalem is the only place where
the tradition is the other way around.
By the way, I gave up.
Shalach didn't give up.
But if you read the paper of Shalach,
then p gives more information than q if that's the case.
I think we have to give up.
That's universally accepted that the smaller approximation
is the one that gives more information.
Anyway, so you talk about partially ordered set.
Now what does it mean to have the object eventually?
Object eventually is a consistent collection of approximations.
You define the object you look for
if you try to get consistent set of approximations.
So a g, a subset of p, is a filter.
That's the notion of the consistent
if it has the following conditions.
If p belongs to g and q is above p,
that implies the q in g.
Namely, if you decide on approximation p
and here is a bigger, something which is bigger,
namely gives less information,
it's definitely a set of good approximations.
Upward closed sets.
Upward closed sets.
That's one thing.
Another thing is compatibility.
If p and q belongs to g, then there exists r in g
so that r is below both p and q.
Maybe p and q are incomparable,
but there exists something in the filter
which agrees both of them.
We say in that case that p and q are compatible.
There exists something that agrees with below both of them.
So that's a filter.
Now you would like the object to satisfy some requirements.
You want to introduce an object with a certain property.
So you say that d, suppose you go to d which is a subset of p,
then d is called dense.
If d is downward closed,
then it's open to be formally closed.
And for every p in p, there exists q less or equal than p
so that q belongs to d.
Namely, it's a set that you cannot avoid.
It's a set of things that whenever you've got an approximation,
there's still a chance of eating d.
You can still extend the approximation to something
that will be in the set d.
Namely, if you're already in d, then that's it.
Anything smaller is in d.
It's like satisfying a requirement.
So you've got an approximation that satisfies the requirement.
I'll give an example in a minute.
For every p in the partially ordered set,
there exists something in d which is below it.
Namely, you can still improve p to an approximation
which satisfies the requirement.
Sorry?
No, no.
And the requirement about g, it intersects some dense sets,
some collection of dense sets.
Let me give you an example.
Suppose that maybe you're keen to think you'd like to do.
Suppose you've got a collection of functions from,
suppose that f is a collection,
some collection is a set of functions
and from natural numbers to natural numbers.
You would like to find,
suppose you want to find a function that grows faster
than all these functions.
Something that majorizes all these functions.
Majorize means eventually, majorize.
What could be an approximation to something like that?
The set p would be...
You say, okay, we want some function g from n to n,
so that for every f in f,
eventually there exists an m such that for every k bigger than m,
g of k is above f of k.
You want something that majorizes eventually every function.
What would be an approximation to something like that?
Approximation to something like that would be
a finite information about the function f.
About the function g, I'm sorry.
So it would be a finite approximation of g.
So p would be made up of pairs of a finite approximation,
so it would be some g star and f star,
such that g star is a finite function from n to n.
I mean a partial function from n to n, but finite.
You get finite information.
f star is a finite subset.
It's a subset of f, finite.
Namely, intuitively, what you mean is that this is the commitment
you already made about the function g that you're trying to build.
And the finite set means that from now on,
maybe whatever you've done, you've done,
but from now on, any function that's mentioned in f star,
you're going to be above those functions.
Yeah?
Can I try to paraphrase it in a way that might be more accessible
if you define it here?
Okay.
So you're doing a diagonalization argument.
You have a construction object that meets certain conditions.
And you want to be able to say, oh, well,
I can make sure that the function has condition one,
and then once it has condition one,
I can make sure it has condition two, and so on.
So what property do you need these conditions to have?
So first, once you, so the downward closure means,
once you achieve that condition.
Then you are done.
The further extension is going to maintain that condition.
And then the other thing is, no matter what decisions I've made
in the past, it's always possible to achieve an extension.
I think perfect description of what,
except that here, not necessarily,
probably we have to meet more than countably many requirements.
That's the issue.
But it's basically exactly that.
So the requirement is for every function f in f,
so we consider df to be the set of pairs g star f star,
such that, of course, g star f star belongs to p.
And the function f is already mentioned in f star.
Namely, you are committing yourself at some point
that you are only committing yourself to be above the function f.
Now, if you've got a g, a filter g, which is subset of p,
which is such that g intersect df is non-empty for every f in f star,
that essentially give you a function which dominates all this function.
So that's a way of satisfying the thing.
So this is the object.
So imagine to exist something you can get by this process.
Okay, so partially ordered set, a forcing axiom.
So now the forcing axiom is that you go to partially ordered set.
You've got a cardinal, a fixed cardinal.
The forcing axiom lambda for the partially ordered set p
is the statement whenever you've got lambda many dense in this sense,
subset of p, then you could admit it.
You can find a filter that you can satisfy the requirement of the,
you've got a set of approximation, then you can admit lambda many things.
Trivially, by exactly what you said.
I'm sorry, I don't know your name.
Russell.
Russell said that if lambda is countable, then it's trivial to satisfy it.
The forcing axiom is true for every p, for lambda countable.
If p is a class of partially ordered set, then it's a statement for everything in the class.
Every p, the forcing axiom for all of zero is always true.
But on the other hand, for many simple p, very simple p, even our example,
if you try to meet continual many requirements, then it's simply false.
You can't meet.
For instance, take this example.
Try to meet, I'm not extending the universe of saturation.
Suppose that f star is made up of all functions from n to n.
You can't find a function that dominates every function.
So you cannot meet to the alpha zero, and you cannot meet continual.
So the interesting case is for alpha zero, this forcing axiom is trivial.
For to the alpha zero, even for very simple things, it simply cannot, no chance of having it.
So the interesting case would be that lambda equal alpha one when alpha one is less than to the alpha zero.
But even in this case, there are obvious obstacles to having this forcing axiom.
There are some obvious obstacles for having the forcing axiom, even if the continuum is large.
So a way of trying to overcome it come exactly by Martin axiom,
which you say that a partially ordered set satisfies the countable chain condition.
If every subset of mutually incompatible elements is countable,
if you take a set of mutually incompatible, then only countable,
the many things are satisfied.
Martin axiom is the statement that this is true for every value less than the continuum,
which is trivially true if continuum is alpha one,
because you're talking about only about countable,
but it's interesting if the continuum is larger.
Now Martin axiom decides many, many different statements.
The white conjecture I mentioned before, the Martin axiom plus continuum is false.
Decides many statements. It doesn't decide the value of the continuum.
There is almost the same freedom, almost the same freedom we have initially.
Everything is consistent with a Martin axiom.
So as far as deciding the problem we want to talk about, it's not, you cannot decide it.
The Martin axiom is really about the power of the forcing method.
Yeah.
But it's a way of avoiding, the limitation of CCC is trying to avoiding the obstacles.
Some people could be satisfied.
But is that the best you can do?
So here is Martin Solovey, the approved Martin axiom.
It's consistent with the value.
It consists of many different values of the continuum, as I said before.
Now, but is the CCC, is that the only obstacle bearing mechanism you can have?
It turns out that it's not.
There is a technical thing, which I don't have the time to, which is called stationary preserving,
that if P does not satisfy this technical condition, then automatically it must fail.
Then you cannot meet, then you can have ALEPH-1, many dense sets that you cannot meet.
So there is something which prevents you from having for this class.
But now suppose that this technical condition is satisfied.
So if it's not satisfied, then no chance.
Suppose it is satisfied.
Then there is an axiom called Martin maximum, which is the statement that this is all for every P
which satisfies this condition and for every lambda which is less than continuum.
So it's a kind of maximal version of maximum that you could have.
Because you can't have it for every P which does not satisfy SP,
but the axiom says that you can have it for SP.
The result is that it is consistent with the failure of CH.
CH is trivial, assuming the consistency of some large cardinal.
But here comes the surprise when we think of it.
It implies that the continuum is either ALEPH-1 or ALEPH-2.
Namely, you cannot wear Martin axiom.
You could have the continuum as large as you want.
There are some limitations which are not Martin axiom.
Here, it has got many, many other consequences,
but it implies that the continuum is either ALEPH-1 or ALEPH-2.
ALEPH-1, the axiom is trivial because you're talking about meeting less than continuum,
meeting ALEPH-0, but you can have it with continuum ALEPH-2 and you can.
And more interesting that further results,
there were several attempts to start with Martin axiom and to extend it a little bit.
So anything that you try to extend it,
Martin axiom consists of many different values of the continuum.
Suddenly, you are getting stuck with the value of the continuum cannot be bigger than ALEPH-2.
There is some kind of obstacle to the continuum being ALEPH-2.
Let me just say that there are other lines which I don't have the time to elaborate,
which indicates that ALEPH-2 is a kind of natural,
all kinds of construction that can work up to ALEPH-2 but then get stuck.
So the final thing is that there may be axioms
which in some sense, or some values of the continuum,
are some possibilities of the continuum problem are more equal than others,
namely not all of them are the same.
So some of them are fits together with some kind of slogan,
some kind of motivation, some kind of structure of set theory,
which are in some sense better or more desirable than other values.
So the thing is not completely, it's not completely while jungle,
some values are more possible than others.
Which one, or what would be the philosophical motivation
and what that's actually the subject of another,
could be the subject of another talk,
and I'm not sure that I have very good answers to the values.
But I think that this line of work in which you try to find axioms
which do have some intuitive motivation,
maybe you don't have the full argument why this should be true,
but definitely why it would be practically useful to adopt them,
at least as one possibility out of small number of possibilities.
I think that there is a very good chance of developing a small collection
of axiom systems, extension of set theory,
which settles many of the independent problems.
Okay, thank you.
