All right, okay, so I'm going to talk about the model of class 5.
Yes, thank you for the opportunity to speak and
introduce myself as well as some part of what I have been thinking about lately.
And yeah, so it was actually a great luck that some of the main players that I'm going to talk about were already introduced by other speakers.
So I hope this helps, but let's see.
Anyhow, for now, let X be an algebraic variety over complex numbers.
And if you're not really doing algebraic geometry, the example to keep in mind is probably just the set of solutions of some paranormal equations inside the n dimensional complex space.
So by having such an algebraic variety, we can consider the topological space of its seed points.
In this example, I would just consider the set of solutions with the topology induced by the say Hermitian metric on C to power n.
And after considering the topological space, we can associate with white nature of linear algebraic variant, namely as a great drink of singular co homology is complex conditions.
And as, for example, Sasha Petrov discussed in his talk.
If X is smooth, so smoothness is some regular condition.
If you were looking at the system of equations, some Jacobian criterion, which defines smoothness.
If X is assumed to be smooth, then, as was shown by Grottingen, this singular co homology actually has a purely algebraic description, namely it can be identified with the algebraic drama co homology, which is defined as co homology of X in conditions of certain
complex which is called algebraic drama.
And also, if we further assume the text is proper, which on the level of the C points essentially means that the space is compact.
This drama co homology can be further decomposed as some of what is called hodge co homologies. So this double graded groups and ice j graded component is given by J's co homology effects this petitions and I for this.
So, so Sasha in his talk was studying what happens with this sort of hodge decomposition property, when we consider varieties over finite views.
But I will be considering different problems.
Different different sort of problem, namely what will happen if we try to describe singular co homology effects of C but not with C coefficients but fp coefficients.
In the moment, let's suppose that X was actually defined over integers. So, yeah, let me know if I'm precisely what this means but in this example we're considering a system of solutions of some polynomial equations.
I would want these polynomials to be defined over integers so that this means that the coefficients are integers.
Yeah, so if X is defined over integers, we can define this reduction model with P.
So in the above case we will just reduce this polynomials model and consider.
So this is the algebraic variety of solutions. And, returning back to this definition of algebraic drama complex actually makes a perfect sense this setting for varieties over finite views.
And so we could consider the drama homology of reduction, given this and maybe a naive or even crazy. Yes, would be maybe the single homology I actually computed by the drama homology of reduction.
So the answer is that not really for actually, in most of the examples that was really not.
I wanted to state in this example.
So, yeah, let's consider just a fine line and then the political space of C points is given by complex plane.
This is the case which is contractible. And this means that the single homology, even with a few coefficients are just computed by a few in a single degree zero.
But if you compute the drama homology in this case, then what you get is the following context we have a polynomial ring over FP, maybe into a free model over it stand by DX, why are the usual ground differential.
Now, specifics of characteristic P is that if you plug in inside the differential, and I know now whose power is divisible by P, then the result will be divisible by P itself and since we work with model P becomes zero.
So it means that zero drama homology of a one, which is exactly the kernel of this map is in fact isomorphic to polynomial ring in X to power P itself.
Yeah, so the first thing you should notice here is that this space is actually infinite dimensional and so, but that's no way it resembles the single homology in this case, even by rough size.
But actually, if you assume the text is proper. Oh yeah and here also assume the text is smooth.
And in fact, in many concrete examples, you can non canonically identify the single homology of a single homology with the drama homology of the reduction, example being like projective space or grass mania, or
you can write is the case of the system, any other examples.
And in fact, a recent work of about more results.
They developed a new homology and the further development.
Introducing this magic homology shows that this idea is not that crazy and the difference between two things is controlled by something relatively explicit and can be described by interval period course theory.
And yeah, I hope to return to visit think rich control.
But, okay, so this was an introduction of what is classically known for in this world of schemes and algebraic geometry but promise that there will be some classifying stacks.
What I was going to talk about. And yeah so now, let's pass to that and say here.
Yeah so main person who initiated research made it here is birth to Tara, who is actually here and will be here for the special year and baby geometry.
So, let's consider the following so let G be a split deductive group or Z. I won't try to define what this means but rather just tell you what are the examples, some particular examples like you can consider a multiplicative group or the group of invertible and
this is just a normal group, or it's double sheet cover given by the screen or group or projective linear groups so all these groups, they have algebraic geometric models, which could be defined for integers.
And given such a group we can consider it's C point and this would give a topological space but also it will have a group structure.
So in fact it's a big group, but in particular topological group and to any such topological group we can associate its classifying space, so then, natural object to consider.
And, yeah, now we can consider it's singular co homology with efficient and this ring is classically known as a ring of characteristic classes.
Yeah, and we can ask a similar question as before so alternatively we can take the reduction of G module E, and in algebraic geometry there is an analog of classifying space construction which is given by classifying step.
And we can also extend their own co homology to the stack setting and.
So, question which Bert asked was, and the rich assumptions or whether these two things agree, either a natural isomorphism between their own and single.
In fact, it turns out that answer is almost yes and let me give the only definition in my presentation here so it's certain condition on the prime relative to the choice of this deductive group.
So, yeah, so a brand D is called torsion, or G, if when I consider the singular co homology of C point of G, with integral coefficient this a bit and group has not really a portion.
Here I just want to emphasize this singular co homology is just some fine and regenerated a bit and group.
And this means that the set of portion price for a fixed group G is just some finite set price.
And yeah, also let me just mention that the red show that this condition on the co homology of G is actually equivalent to the same condition for the classifying space.
The theorem which total proof is that if he is non portion so he lies outside of this finite set of friends, then in fact, this singular co homology ring is isomorphic to the drama.
However, is this isomorphism is not canonical. And in fact, there is no natural method in general in either directions.
Okay, and yeah, so just to give you an idea of this torsion prime looks compared in different situations so I'm not sure when exactly I started 25 on this 25 25.
Okay, okay.
And then I can probably say a couple more.
So, in the case of JLM, the general linear group. If I consider the C points.
This actually is common. This group is common topic equivalent to the unitary group.
And yeah so this group for example appeared in the talk by our home and maybe in the talk of as well.
And yeah so if you consider it's classifying space then it's a classical computation in topology that the integral co homology ring, this classifying space is given by polynomial ring in children classes.
So these are certain elements of CI and degree of each CI is to.
So basically we see that this is torsion free and Indian Brook and the homonomials and CI is give the basis with it.
And there are no torsion primes in this case.
However, any prime is a torsion prime for some.
So this is given by the linear group, namely if we consider G, given by projective linear group size and then it's not hard to compute that a second singular co homology of at C points, in fact is given by Z mod M.
So this is given by every prime which divides and gives you torsion prime, and you can show that this is the set. So the set of primes dividing and is the set of torsion primes.
In this case.
And let me just mention that in the case of orthogonal group or it's double color given by spinor group, the only torsion prime is to.
Yeah, so yeah, let me just show you again the theorem to try to which was describing the drama.
Yeah, the relation between the round single module for non torsion primes and, and special talks what happens for torsion primes whether this theorem extends there.
So that's the example also computed by the tarot shows that no, particularly he was able to compute that if you consider 30 seconds that I'm going to be in a weather.
Then this is strictly bigger than the dimension of corresponding singular homology.
And this I think it really stays the minimal example in this reductive group framework for when the inequality breaks.
When it comes to inequality.
But in a way you can feel the gap and this is given by my joint work with afternoon report call. And so one of the results we show is that it's always true that the dimension of drama homology or the reduction.
The final step is greatly programmed the dimension of the single homology. And moreover, you can fairly explicitly describe the difference, namely it's controlled by a certain other homology theory, namely mod P prismatic homology of the classifying step BG.
And prismatic homology, it's naturally a model over power series ring for FB more precisely the difference is controlled by the you torsion in this model.
I just mentioned that actually our theorem works slightly more generally for motion steps where you can see the motions of smooth proper schemes by deductive groups.
Interesting.
Oh, like just the question of comparing this drama single homology.
So yeah, I forgot to mention that actually for some particular examples of G, this computation of this homology ring of singular homology of BGFC is a very hard problem.
And for some groups, it's not known still.
And, yeah, on the other hand, under the ramp site, you can show that in this case of classifying stack of deductive groups to Sasha in his talk was saying that you don't always have watched the composition in characteristic P, but for deductive groups for classifying
and this gives a splitting of this drama homology as a direct sum of by great pieces.
And each of these by greatest piece can further be interpreted in terms of representation theory of the corresponding reduction of G.
And it's given explicitly as co homology of G with coefficients in some symmetric powers of co joined representation.
And, yeah, so even though G is reductive group in characteristic P, it's no longer linearly reductive and this homology groups can very easily be non zero.
And again, it's a very, it's actually a very hard problem to continue them for small price.
And yeah, so this theorem, or even the other results of birth.
I mean it gives an interesting relation between representation theory of gene characteristic P and some topology classical computational topological problems.
And you could use methods on both sides to get some new information on the other.
And yeah, let me just finish with what things I would like to think about in a yes during this year related to what I just told you.
So, one very interesting example.
This potential comparison is when G is equal to the projective linear group.
Yeah, and yeah.
So, for a portion price, in fact, the answer for the single homology of BG is not known unless P is not equal to him.
And so based on some computations or yeah I can be thinking about this for quite a long time I actually suspect that it might be true that this single homo during is just isomorphic to the drama homo during even though both things are
very hard to compute and in fact the drama homo during is more computable.
I can't really give a formula for any precisely like commercial degree of the dimension but at least there is a very natural complex which computes the cosmology and
so one wanted to compute it.
And another more theoretical question is, so whether these theorems I said it works for portions of smooth proper schemes by reductive groups, whether it can be extended to more general class of stacks.
Me and my brother, we have a candidate for what this class of stacks is but not really have a proof for my homework.
I would like to find the proof.
That's it, thank you.
Do you think that you have hoped the composition.
Yes, do you mean the whole sequence that generated or do you mean and you have not heard the composition.
Actually, I think in this case, I mean, it's not written down anywhere but I think there is a more accurate statement yes so the quote for homology is isomorphic to their own, even as some higher object first of all and it's even functorial in a way.
And it should be isomorphic as infinity algebra.
Sorry.
Is this more general class of stacks you're limited to the end include things like a one much young. Right, exactly. So yeah, it should be. So there is an option of formally proper step back then you'll call the listener, which is essentially saying that you should have got a feeling which you usually
should have the most proper, just proper things and expect that this should be the key condition for having this sort of comparisons and it's it does hold for x mod g you were exposed and property.
Yes, I read this, which you said was a sort of essentially minimally counter example of spin 11.
Can you say something about 11 doesn't have to do with the 11, you know, 11 and 11 at the first time.
So actually, yeah, it's, I can tell.
So, so, actually, you can compute co homology rings drama homology rings for all these PMS work to. And so key condition when drama homology differs from singular is that and should be compared with should be three four or five model eight, and this is related to some
types of griefers algebras.
But then there's like, if you take three four and five. In this case, so and is too simple. Like if there are some exotic isomorphism with other reductive groups and yet you don't get this torsion.
And then the first one, which is three is 11.
Yes.
It's difficult to come up with some cases is homology ring what is the input to the computer some program exactly what you know and what you.
You mean what is known about this.
What are you given.
Sorry, you're given.
Yes, yes, you get you're given a reductive group. So it's some combinatorial data, maybe like with a fixed and with it. Yeah, so for example, here you could take pjland is a fixed and and then you also can vary P.
And he is outside of and then it's covered, for example, by birds theorem, but if he divides and it's actually quite complicated. Oh, and I forgot to say that actually these two things identified in one series of example by it's due to total some classical topological
computation and this gives me hope that also that this could be true.
Yes, yes, yes, essentially, or you can write an extent from smooth schemes as an object or anything to get it.
But then you can show that it's actually computed by any simply sure.
Is this so problem is that they simply show sort of presentation. It is not really helpful here because they're on for a lot of fun pieces is very huge.
We need some global arguments.
Okay, thanks.
