Okay, so the next speaker is Immanuel Reiniger, and we will talk about comparison theorems
in periodic geometry.
Yes, thank you.
So before I talk about comparison theorems in periodic geometry, I first want to talk
about the statements in complex geometry that motivated and that we've also seen in some
of the previous talks.
So if x is a complex manifold, then we can look at its holomorphic deram complex.
This complex is exact by the Poincare lemma.
So we can relate different parts of it in terms of cosmology and the state-of-the-art
theorem.
So the cosmology of the red part isomorphic to the
cosmology of the yellow part of the manifold with complex coefficients.
This isomorphism is natural, and it's kind of interesting because we have extra structures
on both sides that we don't see on the other side.
Here we have the Hatch filtration.
Some filtration here, this c-vector space here actually comes from a z-module here at the
integral singular cosmology.
And this isomorphism is also highly transcendental, so it's already for the Hunter complex plane
we need to be able to access something like 2 pi i in order to define this isomorphism.
And so a natural question is if we can have similar isomorphisms over a different number
of systems, and it turns out that in biologic geometry, so if you work with some epithelial
extension of q-q, that there's actually a bunch of isomorphisms.
I want to talk a particular one where this x is given as some zero set of polynomials
inside of the projected space of k, and I actually want to insist that these polynomials
are defined already over the ring of integers of k.
And then also there's some smoothness here, so the experts can and are encouraged to think
of this as a smooth proper variety with good reaction over k.
Okay, and so then there's analogs of both of these two groups, so the singular cosmology
gets replaced by the etal cosmology of this variety.
And so the Duram cosmology we've seen in previous talks, we can still define this here in the
setting, but actually in this nice setting where we have this good reduction, this Duram
cosmology it only depends on these polynomials, on the values of these polynomials that we
get when we reduce them at the maximum ideal.
And so this gives us some extra structure, gives us some forbaneness on this Duram cosmology
group, and this is packaged by something called crystalline cosmology, but really I want you
to think of this as Duram cosmology together with some extra structure.
And so the theorem of Falking tells us that these two groups are still isomorphic once
we transfer out with some other ring.
So this ring should contain something like 2 pi i that we already needed over here to
define the isomorphism, and this was already conjectured by Gordon Deacon Fontaine and
has since been reproofed many, many times, so there should be a lot more dots here.
And one very nice thing about this theorem is that there's again a lot of extra structures
on both sides.
So here we have this host filtration, we have the forbanious, on this side we have an action
of the Galois group of k bar over k, and one can actually also put, one can put similar
structures on this ring decrys, and then it turns out that this isomorphism preserves
all this structure.
And so this allows us to recover the red part from the yellow part and vice versa, which
was not possible over here, so here we, I couldn't see the filtration on the yellow
side, we couldn't see the integral structure here on the right-hand side.
Okay, so in some sense that's the end of the story, but my talk is only five minutes
over, so I'll say a little bit more, and as geometers we're also sometimes curious about
the relative setting.
So what happens when we have a family of rights, or a family of complex manifolds, and actually
we want to start again by talking about what happens over here.
So now I want to look at a family of complex manifolds, which is smooth and proper.
So the proper is just some compactness assumption, it means that the privileges of compact sets
are compact, and we can try to understand what is the Duram homology of the fibers
of this family, and there's a very nice way to package it, and in terms of a certain
vector bundle for this complex manifold, yes.
Okay, now that we've seen the Duram theorem, it's natural to wonder, can we still recover
the singular homology of the fibers from this Duram homology?
In fact, the answer is yes, and this one needs to look at a connection called the Gauss-Mann
connection.
So this is a map, a seed in your map from this vector bundle to the vector bundle, that's
it, and with differential forms, and we should think of this as some sort of set of partial
differential equations.
And it turns out that the relative Utah homology is exactly the set of those sections of the
vector bundle that satisfies these partial differential equations, so the flat sections.
So this is great, we can get the singular homology back from the Duram homology, even
if we have such a family, but if you really buy into the Duram theorem, then you also
want to go the other way.
If I give you the relative singular homology, you want to be able to reconstruct this Duram
homology, maybe at first it doesn't seem like this should work, but the Riemann Hilbert
correspondence tells us that it does.
So it tells us in the setting that if you start with a vector bundle, with a flat connection
so then again you can look at the flat sections of the vector bundle, but in fact you can
also go back just you take the flat sections and you multiply them with all other homomorphic
functions on X.
That's the connection you just take the connection coming from the differential on the holomorphic
functions.
And to do this, this is exactly the vector bundle that you started with, so this is some sort
of correspondence between the vector bundles with flat connections and certain zero systems.
So actually this Riemann Hilbert correspondence, it gives us a way to phrase this Duram theorem
in a much nicer way and also for the Duram homology more generally of these vector bundles
with flat connection.
So if I'm now again in the setup where I have a smooth proper family of complex manifolds,
then there's a way to go from a vector bundle with connection X to a vector bundle with
connection on the basis.
This E was just the structure sheath and this would be the relative Duram homology.
There's also a way for these local systems so if we again in this case of the structure
sheath and this would just be the complex numbers and then want to kind of again look
at the relative singular homology in fibers.
So we can make, give these names, so it's easy to go to some, alright, if you want to
start E in this local system, color, you can also take the relative homology.
And so now there's a natural question, if I start over here and go down here, there's
two ways to go.
I could start with my vector bundle, take the flat sections and then take relative
singular homology, but I could also first take this relative Duram homology and then
pass to flat sections.
And this is actually, it gives me the same answer.
And the special case for essence of point, this is exactly what you want to hear.
Okay, so let's go back to our setting of pediatric geometry.
So again, I want to work over some finite extension of QP, and now I want to think of
the pediatric analog of these smooth, proper family of complex manifolds.
So I want to be thinking about something like the periodic unit disk, and the problem is
it can't really be described by zero sets of polynomials anymore.
It's rather it's some, it's described by some inequality of certain conversion powers.
Okay, and so we also still insist that we want these conversion power series to be
to have coefficients and in this ring of integers, okay, instead of just K.
So the technical way to phrase this is we started with some smooth, proper morphism.
And so it turns out that there is again, two categories that somehow correspond to this
red side over here, and the yellow side over here.
So I told you before that for the yellow side, you should think of this in terms of etal
comology.
And so this correspondence is a bit worse, we don't get all local systems, but you get
a certain class which are called crystalline local systems here on the left hand side on
the red side, we had this drama comology with this extra functionality which I called crystalline
comology, it had this bovenius, it also had this hodge filtration.
And so the natural counter part of these vector bundles with flat connection is called a filtered
F isochrist.
So this is supposed to be the special fiber.
So again, I'm taking these, these power series that define my formal scheme and I reduce them
not the maximum ideal, and here I mean the generic fiber so I think of these as being
power series over K and not just they're not the difference.
Okay, and so one theorem that I proved recently in joint work with Paul Young-Koo, and this
based on a lot of previous work is that again we have something similar to what happens over
here.
So if I start with a crystalline local system, Lex, which has a certain associated filtered
F isochrist in here, then one can take one can take again these direct images, and it turns out
they're again associated with each other.
So I have higher the recommended L is again crystalline.
Yeah, I don't have this F isochrist.
Again, when, when as is the point this recovers this sort of comparison here.
Yeah, should also point out there was a lot of previous work when this map actually came from a map of smooth
over schemes this was already in this work of faultings.
There's also work when K is an unrallyfied extension to town and town and many more works.
There should also be a lot of dots here.
What was also new for us is that we prove it in a somewhat different way than these people so we look at a third player over here.
So recently, it was a definition of a prismatic side of these x, due to button shows that that was also mentioned in previous talks.
And but shows already they consider it again crystals with pervania structures for this prismatic site.
And they explained to us how once we start here we can get a local system out of it, and how we can get an ice crystal out of it.
And so in the case when X is a point, this is already an interesting case because there's a not to build a gamma action they explained how there is a correspondence between these two sides and what we really did is we tried to generalize this correspondence to higher.
Okay, I'm out of time so that's me.
Any other questions.
Does your, is your, their research to the crystal case or can you also handle semi stable case.
So we only wrote down things in the crystal case I think in general.
A lot of the technology has already been developed for the same server case, for example, blockers medical model G so it seems doable to us to do it in the same stable case but the papers already very long.
So your correspondence goes in one way.
The correspondence goes by this part over here so we have this isn't an equivalent.
This isn't. Okay, so you have to put some.
This one I think it can't be like the ones of category so for example, they can at most CDS watch me.
So these are things that are defined over issue. So you would have at most CDS watch me can do and then I think what control, this is at least fully faithful.
Thank you.
