Thank you very much for the invitation. I'm very happy to be here giving a talk. This
is such a beautiful place. So today I'd like to tell a story about how two big conjectures
in the field relate to each other in what was at least a surprising way for me. So these
are the flux conjectures and unknown conjecture. And this is based on joint work in progress
with Yegor Shaluki. So first, let's just go over some basic definitions that we probably
all know, just to set notation. Throughout this talk, an omega will be a closed symplectic
manifold. And we're going to be mainly focused on Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms and the identity
component of the group of symplectic diffeomorphisms. So once an Hamiltonian diffeomorphism, while
if you have the time-dependent function on your closed symplectic manifold, then you
by Hamilton's equation, you induce a time-dependent vector field, Hamiltonian vector field, and
Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms are diffeomorphisms which are given as time-one, time-one map
of the induced Hamiltonian isotope. And well, just to make sure we're on the same page,
we say that Hamiltonian dwarfism is non-degenerate if its graph intersects the diagonal, transfers
an m-coset. Let's just go over the unknown conjectures. So I split here into two different
cases. So first, the non-degenerate case. So the unknown conjecture in that case states
that the number of fixed points of a non-degenerate Hamiltonian diffeomorphism is bounded below
by the Morse number of your manifold, the minimal number of critical points in a Morse
function. But Morse theory that would imply that the number of fixed points is bounded
below by the total number. And after a lot of work, of which I'll include all the citations
in the end, because I want to get towards the end by people in this very room, we nowadays
know this, we know the number of fixed points is bounded below the total number for any
closed symplectic manifold. Of this inequality, this is open in several cases. I think state
of the art is known for the symplectic torii, cpn, and a spherical symplectic manifolds,
if I'm not mistaken. I'm not sure if there's more cases where we know the Morse cycle.
Now, in the general case, so including the general Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms, the
unknown conjecture states that the number of fixed points is bounded below by the critical
number of the minimal number of critical points that a smooth function can have. And in particular
by Lucian-Lichnell-Monterey, that would imply that the number of fixed points is bounded
below by the cup length plus one. Or the cup length is just the maximal length of cup
products that you can have of cohomology classes of positive degree. Because we're in the closed
setting, the cup length is at least n. Because wedging the symplectic form n times with itself
gives you the bonding form. Let me make a remark. So Andreas Fleurs thought that that conjecture
was wrong in general. Yes. But he thought it was too difficult for the counting sample and one
should talk with a MacDuff into it. That part never worked out. He thought there was the only
person who could really do it. So part of the proof today, there's this analog of the flux group,
the C0 flux group. And under the assumption that it has an accumulation point, we construct the
Hamiltonian diffeomorphism, which is C0 small and has a most one fixed point. But now we can
exclude, but it's ephemeral in the sense that if it's C0 small enough, we can exclude that from
happening. But it does maybe give you a way of producing a counter example in the sense. So thank
you for the comments. So this, so the coupling inequality, it's only proven in the asphherical
case. And for Tori and CPN, but as Helmut mentioned, even Fleurs believes it's not true in general.
Okay, so now let's go towards the flux conjectures. Now we have these sequence of subgroups of the group
of diffeomorphisms of a closed symplectic manifold. So how these, this is the group of
hemiplegic diffeomorphisms, which is a subgroup of the path connected components of the identity of
the group of symplectic diffeomorphism. Simp just notes the diffeomorphisms, which are symplectic,
right, the preservative symplectic form. And we can think, we can, we're going to focus on two
topologies, C0 and the C1 topology. And the C0 topology, one can think of it as a topology induced
by the C0 distance, which is defined by this formula here, where D is just some distance
induced by a choice of Ramanian metric. Because we're in the closed setting, everything will be
and it's reasonable to ask whether each of these groups, or subgroups, is closed in either of
these topologies in the subsequent group. So in this first case here, so looking at symph inside
this, well, the symplectic condition is a condition on the derivative. So it follows pretty easily
that in the C1 case, symph is closed in diffe. On the C0 case, it's also true, but that's a lot
harder to show, and that's the content of the grammar of the Ashford theorem.
Now, the second inclusion here, so looking at the path connected component of the identity,
well, if we knew that symph is locally path connected in either of these topologies, then
well, it's a connected component, so it's closed. So it's a matter, if you can show that in particular,
it will imply that it's closed. So the C1 case, that is true. And the reason why this follows is
because if you have a C1 small symplectic diffe morphism, then you can look at its graph inside
a Y-shaped neighborhood of the diagonal. And this graph, because we have control under derivatives,
this is going to be identified with the graph that will close one form.
And now you can contract that one form towards the zero form, and that will correspond to a
symplectic path, a C1 small symplectic path, basically, from the identity to your C1 small
symplectic diffe morphism. So sym is locally path connected in the C1 topology, and sym0 is closed
in sym. And the C0 case, pretty much nothing is known. We don't know if it's closed in sym,
probably for surfaces, it's not hard to show. But beyond that, we don't know, at least as far as I
understand. But you don't know references to such a case? No. But I thought a little bit about it,
and I don't think it's hard to show. It probably follows from some, it will probably be corollaries
of other theorems that are out there. But beyond that, I have no idea that it would be interesting.
And the flux injectors relate to this first inclusion here, or this third inclusion as I
labeled. And we're asking whether hand is closed inside sym0. And in the C1 case,
a sonic injector, that's a theorem, and it was proven in general by Kono in 2006,
general meaning closed symplectic manifolds, with plenty of previous progress by Laland
with Potorovich in 2007. And in the C0 case, a lot less than it is known. It's pretty much
open. And there has been progress by Hermann, proved it for symplectic tori,
and some progress by Laland with Potorovich in the same paper. And the state of the art is by
Buhowski in 2013. And I'll go over some definitions before I can tell you what the progress was.
In the C0 case. So we want to ask- So was Hermann, there was a consequence of kondizineus here?
I'm not sure. I'm not sure. Maybe. It's- Because there was no-
Yeah, it's from 2003. Before nobody knew what to do, so it wasn't-
It must- I'm assuming it is, but I'm not quite sure. Yeah.
Certainly the type of progress from Laland with Potorovich and Buhowski is very different.
And then what Hermann did. But they somehow don't use homomorphic curves. So I think that's
interesting as well. So now let's go to the definition of the flux homomorphism. But before,
I'll define it a little bit more generally on what I call here map zero, which is on the universal
cover of map zero, which is the space of smooth maps from M to itself, which are smoothly homotopic
to the identity. So not necessarily different morphisms, just smooth. So the flux map is a map
from the universal cover of map zero to the first Iran homology of the symbolic map on this case.
So how do we define it? Well, classes here are just- are represented by paths of smooth maps from
M to itself, which are based at the identity. And we want to be able to evaluate one cycle.
So what we do, well, we take some one cycle, we flow it by this path, representing a class,
and compute it simply like the area. One can show that that is well-defined. And moreover,
it sends compositions to some. But this is not a group, so it's not a homomorphism yet. But when
you restrict- when you restrict to the universal cover of sin zero, then this is a homomorphism.
This is the usual- the usual flexible morphism that we know. So this allows us to define the
topological flux group, which are the fluxes of loops of smooth maps. These are, in other words,
this is the image of the fundamental group of map zero, seen as a subspace of its fundamental-
of its universal covering under the flux map. And it's a subgroup of the first Iran homology group.
And I think I'm gonna write down the definition so that's when I mention it again later.
You can keep it in mind.
I'll leave it here.
Can everyone see? Maybe, sure.
Okay. If at some point you need me to- but these are just fluxes of loops of smooth maps. We're
going to then compare that to the usual flux group, which is fluxes of loops of symplectic
different morphisms. So it's a lot more rigid. So let's now define the usual flux group and the
C0 flux group. By work of Banyaga, once you restrict the flux group to the universal cover
of some zero, a symplectic path based on identity has zero flux, if and only if it's
homotopic relative endpoints to a Hamiltonian path. So in particular, if you have a symplectic path
with zero flux, the endpoint is a Hamiltonian different morphism.
Now we have this again in the sequence of inclusions, where I still haven't defined this,
but ham-zero just denotes the C0 closure of ham inside sym-zero. And of course,
it includes inside sym-zero. And if pi is the canonical projection of the universal covering
of sym-zero, now we can look at the inverse image of ham-zero under pi. So what are these?
So these are classes in sym-zero that can be represented by symplectic paths based
on identity and whose endpoints lie in ham-zero. So in the C0 closure of ham. And similarly,
the preimage of ham, but these endpoints are just Hamiltonian.
So the flux group, well, these are again, fluxes of loops of symplectic different morphisms.
And equivalently, it's given by the image of this guy, so the preimage under pi of ham,
under the flux map. So why do we have this equivalence? Well, if you have
a class in the preimage of ham, then it's represented by a symplectic path whose endpoint
is Hamiltonian, then you can just find the Hamiltonian path connecting to it. And either
by concatenating or composing with its inverse, you have a symplectic loop. But because this part
of the path, which is dotted, is Hamiltonian, it has zero flux. So then the flux of your
symplectic path just corresponds with the flux of a loop of symplectic morphisms.
So that's how you get this equivalence here. And the reason you have, the reason I wanted
this equivalent definition is because now it becomes a lot easier to define the C0
flux group, which is the same thing. But now we're looking at the preimage of ham-zero instead of ham.
So now for the topological flux group and for the usual flux group, we have this very nice
description of fluxes of loops, either loops of smooth paths or loops of symplectic morphisms.
For gamma-zero, the C0 flux group, we don't have such a nice description,
but we can characterize them as what we call almost loops. So what do I mean here? I mean that
any class in the C0 flux group can be seen as the flux of a symplectic path whose end point
is arbitrarily close to the identity in the C0 topology. So it's not, we don't get loops,
but we get almost loops. And these will be very helpful later on, this characterization.
So now what's the relationship between the flux injectors and the flux groups? Well,
in the C1 case, so asking a ham is C1 closed in sym0, that's equivalent to showing that the
flux group is a discrete subgroup of the first-round homology. And that's in fact what Ono
showed in 2006. Now, the C0 case, so asking a ham is C0 closed in sym0, that's equivalent to showing
that the C0 flux group is equal to the usual flux group. And in particular, that implies
that the C0 flux group is a discrete subgroup of the first-round homology. However, we don't
necessarily get this equivalence that we do in the C1 case. Maybe someone can find a way to get
this equivalence, but so far we don't know how to. And the reason is that in the C1 case, we have
this correspondence, right? For C1 small symplectic morphisms, as I alluded to in the beginning,
their graph in the Weinstein neighborhood will correspond to a closed one form. But if you're
C0 small, you're still going to be in some Weinstein neighborhood, but you're not necessarily
graphical. So for that reason, we can't establish an equivalence here. Well, the screen this here would
provide a strong indication for the C0 flux injection.
So what did Bohovsky show in 13 along with the Poltarevich before him? Well, they show that if
the topological flux group is equal to the usual flux group, then the C0 flux injectors
is true. It holds. And ham is equal to ham zero. And what along with the Poltarevich show was exactly
the same thing, but with the additional assumption that the symplectic manifold was a left shits type.
Now, showing that the topological flux group is equal to the usual flux group, it's quite
hard to do. So basically, as tangible corollaries from this theorem in 2013, you know that a
spherical symplectic manifold with nontrivial characteristic,
you know that for them, the C0 flux injector holds, but it's hard to come up with more examples
that you know the gamma is equal to gamma top. And there are examples where these two groups are
not equal. So for some symplectic mapping, for example. So now, let me tell you a little bit
about the relationship between the urinal conjecture and flux injection. So first, and it's going to be
demonstrated in the proof of our first theorem, which is that the C0 flux group is in fact discrete
for general close symplectic manifold. So this is some sort of weak version of the flux injector
in some sense, but it does not prove. In particular, because gammas included into gamma zero, this
provides another proof of the C1 flux injection. So how do we prove it? Well,
we show that if we can guarantee that every sufficiently C0 small Hamiltonian different
morphisms has at least two fixed points, then gamma is discrete. In other words, like I said
in the beginning, under the assumption that gamma zero has an accumulation point,
we can construct a Hamiltonian different morphism with that most one fixed point,
which is C0 small. And the second theorem is that
if phi is sufficiently C0 small, so phi being a Hamiltonian different morphism,
then it has at least a length plus one fixed point. So in particular, because n is at least one,
it has at least two fixed points. So from Romov's work, you knew the existence of at least one fixed
point, but two, we didn't know, because this can, and in particular, the example that we construct
is very degenerate in some sense. So we really needed to be able to show this lower path. So this
was known for small hofer norm by Schwartz. But this theorem follows from a more general theorem.
So here's the thing. Fix some Weinstein neighborhood of the diagonal in m cross m.
Now for sufficiently C0 small Hamiltonian different morphisms, its graph is going to line
that Weinstein neighborhood. So in particular, it's going to correspond to some Lagrangian
semana fold of a codisk bottom. Now you can ask, well, is this Lagrangian exact?
Of course, if the whole path lies inside of the Weinstein neighborhood, then it's going to
clearly be exact because Hamiltonian different morphisms have zero flux and everything is going
to follow from that. But if we don't know that, if perhaps the path was traced far from the Weinstein
neighborhood and then the endpoint comes back in, then what we show is that if it comes back in and
it's sufficiently close to the diagonal or to the zero section, then it must be an exact Lagrangian.
So now the question about fixed points of C0 small Hamiltonian different morphisms
becomes a question about intersection points of exactly Lagrangians with the zero section.
Exact, not necessarily Hamiltonian as a plot, but still the same tools apply the
algebraic tools. So what I mean is that the number of fixed points, what's going to be
equal to the intersections of the Lagrangian graph and the diagonal, and that as I said,
the theorem implies that this graph is an exact Lagrangian. So now we can use some
Le Sturne-Schnellman type arguments for spectral invariance of exact Lagrangians
and obtain the coupling test for C0 small Hamiltonians. So now theorem C, sorry,
theorem V plus proposition one yield theorem A. Because we show that what we can construct
doesn't exist, at least for sufficiently small, if it's sufficiently small.
Okay, is there, presumably not, but is there an example known of
say in the contendent of a sequence of Lagrangians going to zero, but in order to
homotop them to zero, you have to go out, make it far out.
Yeah, because that would be a kind of example to the nearby Lagrangian.
Well, at least the graphical version of it.
Or in a simplistic manifold, a Lagrangian where, yeah, this person was the same, I mean,
you have a Lagrangian near a given Lagrangian, but in order to, you know, it has a topic to it,
but there you actually have to go a while or four hours to invite certain things.
Yeah, yeah, I don't know. That would be quite, that would be a source of several other examples.
And just a remark, if we knew that the simplistic manifold were rational, so the
simplistic areas of spheres form the discreet subgroup of the reels, then theorem C, which is
a theorem about exactness of the grammar, would follow from easier arguments, which are already
in place in the work of LaLong, with the Kotorovich and the work of Puchovsky, basically showing
that the norm of the Louisville form is somehow controlled by the C0 distance.
But the epsilon that you get in those cases, it tends to zero as a rationality, constant
goes to zero, so a rational approximation doesn't work there.
Yeah, so in the context of this list, I'm going to share one version.
I think what Flo was thinking of, taking products of simplistic manifolds, which
would destroy a rationality. Right, so that too. Yeah, that would make sense.
Yeah, I'll go over the construction and maybe there's an, it's somehow, if you can avoid this
theorem, there's a way of constructing this counter example, but it's hard to make sure that you're
not within the frame, like you're not far within a wiser neighborhood, then you see what I mean
in the construction. I'll try to get back. So let's go to the content of proposition one, right?
Now I'm going to spend most of the time just constructing this counter example. Under the
assumption, there's an accumulation point in gamma zero. So there's this great theorem by
Farber and Schutz from 2006, and it's a theorem about one-forms. What it says is that if you have
a non-trivial first cohomology class, then you can find a representative
which has at most one-zero. It's a closed one-form with a most one-zero, which
represents that class. Of course, this one-form has to be, the class has to be non-trivial,
otherwise you would contradict the Lüsterner Schindelman theory.
And what we first do is quantify this theorem in some sense, because what we want to do is be able
to use this one-form to induce a symplectic isotope. So in the same way that you have a
Hamiltonian isotope induced by a vector field satisfying Hamilton's equation,
you can instead of having an exact one-form here, you can just have a closed one-form,
and that will induce a symplectic path whose flux is precisely the cohomology class of that one-form.
So now we have control over the zeros of this one-form, but we want control over the fixed
points of the symplectic isotope of its time one map. And the way to do that is being able to control
its c1 norm, because then you avoid these new one-periodic orbits for me. So you just want the,
you want the correspondence between the zeros and the fixed points. So this is the point of
this first lemma here. So lemma only about closed one-forms. So what we show is that
not only, so I mean H upper one is just some real vector space, so we can fix some norm on it.
And what we show is that there exists a c, such that we can pick this representative
from the Harvard-Schutz theorem, but for, but that its c1 norm is going to be controlled by the
norm of the class with this uniform c. Does that make sense?
Okay, so how, how do we prove this lemma? So first we pick some non-trivial class,
homology class, and pick the representative given by the Harvard-Schutz construction.
So that's going to have a most one-zero, and we can suppose, which is a bit, we can take care of
the case where it has one-zero, which is a bit harder. So this graph is going to look something
like this in, in the full-time and bottom up. So you have only one-zero, and we can pick some
contractible neighborhood of the zero in the base, in the manifold. Now, away from this,
from the fibers of this contractible neighborhood, it's going to be at some delta distance away from,
from the zero section. For some choice of metric, whatever you fix, there's going to be some positive
belt away from this contractible. Now, you can find a small enough neighborhood of the origin
of the norm that we fixed in H over 1, for which every non-trivial, every homology class,
or non-trivial homology class can be represented by a one-four, who see one norm as small compared
to this delta here. So their graphs are going to be something like this, right? Just by picking a
small enough neighborhood of the origin. Now, by Poincaré's lemma, and a little bit of work,
we can show that not only we can pick the representative with small c1 norm, but we can
pick it to vanish identically on the contractible neighborhood. So now when we add this represented,
so alpha plus beta, so alpha was our, the, the, the, the special one form that we picked from the
partnerships construction, we're not changing the zeros inside this neighborhood because we're just
deciding zero, but because it's small away from the neighborhood, we're not creating any new zeros
away from it. So alpha plus beta is going to have the same zero set, and its c1 norm is only going
to depend on the c1 norm of alpha and plus delta over two, which is the delta that we,
but basically only depends on alpha, and alpha is fixed here. So we can call the c1 norm plus
alpha over two, just some cA here. But note that an epsilon neighborhood of the class A
is just A plus epsilon neighborhood of the origin. So every cohomology class here can be written as
alpha plus beta in that same way, and we can do it in a way that you're, by the same argument,
we can do it in a way where the zero set is the same, and the c1 norm is bounded by cA.
So suppose, for example, that we started off with an A that had norm one,
then it's sitting on some sphere, and we prove the lemma basically for some constant for a ball
around that point. Now we just conclude by compactness, because we can extract the finite
couple, and we maximize over this. So what did we show just coming back? We showed that
we can find, given some norm here on H over one, there is a constant, which allows us to control
the c1 norm of this special representative by the norm of the cohomology class.
But this is a theorem only about closed one forms, so now let's translate it to
some plectic world and to get what we want. And basically, we have this corollary,
which states that for any epsilon, we can find a sufficiently small neighborhood
of the origin in the first around cohomology group for which every non-trivial class,
well, not only it will have this special representative with a most one zero,
but the symplectic isotope that it induces via this equation here,
is going to have its time on map, the fixed points of the time on map is going to correspond to the
zeroes of the one form. So it's going to have a most one fixed point. And the flux of that path
is going to be precisely that cohomology class. And moreover, it's going to be c0 small, because
all you need to know is that the c0 distance here is also controlled by the c1 norm in particular
of the one form. So that's just basically, there's nothing, this is just translating
the work from the lemma to a corollary that's going to be helpful for us.
Okay, so now let's use this to prove a model version of what we want to show. So let's do the
c1 case and use that construction. So what I mean is, using that corollary, we can show that there is
an equivalence between the stronger and no conjecture for c1 small Hamiltonian diphymorphisms
and the c1 flux conjecture. I mean, of course, now we know the c1 flux conjecture holds,
and the stronger and no conjecture for c1 small, I haven't seen it written before,
but it could have been deduced since the work of Ono in 2006. So c1 small, I mean just the end
point for the whole path. But let's use this construction to prove this proposition. So let's
first look at this direction. So here we're going to do what we want to do in the c0 case, but in
this easier set. We want to show that if there's an accumulation point in the usual flux group,
then there's a c1 small Hamiltonian diphymorphism with that most one fixed point.
And but note that here it's very helpful that we have a loop. Maybe you'll see when I do this
argument. So we can pick U epsilon, which is that for some arbitrary small epsilon, take U epsilon,
which is the neighborhood that we constructed in the corollary, for which we can produce that
symplectic isotope with flux equal to that homology class and with the most one fixed point.
So take A in this non-trivial and in U epsilon and in the flux group. But because it's in the
flux group, it's represented by some loop. Now take the special representative. So A is a
homology class in a very small neighborhood. So we can take that special representative that
we've been constructing in particular, then do symplectic isotope will have the most one fixed
point and its flux is going to be equal to A. So instead of taking that exact representative,
we just take minus of it. So the flux is minus A. And now we compose the loop with this
symplectic isotope that we've been constructing. By construction, this is going to have zero flux
because the first homomorphism is homomorphism. The flux of the loop is A and the flux of this
induced isotope is minus A. So the time one map of psi t here is a Hamiltonian diphymorphism.
Now the time one map of psi t is also the time one map of psi minus alpha because psi t here is a loop.
So in particular, its fixed points are going to correspond to the fixed point of
psi minus alpha. So it's going to have a most one fixed point. So it's a Hamiltonian
diphymorphism with a most one fixed point and you can make it C1 small just by taking the
say as small as we like. Now, on the other direction, if you have a C1 small Hamiltonian
diphymorphism, then like I said, its graph is going to lie in the Weinstein neighborhood of
m cross m and it's going to be identified with a closed one form. But a priori,
we don't know that that form is exact. So what we can do is use that deformation that I was
explaining in the beginning, use the fact that that that that simp zero or simp is C1 locally
path connected and connected to the zero section. What we're really doing is taking
the C1 small Hamiltonian diphymorphism and making it into a loop. And the flux that we get
is precisely the class of this one form. But it's a Hamiltonian path. So we have no flux
going all the way to the endpoint. And then by completing the loop, we just get the flux
from the one form. So, but if this Hamiltonian is C1, it's arbitrarily C1 small. So we can,
which means that this the chronology class of this one form is small as well.
But since we're assuming that gamma is not discrete, that's not possible. So if it's small
enough, it has to be zero. So then that one form is exact, and everything follows from
from Morse theory and understandational theory. So the construction helped helped us in this
direction. And that's what we want to do in the C0 case. And now we don't have loops. So that's
the tricky part. This idea of just composing and knowing that the time on math is the same,
that's not going to work, at least not without working a bit harder.
So let me recall what we want to show. Well,
we want to show that if gamma zero has an accumulation point,
then we construct the C0 small Hamiltonian different morphism for the most one fixed one.
So again, we take this U epsilon, which is that neighborhood where all the comm,
this is a neighborhood in the first around homology. And all the
homology classes can be represented by these one forms that induce the symplectic
isotopes with the most one fixed point. Now we take A, which is both in U epsilon and gamma zero.
Now take the isotope that corresponding to minus the representative. So its flux is going
to be minus A, it's going to have a most one fixed point, and it's going to be C0 small.
So this is all from that corollary that came straight from the line that we proved.
The line that we proved.
And what we want to do, well, now we want to use this description,
because we know that A is in gamma zero. So in the beginning, I said that
climology classes in gamma zero can be represented by these almost loops.
If it were a loop, we would just compose and we would just follow the same argument as before.
But it's not, it's C0 close, so we need to work a little bit hard.
So let's first suppose, so here, we know that there are either one, there's either one or none
fixed points. So let's first suppose that there are none, which is a little bit easier to deal with.
So suppose that there are no fixed points. And so maybe what I want to do,
let me see if I, no. What happens is the following. So suppose you have no fixed points.
Now your graph is going to be far from the diagonal, right? So let the blue line be the graph
of this, the time on map of this isotope that we're inducing. So it's going to be far,
it's going to be some positive. So just before I go over, what I would like to do is something
similar that we did in the lemma for the one-forms. But now we're not talking about adding one-forms,
we're talking about composing maps. But still, there is some sort of control if we're composing
with something that's small enough. So the case where there are no fixed points, while the graph
is going to lie at some positive, sorry, some positive distance from the diagonal.
And now we take this almost loop arbitrarily close to the diagonal. It can get as C0 close
as we want to the diagonal. And in particular, and then we compose these two things. So we define
psi t here by composing that isotope with this almost loop. So the time on map,
you can check that the distance between x and phi x, where phi is the composition,
is bounded below by this difference here. It's not a hard calculation. And it intuitively makes sense.
So if you're far from having a fixed point and you're composing with something very small,
you're not going to create any new fixed points. And moreover, by what I explained before, this
is a Hamiltonian diffeomorphism because the fluxes are canceling out. So we're constructing it in
precisely that way. And it's going to be C0 small because this epsilon that we're taking
is arbitrary in the beginning. So the idea is we fix this graph here for any epsilon. And then we
choose the almost loop small compared to that epsilon. But this means that we have control over
its C0 size because it's composing two C0 small supply. Is that okay? So while we, in this case,
we built a Hamiltonian diffeomorphism, which is C0 small and has no fixed points. Because we're
assuming there's an accumulation point and that the representative has no zeros.
Okay. So now, what if it has one fixed point? That's a bit harder, right? Because
so if it has one fixed point, it's going to be something like this little line that I drew.
So a graph, so very similar to that one form picture. But no matter how C0 close, I take
the endpoint of that almost loop. When we compose, you can create a bunch of new fixed points here.
So you lose all of that control. So when we were dealing with one forms, we could use
Pankai's lemma and make it vanish around a contractible neighborhood. And now we don't have
Pankai's lemma. But what we do is have is this quite fantastic trick of Bukhovsky,
Umilya and Sefadini. So they use this to prove the C0 continuity of the spectral norm for
a spherical sublactic manifold. So that by passing to n cross n, you can assume that your
symplectic path is supported away from a small ball. And the way you do it is you start out
with some symplectic path. So suppose that this is the endpoint of that loop, of the almost loop.
Then you look at psi cross psi minus one. And locally, you take the symplectic
different morphisms that switches coordinates. And then you conjugate by that. And if you see
what's going on is that locally, you're not doing anything. And if you take it supported in a small
ball, you're not changing psi cross psi minus one away from that small ball inside a smaller
neighborhood, the identity. And maybe something's happening between these two balls. But what we
really need is that it's identity on the ball. And that whatever is happening between these two
neighborhoods is not C0 big. And we can get control of that. So now once we have that,
we can now compose. So we compose that isotope with this almost loop, which is whose endpoint
is supported away from a ball. And we just pick that ball to be where the fixed point is. And
what happens is we don't create any fixed points in that neighborhood. And we can, we still have
C0 control over whatever happens outside of it. So we just take it C0 small enough that you
don't create any fixed points away from the neighborhood. And again, everything follows
in terms of the flux is going to cancel out by construction. So it's a Hamiltonian different
morphism has one fixed point. And it's C0 small. And of course, this was under the assumption of
an accumulation point. But this is excluded by the coupling specimen for C0 small, if we take
epsilon arbitrarily small. So this proves
a counter example. What I did here is still possible, but you would have to find an example
where whatever you construct does not fall within the epsilon of the theorem and of the
C0 small are no contractual. But it's, I haven't been able to do it so far, but it's a possibility.
So in this case, it's ephemeral. We construct this thing and show that it can't exist.
So let me, I have until 130. Okay. So I'll just, while we didn't show the C0 flux injection in general,
we did prove it in a few new cases. So I just want to go over them.
So if we suppose that the symplectic manifold is spherically monotone. So here we're asking
for proportionality between the symplectic, the homology class of the symplectic form
and the first-year class associated to your symplectic manifold on spheres. And we're allowing
the proportionality constant to be zero here. So at least for our coincidence.
So if you're a spherically monotone and you satisfy either of these conditions here,
the C0 flux conjecture holds. So for example, if boiler characteristic is non-zero and you're
spherically monotone, C0 flux conjecture holds. If fundamental group has finite center and C0
flux conjecture holds. If moreover this proportionality is over all of H2, not just spherical classes,
then C0 flux conjecture holds without any further conditions. So for the monotone case, basically.
And there is the slightly more technical condition here, which basically we just have it because
we can find an example of a symplectic mapping tori which satisfies the third condition before
which the topological flux group is different from the usual flux group. So it's basically
showing that there is an example that wasn't covered by, there's an example that's provably
not covered by the previous work, but it's covered by this current theorem. And moreover, this is
not written here, but a recent development. If the symplectic manifold is of left sheds type,
so without any assumption of spherical monotonicity, then we can also show that the C0 flux conjecture
holds in this case here. So if boiler characteristic is zero, sorry, it's non-zero, or if the fundamental
group has finite center. And so, I mean, this boiler characteristic non-zero
condition here, it appears a lot. And the reason why it's usually there is because,
so if you consider the map from pi1 of sym-zero, the evaluation map, right? It takes a loop of
symplectic different morphisms and you evaluate them, and you see what class, so you look at
its orbit class in pi1 of the symplectic map, right? If it's Hamiltonian, then we know that
that class is trivial. But when boiler characteristic is different from zero,
then that evaluation map is always trivial. So that's somehow important in the background
of what's going on here. So if boiler characteristic is zero, then that map is not trivial. So if you
can take rotation of T2 and that gives you non-contractable classes for a symplectic loop.
And moreover, what we show is that in the stratically-monotone setting, in either of these
three situations here, the flux map, which descends from sym-zero to the quotient,
is c-zero continuous. And this is new even in the case of the torus of symplectic torus.
I mean, the first time I came across this problem, I thought that maybe the strategy
was proving that this map is c-zero continuous to show that the c-zero flux injector holds.
But somehow, it's harder this way. But the methods in this stratically-monotone case
actually yield the c-zero continuity. And well, this is what I prepared for you today.
So thank you very much for listening. And as I promised, here are the citations and references
for the work on arnal conjecture. Thank you very much.
Can you explain where the conditions in DRMD come from? Like, why?
Okay. So you want this, right?
Yeah, but also the monotonicity, why?
Yeah, it is important. So for the methods that we have so far, it's important. It's not just,
it helps with the technicalities, because in the end of the day, we want to
compare ranks of Morse homology and Morse Novikov homology. So to do that, we're using
Flurnovikov theory. And Flurnovikov theory behaves well in this stratically-monotone
setting, in the sense that the Flurnovikov homology, so Flurnovikov homology is an
allegous to Flurvomology, but for a non-exact symplectic path. And in this stratically-monotone
setting, it's isomorphic to, at least the ranks are equal to the Morse Novikov rank.
Now, if you are, at least with the variant of Flurnovikov theory that we use, if you're
not in the stratically-monotone setting, then that is not true in general. So for example,
whenever, whenever we're in these settings where Flurnovikov is isomorphic to Morse Novikov,
you know, for example, that the evaluation map is injected in some sense. So if you have a loop of
symplectic bitomorphisms, absorbent class is trivial, then that loop has to have zero flux
in these cases. But there are examples, so by McDoff, by Tolman and Jang, of symplectic circle
actions, which are non-Hamiltonian and have fixed points. So that tells us that in these cases,
that variant of Flurnovikov homology cannot be isomorphic to Novikov homology.
So then there are things, of course, in some parts monotone is helpful, just technically
speaking, but there are non-trivial parts where it's important in this case. Thank you for the
question. I have another question. You said that maybe these arguments can help construct a counter
example. Yeah. And there was this relation to the, well, at least the C1 small version of,
so there's like the C0 counter example for the annulled. Right. Conjecture, is it like,
do you think it could be relevant or is it like totally? It's relevant in the sense of
whatever, if you want to understand if the tools that you're using, if their C0 analogs are stable
in some sense. So if you know that there is a counter example, then you, it's easy to see that
certain things are not going to hold. So yeah, but you cannot use it to construct.
So far, yeah. But it's certainly a way to look at it. And maybe there's something there.
Yeah, like. I think they're trying to make it that to find some smooth context.
Because it's just not smooth at one point, right? It's exactly the same.
Yeah, here. Yeah. Yeah, the idea here is more take this, take this not, well,
close form of the most one zero and see, see if you can combine that with a case where you know
that while the flux group is not, not, not discreet, maybe the flux is small enough that
you can find the small enough loop and make and not create any new orbits. And then that would
also do it. So you believe the flux conjecture is correct? I mean, because on the one hand,
there are non-trivial problems to generalizing this proof. So going beyond the, yeah,
beyond that. But is that the problem of machinery or, I think machinery or viewpoint?
So this way, it's this machinery, the way it's set up right now, the way we do it,
it won't, won't yield the full, without additional ideas.
But you have dreams about machinery, which has to be developed?
I'm more inclined to believe that it is true. And if it were, I feel what I,
it's also certainly connected to nearby Lagrangian conjecture in some sense.
In a specific case. So a counter example, not that that tells you that it should be true, but
That's the general belief about the nearby Lagrangian conjecture of today.
I mean, what's interesting is, in the theorem B, I think, you have the exactness of that graph.
But even if you knew the nearby Lagrangian conjecture,
that would allow you to find a Hamiltonian aizotope, but of n cross m to bring it, to close the loop.
So even knowing the Lagrangian nearby conjecture wouldn't immediately give us what we want,
because we would need this aizotope to be graphic one, in some sense. We would need a Hamiltonian
aizotope on n and on n cross m. But now at least we know that it's exact.
That the graph of the Hamiltonian.
Okay, if there are no more questions, let's take Marcelo again.
