Almost everyone knows why you're here, so School of Math is a tradition of having the
new postdocs give 15 minute talks, introducing their work to the general audience.
So we have two new people starting this semester, one is Shubhadeep Mondal,
who's the first speaker and he's going to talk about formal groups in Unipot and Homophobic
Theory. Thank you, yes I'm very happy to have the chance to get to start. So the goal of my talk
is to explain how to obtain
certain formal group laws.
Right, that's FGL, from algebraic varieties
using a homophobic theory approach.
So let me start with some motivations.
So we'll always walk over a fixed field k, so it's a field k.
Let me assume this to be of characteristic p, which is also a fixed prime.
And let me maybe also further assume that the field is algebraically closed.
So maybe at the starting point, one of the objects of interest is say an elliptic curve,
let E be an elliptic curve over k. So such objects can often be written in terms of
something with three equations like this, and where all of these coefficients
come from the field k. And so it's somewhat of a well-known fact that if I have
two points in the elliptic curve, there's a way to compose the two and get a third point.
So I said differently the points of the elliptic curve, they have a group structure.
And so using this group structure, there are some of the invariants that we can define,
which are useful in studying the elliptic curves itself. So maybe one such invariant is
what's called the ellenic ket module. So what we do is we take the p to the, sorry,
l to the n-torsion points of E and take it in this limit. So l is a prime, say.
So this is the ket module.
And similar invariant maybe is that we can look at other p to the n-torsion points of E
and kind of organize them as a sequence of p to the n-torsion groups,
sequence of p to the n-torsion group schemes, set groups. And so this kind of structure
is what's called more generally a p-divisible group.
So for this talk, I want to focus more on kind of a very similar object, which is
maybe written as e hat and we call this the formal group law of an elliptic curve.
So a way to think about this is that because elliptic curve has some group structure,
so there's also one point which may be called zero. So this is obtained by looking at
looking at an infinitesimal neighborhood
of zero and we restrict the group structure to that neighborhood and restricting the
group structure.
So maybe it's a good idea to just give a rough idea of what a formal group law is, which
is the kind of object one gets after doing this construction. So
so to focus to maybe the one-dimensional case, so a one-dimensional formal group law
is just a power series in two variables,
which satisfies some analogs of the group axioms that I'll not spell out. But the reason we have
two variables is that the group is a binary operation. So when I'm looking at the elliptic curve,
so I think locally it kind of looks like a line, so there's really one coordinate
and this remembers the binary operation that defines the group structure.
Some examples of formal groups, maybe
just take x plus y and this is a formal group that's called an additive formal group law and
denotes g i hat and we could also do this with g i hat. And maybe going back to our elliptic curve,
so if the elliptic curve e is ordinary, then a formal group law is easy to write down and it's
just g i hat. Otherwise, if it is super singular, then it's a bit hard to write it down explicitly,
but I'll try to write it down in a more implicit way. So in this case, the formal group law is given by
some part series x y such that we have this kind of equation
where
so in general, there are infinitely many formal group laws and
this formal group laws
can be organized by an invariant
called height.
So I'll not give a definition of that, but let me just point out that so height of this
will be infinity, height of this is one and height of this one that we wrote down, this is a height.
So one of the advantages of being able to attach certain formal group laws to algebraic varieties is
that it would also give some notion of height for algebraic varieties, which we could use to organize
them as well. So an example of that maybe, so say let A be an even variety,
which can be seen as some kind of a higher dimensional elliptic curve. The important thing
is that they also have some group structure. So in this situation, we could do a similar construction
and then we get some higher dimensional formal group law.
So in all the examples that we have managed to construct some formal group laws, which was
maybe really an elliptic curve and an invariant variety, so that there was always an existing
group structure in the variety itself. So it's kind of creates the question that is there a way
to construct
formal group laws from say higher dimensional varieties,
which do not have a group structure.
So this question was studied by Arvin and Mezzo.
So they studied what may be called some sort of formal completion
of higher product groups
and
constructed certain formal group laws.
So for an example of what their work allows us to do is that say if X is a
higher dimensional variety of dimension R, then the higher dimensional formal group
is a one dimensional formal group that one can attach in this situation.
So the main result that I wanted to talk about
gives a more homotopytheodic way to understand this kind of constructions.
So this is in joint work with Emmanuel who's also here.
So what we do is that so let X be a
proper projective scheme. Okay, so with X one can attach certain group schemes for all that and call this the
unimportant homotopy group schemes.
So all of them are unimportant group schemes and they can be of infinite
value.
Such that we have
if I take n equal to one then this pi one gets back the unimportant nori fundamental group scheme.
And so in general there are lots of new components in this projects but once we get rid of them
take the reduced group schemes. So these are nth,
healic, ethyl homotopic groups
which is also considered by Artyombe and
formal groups. So
say if X, so I'm stating this in kind of a special case but in fact if X has dimension r
then
pi rx is dual to the Artyombe as a form.
And there are some vanishing conditions that one is to
impose here for this to be true. I'm not writing down.
So during my time here as a part of the special year so what I would like to do is sort of
kind of understand this invariance in the context of these stats that has been introduced recently
by Driltode and Bartholore.
So these stats sort of they kind of control the behavior of derogatory homology and this one
is for crystalline and this one is for prismatic.
And maybe I'll end with one kind of instance where this can be useful. So this is a joint
work with Achille Matthew. So we show that one can take the unipotent pi2 of
the prismatic stack associated to BGM and this is dual. It can be used to obtain
the formal group law constructed by Driltode.
Just define over the prismatization of ZP. So maybe I'll stop now.
Thank you very much. Questions?
For defining this by and you assume simply connected?
No. Yeah. So we don't need to assume simply connected and maybe I should say
that so this uses the work of toy in an affine stacks.
So these are some higher stacks and they have a certain property which is called affine.
Sorry. Affine stack. But we don't need to assume that it's simply connected.
And so for higher ass, these are automatically a billion but when R is equal to one and then
we're in the sense of a curve, we can actually get some non a billion formal group laws which
I think the work of Artin and Maze would always give something commutative because the study
that they got. So your unipotent fundamental or uniform high ends, can you recover the
homotopy groups associated to other homology theories besides pay out of K-12? So for instance,
first of all, can it be done just you could try to apply it to these stacks and I think there are
some notions such as the important their own fundamental group and so on. And then you could
try to kind of reconstruct them by applying like a very similar method to the other stacks.
I mean, those are not proper. So you don't really need the proper scheme. So I think maybe
I was making a simplifying assumption. You don't really need to cross. Yeah.
Can you like this assumption over your field is crucial because these stacks don't give over
the assumptions. So not always. I think in general, there's some problem that the homotopy
sheeps might not be representable unless you're walking over a field. But in some cases like
this, we really do work over the prismatization of ZP, which is the stack. It's far from the field,
but sometimes they might be representable. So you can contemplate all of these objects
very generally. But the only thing to keep in mind is that the bias may not be representable if
your base is very general. Over a field, they're always representable. Yeah.
You don't assume it smooth. We don't need to assume it smooth.
Yeah.
Is there some hope for an enlargement of this where you have your law things like GM as well?
I think the case of GM is harder to allow outside the Pi one case.
But it'll be interesting to be able to do that.
I'm a bit worried about not simply connected. You don't get infinite dimensions or objects.
So all of this bias, I should really have said they're pro-unipotent. So all of them are really
just pro-unipotent. So are you just getting the groups themselves, or do you actually get some
notion of a unipotent homotopy type? Yeah, there's a homotopy type that I was not mentioning. Yeah,
it's a good question.
All right. Thank you.
