Thank you very much for the invitation.
All I'm going to talk about is joint work with Mohan Saminathan.
The setup is as follows, we fix a closed symplactic manifold x omega and an omega team almost
complex structure J. And since we work in Grammar Phytian Theory, kind of the main thing is
refining variance using the modulite space of stable maps into X, which is a very classical
object. And it consists of J-Holomathic maps U from nodal surfaces C. So essentially somewhat
kind of women's surfaces with so-called nodal points where we just glue these two new women's
surfaces together. And we have to kind of allow these to get a compact modulite space.
And we have some additional data, which essentially constrain things like the topological type C can
have. So G is the arithmetic genus, N is the number of marked points, which we add to the modulite,
to our curves, to later-onput constraints. Beta is a homology class, and U is supposed to
represent this. And kind of this adjective stable just means that a group of biholomorphisms of
the domain C, which we present, which fix the marked points and which preserve U, is finite.
And we have this condition to get a host of space. So by Grammar of Compactness,
this space is compact and matrizable. Now using, we have two natural maps on it,
on one hand devaluation map to XN, which just evaluates a stable map at its marked points.
And on the other hand, a stabilization map, which forgets the map U to X, just remembers the domain
and collapses any components of the domain which become unstable as soon as we don't have the
information of U anymore. Now this modulite space is non-empty only if we're in the stable range,
where 2g minus 2 plus n is strictly positive. Kind of for the following definitions, you can
assume it to be just a point of a vice. So we want to define invariance using this via
so-called Grammar Fit and Homomorphisms, which are maps from the homology of XN
to the homology of the modulite space of stable curves, using this following push-pull formula,
where first of all we're taking some homology class on XN, we're pulling it back to our modulite
space, which you can just think of as putting constraints on our curve for the marked points
to get mapped to certain submanifers on X. And then you push the whole thing forward to the modulite
space of stable curves using some fundamental class of this modulite space. Now most of you
probably know that this definition is not well defined in general, because the modulite space
of stable maps often does not admit a fundamental class in the expected degree, essentially due
to the fact that the quotient equation might not be cut off transversely. And kind of the idea of
any virtual framework is to replace the fundamental class or like the non-existent fundamental class
in this equation with a suitable virtual fundamental class, which lives in the expected
degree and should be the same as the fundamental class if our modulite space is indeed cut off
transversely. Global condition charts are just one kind of setup in which you can construct
a virtual fundamental class easily. So a global condition chart from modulite space M or just
any space M consists of a compact league group G, the curving group, which acts on a gene on the
manifold T, which we call the thickening such that the action only has finite stabilizers.
It should lift to a vector bundle E over T, which we call the obstruction bundle. And we should also
have the data of an equivalent section S of this obstruction bundle, such that the orbit space of
the zero locus of S is homeomorphic to the space M. The virtual dimension of M with respect to such
a global condition chart is the dimension of T minus dimension of G minus the rank of E,
which would exactly be the dimension of M if S were to intersect the zero section
transversely. But this quantity makes sense, even if it does not. Now for a fundamental class over
say the homology of professional coefficients, we need an orientation and we also need an orientation
for the to have a virtual fundamental class. Now an orientation of a global condition chart
is a georientation of on one hand, the obstruction bundle. And on the other hand,
this georientation of this stable vector bundle, where we take the tangent bundle of G and this
mafrag G underlined just to know the trivial bundle of fiber, the algebra of our curving group G.
Once we have this, we have this, the virtual fundamental class of M with respect to this global
condition chart is an element in the dual of check homology given by the following composition,
where the first is an isomorphism from the check homology of M to the equivalent homology of T
relative to the zero locus of our section. And we then just evaluate the pullback of the
Aquarian Tom class of the obstruction bundle on elements in here. And we need to use
rational coefficients for this because this first isomorphism wouldn't exist if we have,
if you use, for example, integer coefficients, except of course, if G is trivial.
Yeah, and of course, if as intercepts your section transversely, you see that this is just
the fundamental class of the Robe fold M. Now, I'm telling you this because we showed last year
that the modernized space of stable maps to X admits an oriented global condition chart
of the expected virtual dimension given by the index of the quotient map return. And here we assume
have just that G and N are strictly bigger than zero, which are the only cases in which
this makes sense. So it's virtual fundamental class is independent of the choices you have
to make during the constructions. So there's a bunch of auxiliary data you have to choose.
But in the end, you will always get the same virtual fundamental class.
So we already see that this morphism down here kind of is well defined because we can replace
the fundamental first before with the virtual fundamental class. But in fact, we want to have
in the end, symphlectic invariance. So we also need to see what happens if we choose
a different almost complex structure. And we show that if you choose another such omega
team, almost complex structure J prime, we can construct a cobertism between global
Cornishie charts for these spaces. So we have to make kind of these auxiliary choices in a uniform
way. And then we can construct a cobertism. And in particular, whether we define this morphism
using J or J prime doesn't matter. And we get well defined symphlectic invariance.
Okay, so Cornishie charts are quite familiar to certainly many of you. Since local Cornishie
charts have been used in several approaches before, the novelty of our approach is really that we have
a global chart for the host modelized space. So you don't just can describe as some open subset
of a modelized space like this, but we just immediately get the whole space, which gives
the one line definition of the virtual fundamental class. In particular, we don't need kind of
complicated and technical machinery to batch together local information coming from these models
into a global virtual fundamental class. We just get it on the nose.
I was at McLean and Smith, where the first to construct such a global Cornishie chart
in genus zero. In 2021, they also have an independent construction hygenus.
These three offers didn't just construct or define the virtual fundamental class I showed you
before, they also construct a more of a k-few valued virtual fundamental class. And this allows
for the definition of common fit invariance in certain complex oriented generalized common
theories and also these two notions such as quantum k-fewy.
On another exciting development or construction has been a favor by Anxu, where they construct
integer valued common fit and type invariance using a global Cornishie chart. And they only
construct them in genus zero because at the time there was only global Cornishie chart available
for this modelized space in genus zero, but the machinery should be compatible for our construction
to give such invariance and hygenus. Now, let us come to the application Swaminathan and I proved
namely a formula for the grammar fit invariance of a product of two symplectic manifolds.
His formula was conjectured by conservative and modern 20 years ago,
but has only been proven in genus zero in the case where at least one factor is semi-positive.
It is as follows. So if the sum of all beta in the homology of x which project forward to
kind of some fixed classes beta zero respectively beta one, then this grammar fit invariant is the
same as the cup product of these two grammar fit invariance, which is kind of some senses.
What you would probably guess if you had to think about it for a while, but it is kind of
nice compatibility a formula. In particular, we have our proof doesn't work in the two exceptional
cases where the modelized space of stable curves is an ineffective orbital, but there might be a
different approach to fix that. So that's really just kind of a technical matter and we know the
geometric problem. In particular, if you specialize through the case where the genus is equal to zero
and we have three marked points, this formula shows that the Künoff isomorphism induces a splitting
of the quantum small quantum cormel ring of x into the tensor product of the quantum cormel
ring of x zero with the quantum cormel ring of x one over universal Novik ring.
Are there any questions about this? So I don't really have time to even kind of show you really
the construction. So let me kind of say something somewhat hand-vibing or more like give you a recipe
on how you would want to construct a global condition chart perhaps. So you start off with
some origin modelized space M. And the first thing you do is that you add the data to this
to kind of break this imagery. So elements in here might have non-trivial automorphisms
and you want to rigidify these elements so that instead of having automorphisms,
you have elements with no automorphisms, but your space comes equipped with some G action
where G is the compactly group. Once you have this, you have get a map or hopefully get a map
to some smooth base space of rigidifying data, which I will show you later what it is in our case.
And you now have the possibility, since you no longer have the problem of equilibrium
transidelity, to add perturbations to your space to then achieve transidelity. So you
end up with a kind of manifold, which hopefully also comes with submission to this smooth base space.
And to which hopefully also your group action extends. So you just need to kind of do this in a
compatible way. Once you are at this point, usually it's quite easy to see what your obstruction
bundle and the obstruction section should be. You just want to in some sense remove all the
additional data you put onto your moduli space to again recover it. In our case, let me just describe
the case where n equals zero and the rigidifying data are highly positive embeddings of the domains
of our stable maps into projected space. And these are so-called framings. They were introduced
by Mark McLean into symplectic geometry, but have been used in algebraic geometry before.
In our case, then the base space will consist exactly of embedded regular curves and pn.
So this is a nice smooth manifold of the expected dimension. And essentially in this space you see
the whole domain of our stable map, which is kind of important for if you then want to add
perturbations to it. Now these perturbations are elements of this obstruction space. The kind
of the important bit is to note that you have some line bundle here, which can become highly
positive as you choose k very, very large. And the choice of k is somewhat arbitrary. You just
need to choose it sufficiently large, such that kind of your perturbed Cushman equation is cut
off transversely. The covering group is the projective unitary group, which acts on the framing
and on the perturbation term induced by the action on projective space, respectively, these
line bundles. And the case of strictly positive n follows formally from the case where it is equal
to zero. So I've said before that there are several choices to make, and depending on these choices
you get different global condition charts. And you want to know kind of when two global condition
charts for the same space give you the same virtual fundamental class. And what I will describe now
three kind of moves you can do, which don't change the virtual fundamental class of some,
yeah, of some space. And we say that two global condition charts are equivalent if they're related
by zigzag of these moves. And the first move is simply if you're given some condition chart
with thickening T and you also have a gene variant open neighborhood, you inside T of
the CO locus, then you can replace the original global condition chart with the global condition
chart was thickening is just you and where you kind of just restrict the obstruction bundle and
obstruction section to you. Group enlargement is a slightly more non trivial kind of move
which kind of concerns the situation where you want to add more rigidifying or you have added
more rigidifying data to your modelized space. Formulate means that if you have a principle G
prime bundle for some completely G prime over the thickening T and which also has a compatible G
action, then you can replace your original global condition chart with the global condition chart
was covering group is G times G prime. The thickening has now it's not the total space of P.
And we just pull back the obstruction bundle obstruction section.
Finally stabilization kind of happens or like concerns the case where you add one to add or
add more perturbation data. So it says that if you have a G vector bundle W over T, you can
you replace the original global condition chart with the condition chart was thickening is now
the total space of W. But where you have also changed the obstruction bundle kind of accordingly
named you just pull back the original obstruction bundle, but adds the pullback of W itself. And
the new obstruction section is given by the pullback of the obstruction section,
plus the diagonal section of the pullback of W.
Okay. Now, this maybe give you that you should give your feeling for the fact that a global
condition chart itself is not in some sense a really valuable thing. Like, you shouldn't be too
attached to one global condition chart. Since it's just one representation of your modelized
space in a certain way. And also my next like, okay, how to say this, also kind of different
presentations might be useful in different ways. And so my next slide content or last slide concerns
the question, how to construct a global condition chart from a given one. And kind of the basic
question you might ask, once you have to work with these things is, if I'm given some map between
more life spaces, for example, forgetful map, a clutching map, and go my pitch and theory,
can we lift this to a map between the global condition charts? And the problem is that usually
this is not true. Simply because that is many auxiliary choices and your base faces might be
different and your things might have different dimensions and whatever. However, you might not
want to save a few global condition chart KM, but change it to a new one, which is equivalent,
and not change it, but change to one which is equivalent to KM. And kind of the trick is
that global condition charts can be pulled back along maps to the base space. So you have a map
from the thickening T to the base space B. And maybe if you have a different space B and the map
to from B prime to B, then you can just form the fiber product to construct a new manifold,
which might be the thickening of a global condition chart for different space. So in short,
you can use the global condition chart for N to construct a new global condition chart for M,
which on one hand comes a financial map between these global condition charts by construction.
And on the other hand, is equivalent to the original global condition chart for M,
which you had. This step usually requires some work, but it's not too hard in practice.
And let me end with the mark that this is the key idea in the proof of the product formula,
where we use this map here, which is some kind of product map which projects
your stable map onto each factor and collapses components if they become unstable, as usual.
That's all I want to say. Thank you for your attention.
Thank you very much, Amanda. That's a great talk today. Any questions?
About the theorem, you mentioned exceptional cases of genus one with one point and genus
two with zero points. Where do these come from? The problem is that we essentially make in...
So what do you essentially want to say is you want to lift...
How to say this smartly? So this comes like this, this relation of course comes from a
relation between the virtual fundamental classes. And we can lift this to a relation
between the fundamental classes of these two spaces where you need to use some more homology.
And the problem there is that in the case where the modulate space is effective,
you can restrict it to automorphism free locus and ignore everything else because
it has sufficiently high co-dimension. And so you just don't need to worry about any
orbital stackiness. But if your modulate space is ineffective, you just need to deal with the fact
that how compatible are these things? Essentially the problem is that intersection
theory on orbitals in different geometric context is not really well developed. Or at least you
couldn't find any reference for that. And so we're just like, okay, just don't do it. But you can
probably work around it. Thank you. And just to be clear, you write your GW, in the definition
of grumble bottom variance, you write your domain as just having one, as being one copy of a
homology. But do you seem to be able to do this for any number of constraints?
Oh, I'm using, I'm here, let me, sorry, sorry, where's it? Okay. Here I think, no, yeah.
Alpha is an element in the homology of x to the power of n.
X to the power of n, they see this. Okay. Sorry, the name is Reggie.
No, no, it's usually written differently.
No, thank you. That clarifies it for me. Thank you.
Any other questions, comments?
All right. In that case, will we thank Amanda again? Thank you, Amanda.
