All right, for our third speaker today, we have Tonya Nala, intriguing title of Omotope is with us.
Thank you for the introduction. And yes, so the title is maybe a bit of a provocation, but let's start so I understand that many people here are not algebraic geometers, but it's also the special year.
So my talk will also fall in line of this special year in the sense that I will discuss about cohomology theories in algebraic geometry.
And just as quickly recall, what this means is that we have our geometric object X.
Maybe it's a variety might be a scheme might be, you know, just a geometric object in algebraic geometry, and then the object.
You will associate.
So homology groups.
And on the right hand side, we now have something that's linear algebra, basically.
So in some sense, co homology theories are ways to turn geometry into linear algebra, and also whenever you compare to geometric object, you get the linear map you basically get a matrix.
Okay, that makes sense.
I think one of the sort of original motivations that maybe I don't think anyone has discussed thus far was the proof of the whale conjectures.
And there, people really wanted to understand how the number of solutions to polynomial equation system behaves for finite fields they only have finite many solutions, when you increase the size of the field.
Well this, how sort of co homology helps with that is that first of all you notice that the solutions are the fixed points of the of the propinus, which is a geometric operator on X, so it's an automorphism of X, well, and the morphism of X.
And the solutions of for the solutions in finite field correspond to the solutions in the algebraic closure, which is an infinite field that are fixed under this propinus operator.
But this letter number, you can compute by applying something like the left such fixed point formula.
So in the end, you will end up computing this number as an alternating sum of some traces here. And this is just a very amazing sort of thing that you can do with co homology theories and algebraic geometry.
And of course, like, in order to apply this formula you need to have a theory of like co homology theory that works in settings that are seemingly discrete like geometry and positive characteristic.
And, well, then first people started to try to find such a co homology theory but then they found, they made the following observation that probably many of you already made while listening to these talks, namely, there's not only one co homology theory, but there's
actually plenty of them.
So let me list some of them that we have seen.
And because it's a special year to be at a special year, we have heard about all these pietic co homology theories.
So we have the round, maybe that's not the etiquette but certainly you have crystalline co homology.
And you also have something called the prismaticology.
Okay, so these are three examples of college theories.
It sounds like they sound like.
But anyway, these are the co homology theories that at least me and Sha Sha we're talking about and plenty of others.
But then there was another co homology theory that appeared in she was and our ones and Alan's talk at least, which is algebraic Katie.
Okay, this is another co homology theory.
And I'll just add one more in this list. Well, okay.
One more to this stage, which is algebraic boredom. So this is some co homology theory that looks like the co homology theory is in algebraic topology.
And to end, maybe I should have really started with this.
And then you have the L addict.
Theology theory, which is a very important role in the story that they explained before.
And then you also have something called the motivic co homology, which also I think up here, they are going to stop.
Now we have seven co homology theories on the board or maybe six.
And a question.
I mean, you cannot count right.
And then the question is like, okay, it's a bit messy like you have all these different co homology theories that form a zoo.
You can somehow construct the universal co homology theory, or if you view co homology theories as turning geometric objects into linear algebra, is there a universal way to linearize these objects.
And the first sort of suggested framework to do this is growth index framework for motives.
And I'm just going to go some sort of stories I might give some historical inaccuracies.
And maybe sweep something under rock. But anyway, this is something that is universal enough to at least recover the sort of motive eco homology, and a lot of eco homology and things like this.
And it was not only used first as a sort of an organizing principle for all the different co homology theories but also it was suggested as like a potential strategy for like, proving the hardest part of the
well conjectures by proving so called standard conjectures, but the standard conjectures are very difficult it seems they're still open and I think they will improve the hardest part of the well conjectures using another way.
Okay.
So in some time past people realize that this sort of suggested framework for motives is not really somehow the you to the ultimate framework for go on with your racing as a part geometry, and in particular like early or late 90s really
Fabian Morale, who is here.
Let me be noted by age, because it's going to be like a stable version.
And this is something that captures things that are not quite.
And also the single or co homology, but are sounding like K theory, or algebraic co borders, and this was used by one of the ski and other people in the roster to prove this sort of block cattle and in their conjecture on quadratic forms.
So if you understand the relationship between these two things is you can sort of think that you obtain motives from a one homotopy theory, when you consider objects that are linear over the motive co homology as an object, like as a ring
one homotopy theory.
But so one of the fundamental assumptions for me one homotopy theory or the observation you start when you start building this theory is that a one is contractible, meaning that the co homology of a one should be the same as the
point. But I think in media stock yesterday, we did so to see that the, that around co homology of a one is very complicated.
And this is why me my co authors and I are trying to consider what I call a homotopy theory.
Without.
Well, let's say a one.
So this is a variant of the co homotopy theory, where a one is not assumed to be contractible. And you can see why this is sort of a provocative title because maybe I should have put an a one there but it's not.
In any case, the relationship between this theory, which I will call MS, coming from motive expector and this SH a one homotopy theory is that you obtain this one from the left side by forcing a one to be contractible.
Somehow the right rough idea of the construction of this MS.
We. So, so, sorry, a one homotopy theory starts with the assumption that a one is contractible, and this is what we want to avoid.
So instead of that, we only ask the co homology of projective spaces to behave as expected, roughly speaking, and this is surprisingly enough for us to get some sort of geometric results.
Okay, so I've explained some sort of, I haven't explained anything I've said a lot of things about this weird category where you don't even have a one homotopy.
Okay, that's all nice, you can get.
Oh, sorry.
I guess the point to us that you can get these things out of there.
I should say here, here you have dashed arrows, and here you have solid arrows.
And this is for the reason that actually if you're working over things with singularities, then even to get K theory and MGL, they don't really live here, but they should live here, because actually algebra K theory also is not going to be a one invariant for
singular schemes.
Anyway,
so we have a category we can get things out of it, but can we actually prove anything about it.
And we can prove some things.
Let me try to explain.
And the first result.
This is a recent paper by Marco you are and me and remain.
And this is like the analog of the contractability of infinite dimensional sphere in topology.
And how does this analog look like.
Well, you have a infinity infinite dimensional affine space, minus the origin.
And you can include it in the infinite dimensional affine space.
And the claim is that this is an equivalent in our motive expecting category.
And you can see that if a one is contractible then actually so is going to be a infinity.
So actually, if a one was was contractible then the sort of infinite dimensional sphere would be contractible as well.
Okay, cool but why would anyone care.
Well, this is actually an important ingredient.
So we are improving that.
We are improving that.
Or infinite dimensional grass manians classify.
So there's a statement in topology that on a nice enough topological space, the whole topic classes of maps to an infinite cross money on our in one to one correspondence with vector bundles on that thing.
And that is true in order to expect from category.
And why is this, then useful. Well, you can use this, or this is actually an important ingredient, or maybe slightly weaker version of this of another theme, which sort of shows that we can.
So just, you know,
that looks bad, but luckily it's.
But this, this can be for that result. So I'm not saying a little bit in the order of things.
This sort of explains the role or gives or clarifies the role of algebra k theory in the world of orcology theories in a, in algebraic geometry.
And then in the statement is, we have this sort of motivate analog of the sphere spectrum in our category.
And then we can take the free module of infinite dimensional project space so this is like infinite grass money on one of the examples, so this classifies line bundles.
And what is this thing it's it's like a free module.
So in order to map out of this to another co homology theory, you actually need just to pick a class in the college of infinity, and then you get a map.
The other is the map out. But once you do something.
You invert this sort of element better than what do you get out.
It's algebraic k theory.
Okay, so in this sense, the only different like the, if you want to map out of algebra k theory to other co homology theories you need to pick.
You need classes on co homology of infinity and then you need to somehow address what happens with this beta, and then you can sort of understand the maps between those things.
I think I am out of time so I will end here.
Are there any questions.
There will be one strengthings by what he was doing was systematically using financially many very good map.
Do you have to say the same thing.
You mean this finite correspondence business.
We do not have the same kind of, or we haven't constructed a category that's analogous to that one, because this is somehow related really like intimately related to sort of motive story.
But I assume one could make a similar construction here to get like a theory of some sort of non a1 invariant motives.
Yes.
Yeah, when you say you classify it, but I don't mean over any scheme or just a fine.
It was, you know, over kind of possible in the a1. Well, first of all, I mean you can classify vector bundles is like classifying vector bundles.
And you have a map between them, which becomes an equivalence in this motive spectrum category. And this is one of the ingredients you will need in that.
But now we don't have some, we don't have something as nice as you have any other theory.
Yep.
Is there an analog of this construction in typology, where you started to get a good political spaces, and instead of inverting all homotopy equivalence.
You mean, instead of enforcing homotopy invariance you do something what we do.
We just find out what's in between all spaces.
So I think
what I heard is that okay well you can of course consider this kind of thing. What you want to do is you want to somehow tensor invert, maybe the Riemann sphere, or maybe the projective line in like real, real projective line.
So if you somehow invert tensor invert the circle, then you can show that things that are parameterized, like homotopy is parameterized over s one become homotopic in that in this categorical sense.
A circle is good from two intervals and somehow you can use that to show that actually you get some of the invariance, but everything really like depends on what you're trying to do.
So for complex analytic thing, real analytic thing, real smooth things, maybe the story will be very different.
But yeah certainly you can consider this kind of thing.
So we also have the stable infinity category of non commutative motifs.
Yes, we're also print key theories co represented by the sense of.
How is that related to your.
So, so one important difference with non commutative motives is that in non commutative motives we have non commutative geometry.
So here everything is somehow generated by actual geometric objects like commutative geometric objects.
So certainly I think long gone with the geometry contains things that are theory does not come yet contain, but I would imagine that there is a comparison map from from this world to the non commutative motives world that will associate the motive or that like the
some variety.
It's not coming a bit more than.
All right.
