The next speaker is Greg, a great chef, and he will speak about localizing invariance
in attic job.
Hi.
Hi.
Okay.
Thank you.
So I decided to change the topic.
Yeah, I think the previous title was a little bit ambitious.
So today I want to tell you about one recent development, the attic geometry, and for the
experts I want to say that there is two major technical components involved, namely, condensed
mathematics and the k-tier delizable categories.
So I will not talk about that at all.
Instead I want to kind of tell the path towards k-tier.
And so I want to start with motivation, or maybe with some stories of what is k-tier.
So we can start with the x, with the compact house row of topological space.
And several people trying to explain to you that there is a very interesting invariant
in topology, namely the complex k-theory, which we can't associate to such an object.
So contemporary people formulate it like this.
So you take x and then you produce a spectrum and then you compute its homotopy groups.
So a spectrum is a certain object in algebraic topology, and in particular it has homotopy
groups.
So you can just define higher k-groups of x to be the homotopy groups of this object,
of this k-theory spectrum.
And k-zero in this context is just the group completion of the monoid of isomorphism classes
of complex vector bundles on, okay, it's supposed to be x, sorry, okay, yeah.
So okay, so there is a similar story in algebra and algebraic geometry where you start with
an algebraic variety or a scheme.
So several people try to explain to you that an algebraic variety is something like a set
of solutions of a system of equations.
But actually this sort of formalism is able to talk geometrically about questions and
numbers theory.
So it can take as input any commutative frame.
And this question, what is k-theory of an algebraic variety or a scheme is already interesting
in this case.
The k-theory of a ring.
So now it's possible so people know how to produce, again, the k-theory spectrum of
x.
So if you take x, an algebraic variety, you produce a certain logical object and then
you can do this homotopy groups.
And for nice schemes, you have a similar description of k-zero.
So maybe the reason why I say similar and not the same because here, kind of like one
thing that I do not want to mention explicitly is that you need to put some condition that
you split short exact sequences of vector bundles, something like that.
But now you can ask the following question.
So now let x be an algebraic variety overseas.
So we're in the realm of complex analytic geometry equation.
So what is the relationship between the two k-theories that we can construct in this case?
It can be x is an algebraic variety overseas and produce its algebraic k-theory.
Or we can pass to the set of its complex points and now it's a typological space.
And now we can construct its typological complex k-theory.
So this is an interesting question already if you just take x to be the spectrum of c
or just like one point.
And in fact, there is a comparison map in this case.
So you can go from the algebraic k-theory of spec c to the typological k-theory of just
one point.
And so this is a map of spectra.
So when people work with spectra, they talk about its rational part and they talk about
passing to rational coefficients and finite coefficients.
So whatever it is, it's some sort of algebraic procedure entirely in the realm of spectra.
And now you can ask this question, OK, so this is just a map of spectra.
So what happens when you pass to finite coefficients for whatever reason?
And I can say that if you want to ask the same question, oh, what happens when you pass
to rational coefficients, this question is a little crazy because on the left-hand side
you'll have something that has to do with algebraic cycles, and on the left-hand side
you'll have something which is entirely typological.
But with finite coefficients, it's a reasonable question.
And it turns out that for this very specific variety, this is just an isomorphism.
So now you can ask, so this question, OK, so how can we do the same thing but now over
the added fields?
So for me, added geometry is just a key analytic of complex analytic geometry.
And so this is a field which is, of course, very important.
And now you can say, OK, so we have the algebraic analog there, or you can define algebraic
in theory in that context.
What about its logical counterpart?
And so this question is, again, very interesting already for a zp or qp.
So what is this other key theory for such simple objects?
And so maybe reasons like why we want to look for something like this.
So first of all, this algebraic key theory, which you can define in this context, just
does not take the foliage of Huber rings into account.
So maybe here I want to say that attic spaces is built in a fashion which is similar to
how you build schemes or algebraic varieties.
You start with some basic built-in blocks, which in the case of algebraic geometry correspond
to rings, and here they correspond to certain classes of typological rings, and then you
glue these.
OK, so the second reason here is, OK, it does not satisfy the set.
So what does it mean?
You can ask the following question.
So how can you relate global key theory on a geometric object to local key theories?
So it can be formulated as follows.
So if you just take u and open subset of x and send it to key of u, then this guy is
not a sheaf in general.
And here by key u, I mean it's algebraic key theory.
And there is a third question, which is maybe not related to the first two ones, but still
a reasonable question of some sort of continuity.
So you can consider this natural map.
So you just take the algebraic key theory, zp, and map it to this inverse limit.
So this map is not an isomorphism.
So our new key theory will solve all these problems, so it will satisfy all these properties.
And furthermore, there is going to be a comparison map between the algebraic key theory, zp, on
the left hand side, and this sort of new key theory on the right hand side.
And this map is going to be an isomorphism, any number of them.
So if you want the difference between the algebraic key theory of zp and this sort of
new key theory of zp, it will be entirely in the rational part.
So it doesn't have to be coprime, too?
No.
OK.
Maybe now I want to sort of explain one way to construct key theory.
So what do we have here?
So let's look at the objects in the parenthesis.
So these guys are just two categories, concretely group points.
So you take vector spaces over C, and just as maps, you take only isomorphisms between
two vector spaces.
So on the left hand side, you just say, OK, so I endow each space of isomorphisms with
the discrete topology.
And on the right hand side, you just say, OK, you endow these spaces with its natural
topology over C. So these two guys are monoids in some topological sense.
And algebraic topology gives you a recipe how to construct groups or infinity groups
or whatever you want to call them out of these monoids.
And so you can perform these formal procedures.
And then what you get on the left hand side, you just get the algebraic key theory of C.
And on the right hand side, you'll just get K of this point.
But now I want to change the perspective.
So maybe one of the reasons that this procedure of taking infinity group completion is just
crazy.
So you cannot really control it.
You cannot say what happens there.
So you want to decompose our formalism into two steps.
So first of all, we just take a geometric object, and then we associate a stable infinity
category too.
So you may think of triangulated category as something like quasi-coherent sheaves on
schemes or the direct category of a green.
And then you want to prefer string universal, like you want to apply string universal algebraic
invariant.
So namely, just take your stable infinity category and apply the key theory function to it.
And you'll get a spectrum.
So now I want to focus on the first kind of passage.
Second passage is, of course, also very interesting and exciting.
I'll just pretend that Wenger sent everything about it, but this is where a delightful category
is entering the game.
OK.
So now maybe let me try to motivate why you want to decompose it like this.
So one very practical reason.
OK.
So suppose that you want to define key theory for schemes.
So this approach, this general idea will yield the correct answer.
So in the sense that it will satisfy the send.
But the first approach where you start with vector bundles, it has some technical complications.
So here, what you do for a scheme is you take x and then associate either the category
of perfect complexes on x or, depending on your perspective, which is the same, you just
associate the category of quasi, the direct category of quasi-coherent sheets on x.
And the second point, which is maybe a little bit more interesting, is that you can see
key theory of behavior already at the level of categories.
So this procedure of infinity growth completion, as I said, is crazy.
So what you want to do, you want to take, perform some part of it already at the categorical
level.
So in particular, what it means is you can give one example.
So key theory will produce a group.
And for any vector bundle, you'll have its inverse, its formal inverse in phase 0.
And this passage to stable infinity categories will already give you some categorical object,
which is the k0 inverse of your vector bundle that you started with.
Okay, now you can ask this question, okay, how does this approach work in attic geometry?
So there is one fundamental problem.
Until recently, there was no good theory of quasi-coherent sheets on attic spaces.
And this is not specific to attic spaces.
Whenever you want to study analytic geometry, you'll have this problem.
So the same problem happens when you work with complex analytic spaces.
And there is a magnificent solution to this, which is condensed mathematics.
So I will not explain how it works, or I will not give a lot of reasons why one should believe
that this is the right solution, I'll just say the following.
So what it allows us to do is the following, you take an attic space, x, and you can actually
produce two categories.
So you can produce two candidates, if you wish, for quasi-coherent sheets on x.
The first one is the category of solid sheets on x, which has certain soft categories, the
category of nuclear sheets on x.
So now you can say, okay, so what happens if I just apply this k-theory function to any
of these two categories?
If you apply it to solid sheets, you'll just get zero.
So this is, and it is very easy to prove.
So it's a very boring answer.
So what you have to do, you have to apply it to the category of nuclear sheets, and this
is our definition.
And now we can actually prove many results.
So one thing that you can show, you can relate globally defined k-theory to its local version
sort of.
So what I mean by that, again, is the shape of spectra on x.
So if you take you an open subset of your x space and map it to the k-theory of the
category of nuclear sheets on u, then you'll get just a sheaf of spectra.
And one other property that I would like to mention is exactly this continuity result.
So it turns out that this new k-theory is continuous in the sense that it's exactly the inverse
limit of k-theories of quotients of z-modulo pn.
And from that you can formally deduce that this comparison map from the algebraic k-theory
of the p to this new nuclear k-theory of the p is an isomorphism modulo m.
Okay.
mp there?
Sorry?
Is m allowed to be positive p?
Yes.
Yes.
Okay.
I'll talk about it.
Yes.
I think that's it.
Yeah.
Thank you.
I want to answer your question first, which is so important.
So if m is not positive p, then this is like simply follows like from diverse rigidity.
So what you do.
So like, but in general, you have to observe the following.
So take the algebraic theory of the p and then ask the following question.
Is this like map from the algebraic theory of the p to this inverse limit and isomorphism
modulo p?
It is.
What's a nuclear sheet?
It's a little bit different.
Functional analysis?
It's related to the notion of nuclear space, like nuclear spaces and functional analysis.
Yeah, but it, like, we'll take something.
We can't marry growth in these two worlds.
From early work.
Okay.
Okay.
Seriously.
Yeah.
Wait.
This is less.
It's a stable infinity.
That's awesome.
I mean, I would say that.
I don't know how to globalize it.
But I think that's the best thing we can also prove that he is.
Yes, I think because of the work of the direct.
So, going back to the example that you started with.
Can that also be shoehorned into this?
Framework of FM op K theory of a suitable dualizable.
So what, what, what you can definitely do, you can like, so you can definitely say that you can be realized as the key theory of some dualizable intensity category.
And I think it's.
It should be also like true for the like general complex housework space.
So is there a concrete model of the.
The K theory of like, I find.
I mean, like, so this concrete model like it's like, I don't know, like this continue to result. Is it concrete for you?
I guess that's the question. Yeah, so like if you take just like, let's say in the theory and like bring with the ideal I event, like complete with respect to this ideal either.
It's new K theory will be the inverse limit of like the K theory of like our module, I to the power of that.
I mean, is there also like an excision sequence where if I wanted to understand the K theory of the generic fiber, it's a fun as it's to understand the other pieces.
I'm not sure about that.
Like how general you can formulate that. Yeah.
All right, well, we'll all care for this term over the whole year and we can continue discussing this.
So let's thank the three speakers for this one.
