Good evening.
It's my pleasure to welcome you to another exciting Friends Talk.
My name is Reinhold Gebert and I'm a friend of the Institute.
In fact, I'm a rare breed of friend because I've been on the other side.
I was a theoretical physicist and member in the School of Natural Science 14 years ago.
I was very excited and deeply moved when Pamela asked me whether I'd like to announce today's
speaker, Edward Whitten.
Ed is the reason I came to America and he's also one of the key reasons why my wife and
I are so passionate about the Friends and the Institute.
I will never forget the day I received the invitation letter from Ed, the undisputed
Lord of the Strings, to come to the Institute.
To use a comparison, it's as if the late Michael Jackson, the king of pop, had invited me to
join him for a concert.
I cannot possibly list all of Ed's accomplishments and prizes.
However, it's particularly noteworthy that he's the only physicist who's been awarded
the Fields Medal, which is the equivalent of the Nobel Prize in mathematics.
Ed is also the most cited physicist living today.
With more than 350 published scientific papers, he has established mathematical physics as
a subject in its own right.
Today, Ed will talk to us about knots and quantum theory.
While it's obvious to me that tangled strings can form knots, I'm curious to hear what this
has to do with quantum theory.
So Ed, please twist our brains.
Well, thanks to the Friends for inviting me and thanks very much, Reinhardt, for the kind
of introduction.
So actually, the talk I'm going to give today is a little bit different from any I've given
in the past.
I decided that it wouldn't be that exciting for me to give an overview of anything since
I've done it before.
So instead, I was going to give a talk in which I actually would try to explain to you what
I've been working on in the last year.
But the trouble is that I can't quite do that.
I'll really spend most of the time trying to orient you about the backgrounds.
And then we'll just say a few words about what I've been doing.
Now, first of all, a knot is more or less what you think it is.
It's a possibly tangled loop in ordinary space.
So that's an example of a knot.
The only thing is that this is kind of useless knot because it doesn't tie anything to anything.
Usually we think of knots as having a reason.
For example, you're tying something together, possibly.
But from a mathematical point of view, that's an excess baggage.
So the essence of a knot is a loop in three-dimensional space, a loop such as the one I've drawn
here.
So it's confusing to look at, and that's one of the basic truths about knots.
Knot are perplexing to try to comprehend, even though in principle they seem like simple
things in concepts.
So the example probably reminds us of something we know from everyday life, which is that
well, it's very easy to generate a messy knot.
And once you've done so, it can be pretty hard to understand what you've got.
So in particular, if you've got a knot, it can be pretty hard to know if it can be untangled.
And I think it's even harder if you're given two different tangles to decide whether they're
equivalent.
So we kind of feel given a messy piece of string, especially if we have some reason
to know from the way it was made that it can be undone, that we can undo it.
But if you're given two pictures like this, and it has to decide if they're equivalent,
that's really messy.
Now this might not sound like a question in math.
If your concept of math is that it has to do with adding, subtracting, multiplying, and
dividing.
But in fact, there's a lot more to math.
And in the 20th century, mathematicians developed a rather deep theory of knots.
Knot's turned out to be rather deep mathematical objects.
And mathematical knot theory gave surprisingly surprising ways to answer questions, like
whether a given knot can be untangled, or whether two different tangles are actually
equivalent.
So that's what mathematicians did, and I'll tell you a little bit more about it in a bit.
But before going farther, I'd like to address the question of why I'm interested as a physicist.
Now knots are things that can exist in three-dimensional space.
But personally, I'm only interested in them because of something surprising that emerged
in the last three decades.
Much of the theory of knots is best understood in the framework of 20th and 21st century
developments in quantum physics.
In other words, what I care about personally are not the knots per se, but their relations
to quantum physics.
Now, I was actually asked while we were chatting before the seminar when knot theory got started,
and people wrote about knots in the 19th century.
But by 1923, James Alexander defines an invariant of knots that mathematicians still study today.
And an important refinement was made later by our former colleague here at the Institute,
John Conway.
But the story, as I'll tell it, begins with something called the Jones polynomial, which
was discovered by Vaughan Jones in 1983.
So he discovered a new property of knots called the Jones polynomial.
This led to a lot of new discoveries continuing to the present day.
So it's very modern, close to the frontier of contemporary mathematics, but it's also
surprisingly elementary in the basic concept.
You could go into a high school class, at least a high school class of kids who like
math, and explain what the Jones polynomial is without compromising very much.
There are not many things at the frontiers of modern mathematics where one would say
that.
For instance, nobody would claim that you could explain Andrew Walz's proof of Fermat's
last theorem to high school students.
Not even close, not even the concepts that he used, or the tools or techniques.
It's layer upon layer, the proof of Fermat's last theorem is many layers removed from
what you could explain to high school students.
But the Jones polynomial, even though it is near the frontiers of modern mathematics,
is also so elementary that you actually can explain it to high school students.
So what Jones discovered basically was a way to compute a number for any knot.
So we'll call our knot k, and we'll write j sub k, for the number Jones calculates for
this knot.
So there's going to be a definite rule to calculate jk.
So no matter how messy the knot might be, such as the one I showed you a picture of
a little while ago, you can calculate the number jk attached to that knot if you're
patient enough.
And what Jones discovered is that if this magic number jk is not equal to one, the knot
k can never be untangled.
And moreover, if two different knots have different numbers, then they're not equivalent
to each other.
You can't bend and stretch one into the other without cutting the strands.
Now if we take this knot here, you could think about trying to unravel it, and you probably
won't make much progress.
But how could you prove that that particular messy tangled loop of string cannot be unknotted,
cannot be turned into a simple circle that isn't tangled up?
Well, Jones gave a way to answer a question like that.
Calculate this number j attached to the knot, and if it isn't one, it means the knot can't
be untied.
And more generally, if two knots have different numbers, then they're not equivalent to each
other.
You can't transform one into the other without cutting and tearing the string.
So finding the method by which Jones calculates j sub k was clever, but once it was discovered,
in principle you can use it without any cleverness.
There's just a set of instructions that you're supposed to follow, and you use them to calculate
jk.
So how do we calculate jk?
Well, one important fact, one important rule is that it's one in the case of the unknot,
which I probably should have drawn before.
Untangling a knot means moving around the strings so as to transform it into the unknot
without breaking or tearing anything.
For all the other knots, we have to play a little game.
So to play the game, we pick three favorite numbers, for example, two, three, and five,
but any numbers will do.
And we're going to do something that might seem to make life more complicated.
Instead of a single knot k, we're going to consider three knots, k, k prime, and k double
prime.
And if the three knots that we pick are related in a certain way, there's going to be a relationship,
mathematicians call it an identity.
The twice j of one knot plus three times j of the second knot plus five times j of the
third knot is going to be zero.
Remember, there's nothing special about the numbers two, three, and five.
We just picked them.
Joan says you can pick your favorite numbers, in fact.
This identity is so powerful that it will enable us to calculate the j's.
So this identity isn't going to be true for every three set of knots.
I have to tell you how the three knots should be related to make the identity true.
To explain that, I've drawn something which isn't a knot.
It's not a knot because something is missing.
So out here, we've drawn a bit of a knot, but the blue dotted line, inside the blue dotted
line, I've left a gap represented by the question mark.
To make a knot out of this thing, there are four strands that end on the blue dotted line.
And to complete the picture, we need to somehow connect those strands.
By the way, if we connect them, what we arrive at might be either connected or not connected.
Although I use the term knot, we're not going to worry about whether it's actually a single
piece of string or more than one piece of string.
More than one piece of string would make what mathematicians call a link.
So to explain what k, k prime and k double prime are going to be, I'll give you three
different ways to fill in what's missing here so as to make a knot.
We pick three different ways.
If you glue any one of these three little pictures in here, you'd complete the picture
and make a knot.
So that gives you k, k prime and k double prime.
And then we declare that the numbers, unfortunately I wrote here functions.
I was trying to get rid of such mathematical terminology.
It should say the numbers, jk, jk prime and jk double prime associated to these knots,
should obey this relation two times j of the first knot plus three times j of the second
knot plus five times j of the third knot should be zero.
So that's a relationship that Jones's knot numbers obey.
And you see, anytime the two strands crossed each other, we can draw a circle around it
and call that k.
And then we would make k prime and k double prime by replacing the picture inside the
circle.
So this is an operation that we can do whenever we look at a knot and we see two strands that
look like they're on top of each other.
So if we've got a picture like this, so where one strand crosses another gives what not
there is called a crossing.
So in this picture you see roughly a dozen crossings, one, two, three, four, five and
so on.
It looks like it's more than a dozen.
We could draw a little circle around any crossing and then we could add in the two other pictures.
So we'd get a relation that two times the j number of this knot plus three times the
j number of some other knot and so on, five times the j number of the third knot would
add up to zero.
So there are a lot of different ways to apply the rule to a given knot such as this one.
It's not very hard to see that if you are given this rule you can actually calculate
j for any knot.
So that's definitely what we would prove to our audience, our hypothetical audience of
high school students interested in math.
So if you were faced with the problem of untangling this knot you might notice, well if I could
pass this strand through that one it would be easier.
So the identity tells us passing through this strand through this one is like replacing
K by K double prime.
If we didn't have to worry about the third knot it would tell us that one j number is
just minus five-halves times the other.
But the third term in the identity is simple in a different way because the lines don't
cross at all.
Anyway, if you work at it a bit, I won't take the time right now, but if you work at it
a bit, this identity is so strong that it tells you what happens if you either cross
a knot through another knot or else remove a crossing and after a little while you find
that you can calculate the j number for every knot.
Actually the easy part is to show that you can calculate j for any knot given our rule.
The hard part is to show that there's never a contradiction.
There might be a contradiction because there are many ways to apply the rule.
This particular knot had about 15 crossings and so we could apply our rule at any crossing
and then at any other crossing and so on.
There are many ways we could proceed and you might run into a contradiction.
But Jones and other knot theorists showed in the 1980s that there's never a contradiction.
One always arrives at the same number, same answer for the Jones number, jk of a knot k,
no matter how you calculate it.
So the proof showed that Jones's recipe is correct, but it left a why question.
Why it works, what it means if you wish.
The trouble is that although that's sort of one of the most basic questions in math or
physics, it's hard to explain if you don't work in mathematics or in a lied field.
If you're not accustomed to mathematical work, you might have only a hazy idea that
there's a difference from understanding what's true and understanding why it's true.
But the beauty of the why answers is actually a lot of the reason that people do mathematics
in the first place.
Now in this case, as people worked on the Jones polynomial, they discovered more and
more remarkable formulas with less and less understanding of what they meant.
But there was a clue.
In fact, there were lots of clues.
As the subject developed, it had many ties with mathematical physics.
In fact, Jones and his original work had one relationship to mathematical physics and many
others were discovered, a flood of things, bewilderingly many ties between the Jones
polynomial and mathematical physics.
If anything, there were too many links between the Jones polynomial and mathematical physics.
If you're trying to solve a mystery, it's much better to have a good clue than a large
assortment of clues of dubious merit.
So I won't try to tell in detail how this story unfolded in the 80s, but I will mention
those who influenced me the most were three members of the IAS, one of whom was now my
colleague on the faculty and former institute professor Michael Atilla, the distinguished
mathematician who is now in Edinburgh.
So there were all kinds of links between the Jones polynomial and mathematical physics
of different kinds, but it turned out that the natural explanation has to do with quantum
theory.
So now I need to tell you a little bit about quantum theory and how it differs from pre-20th
physics.
So imagine a classical particle, for example, it could be the planet Venus.
It starts somewhere, it ends somewhere else.
In between it will travel on a nice reasonable orbit that you can find by solving Newton's
laws, by solving Newton's equations of motion.
Here instead is a quantum particle.
It can follow any path at all.
A fairly typical path might be quite irregular, like this one.
If you look in detail at the path followed by a quantum particle, it might look like
it lacks rhyme or reason.
Now for the quantum particle, we have to allow all possible paths.
I drew one here, but I drew three more over here.
So these are paths a particle could follow in going from here to here.
Going to Feynman, it could do whatever it wants, so to speak, it can go on any path
at all.
I've drawn this path, this one, and this one.
And since the lecture is about knots, I couldn't resist that two of my three paths are knotted.
Although to make it easily drawable, I use the same knot in each case.
This particular knot is called the trefoil.
By the way, this knot is a little bit, as drawn here, it's a little bit more like a
knot in real life.
It starts somewhere and it ends somewhere else.
It's tied down at the end and it's not in between.
It's not a freely floating knot in empty space like the mathematicians usually think about
and like I drew earlier.
Now one important thing is that we're doing quantum physics, but it's going to be relativistic
quantum physics because after all, the 20th century gave us relativity along with quantum
mechanics.
So when I draw a path, it's not a path in space, it's a path in spacetime.
So it's true that a path can be knotted, but that's special to three dimensions.
If you had a fourth dimension, you could always slip the loops across each other.
And in two dimensions, you couldn't even draw a knot.
The lines would cross rather than avoiding each other in three space.
Theory is the right dimension for knots.
So if you're going to interpret your knots as the paths followed by a particle in space
and time, it'll have to be a spacetime of the right dimension.
When we count time as one of the spacetime dimensions, the real world has four dimensions,
three space dimensions and one dimension of time.
But to understand knot theory, at least in the approach I'll be explaining for the next
little bit, we're going to imagine living in a world of only three spacetime dimensions,
not four, or a world of two spacetime dimensions in one time.
So this is actually what I drew, the world of three spacetime dimensions where you can
think of time as running from left to right.
And yes, we're letting our particles zigzag back and forth word in time, since we allow
that relativistically.
So now I've drawn a knotted path.
So a quantum physicist doesn't, a classical physicist finds the right orbit by solving
Newton's laws.
But a quantum physicist doesn't know what the right orbit was.
The quantum particle could travel in any possible orbit.
And a quantum physicist has to sum over all possible paths by which the particle might
reach its destination.
How to do this sum, well this is a very schematic history of physics in one sentence, but roughly
speaking, how to do this sum is what physicists learned in developing quantum theory and ultimately
constructing what's now the standard model of particle physics.
So mechanically, any path is possible, but if the particle did travel on a particular
path which I'll call k, then there's what's called a probability amplitude for the particle
to arrive at its destination via this path, and that amplitude depends on k.
The way that the probability amplitude depends on k is very important.
It's the reason that there's some order even in a quantum universe.
All paths are possible, but peculiar paths with a lot of zigzags are not very likely.
The particle could do anything, but when you do the sum over all possible paths, you get
an answer that mostly, at least under familiar conditions where our ordinary intuition applies,
the sum over all possible paths mostly corresponds to paths that are pretty close to the classical
path that Newton would have favored.
But even to try to do this, to do the sum over paths and find out that Newton's result
is a good approximation, you need to be able to calculate the quantum mechanical amplitude
that the particle did travel on a given path k.
That amplitude is given by something which is called the Wilson operator.
I'll call it W sub k.
For today, we don't really need to know exactly how it's defined.
All we need to know is that it's a basic ingredient in quantum physics, and for instance, if you
want to calculate the force between two quarks in an atomic nucleus, what you use is the
Wilson operator.
So once you start thinking about the sum over quantum paths and the Wilson operator, it
turns out that there's a very simple connection between the Jones polynomial and quantum physics.
The connection is simply the following.
We regard a knot k as the spacetime orbit of a charged particle.
Then the Jones polynomial, in other words, Jones's number, is the average value of the
Wilson operator.
Here's the formula in its simplest terms.
The number, J sub k, that Jones attached to a knot, is the average value of the Wilson
operator where the averaging is a process of quantum averaging.
You might wonder what are the numbers two, three, and five that we use when we played
the game.
They're determined by the charge of the particle and Planck's constant, loosely speaking.
Now one point I perhaps should add is that technically when we carry out this program,
well, we don't use the standard model of particle physics.
For one reason, we need a three-dimensional model, not a four-dimensional model.
The model we have to use is developed using something called the Tern-Simon's function
for gauge fields, where Tern was one of the most famous mathematicians of the 20th century.
Simons is also a very distinguished mathematician, as well as businessman and IAS trustee.
Now why have I been telling you these things?
Well, one reason is that I like them, and it's fun to relive my early days at the IAS.
But that's not the only reason.
There's actually a more contemporary twist in the story.
I've been working on it this year, and I want to tell you at least a few words about it,
although it is a little bit harder to explain properly than the story we've just been talking
about.
So we took what you might have thought was a roundabout interpretation of knots.
In everyday life, the simplest interpretation of a knot is an object that exists in space,
an object in real space that we can see.
But to interpret the Jones polynomial in quantum theory, we instead had to view a knot
as a path in space-time.
So interpreting a knot as a path in space-time is maybe less obvious than interpreting a
knot as a physical object in space.
Around 1990, when he was a member at the IAS, my colleague Igor Frankl started to develop
pieces of what he hoped would be a new mathematical theory in which the knot would be seen as
a physical object rather than a path in space-time.
I talked to him a lot about his ideas when he was here, and I wish I could claim that
I encouraged him and made useful comments, but I didn't.
I only gave him reasons it wouldn't work.
Anyway, if it was going to work, it was supposed to involve a more powerful version of the
Jones polynomial in a theory that would have one dimension more.
Technically, the reason I thought it wouldn't work, actually, was that the Tern-Simon's
function is special to three dimensions.
It can't be related classically to anything in one dimension more.
So I thought that would mean that there wouldn't be a four-dimensional theory related to the
Jones polynomial but with the knot as a physical object rather than a path in space-time.
But Frankl didn't listen, and he continued developing the ideas with colleagues such
as Lou Crane, who's now at the University of Kansas, and his student, Michael Kovanov.
And finally, by 2000, Kovanov created what's now known as Kovanov homology, which is a
refinement of the Jones polynomial, in which the knot is a physical object rather than
the path of a point particle.
Now, in a couple of ways, it's like the Jones polynomial.
It's very clever to invent it, but once it's invented, it can be computed by an explicit
set of rules.
The only trouble is that I won't tell you the rules for defining Kovanov homology.
For the Jones polynomial, I basically explained the rules, but maybe I went through it too
fast.
But for Kovanov homology, you really wouldn't want to go into a high school class and try
to explain the rules for defining Kovanov homology.
In principle, they're elementary, but it would take a pretty unusual high school student
who would have the patience to try to understand it.
You don't need quantum physics to define and calculate Kovanov homology.
And in fact, most people working on it don't think in terms of quantum physics at all.
But just like I told you earlier about the Jones polynomial, the literature on Kovanov
homology is full of what answers, and it's kind of short on why answers.
So there are amazing discoveries of what's true.
They generate more and more mysterious formulas.
And the possibility is open or given the history with the Jones polynomial and the way that
the Kovanov theory was invented as a more refined contemporary counterpart, you would
at least wonder that maybe a quantum dimension is needed to get a better explanation of what
the formulas mean.
I think I told you this already.
We can define Kovanov homology by an explicit recipe.
So I mean, it's a much more sophisticated recipe, but once you learn the recipe, you
can for any given knot just calculate its Kovanov homology.
But it's not a recipe you'd try to explain in high school.
Now, Kovanov homology has had a lot of impact mathematically.
For example, our math school here at the IS had a special program on Kovanov homology,
a few years ago.
So a few years ago, a group of three physicists actually proposed a quantum interpretation
of Kovanov homology based on some earlier work.
Vafa was my student actually, and actually Vafa and Gukov were my students.
The other two were former IS members.
Their story used plenty of avant-garde ideas about quantum fields and strings and all that.
But as beautiful and powerful as it was, I always suspected, well, always means always
since 2004, that there might be a more direct route.
What really troubled me a little bit was that, okay, the Jones polynomial was interpreted
in quantum theory, and then it was generalized to Kovanov.
These authors interpreted Kovanov homology in quantum theory, but the way they did it
looked like it had nothing in common with the way the Jones polynomial was interpreted
in quantum theory, and that just didn't feel like it should be the end of the story.
So I thought there should be another dimension to the answer, and I spent the last year trying
to construct a more direct route from quantum theory to Kovanov homology.
Honestly, even though in a sense I found what I was looking for, I don't know whether
to say I found a more direct route or just a somewhat different one.
Now, I gave you a very schematic picture of how quantum theory is related to the Jones
polynomial, and I'll have to be even less detailed for Kovanov homology, but I will
say a word or two.
The main difference between Kovanov homology and the Jones polynomial is that the goal
of the theory is more abstract.
So what Jones defined for a given knot is a number, but what Kovanov described for a
given knot is a space of quantum states, except he didn't call them quantum states.
He just called it a vector space, if you wish.
So if you think of the knot as a physical object in three-dimensional space, then its
Kovanov homology is the space of possible quantum states.
So the problem that presents itself, given Kovanov's crazy algebraic recipe for computing
Kovanov homology, is to find a quantum theory in which it's true, that it makes sense to
consider a knot as a physical object, and the space of quantum states of the knot will
turn out to be what Kovanov just defined.
So that's what the problem is, but it might have sounded like a mouthful, whereas in the
case of the Jones polynomial, the problem was just to calculate a number, which I more
or less explained how Jones calculated the number.
Now because the theory is in four spacetime dimensions instead of three, four spacetime
is the right dimension for the real world, at least macroscopically.
So the theory involves ideas and methods that are even closer to real particle physics than
those that go into understanding the Jones polynomial.
So they're closer to real particle physics, but one could have tried to give a lecture
just about some of those ideas, but I thought I'd have to be very schematic here, since
we've already gone into quite a bit.
I'll mention though very briefly two of the main ideas that are important in making sense
of Kovanov homology and quantum theory, but weren't needed for the Jones polynomial.
For the Jones polynomial, in a sense, we only needed the basics of quantum mechanics and
relativistic quantum theory and how we do gauge theory.
But for Kovanov theory, we need a lot more avant-garde ideas.
One important idea is symmetry between electric and magnetic fields.
You probably learned about electric and magnetic fields in high school.
If you went a little bit deeper into it at the university, you would have run into Maxwell's
equations in which the electric and magnetic fields play very similar roles.
But symmetry between electricity and magnetism, quantum mechanically, is a very subtle idea
that's only been important in theoretical physics relatively recently.
So electric magnetic duality was pioneered by Goddard, Noyts and Olive among others in
the mid-70s.
And it was proposed in the mids, in the 70s by Adhoft, Mandelstam and others, Pauliakov,
I should mention, in connection with the problem of how quarks are bound together in nucleons.
But really electric magnetic duality only came to be well understood in the mid-90s.
And if I were giving an overview talk today, rather than trying to tell you what I've been
doing in the last year, I might have devoted the whole hour just to trying to explain to
you what electric magnetic duality is.
Since the mid-90s, it's been one of the main ingredients in studies of quantum fields and
strings at the IAS and elsewhere.
Another ingredient of string theory also turns out to be important, that's extra dimensions.
What we want is supposed to be a theory in four spacetime dimensions, but it turns out
that understanding it properly involves relating it to theories in five and six dimensions.
But the biggest surprise of all is that even though it can be defined by an explicit recipe
with no reference to quantum physics, not only it can be defined, but that's what happened.
Kovanov defined his theory by an explicit recipe with no reference to quantum physics.
But actually, Kovanov homology can be understood, perhaps much better, using the most new fangle
tools in the quantum theorists toolkit.
So I've tried today, at least, to give you a little bit of a hint, not about any big
picture, but about my picture of last year.
And I think maybe we've left some time for questions, too.
Thank you.
Yes?
Give us some idea of where we can do some work with a practical basis.
No, I admire the work.
I don't know about Kovanov homology.
For the Jones polynomial, there's a glimmering of an application, because people trying to develop quantum computers
— it's a different direction, I could have gone in the talk to explain that — but people trying to develop
quantum computers have the problem of what they call decoherence, interaction of a material with the outside world,
where the subtle quantum effects that you need for a quantum computer get lost.
And one of the most seriously discussed ideas for making a quantum computer involves quantum
whole systems at very low temperatures, very strong magnetic fields, where the quantum theory
relevant to the Jones polynomial comes in.
So there actually is in condensed matter physics.
It's not completely proved experimentally, but there are experimentally studied systems,
which are believed to be described by the Jones polynomial.
More exactly, the quantum interference effects that you get when quasi-particles move around
are believed to be described by the Jones polynomial.
So it's early days, so no one has any idea if that method or any other will be used to make a quantum computer.
But that's a partial answer to your question.
There's also a much more recent development involving what are called topological insulators
discovered just in the last couple of years.
The topic is called topological insulators.
It might take us too far a field if I would try to describe what they are now, but it's actually a little
bit closer to coven ophthalmology.
It's imaginable that a further extension could lead to coven ophthalmology,
but certainly it uses the Jones polynomial in an interesting way.
By right, your question shouldn't have had an answer.
It's a miracle that it does.
Yes?
Do you know if anybody has considered looking for a Jones polynomial number for their amyloid tangles?
I'm trying to think if I know anything at all like that.
The question was whether tangles that occur in biology could be usefully started using the Jones polynomial.
I think I could state it that way.
My guess is, well, I was surprised at what the condensed matter physicist has found,
but I haven't heard of anything like that in biology.
Yes?
Is the current form of magnetic field equivalent to anything that could be used in that way?
It really strongly suggests that they should exist.
And there's a sad fact of the matter, which is that the theory of cosmic inflation was invented
around 1980 by Alan Goothe and others to explain why monopoles are very scarce.
The inflationary universe is supposed to have made them dilute,
and since there's a decent amount of experimental evidence since then supporting the inflationary
universe, they might actually be correct.
That interpretation of what's happened might be correct.
It's got a very sad corollary, which is that Goothe overdid it.
I was trying to make monopoles scarce enough, but the inflationary universe dilutes the monopoles
by the exponential of a large number, and the exponential of a large number is a very, very large number.
Yes, so that may be the answer to where the monopoles went.
But I'll tell you that I spend my time studying theories that really only make sense if monopoles exist.
My question is, as one of the leading rights in the field, how do you decide what you're going to explore?
Well, the hardest part of research is exactly to decide what questions you're going to work on.
If you ask a too big a question, you won't be able to answer it.
And if you ask too little a question, it's not worth answering.
So you try to find the sweet spot of something that's worth doing that you actually can do.
And you spend a large fraction of your time not able to find the sweet spot.
So a very large fraction of your days, actually, even if you are working on a good problem,
a very large fraction of the days, at the end of the day, it seems like you've done nothing.
You might have spent most of the day staring at a sheet of paper, and I really mean it more or less literally,
or finding excuses for wasting time because you can't think of what else to do.
Since I'm telling you what I worked on in the last year, I might as well tell you how I work.
Yes?
I imagine that resisting distractions with other than the questions that the professor is working on
and the focus question is very, very different.
It is sometimes.
But this thing I've told you about probably seems like a strange passion to most of my colleagues,
but it is my passion.
Unfortunately, I may have succeeded in explaining the Jones polynomial,
but I think it was too hard to explain Kovanov homology properly.
But it's something I really care about, regardless of who else does.
And once I started working on it, it made it a little bit easier to...
In this particular year, I'm not describing every year in my work,
but in this last year, it made it a little bit easier to resist distractions,
possibly to my own detriment because I believe there are some of the distractions
that I should have followed more closely than I have.
Yes?
So far, it's not that it could be untangled because it's bad?
Yes.
Do you have a sense that it could be more significant with respect to strength here?
I really think that what is significant, both mathematically and physically,
is that knots and whole-related cluster of things in low-dimensional geometry,
but I've stressed knots today, are best understood in terms of quantum theory.
So I'm not giving everybody's answer, but I'm giving you my answer,
but I really find fascinating...
It's not the knots per se, but the fact that the way to study the knots is quantum theory.
Yes?
Do you have a sense of what the next problem is or the problem is?
I know two problems that I've been postponing.
The only question is what to tell you about them.
Well, one is kind of gratuitous, but some of my colleagues, younger colleagues here at the Institute,
they made a surprising discovery in mathematical physics a couple of years ago,
Aude, Tachikawa, and Gayato.
Unfortunately, there isn't really time to explain it because it involves,
superficially, ideas that are miles away from the knots.
But it's a complete accident, but I think that the story about coven ophthalmology
is probably applicable to their stuff as well.
So that's one thing I want to do.
There's a second thing I want to do.
It's something that's been nagging at me for about 25 years, really.
In around 1986, some Russian colleagues, actually one of them is one of these guys I mentioned
who worked on coven ophthalmology, Albert Schwartz.
He's now in the U.S., but at the time they were Russian colleagues.
They pointed out a very interesting property of super-strength perturbation theory,
which I was sure at the time would have an impact on the field, but it didn't.
I recently did a citation search for their paper, and it has very few citations.
And nobody did anything significant with it.
And the authors of the paper are probably, well, at the cost of being a little bit melodramatic,
I feel that the authors of the paper, and me, might be the only ones who paid attention to it.
I think it would be a shame if we all retire and the paper gets forgotten,
so I kind of would like to do something with it.
Yes?
Have you had occasion to think about the facility of invariance?
Well, I'm worried that that isn't the right question for this audience.
The answer is not on purpose.
But once a colleague Lev Rosansky and I discovered a new way to construct a quantum theory,
some people got Rosansky-Witton theory that generates some of the vacillia of invariance.
But I can't think of anything to say about it for a general audience, so I think I'll stop.
Anything, any questions? Yes?
I understand that 30 years ago, spring period, people thought that I'd be inferior to everything.
Yes?
Do you still feel that is that the case?
It's definitely our best shot.
It's our only real shot.
We've definitely discovered a lot of exciting ideas that go way beyond what we'd understand today if we hadn't had string theory.
For example, the kind of mathematical physics related to Kovanov model.
That's miles away from physics, but it's an illustration of the power of the ideas.
We wouldn't have that, except because of the way they show up in string theory.
Personally, I think string theory is on the right track, but it might be younger people who will have to decide that later on.
Yes?
I wasn't exactly clear on the definite context of the reference to inflationary theory.
Yes?
So maybe I'm not sure.
I was asked, okay.
The answer to a question I was asked about magnetic monopoles is that I spend my time working on theories that only make sense if monopoles exist.
But they haven't been discovered.
So you can ask your question in a moment, but since my answer apparently was unclear, I want to elaborate on it slightly.
The answer to the previous question.
I perhaps extrapolated slightly from the question David asked before, but a semi-compelling explanation of why the monopoles haven't been seen if they're there is the inflationary universe.
Which in fact was invented precisely to reduce the abundance of monopoles in the real world.
That might be the right interpretation, although it's a frustrating one.
It would have been better if Alan Goothe had reduced the abundance of monopoles to a manageable amount.
But unfortunately, he overdid it.
Anyway, what's your question?
Well, just that I read that Roger Pimlo was just a non-computer that said that, that's not technically broken, but saying he doesn't believe in the inflationary universe.
But I was just curious whether that was something that you said.
All big theories have their skeptics.
Yes?
Can you comment on the trouble with physics, at least moment?
Well, I can't comment very usefully, because I haven't really looked at it.
But as I said a moment ago, all big theories have their critics.
Yes?
In the example you were working through, where you assume a three-dimensional space time.
Yes.
Where you talk about a polynomial associated to the path of the particles in the space time.
It sounded as if that polynomial would only define if it was genuinely a knot.
So if it actually crossed itself, intersected itself, it would be a three-dimensional space time.
But I don't see why it's true.
Do you say if you allow the paths to go back in time, why might they pass through the same space time?
Well, they can pass through the same point.
And then you run into a phenomenon.
For example, Newton had the one over R squared force law.
So if particles get close, there's a strong force.
You have to calculate that force.
It changes the answer.
So two strands can pass through each other, but when they do, the quantum answer changes.
There's a simpler theory when they don't pass through each other, but your question makes perfect sense.
It has an answer, which the quantum theory will give.
They're not usually called knot polynomials, but there's a more general thing you can define when they do cross each other.
You get a different answer.
A space time history that is self-crossing is different from a knot.
So it can have a different answer than it does.
I even wrote a paper about it once.
Any other questions?
