My last two lectures are on a quite different topic.
The goal will be to provide an introduction to global properties of general relativity.
So we'll answer questions such as the following.
Why is a singularity, or in what sense is a singularity inevitable once there's a trap
surface in space-time?
Why can the area of a classical black hole only increase?
Why can't you traverse a wormhole in space-time, at least at the classical level?
And why is the ADSEFT correspondence compatible with causality?
So these are mostly statements about the causal nature of space-time.
Where can you get from a given starting point along a world line that's everywhere inside
the local light cone?
So the causal structure is really what's new in Lorenz's signature compared to Euclidean
signature, which is more visible in everyday life.
Since our everyday experience is non-relativistic, we're all quite familiar with Euclidean geometry
in two or three dimensions.
And curvature is easy to visualize at least in two space dimensions.
But what's new in Lorenz's signature is the notion of causality and the constraint to
travel inside the light cone.
So the implication to this is basically what the two lectures are about.
Now some of you are familiar with these topics, but some not.
And if you're not familiar, I can offer some good news.
There are a lot of things you can learn based on only a very small number of ideas.
So after a very short time, you too can be an expert, or at least a reasonable facsimile
of an expert.
So since the questions are about causal structure, we'll be studying causal paths in space-time.
A causal path, X mu of tau, where X mu are coordinates and tau is a parameter along the
causal path, is one whose tangent vector, dx mu, d tau, is everywhere time-like or null.
And by convention, we'll normally take our time-like paths to be future-directed.
So normally, dx mu, d tau will be a future-directed time-like or null vector.
So geodesics will be important because a lot of questions have to do with what's the best
you can do with the causal path.
For instance, what's the closest you can come to escaping from the black hole or traversing
the wormhole?
The answer to such a question usually involves a geodesic with special properties.
So we'll start by just considering causal paths in Minkowski space-time from a point
q to a point p in its future.
So here's what's called the causal diamond of the points q and p, all points that are
to the future of q and to the past of p.
So a causal path from q to p will stay inside that causal diamond.
I'll write dqp for the causal diamond, and it contains all causal paths from q to p.
So the first essential point is that the space of causal paths from q to p is compact.
Now here causality is completely essential.
If we dropped causality, we would not have any compactness.
Without it, a sequence of paths could oscillate more and more wildly and have no convergent
subsequence.
So for example, in two-dimensional Minkowski space, here's a sequence of non-causal paths
that go from the origin to the point 1, 0.
Let x be the sine of pi n t, where t goes from 0 to 1.
Then x oscillates wildly while t is going from 0 to 1.
So this is a wildly oscillating sequence of paths with no convergent subsequence.
So the space of paths in Minkowski space between two points with no causality condition
with the hopelessly non-compact.
But causality changes things because in this picture, a causal path can't have an angle
of more than pi over 4 from the vertical.
Now we're really interested in causal paths in the Lorenz signature metric, but it's
convenient to introduce the Euclidean signature metric with plus signs.
And let's ask what a causal path looks like in the Euclidean signature metric.
Well, a straight line has Euclidean length 1 between these two points, but an arbitrary
causal path has length no more than square root of 2.
Because the condition that the angle is never more than 45 degrees from the vertical ensures
that the longest Euclidean path that's causal would go like this.
And its length would be the square root of 2.
It's not unique, but it's an example of the longest causal path.
Once you have an upper bound on the Euclidean length, compactness follows.
If you have any causal path of length at most square root of 2, parameterize it by a parameter
s that measures the length times the arc length, so s runs from 0 to 1.
And suppose we're given a sequence of paths parameterizing this way.
So x is now the pair t and x, so x is the pair of spacetime coordinates.
So we consider a pair, a sequence of parameterized paths for each n equals 1, 2, 3.
We have a path where x and t, which I've abbreviated as x, depends on a parameter s that runs
from 0 to 1.
And s parameterizes arc length times a factor that's at most square root of 2.
So since the total Euclidean length is square root of 2, even if we forget causality, these
paths will lie in a bounded subset.
But actually we know they're in the causal linements.
They start at q and they end at p.
So xn of s is independent of s if s is 0 or 1.
You get a convergent sequence, takes an argument that you probably learned as undergraduates.
Let's first set s equals a half.
Since xn at s equals a half lies in a compact subset of Minkowski space, there's a subsequence
of these paths such that xn of 1 half converges.
Throw away all the other paths and just look at this subsequence.
You take a further subsequence where xn of a quarter and xn of 3 quarters converge.
And then you do it at fractions whose denominator is 8 and then 16 and so on.
So continuing, you get a subsequence that converges at any point of the form a over
2 to the k with integers a and k.
If our paths weren't causal, this actually wouldn't prove anything because they could
oscillate wildly between neighboring integers of this kind.
But causality or the constraint on length prevents wild fluctuations.
So actually for this sequence, xn of s converges for all s.
So we've learned that the space of causal paths between two points in Minkowski space
is compact.
Can you state briefly what the topology is?
Well the topology is the one I use in the argument.
So what we proved was we found a subsequence where for every s there was convergence.
So if you want to define a topology, it's the topology where an open set is determined
by constraint on where you are at the finite number of values of s.
So those are the open sets.
We found a subsequence which is, thank you.
We found a subsequence which converges in that topology.
I was hoping to avoid answering that kind of question.
I'm toying with, well, in a written version I might define the topology in a footnote,
but I was hoping to keep away from it.
So the space of causal paths is compact.
There's a question that's conjugate to your question which you might ask later.
We'll see if somebody does.
Now a corollary is there must be a causal path from q to p that maximizes the elapsed
proper time which is given by this usual formula.
Well to show that more carefully, there has to be an upper bound on tau because a sequence
of paths whose proper time keeps increasing couldn't have a convergent subsequence.
Moreover, if tau zero is the least upper bound on tau, you could consider a sequence
of paths where tau n converges to tau and that would have a convergent subsequence
which would be a causal path of proper time tau.
So you talk about upper semi-continuity, but I'd prefer to avoid it.
What's being said is that I have treated the proper time as a continuous function.
It's actually what's called upper semi-continuous which means it can jump in one direction
only when you take a limit and the direction in which it can jump is such that this argument
works.
In the particular case of Minkowski spacetime, you can prove this more trivially.
There's a unique geodesic from q to p, namely a straight line, and it's the path of maximum
proper time.
But the only fact we really needed about Minkowski space to establish the compactness of the
space of causal paths was that the causal diamonds of points that such a path can visit
is compact.
Once we know that, once one has that essentially, the same argument would work in any spacetime.
So the space of causal paths is compact whenever the causal diamond itself is compact by essentially
the same argument.
If the causal diamond isn't compact, the space of causal paths won't be compact and
in general there won't be a path of greatest proper time.
So I'm going to give a trivial example for this and also a more interesting example.
Here's the trivial example.
You take Minkowski space but remove a point from it.
It's still a spacetime with a Lorentz signature metric that solves the Einstein equations.
So if you discuss arbitrary Lorentz signature metrics that satisfy the Einstein equations,
this is one.
But obviously the causal diamond is now not compact because we removed a point and a sequence
of causal paths that don't pass through this point but that converge to one that does pass
through it.
We'll obviously not have a limit in this spacetime in which we've removed that point.
So a point has been emitted so a sequence of causal paths will no longer have a limit
and if you have two points whose geodesic in Minkowski space passes through R, then those
will be two points that aren't connected by a path of greatest proper time.
They're not connected by a geodesic.
So there's a more interesting example provided by anti-deciderspace but to describe it completely
requires some familiarity with anti-deciderspace.
So I'll have to, I'll try to put the minimum requirements on your familiarity.
So here I've sketched anti-deciderspace in two dimensions but in more than two dimensions
if you fold over the picture and identify the left and right halves you'd get the penrose
diagram of anti-deciderspace in any dimension.
So I'll describe it as a front two dimensions but you can think of it in any dimension.
The left and right hand boundaries are at spatial infinity.
If you try to get to the boundary along a spatial path its length is infinite.
So the boundaries are not part of the spacetime.
However if you try to get from the boundary to infinity along a light like path you can
get there, well proper time doesn't make sense but you can get there with finite affine parameter
but what's perhaps most important is that you can get to infinity and back in finite
time.
So starting at Q you could go to infinity and back in a finite time.
That means that the causal diamond of the point Q and Q prime is not compact because
the points R and S are missing from the causal diamonds.
But if you replace Q prime with a point a little bit in its past then from Q to that
point you can't get there by going to infinity and back so there would be a causal diamond
that's compact.
So any points to the pass of Q prime say here from what I've said has to be connected to
Q by a causal path of maximal proper time and that will be a time like geodesic.
So I've drawn the time like geodesics from Q and they fill out this quadrilateral.
The points in the interior of that quadrilateral are exactly the points whose causal diamond
with Q is compact because you can't get to infinity and back in a finite time.
And these points are all in a unique time like geodesic from Q and those time like geodesics
maximize the proper time.
So if you're inside in the interior anywhere of this quadrilateral you're connected to
Q by a compact causal diamond and by a causal path that maximizes the proper time.
Once you're outside the quadrilateral there's no compact causal diamonds and no general
proof that there has to be a path that maximizes the proper time and indeed there isn't.
So you could be outside the diamond here or maybe up here and later we'll discuss what
happens up here but at the moment suppose you're at the point P.
First of all there's actually no geodesic from Q to P.
The time like geodesics do what I've drawn and don't get to P and the light like geodesics
just go out here and the space like geodesics go sideways.
So there's absolutely no geodesic from Q to P and there's no path that maximizes the
proper time.
The upper bound on the proper time from Q to P is infinity because a causal path can
go very, very close to the boundary, stay there for a while and then go up to P always
at an angle less than 45 degrees.
And because you can be arbitrarily close to the boundary and because the lengths and times
blow up near the boundary a causal path from Q to P can have an unbounded proper time arbitrarily
large.
So this is a more interesting example of the statement that once the causal diamond is
not compact a causal path from Q to some other point P in its future may not exist that maximizes
the proper time.
To recapitulate we're studying causal paths because they're the key to understanding black
hole singularities and all that.
And we've learned that the space of causal paths from a point Q to a point P in its future
is compact as long as the causal diamond is compact.
We'd like a useful criterion that ensures this.
Luckily there's a good criterion that's very well motivated physically.
We ask for the space time M to be globally hyperbolic.
Well what globally hyperbolic means is that it has an initial value surface C and whatever
happens in M can be determined from initial conditions on C.
So here's M and C is some sort of complete space like hyper surface which has the property
that physics throughout M is determined by what happens on C.
So technically C is space like every point in M that's not on C is in its past or future
that means it can be reached from C by a time like future or past going path.
And there's a technical statement that needs a little more explanation if P is a point
to the future of C then any past going path from P can be continued till it meets C and
conversely if Q is in the past of C a similar statement holds.
So the intuition to make physics determinable from what happened from what there was on
C it must be the case that any signal you get at P most of some how came from C.
Well how did the signal get to P?
It got to P on some causal path.
So to be able to predict the physics at P based on what there was at C roughly what
you need to know is that every causal path started on C or to be more precise as in this
technical statement every causal path can be continued until it reaches C.
So if you want to know what signal reached P well it was a sum of signals on different
paths and if you know why something came this way well it started on C farther back or maybe
it started somewhere else on C farther back but whatever path by which a signal arrived
at P can be traced back till it ultimately came from C.
That's meant to be the intuition and the technical statement that matches the intuition
was in the sentence.
So informally if you were missing a point P between P and C a past going causal path
could get stuck and couldn't be continued till it reaches C.
So here that's meant to be a little hole a point emitted from the space time and here
there's a signal that can reach P that has nothing to do with what there was on C.
In this space time initial data at C is not enough to predict what you'll see at P you
need to know what signal arises from the missing points.
I think I have another version of the same picture.
If there's a missing point you can't predict what happens in the future without knowing
some conditions there.
So initial data on C would predict what happens in the white region but would leave you not
knowing what happens in the gray region.
So conversely a space time that develops from an initial value surface in a deterministic
way doesn't have anything missing.
So it's not totally clear that only globally hyperbolic space times should be considered
in general relativity.
For instance there are lots of analytically continued solutions in all the textbooks that
can be continued until they aren't globally hyperbolic.
But these are the space times that match the traditional idea of predicting the future
and the present from the past.
So any alternatives to globally hyperbolic space times are going to be more exotic.
So it's at least well motivated to consider this class of space times.
And that's the class that we'll be studying in these lectures.
Globally hyperbolic space times have the property that spaces of causal paths with suitable
conditions on their endpoints are always compact just as in Minkowski space.
So roughly it's because globally hyperbolic means there's no missing point.
I'll give an example though that's slightly different from what we've said.
Here we'll consider the space of causal paths from a point Q to the initial value surface
C. I think I didn't introduce the terminology.
C is an initial value surface or a Cauchy hyper surface.
So I claim, so here's a point Q which is in the past of the initial value surface.
And I've drawn only the part which is that can be reached causally from Q.
And I claim the space of causal paths from Q to C is compact.
So I'll explain the beginning of the argument.
You look at a sequence of such paths.
You want to show it has a convergent subsequence.
Well to begin the argument, inside the future of Q there's a small piece that looks like
a causal diamond in Minkowski space time.
And we already know that restricted to that small piece the space of causal paths is compact.
So our sequence has a subsequence that converges at least inside this little bit.
So it converges as far as Q prime.
And then we start again at Q prime and continue in the same way and go to subsequence that
converges farther.
And then we keep going and we learn that a subsequence converges all the way up to C.
So global hyperbolicity ensures that we can always continue.
It ensures that whenever we've found a partial convergence to a partial causal path, first
it ensures that that partial causal path can be continued.
And then you repeat the arguments basically.
So you eventually learn that the space of causal paths from Q to C is compact.
In particular, the region of space time that such a path can visit is compact.
Obviously, if there were a sequence of points that can be visited by causal paths from Q
and that sequence had no convergent subsequence, then a sequence of paths that visit those
points would also have no convergent subsequence.
So if M is globally hyperbolic, the portion of space time that can be reached by paths
from Q to C, causal paths, is compact.
The gray region is compact.
Now here's an exercise, but it's a little harder than most of the exercises I've asked.
Anything that I've explained shows that in a globally hyperbolic space time, if P can
be reached by a causal path from Q, then the space of all causal paths from Q to P is compact.
If you want to do it, let me suggest that you take Q to be in the past of M and consider
separately the cases that P is in the past or the future.
Sorry.
Take Q to be in the past of C, the initial value surface.
Here's as a lemma what I explained here, this statement, and then consider separately
the cases that P is in the past or the future of the initial value surface.
You'll need two different arguments in the two cases, but if you understood the claim
about causal paths from Q to C, you should be able to make a similar, to deduce a similar
statement about causal paths from Q to P for any point P in the future of Q.
This exercise means that globally hyperbolic space times have the property that spaces
of causal paths between two points are always compact.
Now compactness, so you haven't done this exercise and you may need to think about this
argument more, but let's accept that in a globally hyperbolic space time, which means
a space time where you can predict the future from the past so that nothing is missing,
that spaces of causal paths are compact.
Well if so, it means that there's a causal path of maximal proper time from any point
Q to any given initial value surface C and also to any other point P in its future.
Now what I want to do from here is to navigate to the non-trivial result about singularities
that's easiest to explain.
That means not following the historical order.
The historical order involved first the result of Penrose that will probably not come to
till tomorrow.
The easiest result to explain is Hawking's theorem about the Big Bang in traditional
cosmology without inflation.
It's easier to explain because it only involves time like geodesics, but the other applications
involve the slightly more subtle case of null geodesics.
So before we get to time like geodesics, we're going to work in ordinary Riemannian geometry
where we all have more intuition, or at least most of us.
Then we'll go over to Lauren's signature case.
So here's the question.
In Riemannian geometry, is the geodesic the shortest distance between two points?
The shortest path between two points?
Yes, for a short enough geodesic, but in general no for a geodesic that goes too far.
A geodesic extremizes the length but may not minimize it.
Here's a picture on a two-sphere.
If P and Q are close enough, then there's a unique shortest geodesic between them.
A geodesic that goes less than halfway around the sphere is the unique shortest path between
those two points.
But a geodesic that leaves Q and goes halfway around the sphere arrives at what's called
a focal point, Q' also called a caustic, on the other side of the sphere.
For instance, if Q is the north pole, then every geodesic from Q will meet at the south
pole.
The south pole is a focal point for all the geodesics from Q, and the south pole is halfway
around the sphere from the north pole.
This point should have been labeled as Q' not Q. It's meant to be the focal point that's
supposed to be halfway around the sphere.
I don't think the drawing shows that well.
What's meant to be shown is that if P is half, well, I had a problem which is that if you
can see Q, then you can't see the focal point, it's on the other side.
I wasn't a good enough artist to deal with that.
What I wanted to show in the picture is that if P is halfway around the sphere, there are
many geodesics, there are shortest geodesics, not just one, and that's because all the geodesics
from Q focus at the focal point on the other side.
So a geodesic continued past the focal point is no longer the shortest path because you
can do better by slipping the path around the sphere.
In the case of the sphere, you all know this, you start at the north pole, go around to
the south pole and keep going.
You've gotten there by a geodesic, but a shorter geodesic would have gone the other way around.
So in general, if you continue a geodesic past a focal point, it's no longer the shortest
path, and that's in general true.
Suppose that QP is a geodesic that has a focal point Q prime.
Having a focal point Q prime means that the QQ prime segments can be deformed to this
segment that's also a geodesic.
So the QQ prime part of the geodesic can be slightly displaced to a nearby geodesic that
connects the same two points.
Well, the displaced geodesic has the same length as the first one, since geodesics are stationary
points of the length function, so if you can displace a geodesic with keeping fixed the
endpoints, that doesn't change the length.
But the displaced geodesic has a kink, and its length could be reduced by rounding out
the kink.
So if there's a focal point Q prime between Q and P by replacing this segment with this
one and then smoothing out the kink, you'd get a shorter path from Q to P, showing that
a geodesic that's been continued past a focal point never minimizes the length between the
two points.
Any questions about that?
So in this case we learned that the original geodesic was not length minimizing.
Now it's not important that all geodesics from Q are focused to Q prime, which is what
happens in the case of a sphere.
All we used in the argument was that there was some direction in which the QQ prime segment
could be displaced, not changing its endpoints.
And we didn't even need to know that the QQ prime geodesic can be displaced exactly as
a geodesic.
All we really need to know is that it can be displaced while solving the geodesic equation
in first order.
In other words we needed to know that the equation for deforming a geodesic has a zero, for deforming
the geodesic, keeping its endpoints fixed.
We need to know that it has a zero mode, so that to first order we can solve the geodesic
equation by some displaced thing.
If that happens, since we solved the equations to first order, the displacement doesn't change
the length function in second order.
But rounding off the kink does reduce the length in second order.
So displacing the QQ prime segment and rounding off the kink will reduce the length if the
displacement caused no increase in second order.
Or in other words, if the displacement came from a zero mode of the linearized equations,
not necessarily an exact displacement that you can make to all orders.
Any questions?
Now often we want something similar, but not concerning a path from point Q to point P,
but from from initial set W to P.
So the simplest case is that W is a sub-manifold, and well you basically all know how to try
to find the shortest path from a sub-manifold to P. It should be a geodesic that's orthogonal
to W. It should be a geodesic that connects W to P, but where it leaves W it should be
orthogonal to W.
If it left W at an angle like this one, you could shorten it by moving the point where
it leaves closer in the right direction so that it became orthogonal.
Now just as before, if P is close enough to W, an orthogonal geodesic from W to P minimizes
length among paths from W to P. But if you continue a path to focal point, the geodesic
stops being length minimizing.
Same story.
Well we'll have to say what a focal point is.
A focal point is a point Q prime, such on the geodesic from W to P, such that this segment
can be deformed to the green segment, which is supposed to be another nearby geodesic
also orthogonal to W.
So that's a focal point.
This is a focal point if this segment can be deformed to a nearby segment that's also
an orthogonal geodesic from W to P.
So the reasoning showing that a geodesic with a focal point isn't length minimizing
is the same as before.
Displacing this segment to the green one doesn't change the length and rounding off
the kink reduces the length.
So this is your last chance to ask a question about Euclidean signature.
Yes?
You talked about deforming these curves, but we can't get the geodesic to do that.
It seems we can remove a point and still be in the...
We're not removing points.
No.
A geodesic is a continuous curve in space time, right?
So we don't remove a point from it.
A geodesic solves the differential equation.
If we remove a point between these two geodesics that you sketched, would it be pretty easy
to argue and still pull?
So does our deformation mean to the continuous deformation between geodesics?
Well the argument is based on making the deformation from the...
Okay, I'll take the question to reiterate what kind of deformation we want.
We have the blue curve, which is a geodesic that's also orthogonal.
That means it solves a certain differential equation.
We find a zero mode of the differential equation, meaning that to first order we can make a
displacement.
I've drawn the picture with the finite displacement because it's the only picture I can draw.
But in your mind's eye, in this argument, you make a very, very slight displacement
of the blue one to a nearby green one.
And the displacement, so now we have a path from W to P, which has the same length as
before, but it's not a geodesic.
It has the same length because we've deformed from here to here, still solving the geodesic
equation.
Since geodesics are critical points of length function, any family of geodesics between
given endpoints, or in this case one endpoint fixed and the orthogonality condition, such
family of geodesics have the same length.
So trading in this blue part for that green part doesn't change length.
Or it doesn't change length up to an including second order if we only solve the zero mode
equation in first order.
So we've gotten this non-geodesic path from W to P that has the same length as the geodesic.
But because it's a non-geodesic path, it can be improved by rounding out the kink.
And that will make a shorter path from W to P. So a geodesic orthogonal to W that's
continued past the focal points does not minimize the length anymore.
So I'll invite one more question on Euclidean signature.
Yes?
Well, I think you should see it for yourself.
So go from the north pole on a geodesic to the south pole and keep going.
Now replace the geodesic part from the north pole to the south pole by a geodesic that went
sideways from the north pole to the south pole.
Now you've got a path that went from the north pole to the south pole and then it went off
at a right angle or something.
Now I hope you can visualize spherical geometry well enough that you can see.
It's got a kink and if I round out the kink I make it shorter.
Well the point of the argument is that in the case of the sphere you know what the whole
sphere is.
But if we're making general arguments about romanian geometry or general relativity we
want to use only what we know for sure which is the behavior near the geodesic.
And the reason I emphasize slightly rounding it out is not that that gives the shortest
path but it's enough to prove that the original one wasn't the shortest and it only used the
geometry near the original path.
So in the arguments we'll present, well eventually Hawking and Penrose tried to prove statements
about the global geometry of spacetime but you start with much less knowledge.
So it's important to make an argument about improving your geodesic that only uses the
geometry near that geodesic.
I think we have to go on to Lorenz signature but since the considerations will be similar
if you had a question here you'll get another chance.
Well I see one more.
I'll take a quick question.
No we're not discussing spacetime without boundaries.
Our spacetimes are manifolds with Lorenz signature that satisfy the Einstein equations.
So now we go over to Lorenz signature but what we've said has no good analog for space
like geodesics.
A space like geodesic will never be a minimum or maximum of length function because also
oscillations in spatial directions tend to increase length and oscillations in time directions
tend to reduce it.
So two points at space like separation can be separated by an arbitrary space by a space
like path that's arbitrarily short.
In this picture a time like path is at a 45 degree angle.
This path goes almost at a 45 degree angle and then goes back.
It's a space like path but it's almost time like so it's very short.
And I think you all know I use the time direction but even without using the time direction
by wiggling in space directions you could make a very long path between two points.
So there's no upper or lower bound on the length of a space like path between two points.
But what happened in Euclidean signature has a beautiful analog for time like geodesics.
Here we discuss the elapsed proper time along a geodesic not the length and spatial fluctuations
tend to reduce it.
So a sufficiently short segment of any time like geodesic maximizes the elapsed proper
time.
But if you continue a time like geodesic past a focal point it no longer maximizes the
proper time.
So the blue is meant to be a time like geodesic from P to Q.
But a focal point means that there's some point Q prime such that there's another nearby
time like geodesic the red one which I hope you can see that reaches the same destination
from Q that the blue one reaches.
So that means if the QP geodesic contains a focal point it can be replaced with a non-geodesic
time like path that has the same proper time.
Since it's not a geodesic you could again round it out.
And while rounding it out reduced the length in Euclidean signature it increases the proper
time in Lorentz signature.
The fact that rounding out a time like path increases the proper time in Lorentz signature
is called the twin paradox.
So a twin that stays at rest has longer proper time than one that accelerated and then bent
back.
So I'm using the, see, a sufficiently small region where we do the rounding can be approximated
by Minkowski space.
So the statement that rounding increases the proper time is literally if you like the
twin paradox at work.
So a time like geodesic that continues path to focal points doesn't maximize the proper
time for the same reason that in Euclidean signature a geodesic that goes past the focal
point does not minimize the length.
So I'm going to give two examples of time like geodesics that don't maximize the proper
time between their endpoints.
And then I'll give you all a chance to complain about this claim.
So the first is in the motion of the earth around the sun.
So if you follow the earth's motion over many orbits you get a geodesic that does not maximize
the proper time.
That's because you could do better by launching a spaceship into space with almost the escape
velocity from the solar system.
So it goes way, way up, stays there for a long time, and you time its orbit properly
so it falls back to earth.
That means while the earth goes around many orbits the spaceship goes way out here and
then comes back.
Well, the proper time that elapsed on the spaceship was longer than the proper time
on earth because the spaceship is less affected both by Lorentz time dilation and the gravitational
redshift.
So the motion of the earth around the sun when continued for a long enough period does
not maximize the proper time.
Now my second example has the advantage that we can describe a focal point.
So the second example is anti-disservice spacetime.
So we start at the same point Q as before and as the picture shows the time like geodesics
that leave Q all reach a focal point at a point Q prime.
So this is an analytic continuation of the same factor of sphere.
You all know that a geodesic from the north pole will focus at the south pole.
Well anti-disservice space is an analytic continuation of the two-sphere to Lorentz
signature.
It has the same property that the geodesics from Q all focus at Q prime.
Now previously we considered a point that can't be reached from Q by a time like geodesic
but now we'll consider a point that can be reached from Q by a time like geodesic but
that point has gone through a focal point.
So the point R is on a time like geodesic from Q but that time like geodesic has gone
through a focal point so it does not maximize the proper time.
So what do you think is the maximum proper time for a causal path from Q to R?
Okay, so three cheers for whoever said infinity because as in the previous example you can
go out to the boundary, you don't literally go all the way to the boundary which is infinitely
far away but you go close to the boundary as close as you want, stay there for a while
with no upper bound on the proper time and then you go back to R.
So once we've passed a focal point the geodesic no longer maximizes the proper time and in
fact in this example there is no upper bound on the proper time.
In the case of the Earth going around the Sun there would have been an upper bound on
the proper time because that's happening in a globally hyperbolic space time.
ADS is not globally hyperbolic by the definition we used because there are causal paths taking
an initial value surface here.
There are causal paths that can't be continued until they reach the initial value surface
namely a causal path that would go this way to the boundary.
So ADS is not deterministic in the sense assumed in our lectures because it needs a boundary
condition at spatial infinity.
So you can modify the statements, you can modify the definition of global hyperbolicity
for the ADS case but it's not globally hyperbolic by the standard definition and that's part
of why there's ultimately no path from Q to R that maximizes the proper time.
So I guess this is your good chance to complain about Lorentz signature paths that maximize
the proper time.
I'm going to assume that was extremely clear in convincing explanation.
Now in general focal points are easy to come by because a very slight gravitational attraction
can cause geodesics to eventually converge.
To prove a singularity theorem we need a good way to prove that time like geodesics
develop focal points.
That's provided by the Rachidori equation.
It's actually provided by Rachidori's original equation not the more subtle variant due to
sacks that was introduced later and is nowadays what's most frequently called the Rachidori
equation.
So in D dimensions we'll consider a space time with an initial value surface s whose
coordinates I'll call x vector.
Xi runs from i up to little d which is capital D minus 1.
So here's the initial value surface and by looking at time like geodesics orthogonal
to the surface we construct a coordinate system in space time.
So at every point on the surface we find a time like geodesic that's orthogonal to
the surface.
There's a unique one and every point that's close enough to the surface is a unique orthogonal
time like geodesic which will be the path that maximizes the proper time from p to s.
So if p is close enough to s there will be a unique time like geodesic and it will maximize
the proper time.
And then we use this to give a coordinate system.
If p is only geodesic that meets s orthogonally at x and it's a proper time t to the future
of x along the geodesic then we assign to p the coordinates t and x.
And these are good coordinates near the surface s.
I hope it's obvious they're good coordinates.
Locally the situation is like Minkowski space.
The Minkowski space s could be time zero and we'd parameterize s by the spatial coordinates
x and the orthogonal geodesics just run in the time direction and the coordinate system
we'd get this way would be the A-standard Lorentz coordinate system.
Now in this coordinate system the metric looks like I've written minus dT squared plus a
spatial metric.
So I could have described this coordinate system by saying that g zero zero is minus
one and g zero i are zero.
That might have looked like a more familiar way to describe the coordinate system.
But the more geometric language of orthogonal geodesics has the advantage of helping us
understand how the coordinate system breaks down.
If I'd used this language I'd have just told you that locally we could introduce, we could
satisfy that gauge condition but it might break down if you go too far away from the
surface s.
And it's important for us to know how it breaks down and the language of orthogonal geodesics
will help us understand that.
So even if the space time doesn't become singular our coordinate system breaks down at focal
points because if several orthogonal geodesics from s meet at the point p then we would not
know which coordinates to use for p.
A focal point can't be labeled by which orthogonal geodesic it's on so our coordinate system
will be bad when a focal point occurs.
And in a weak gravitational field the way the coordinate system will break down in a
weak geodesic gravitational field that is nowhere near producing a singularity the coordinate
system can still break down at a focal point.
So since the spatial metric determines the distance between neighboring geodesics a sufficient
condition for a focal point is that the determinant of the spatial metric goes to zero.
Let me just make that clear.
So in this metric the geodesics we're talking about are at fixed x so no matter what t is
the metric gij measures the difference between parallel orthogonal geodesics from s.
But gij depends on t in a way that you find by solving Einstein's equations.
So the distances between geodesics are time dependent in general and a focal point means
that some distances go to zero which means that the determinant of the spatial metric
goes to zero.
So that'll be our sufficient condition for a focal point.
And the Rachidori equation will give a sufficient condition to ensure that the determinant of
g goes to zero within a known time.
The Rachidori equation is just the zero zero component of the Einstein equation in the
coordinate system of the orthogonal geodesics.
So we just have to calculate r zero zero and in this metric it's that well it can be notoriously
tricky to not tricky but a tedious to calculate the Riemann tensor but if you try it you'll
find that this is a case where you can do it quite easily and after a relatively short
computation you'll get this formula for r zero zero.
Now it's customary to define a or sometimes v which is the square root of the determinant
of g.
It measures the area or volume depending on the spacetime dimension occupied by a little
bundle of geodesics.
And then a dot over a is half of the trace of g inverse g dot.
It's called the expansion and it's often denoted theta but I will really only use that notation
in the null case.
It's convenient to also define the traceless part of g inverse g dot which is called the
shear although people usually one half of what I call m is the shear.
And then the formula for r zero zero expresses it in terms of a dot over a and the traceless
part m.
Now it's convenient to define a modified stress tensor which is the stress tensor minus one
half g mu nu times the trace of the stress tensor.
And then the Einstein-Rachidori equation which I remind you is just the zero zero Einstein
equation becomes this.
Now what's called the strong energy condition is the statement that t zero zero hat is non-negative
at every point and in every local Lorentz frame.
So it's satisfied for non-relativistic matter, for radiation and for negative cosmological
constant.
The outstanding example that doesn't satisfy it is a positive cosmological constant.
And so for example the present universe is believed to not satisfy the strong energy
condition because of the cosmological constant.
If we assume the strong energy condition all the terms on the right hand side of the Einstein-Rachidori
equation are negative.
So minus trace m squared is negative, the strong energy condition says that minus t zero zero
hat is negative.
So the strong energy condition says that this thing is negative.
And a little algebra shows us that d by dt of one over a dot over a is bigger than one
over the spatial dimension.
So now we can get a useful condition for the occurrence of focal points.
We go back to our initial value surface, we assume that a dot over a is negative at some
point on the surface.
Say it's equal to minus lambda where lambda is positive.
So the initial value of one over a dot over a is minus one over lambda.
And the inequality on d by dt of one over a dot over a implies that it goes from zero
to below within a known time, a known proper time which is d over lambda.
So equivalently, a dot over a goes to minus infinity within a known proper time along
the orthogonal geodesic.
In other words, the future going orthogonal geodesic leaving us meets as, well, it meets
a focal point where it goes to zero or a singularity where a dot goes to infinity within a proper
time d over lambda.
If you're more careful, you can show it meets a focal point before it meets a possible singularity.
I won't actually show that.
So this shows that focal points are easy to come by.
For example, you could simply be in Minkowski space.
If your initial value surface is time zero, the orthogonal geodesics go straight ahead
in time and never focus.
If you took a wiggly initial value surface, the orthogonal geodesics will meet somewhere
in the future or the past, depending on how it wiggles.
So a wiggly initial value surface in Minkowski space will lead to a lot of focal points.
So in any situation where the gravitational fields are weak, you're going to get focal
points, not singularities.
So now we're ready for Hawking's theorem about the Big Bang.
Hawking assumed the universe is globally hyperbolic with an inter—actually, before
I present the theorem, I'll stop for questions.
So Hawking assumed the universe is globally hyperbolic with initial surface S, and he assumed
the strong energy condition.
In other words, he assumed the stress tensor was made of ordinary matter and radiation.
The inflationary universe had not been invented yet, and it gives a way to avoid Hawking's
conclusion because a positive cosmological constant violates the strong energy condition.
Well, if the universe is perfectly homogeneous and isotropic, it's ascribed by a well-known
cosmological solution of these people and then emerged from the Big Bang at a calculable
time in the past.
But suppose more realistically that the initial surface is not perfectly homogeneous, but
that the local Hubble constant is everywhere positive.
In such a universe emerged from a Big Bang, one could imagine that as you go back in time,
the inhomogeneities become more severe, the standard solution is not a good approximation,
and part or most, or maybe even all of the universe, did not come from an initial singularity.
So that's the question that Hawking was addressing in his theorem.
He showed that, well, under the assumption of the strong energy condition, there must
have been a Big Bang.
So assuming the strong energy condition and that the universe is globally hyperbolic,
he showed that there was a Big Bang.
To be more exact, he showed that if the local Hubble constant has a positive minimum value
H min on an initial value surface S, then no point in spacetime is a proper time more
than H min to the past of S.
I should define precisely the local Hubble constant for a homogeneous isotropic expansion
like the usual one where I've avoided spatial curvature for simplicity, partly because it
was unimportant in the past.
You usually define the Hubble constant by r dot over r.
That's the same as a dot over a times d, where a is the determinant of the spatial metric,
which is the same as r to the d in this case.
So this is the definition we'll use for local Hubble constant.
So our assumption is that a dot over a is equal to a bigger than the spatial dimension
times H min, assuming time is measured toward the future.
But we're going to measure time toward the past, looking back toward the Big Bang.
So we'll write the hypothesis as being that a dot over a is less than minus d times H
min.
So the proof of Hawking's theorem consists of comparing two statements.
Since the universe is globally hyperbolic, every point p to the past of S, well every
point p in general, is connected to S by a causal path of maximal proper time.
As we know, such a path is a time-like geodesic without focal points, and it's orthogonal
to S, as shown.
So that was the first statement.
The second statement is that the initial value of a dot over a being less than minus
dH min implies that any past going time, like geodesic or orthogonal to S, develops a focal
point within a proper time at most 1 over H min.
So if you combine the statements, you see that there's no point in spacetime that's
to the past of S by a proper time more than 1 over H min.
So still assuming the strong energy condition, the minimum value of the local Hubble constant
gives an upper bound on how long anything could have existed in the past.
That's Hawking's theorem about the Big Bang, or at least the simplest version of it.
Any questions about Hawking's theorem, or the ingredients that went into it?
I can't quite hear, sorry.
A time like Geodesic, I still don't understand the question, let me come closer, or stand
up and speak louder.
Well, okay, the question is whether time like Geodesic is so important in those arguments.
I don't know what other arguments there might be.
So I'm not sure how to answer that question.
This argument works very elegantly for globally hyperbolic spacetimes where every point P is
disconnected to the initial value surface by an orthogonal time like Geodesic that maximizes
the length, the proper time.
I don't know what you could do with non-Geodesics.
Any other questions on anything up till this point?
How much of GR is used needed for this proof, like if we replace Einstein's equation by
some other equation?
The question is, what if we replace Einstein's equation with some other equation?
There aren't a lot of interesting equations to replace it with.
You can add higher curvature terms to Einstein's equations.
We'll mess this up a little bit, but in practice, you might want to remember those equations
are generally hard to take.
The quick answer is I don't know because I don't take, I see, if the higher terms you
add to Einstein's equations have infasomal coefficients, then they're not going to do
anything, naively, and I'm not sure it's physically sensible to study such equations when the
coefficients are taken to have a big equation, a big effect, but with that said, I don't
know the answer to your question.
There's a relatively sensible case above four dimensions.
In four dimensions, there really aren't any sensible equations to use instead.
Above four dimensions, there are some relatively sensible ones.
I don't know if anyone has looked at what happens to the Rachidori equation, so I can't
answer the question properly.
Any other questions?
Yes?
Sir, could you mention any why this is not just a coordinates in the diagram?
Let's compare the two statements.
The question is why isn't this not a coordinate singularity?
We compare two statements, the first statement.
Every point P is connected to S by a causal path of maximal proper time.
That was the first statement.
The second statement shows that that path of maximal causal time cannot have a length
more than one of Rachmin.
So we've proved that every point is a time no more than one of Rachmin to the past.
Any other questions?
Well, I hope you've all had so much fun that you're now anxious to start studying nullity
adesics.
So any nullity adesic has zero elapsed proper time.
But nevertheless, there's a good notion that has similar properties to maximal proper time
for time-like paths and minimum length in Euclidean signature.
We'll say that a causal path from Q to P is prompt if no causal path from Q to P could
have arrived sooner.
To be precise, a causal path L from Q to P is prompt if there's no causal path L prime
that would have arrived at a point that's near P but to its past.
So this path is prompt if you couldn't have gotten there faster.
If there's no causal path from Q to R, even if R is only slightly in the past of P, then
we say that the path from Q to P was prompt.
And prompt causal paths, as you'll see, are very special, but they're analogous to time-like
paths that maximize the proper time or Euclidean paths that minimize the distance.
So more or less by definition, it means P must be in the boundary of the causal future
of Q.
By the causal future J plus of Q, we mean all points that we can reach from Q by a future-going
causal path.
For instance, in Minkowski spacetime, J plus of Q consists of all points in or on the future
light-cone.
Well, if a point U is inside the future light-cone, then a point slightly to its past is also
inside the future light-cone.
A causal path from Q to someplace inside the future light-cone is not prompt.
But if I take a point U that's on the future light-cone, then slightly to its past, you're
outside the future light-cone.
And you can't get there by causal path from Q.
So a causal path from Q to a point on the future light-cone is going to be prompt.
And it's also going to be unique.
It'll be a null geodesic.
Sir, what does near mean for the definition of prompt?
While you take a, how do you decide that the point R, the question was what exactly do
I mean by near?
I was hoping it was intuitive, but anyway, let's go back.
To decide that R is in the past of P, we find a time-like path from R to P. It has a proper
time.
I could take an arbitrarily small bit of that.
So near means that no matter how close we are to P, but slightly to its past, we can't
get there from Q by a causal path.
So near, so prompt means that P is the absolute best we can do.
We can't get even slightly to the past of P by any causal path.
What does sooner mean?
Sooner means along this time-like path.
So what?
This was a time-like path.
R is strictly in the past of P. So this is a time-like path.
Is it from globally with space and power different from policy?
One is asking the tricky question of whether I'm imposing a global or local condition
on prompt.
So for some applications, it's important to impose a global condition, but for a long
time we'll only be imposing local conditions.
I want to explain the local conditions, but I also will remark on the importance of a global
condition at some point.
So as you can see, if you want to get from Q to U, you can barely get there along a null
geodesic.
You couldn't have gotten anywhere that's strictly in the past of U. So the null geodesic
from Q to U is prompt.
And more generally, in Minkowski's space time, every null geodesic is prompt.
And every point on the boundary of the light cone is connected to Q by a prompt null geodesic.
So even though prompt causal paths are very exceptional, they are useful analogs of proper
time maximizing time-like paths.
So we're going to explore their properties.
So first of all, a short enough segment of any null geodesic in a Lorentz signature
space time is prompt just as if one were in Minkowski space time.
But if continued, a null geodesic might become non-prompt because of gravitational lensing.
Here's an example.
While recently, astronomers saw multiple images of the same supernova.
The images did not arrive at the same time.
And obviously, the images that did not arrive first were not prompt.
Well, in the definition of prompt, I'm not sure it will help to give a detailed answer
to that question.
There are a lot of equivalent notions you could define.
I think the geodesic that arrived one year later did not get there as soon as possible.
The idea of prompt, you could work out formally by the definition I used before, but let's
not do that.
So definitely if you studied that example more carefully using Einstein's equations,
you can apply all the points that we'll be discussing.
So a causal path L whose tangent vector is somewhere time-like rather than null can't
be prompt because by modifying L to be everywhere null, you'd find a nearby causal path that
would arrive in the past of P. The reason I emphasize nearby is the same as in the answer
to a previous question.
When we are studying a geodesic and we want to decide if it's prompt, there are some local
conditions that we can study just using the geometry near P. And those are near that path.
Those are easier to discuss because we at least know about the geometry near that path.
There may also be global conditions.
I hope you can see the, can you see this if I, is it possible to see that, someone in
the back?
So if the, okay, let me curve slightly so this is a time-like path.
If it's somewhere time-like, then somebody traveling on this path could deviate and make,
and go off in a null direction, slightly to the past.
And once you're slightly to the past, you can keep going everywhere slightly to the
past on a causal path.
So when I say slightly to the past of given causal path, I mean a causal path that almost
follows the first one, but is everywhere slightly to its past.
Once you get to the past of another causal path, you can keep going parallel to it and
remain always slightly in the past.
And if a causal path ever deviates even slightly from being light-like, that means it's not
going as fast as it could have gone.
You could deviate in the same direction, but in a light-like direction, get slightly in
the past of the first one, and once in the past, always in the past.
So a prompt causal path will have to be everywhere null, and it actually has to be a null geodesic
because if it bends everywhere, it won't get to its destination as quickly as possible.
So this is meant to be a picture in space.
So imagine it's actually a Minkowski space.
Imagine that these are spatial trajectories, but each particle was traveling at the speed
of light.
So elapsed time, which isn't drawn as the same as the elapsed arc length.
Since this arc length is bigger, this path arrives later in time than this one.
So the one that wasn't a geodesic can't be prompt.
I explained that in Minkowski space, but it's automatically true in any spacetime because
a small part of any spacetime can be approximated by Minkowski space.
And whatever you can do in Minkowski space to get ahead of a non-geodesic causal path,
you can do that locally in any spacetime.
And once you're slightly ahead, you just stay ahead.
You don't know where the causal path is going, but wherever it's going, you follow it, but
slightly to its past.
So in Minkowski space, when I tell you that a prompt causal path has to be a non-geodesic,
I'm just saying that to get somewhere as quickly as possible, you should travel in a straight
line at the speed of light.
But that's actually true in any spacetime in the form that the most prompt causal path
is always going to be a non-geodesic.
Not every non-geodesic is prompt, but the prompt most causal path is always a non-geodesic.
And finally, and you perhaps knew that this was coming, to be prompt, a non-geodesic must
contain no focal points.
So the definition of a focal point is similar to before.
Q prime is a focal point if the Q-Q prime segment of the non-geodesic can be slightly
displaced to a nearby non-geodesic from Q to Q prime.
So QP is a non-geodesic, but the Q-Q prime segment can be displaced to another non-geodesic
nearby drawn in red.
And now we have a path, a causal path, namely the red one followed by the green one.
That's null, but it's not a geodesic.
And since it's not a geodesic, by rounding out the kink, you could move it into its past.
So you'd modify the orbit slightly near this point and get to the past of this green
geodesic and stay everywhere to its past.
Wherever it goes into space-time, you follow it slightly in its past.
So the fact that bending can let you get into the past, well, there's a Lorentz frame in
which bending would be bouncing back from a mirror.
So up to a Lorentz transformation, the statement is that a light ray that bounces off a mirror
wasn't prompt because while the light ray went this way and that way, you could have
just stayed at rest and then gone off at the speed of light earlier.
So if you can deform, if there's a focal point in the QP geodesic by deforming it and then
rounding off the corner, you get a nearby causal path that's time-like near the corner.
And since it's time-like near the corner, a further modification would put you strictly
in the past of the green segment between Q prime and P.
So any questions about that?
Yes?
Well, the question is if prompt has minimized the affine length.
It's a good question, but you have to remember that there's no natural normalization of the
affine parameter.
So there isn't a well-defined function you'd want to minimize.
In Minkowski space, if you have two points null separated, there's no natural measure
of the distance between them.
Because up to a Lorentz point-gray transformation, any two null-separated points can be mapped
to any other two.
So there can't be a natural measure of distance along the geodesics.
So we don't minimize any, we don't say we're minimizing or maximizing anything.
Instead we say there's no focal point.
The reason I went started in Riemannian signature and then discussed time-like paths was so
you'd be familiar with focal points as a good criterion.
And when we get to null paths, which are the most important one, they don't minimize
or maximize anything, but the existence of a focal point is a good substitute for saying
that a path is not optimal, not prompt.
Another question, if there is one.
Is the absence of focal points sufficient for a null-separated?
That's actually, the question is, I've stated this as a necessary condition for promptness.
It's not a sufficient condition.
Juan also asked the same question basically a few minutes ago.
There are easy counter-examples and I'll eventually give a counter-example.
So we're only discussing necessary conditions for promptness, not, oh well I might in a moment
totally logically say a sufficient condition, but anyway, so far only necessary conditions.
Likewise we say a path from a set W to a point P is prompt if it arrives as soon as possible
in the same sense, meaning you couldn't have arrived slightly in the past of P.
So L is prompt if there's no path that would have arrived slightly before P.
So the same arguments show that a causal path to be prompt has to be a null geodesic and
very, very importantly if W is a sub-manifold, then in addition L has to be orthogonal to
W.
The argument for that last statement is very important, but the argument for it is the
same as it was in the Euclidean case when you, if you saw it in high school.
If L is not orthogonal to W, first of all I should tell you what orthogonality means
just to make sure that isn't confusing.
Orthogonality means that any tangent vector to W at the intersection point is orthogonal
in Lorentz metric to the tangent vector to L.
Same definition that orthogonality usually has, but except we're in Lorentz signature.
If L is not orthogonal to W, if it leaves, if L leaves W at an angle, this is W and this
is L.
If L leaves W at an angle, then by moving the starting point closer to orthogonality,
in Euclidean signature you would reduce the length, but in Lorentz signature you could
move L into the past.
To be prompt, L has to be orthogonal to W.
Orthogonality between a null vector and a space like set is only possible if W has real
co-dimension at least two, and that case will be very important.
So a prompt path, to be prompt, a path from L to W must again have no focal point, where
the definition of a focal point is similar to what it was before.
The blue geodesic has a focal point at Q. If this segment can be deformed to a nearby
null geodesic that's also orthogonal to W.
The proof is the same as before.
If you can make such a deformation, then by rounding out the kink and using the twin paradox
or the mirror reflection principle or whatever, you could find a causal path that would have
arrived in the past of P.
Now in a general globally hyperbolic space time, such as maybe the whole universe, the
real universe, a null geodesic can develop a focal point because of gravitational lensing,
so not every null geodesic is prompt.
If you want to find an example, first look in your telescope and see a gravitational
lens.
Whenever there's a gravitational lens in two images, they arrive at different directions
and different times, but if you could move around in three dimensions in your spaceship,
you could find a point where those two geodesics would meet, and that would be the focal point.
In other words, the fact that the rays were bent by a gravitational lens will tell you
that there's going to be a focal point somewhere.
That was too much of a digression.
A null geodesic might develop a focal point, but there's an important fact that's true
just as in Minkowski space.
Every point in the boundary of the future of a set Q, the boundary of the causal future
of Q, is connected to Q by a prompt null geodesic.
That's actually true for any set W, any space like set W, so here's the proof.
So W is any set, J plus of W is its causal future.
J plus of W consists of all points you can reach from W by a causal path.
So the P's are some examples of points in J plus of W, and the red curves are causal
paths from W. U is a point on the boundary of the causal future of W.
So we've got this sequence of causal paths to the P's, and the P's are approaching U.
So in a globally hyperbolic space time, an aspect of the compactness of spaces of causal
paths is that if you take a sequence of causal paths to the P's, and the P's are approaching
U, there will be a convergent subsequence, which is a causal path gamma from W to U.
In other words, if we pick these paths to the P's at random, they may not converge,
but they'll always have a subsequence that converges to a causal path from W to U.
The argument is very similar to the argument I gave at the beginning when we were discussing
some aspects of the compactness of spaces of causal paths.
This wouldn't be true in a non-globally hyperbolic space time, because, for example, a point
on this limiting path from U to W might be absent.
It always takes global hyperbolicity to be able to say anything nice about compactness
of spaces of causal paths.
If U is really in the boundary of the future of W, the path gamma from W to U is prompt,
because if it wasn't prompt, that meaning another one would reach the past of U, then
a whole neighborhood of U would be in the future of W, and U wouldn't be in the boundary
of the future.
I'm a little worried this might have seemed abstract, so I just want to give you an example.
In Minkowski space, W could just be a point Q, and then the causal future is the future
icon in its interior, and the statement was that a point on the boundary of the causal
future can be reached from Q by a prompt null geodesic, which was actually the first example
I gave when we started discussing null geodesics.
But that's true in this greater generality.
Q could be replaced by any compact set in a globally hyperbolic space time, compact space
like set, in a globally hyperbolic space time, and a point on its boundary of its future
can always be reached by a prompt null geodesic.
Now there's another handy fact we need to know, which is that in general, set C is called
a chronal if no pairs of points in C can be connected by a time-like path.
Here it's important the path is time-like rather than null.
So the boundary of the future of a set W is always a chronal.
Well, you see, let U be in the boundary, and suppose V is in the future of U, so this is
a time-like path.
We could reach V from W by a non-null path, namely the path to U followed by this time-like
path.
So since V can be reached by a path that isn't everywhere null, it's not in the boundary
of the future of W, it's in the interior of the future.
So, the boundary of the future is always a chronal.
Because as I said, if U is in the boundary and V is in the future of U, then V is in
the interior of the future of W, not its boundary.
So there's one more property of the future of a closed set, and then I think that's the
last thing I'll try to explain today.
The boundary of the future of a closed set is always a manifold without boundary, though
it's often not smooth.
In a globally hyperbolic space-time, it's a closed sub-manifold.
So here's an example, which is the future-like kind of a point.
So here I have to clarify one detail.
To consider Q itself to be in its own future and also in the boundary of its future, another
causal future.
In other words, we allow the case of a prompt null geodesic that consists of only one point
Q. Otherwise, we'd have to state too many exceptions.
So with the understanding that Q is in J-pos of Q, then the boundary of J-pos of Q is the
future-like cone, including its vertex.
And as you can see, that's a manifold, although it's not a smoothly embedded sub-manifold
of space-time.
It has a singularity at Q.
So this is the general story for the boundary of the future of any set.
Yes?
What is a closed sub-manifold?
You didn't mean compact?
Compact.
Compact.
Well, a sub-manifold might have been unclosed, because you could remove a point from it.
So closed sub-manifold is different from compact sub-manifold.
I think I meant-
It's a closed subset.
Which means it's a couple minutes over.
Yes.
Well, I hope I haven't made a slip and that closed sub-manifold is enough for the statements.
Let's see the arguments, and that might jog our minds.
But they typically aren't compact for you.
The one you're doing is not compact, so it's better not be compact.
Oh, sorry.
W, sorry, sorry, sorry.
I wanted W to be a closed sub-manifold.
No, but you said it is a closed sub-manifold.
Oh, oh.
Yeah, it's not compact, of course, but it's a closed sub-manifold.
In the sense of being a closed subset.
So, for the proof, pick an arbitrary point P in the boundary of the future.
We want to show that the thing is a manifold near P.
So you pick a small bowl near P in which M can be approximated by Minkowski spacetime,
and then you pick coordinates T and X centered at P.
So here's a drawing in two dimensions.
And in two dimensions, this drawing would really already be the proof.
Remember that P is connected to W by a null geodesic.
But in two dimensions, there only are two null geodesics through P.
So this is one of them, I'll tell you.
And if that null geodesic goes to P, then everything to its future is in the interior of J-pos of W.
And the geodesic itself is the boundary of J-pos of W near P.
So the picture is already the proof in two dimensions.
But assume we're above two dimensions.
Then this picture, of course, is oversimplified because it is drawn as a two-dimensional picture.
So we pick a coordinate system near P in which M can be approximated by Minkowski spacetime,
and we pick coordinates T and X such that P is at the origin.
And now we look at the paths of constant X, straight lines in the T direction.
So near P, the picture looks something like this.
And a path of constant X, which I call gammas of C, it's defined by X equals C.
It's parametrized by the time.
Well, if T is positive enough keeping C fixed, it's in the future of P,
so it's in the interior of J-pos of W.
And if T is negative enough compared to C, it's in the path of P, so it's not in J-pos of W.
So as you go forward in T, you go from not being in J-pos of W to being in J-pos of W.
And that can only happen once.
Because once you're in J-pos of W, any point in your future is certainly in J-pos of W.
So there's a unique T for each C at which you enter J-pos of W,
and that point is in the boundary of J-pos of W.
So T is determined as a function of C by the condition of being in J-pos of W.
So we can take C as local coordinates for the boundary of J-pos of W,
and therefore the boundary of J-pos of W is a manifold.
Which we'll use tomorrow when we get to Penrose's Singularity Theorem and a lot of fun things about black holes.
But I'll conclude with an exercise.
In this exercise, you're supposed to consider different obvious sets, W,
like a circle or a two-sphere embedded in Minkowski's space in the obvious way,
and you're supposed to figure out what is the boundary of the future of W,
and you'll see, hopefully, that it's always topologically a manifold,
though it's usually not smoothly embedded in spacetime.
And I think we'll stop here.
And the first topic next time will be the Null-Rachidori equation,
which you could call the Rachidori-Sachs equation.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
Any questions?
So you define the focal points as kind of these first order variations of geodesics,
but I could imagine a case where I have two non-distincts.
The question of which we've had two previous versions of this question
is it has to do with the fact that non-existence of a focal point
is a necessary condition for promptness but not sufficient.
There are obvious examples.
An example in the rent signature is a cylinder
where a null geodesic could wrap around the sphere a lot of times.
And if it wraps around the circle a lot of times
and it eventually stops being prompt,
because, for one thing, you could get there by time-like path to the same destination.
There are lots of other examples,
but as three of you have asked why now,
the absence of a focal point is a sufficient condition for promptness,
sorry, a necessary condition for promptness, not sufficient.
Any other questions?
Yes?
You said that sufficiently short null geodesics are prompt.
When you say short, is it the focal point in space?
Well, you take a null geodesic.
It has an affine parameter which has no natural normalization,
but pick one, and then in that affine parameter,
a sufficiently small bit is prompt.
But more informally, take a geodesic and a point Q on it.
There's a segment starting at Q,
such that if you stop the geodesic anywhere in that segment, it'll be prompt.
Sufficiently short really makes sense topologically.
It doesn't matter how you measure it.
You could pick any parameter at all along the path,
and for a sufficiently small length, it will be prompt.
I didn't give a formal proof, which we kind of will give tomorrow if we have time,
because we'll need it eventually in discussing some of the later results.
I don't know if we'll quite get time for it,
but I thought it was an obvious result,
so I didn't think we needed a formal proof today.
Any other questions?
Okay, then we'll take a break.
