Thank you for the invitation to speak and thanks for coming.
So I work in algebraic number theory and I work in the part of algebraic number theory
that's called the Langlands program and that is about building reciprocity laws and connecting
number theory to other parts of mathematics such as harmonic analysis and representation theory.
And so I want to start out by just giving a very basic example of a reciprocity law,
you know, the kind of connection that we're looking for.
And so the first example of such a reciprocity law is quadratic reciprocity.
And so you could ask the following question.
First of all, just when you first start thinking about properties of whole numbers,
a very basic question that can come up is what numbers can be perfect squares?
You know, what can the last digit of a perfect square be?
And if you think about it, okay, you can have 1, 4, 6, 9, 5, 0,
but you can never have 2, 3, 7 or 8.
And so, you know, it seems like there's a pattern there.
You can answer, you can ask a more general question.
You can ask, okay, you know, what can the last digit of a perfect square be?
Not in base 10, but in base p, where p is some large prime number.
So for example, if say q was some other prime number,
you could ask about the equation x squared minus q and whether that has solutions,
but not sort of on the nose, not trying to solve this equation on the nose,
but rather, you know, can you find a whole number x such that x squared minus q
is some multiple of a prime number p.
So p and q are primes.
So you can ask this kind of question or, you know, alternatively,
how does the number of solutions to this equation,
modulo p, vary as p varies?
And it turns out that quadratic reciprocity tells you precisely that
the number of solutions can be 0 or 2,
and the fact that it's 0 or 2 depends only on sort of what
the residue of p is when you divide it by q.
Well, really by 4q.
So on p, modulo 4q.
So this is a very simple kind of reciprocity law that encodes the number of solutions
to a quadratic equation just in one variable.
And the number of solutions, modulo p, as p varies, is given by p modulo 4q.
And this kind of reciprocity law was generalized in the first half of the 20th century,
and that was known as class field theory.
That was a very exciting achievement.
So this is maybe the first example that I want to give.
But then in the 1950s, Eichler wrote down a different kind of reciprocity law.
So this was maybe the next really spectacular development, reciprocity law
involving an equation, so a cubic equation, in two variables.
Let's say this is a reciprocity law for the following.
So the cubic equation would be y squared plus y equals x cubed minus x squared.
And what you're looking at is the number of solutions in the number of solutions.
But again, modulo p.
And let's say that this has NP solutions.
So the question is, how does NP vary?
And it turns out that, well, you can compute, say, you can look at solutions mod 5,
and you get four solutions.
You can look at mod 7 and so on.
And as you compute small values, what you see is that the number of solutions
is roughly as large as the prime number of p.
So here we just had zero or two solutions.
Here you can for large primes.
You can have lots and lots of solutions.
But it turns out that the error term, so this quantity p minus NP,
can be described by a reciprocity law.
And I'll give you a very basic version of this,
and then I'll explain what's underneath it.
So the idea is that this error can
be recovered as the coefficients of the following power series expansion.
So we're going to take an infinite product, q times the product from 1
to infinity, 1 minus q to the n squared, 1 minus q to the 11n squared.
And you expand this out.
This is a power series in q, starts with q to the 1, so an q to the n.
So you have this kind of power series expansion.
And it turns out that when p is a prime number,
you have the reciprocity law.
Ap is equal to p minus NP.
And so as you expand this power series,
you can compute the coefficients.
And for instance, you can check that the fifth coefficient is 1,
which matches 5 minus 1.
So this is the kind of next level of reciprocity law.
It's giving you something about the number of solutions of a cubic
equation in two variables.
But the really interesting thing is that there's
sort of a lot of math that's hidden underneath this.
So I want to try and explain sort of what the two objects mean.
So what does the cubic equation mean?
What does this power series mean?
And so that is a more sophisticated version of the reciprocity law.
And that is, let's say, I could say the statement
that elliptic curves are modular.
So I need to talk about the two objects that show up.
So first of all, this equation, this cubic equation
with integer coefficients, this represents an elliptic curve
E over Q. So an elliptic curve is a projective smooth curve
of genus 1 together with a distinguished point,
a point at infinity.
And if you forget about the point at infinity,
then you can describe this elliptic curve
by means of a cubic equation, for example, this one.
And so this cubic equation is really
this kind of elliptic curve.
And the statement that elliptic curves are modular
is the statement that you can extract from the elliptic curve
a number theoretic object, a Galois representation.
And you can show that this is the same as the number
theoretic object or the Galois representation
that you can extract from some other side,
the side of a modular form.
So a Galois representation is, first of all,
a representation of the absolute Galois group of Q.
So what you want to look at is, OK,
you have the rational numbers.
If you adjoin to the rational number solutions
to polynomial equations, then what you get
are algebraic numbers.
And algebraic numbers have lots of symmetries.
And if you look at sort of all the symmetries
of all algebraic numbers, then you
get this kind of Galois group.
And concretely, what this is, this
is an inverse limit of the Galois groups
of all the finite extensions of Q.
And so this is a very big profinite group.
It has a complicated structure.
Topologically, it's something like a cantor set.
And it turns out that we can use two dimensional representations
of this kind of Galois group to remember
some information coming from elliptic curves
and also coming from this kind of power series
that I'll talk about in a minute.
So let me just say, so what we are looking for
is Galois representations that are two dimensional.
So I'll say here, this is what we're interested in.
And they are valued.
So sort of everything is constructed really
in terms of congruences mod p or mod p to the n.
Turns out these Galois representations
will be valued in Qp, where Qp is the completion
of the field of rational numbers, but not with respect
to the usual absolute value.
Then you would get the field of real numbers.
But rather, this is the completion
with respect to the piatic absolute value.
That's precisely when you say that two rational numbers
are close if they are congruent modulo high power of p.
So if their difference is a multiple of a large power of p.
And so it turns out that does satisfy the triangle inequality.
It does give you an absolute value.
And if you take the completion with respect to that,
what you get is this field Qp.
So the elliptic curve, so forgetting the point at infinity,
is just given by this cubic equation.
Maybe this is the algebraic way of thinking
about the elliptic curve.
There's a geometric way of thinking about it as well.
Let's say if I take the underlying Riemann surface,
I said it's genus 1.
The underlying Riemann surface is a torus.
C, modulo of some lattice, looks something like this.
So we have some point at infinity.
And then, yeah, so it's a torus.
And something that you can see from the geometric picture,
and that still exists from this more algebraic description,
but it's harder to see, is that this is not just a curve,
but it also has a group structure.
And the group structure on the underlying Riemann surface
is just induced from addition on complex numbers.
So you can define what it means to add points on this torus,
and it's just sort of you add complex numbers,
but modulo this lattice lambda.
And so in order to extract some number
of theoretic information from the elliptic curve,
what you need to do is use the fact
that it's a curve defined over q,
but also use the fact that it has a group structure.
And the way you do it is you look
at the p to the n torsion points on the elliptic curve
for varying n.
So what do these mean?
So points on the elliptic curve,
such that if you multiply them by p to the n,
you get to the origin.
So the point at infinity is identified
to the origin in this picture.
And the p to the n torsion points, just geometrically,
they look like z mod p to the n z squared.
So that's sort of abstractly what they're isomorphic to,
but they have extra structure.
And the extra structure comes from the fact
that you have this elliptic curve defined over q.
And so you can define the group structure over q as well.
So you could have, say, points x1, y1, x2, y2,
and adding them up would be given by some polynomials
in x1, y1, x2, and y2.
And so that means that when you try to find p
to the n torsion points, what you're doing
is just solving a bunch of polynomial equations.
And that means that the coordinates
of the p to the n torsion points are algebraic.
And because of this, they come with these extra symmetries.
They come with an action of this absolute Galois group.
And so I'll call this g sub q.
This is the absolute Galois group of q.
And so this module has this extra structure,
this action of the Galois group.
And so the Galois representation attached
to an elliptic curve, I'll call that rho e.
So this is exactly the Galois action
on the p to the n torsion points as n varies.
And it turns out that as n varies and goes to infinity,
these actions are compatible.
And what you get is an action on the inverse limit.
So this is the same as g l 2 of the inverse limit with respect
to n of z mod p to the n z.
And so it turns out, so you can define this inverse limit
to be z p.
And then that z p is identified exactly
with the ring of integers inside the field q p
of piatic numbers.
So this is g l 2 of z p.
g l 2 of z p, where these are now piatic integers.
And so to get q p, all you need to do is invert p.
So you use the fact that you have a group structure defined
over q to construct a Galois representation
from the elliptic curve e.
And so this seems pretty specific to this context
where we're looking at an elliptic curve.
And you have all this dues as a crutch.
But it turns out, so I want to make this remark,
there is a general machinery that will give you lots and lots
of Galois representations.
And for that, maybe it's useful to think
about what z mod p to the n z squared
represents in terms of the elliptic curve.
It's exactly the first singular homology
of the elliptic curve with coefficients in z mod p
to the n z.
So what we've done here is we've put a Galois action
on this first homology.
So if you work duly, you could work with homology.
And then basically you're looking for a way
of putting a Galois action on the homology
of some algebraic variety defined over q.
And that's exactly what etal homology does for you
as long as you change your coefficients appropriately.
So I'll just say that etal homology, which
was developed by Grozendick, gives GQ action on HI,
so the singular or Betty homology of an algebraic
variety, as long as you extend your coefficients to q p,
and x is some algebraic variety defined
over the field of rational numbers.
So it's given by the solution to some finite number
of polynomial equations, for example.
So whenever you have something like this
and you take Betty homology and you extend your coefficients
to q p, you're going to have a way
of getting Galois representations.
And so I guess on this side of the reciprocity law,
this cubic equation represents an elliptic curve,
and then you use this concrete version of etal homology
to get the Galois representation.
So now I want to talk about the other side
and what this infinite product represents
and talk about how to construct a Galois representation
from this infinite product.
And it's going to be more vague, so I'm not
going to give such a concrete way of doing it.
But so the first thing that I want to say is I said there
row F. So what we have is F is a modular form.
So this is really an object that lives
in the world of harmonic analysis.
It's a holomorphic function on the upper half complex plane.
So a set of complex numbers that have strictly positive
imaginary part and also satisfying many symmetries.
And maybe I'll be more precise about what these symmetries are.
Later on, I'll just say that one of these symmetries
is invariance under sending z to z plus 1,
which means that you can write such a holomorphic function in
terms of its Fourier expansion.
And so if you take q to be the parameter e to the 2 pi i z,
then such a modular form is given by a Fourier expansion,
which is exactly this type of power series in q.
And so this particular infinite product
is really the Fourier expansion of a modular form,
of a very specific modular form.
So a function on the upper half plane
satisfying a specific set of symmetries.
All right.
And so to tell you a little bit more about how
to understand modular forms, first
I need to talk about the space that the modular forms live on.
So the upper half plane can be endowed
with a hyperbolic metric.
And its group of isometries under this hyperbolic metric
is SL2R.
So H has an action of the group SL2R.
These are known.
So the action of a matrix in SL2R on the upper half plane
is known as a Mobius transformation.
So if you've heard of those, maybe
I'll say another way of thinking about this action
is you can embed, if you'd like,
the upper half complex plane into p1 over c.
The flag variety that parametrizes
lines inside a two-dimensional complex vector space.
And this has an action, natural action of gl2c.
And the action of SL2R on the upper half plane
is exactly the restriction of the action of gl2c on p1 of c.
All right.
So you have something like this.
And because of this, you can view H, is there a question?
Sorry.
You can view H really as a quotient of the real points
of the group SL2 by the stabilizer of any one point
on the upper half plane at the point i.
So for example, I could take the point i here.
The stabilizer would be SL2R.
So there's some hint at what the underlying structure
of the upper half plane is.
You can think of it as this kind of quotient.
And I should say that if you look at it on this side,
then a priori what you see is just
that you have the structure of a real manifold.
So you've started with some reductive group over q.
For example, SL2, you can take the real points of that.
And you can take the quotient of that
by a maximal compact subgroup.
And so a priori, so what you get is called
a symmetric domain for that group.
And a priori, it just has the structure of a real manifold.
On the other hand, if you look on this other side,
the upper half plane has a natural complex structure.
So to study modular forms, which are these,
you can think of them as giving rise
to these q expansions, these power series in q,
it turns out you have to think a little bit about the upper half
plane.
And in the special case of modular forms,
there's more structure hiding underneath.
There is a connection to this connected reductive group SL2.
And then there is a natural complex structure
that you can put on the upper half plane.
That's not necessarily obvious from that description.
So maybe I'll talk about the symmetries that f needs
to satisfy.
So the symmetries are under the group, well, SL2z
lives inside SL2r.
So it acts on the upper half plane.
And inside here, you can define congruent subgroups.
So the particular one that I'm going to take
is going to be gamma 011.
This is a subgroup defined by a congruence relation.
It's a subgroup of matrices that are in SL2z, which
satisfy the property that they are congruent
to upper triangular matrices, modulo 11.
So it turns out that the particular modular form
that I wrote down has symmetries specifically
under this subgroup.
And so in general, you could have lots of other congruent
subgroups inside SL2z.
But for this particular one, we're
going to work with gamma 011.
Maybe I'll call this gamma.
And so it turns out that the symmetries of f
are designed precisely to make f descend
to a holomorphic differential on the quotient of h
by this gamma.
So f descends to a holomorphic differential
on the quotient h modulo gamma.
And maybe I want to draw a picture.
So I won't draw a picture of h mod gamma,
but just maybe of h mod SL2z.
So in order to do that, what you want to do
is draw a fundamental domain for the action of SL2z
on the upper half plane.
And what this fundamental domain looks like
is something like this, where here you
have a sixth root of unity.
Here you have a cube root of unity.
These are vertical lines.
This is i.
And so this is a fundamental domain.
And in order to think about the quotient h mod SL2z,
you need to do is identify this side with this side
and this side with this one.
And then your quotient looks something like this.
So it's basically not compact.
It's like the punctured Riemann sphere,
except it's not really a manifold.
It has a couple of orbital points around i and rho.
But otherwise, it looks something like this.
And h modulo gamma 011 possibly look like a cover,
maybe with higher genus.
So maybe something like this.
So the smaller your gamma, the more congruent relations
you impose, the bigger your space you get some covering.
So the modular form f, really its symmetries,
allow you to think of it as a holomorphic differential
on this space.
And because h has a complex structure,
the quotient h mod gamma also turns out
you can endow that with a complex structure as well.
So this is a Riemann surface.
And now the more sort of striking thing
is that it's not just that, but it turns out
to be the underlying Riemann surface to an algebraic curve
that's actually defined over q.
So let me write that.
So where y gamma is defined over q,
so maybe not necessarily an elliptic curve.
So not genus 1 depends on really what gamma is,
but some curve is not projective over q.
And I should tell you why this happens.
So this has to do with the fact that we
have a complex structure here.
But really, the reason why the curve is actually
defined over q is that you can think
of the upper half plane.
First of all, you can think of it as a moduli of complex
structures that you can put on a two-dimensional real vector
space.
And if you think a bit more about that,
that would be the same as a moduli of hodge structures
that you can put on a two-dimensional real vector
space.
And then it turns out that you can interpret the quotients
of h by gamma as moduli of elliptic curves
over c, possibly equipped with extra structures.
And so you can define the moduli problem elliptic curves
with extra structures over q, and that's
how you can show that it actually comes from a curve
defined over q.
And so the idea is to think of this h
as a parameterizing hodge structures of elliptic curves.
And then you want to think of this embedding
that I drew here, the map from h to p1 of c,
as the map that will take the hodge decomposition
to the hodge filtration.
So the hodge filtration on this two-dimensional,
say, the beddy duram homology, say, of an elliptic curve,
would just consist of a one-dimensional subspace
inside a two-dimensional one.
And that's exactly what this p1 of c parameterizes,
lines inside a two-dimensional complex vector space.
So I guess the point is to think of this map
as taking the hodge decomposition or hodge structure
to the hodge duram filtration.
All right, so that's the story.
And so f, you think of it as giving rise
to a differential omega f.
And because of the hodge decomposition for y gamma,
or maybe some refinement because y gamma is not compact,
you can think of it as contributing really
to the beddy homology of this curve defined over q.
And then you have to see that the beddy homology has,
say, you can take it with rational coefficients.
And then if you can, then you take your scalars
and you extend them a different way.
So you can extend them to qp.
And then you can work with the etal homology of the curve.
So roughly because these quotients, h mod gamma,
really have this structure, you have access to etal homology.
And because of that, you can construct
the Galois representation attached to a modular form f.
So you can construct rho f this way.
And so it's more vague, and it uses this etal homology
machinery.
And there's a specific sense in which
you can trace the modular form f through all these spaces.
And the way you do it is basically
there are lots and lots of, so these spaces have lots
and lots of symmetries.
There are some operators that are called Hec operators that
act on everything in sight, that act as correspondences.
And what you're tracing through is really systems of eigenvalues
of all these operators.
So you're keeping track of spectral data,
and you're cutting out some generalized eigenspace.
Corresponding to a certain system of eigenvalues,
and that's where you see this Galois representation attached
to, the modular form f.
And so maybe I want to talk a little bit.
So the reciprocity law, the sophisticated version
of the reciprocity law, says that you
have an isomorphism between the Galois representation coming
from this cubic equation and the Galois representation coming
from the modular form with that specific power series
expansion.
So the reciprocity law was this one.
And so now you have some hint about what these objects are,
how they're constructed.
And so maybe I want to talk a little bit about consequences.
And there are sort of two major consequences
in both directions.
And so the first one is, let's say,
the fact that if you have an elliptic curve,
then you can relate that to a modular form.
So in that direction, the famous consequence
is Fermat's last theorem that was approved in 95
by Andrew Wells.
And that relies on the so-called Taylor-Wells method.
The Taylor-Wells method is a method
of sort of setting up mod p congruences
and studying congruences both on the side of Galois
representations and also on the side of modular forms, mod p
or mod p to the n.
And the idea is to use some non-trivial solution
to Fermat's equation to cook up an elliptic curve that cannot
possibly come from a modular form.
So this is a consequence of the fact
that if you have E, you can go to F.
And so you're relating two worlds, this kind of number
theoretic world and the world of harmonic analysis.
Neither one of them is really easier to deal with.
But in this direction, you can transfer one question
and make it approachable.
And in the other direction, a question
about the modular form F that is hard to answer
within the world of the modular form.
But that becomes approachable once you
go to the world of elliptic curves or algebraic geometry
is the Ramanujan conjecture.
So that's something that I want to say more about.
So the Ramanujan conjecture for F.
And so I should tell you what that says.
Well, thank you.
So it says that if you look at some prime number L
and you look at the else Fourier coefficient
of the modular form, then, so for this specific modular form,
it's saying that this is less than 2 times the square root of L.
So this is something that, so a statement about the growth
rate of the Fourier coefficients of the modular form F.
And it doesn't seem easy to prove just
on the side of the modular form.
But you can transfer it to the side of the elliptic curve.
And so what the more sophisticated version
of the reciprocity law says is the following.
So first of all, you can relate AL to the Galois representation
attached to the modular form F in the following way.
So it turns out that these Fourier coefficients, which
are also, in this special case, exactly eigenvalues.
So spectral data can be identified
with the trace of the Galois representation
attached to the modular form F evaluated
at a specific element, which is the Frobenius at L.
So I'll take L to not be P and to not be 11.
11 is sort of a weird prime for the modular form F
and also for that cubic equation.
So if you take L to be different from P or from 11,
then it turns out that you can really
probe the absolute Galois group of Q
from the point of view of this representation
by the Frobenius at L. So these are elements that are really,
so in character, so these are really elements
in the absolute Galois group of the finite field with L
elements.
It's an automorphism that will send X to X to the L.
And so it turns out that there is a way of lifting these
and thinking of them as elements in the Galois group of Q,
at least from the point of view of this particular Galois
representation.
So this is well-defined.
And then what the reciprocity law is saying
is saying that this is the same as the trace of rho
E on the Frobenius at L. So this Frobenius at L element,
this is thought of as generating this Galois group.
So the absolute Galois group of a finite field
is really just generated by this one element.
You can evaluate the Galois representation
attached to elliptic curve on this.
And it turns out that you can reinterpret this
via some sort of left sheds counting point formula as L
minus N sub L. So L, the prime number that you start with,
and N sub L was really the number of solutions mod L
to this cubic equation.
So this error term that I said was encoded
in the Fourier coefficients of the modular form.
And just to explain sort of what's happening here,
the point is that you can think of your elliptic curve.
So for instance, that cubic equation
as not being a cubic equation over Q,
but rather you can think about this
as defining an elliptic curve.
So you can think of the equation mod L.
You can think of this as defining an elliptic curve over FL.
And whenever L is not 11, it turns out
that this is actually smooth.
So it does give an elliptic curve over the finite field
with L elements.
And then this will have an action of this Frobenius element.
And what you're computing here is
roughly the trace of that Frobenius element
acting on the H1 of the elliptic curve.
And so the left sheds counting point formula
comes from looking at H0 and H2, which
are easier to understand.
And then you compare it to the number of fixed points.
And the number of fixed points are exactly points
that are fixed by sending their coordinates,
say x1, y1 to x1 to the L, y1 to the L.
And those are exactly the points of the elliptic curve
that are actually defined over the ground field,
the field with L elements.
So the idea is to think of this as sort of something coming
from H1 in the sense of etalc homology,
so in the sense of this mysterious homology theory.
OK.
And then the point is that to get the bound
AL in absolute value less than twice the square root of L,
what you need to do is instead get a bound on this side.
And for that, the following is a consequence
of the vacanjectures.
So let's say x over FL is a smooth projective curve.
So for example, it could be our elliptic curve E.
And then you can look at HI of x.
So this etalc homology with QP coefficients,
this has, because the etalc homology comes with a Galois
action, this has the action of the Frobenius at L.
And what the vacanjectures tell you
is that the eigenvalues of the Frobenius at L
are actually algebraic numbers.
And if you embed them into the complex numbers in any way,
then their absolute value is going
to be determined just by the degree of the homology group
that you're in.
So the eigenvalues of the Frobenius at L
have absolute value always L to the i over 2.
And so this is how now you can get the right bound.
This is, you're looking at the Frobenius at L
acting on H1 of the elliptic curve.
And so the absolute value of the two eigenvalues
will be square root of L. And so the trace
is the sum of the eigenvalues less than twice
the square root of L.
And so you get the bound on this side.
And that's another example of what
the reciprocity law is good for.
I should say this was all proved.
So most of what I've told you was already
known since the 70s and largely done by Deline,
including the vacanjectures and the proof of the vacanjectures
and this bound, the Ramanujan conjecture.
OK.
But so since then, people have been
trying to generalize things to higher dimensions.
And so I want to end by thinking about the more general
picture.
And there are two things that you may want to generalize.
One of them is understanding higher dimensional analogs
of modular forms and relating them to Galois representations.
And another one is understanding a generalization
of the Taylor-Wales method, which
is this method that uses congruences.
And that starts with a Galois representation,
such as the one coming from the elliptic curve E.
And tries to connect it to a modular form.
So I'm going to start talking about the higher dimensional
version from the point of view of generalizations
on the automorphic, on the modular form side.
And so what I'm going to take is maybe I'll take G
to be a connected reductive group over Q. And attached to G,
you can form the symmetric domain
by taking the quotient of the group of real points
by a maximal compact subgroup.
So for SL2, this was the upper half plane,
for other groups, for example, if I
took SL2 over an imaginary quadratic field,
so for instance, the restriction of scalars.
But I can just think of it as SL2 over Q adjoined I.
Then it turns out that H, X can be identified
with hyperbolic three space.
So there are some instances where you don't get something
with a complex structure.
Here you can just use the formula
and see that what you should get here
is a real manifold of dimension three.
So it doesn't have any hope for having a complex structure.
And then if you take gamma inside G of Q,
some congruent subgroup, so something
that's cut out by congruences, and you
look at the quotient X sub-gamma.
This is defined as the quotient X mod gamma.
These are locally symmetric spaces for the group G.
In the case when G is SL2 over an imaginary quadratic field,
the locally symmetric spaces are arithmetic hyperbolic
three-manifold.
So again, you don't have an algebraic structure
the way you did for the quotient's Y
gamma, which were these curves defined over Q, modular curves.
So you don't always have an algebraic structure.
That's one obstruction to generalizing things.
I'll just say, however, in some cases,
so in the case where you can interpret
the symmetric domain as a sort of modulized space
of hard structures of abelian varieties,
so generalization from the setting of the upper half
plane where you think of them as modulized spaces
of hard structures of elliptic curves,
you can get an algebraic structure.
So if G is, for instance, Gsp2G or a unitary group,
then you do get an algebraic structure.
And in that case, so X gamma has an algebraic structure.
In that case, the X gammas are called Shimura varieties.
So they're going to really be algebraic varieties that
are defined over Q or over some finite extension of Q,
so over some number of feet.
And in that case, it's still possible to generalize
the story that I talked about here.
And so that's something that people
have been doing for the past, maybe, well,
in the, say, 30 years or so.
And it's been quite successful.
So maybe I want to just give you an example.
So I talked about the Ramanujan conjecture
for this special case, this modular form F.
So there is a generalization of this conjecture
to higher dimensions.
It's called the Ramanujan-Petersen conjecture.
I want to tell you what's known about this.
So maybe I'll say this theorem one.
And so in order to phrase it, I need
to use some technical words.
But I'll try to say what they mean.
And so I'll take pi to be a cuspital automorphic
representation of GLN.
Let's say over some F, which is a CM field.
So the composition of a totally real extension
of Q with an imaginary quadratic extension.
So let's say that you have something like this.
This is going to be a higher dimensional version,
higher dimensional generalization
of this notion of a modular form.
And you need to have some technical conditions.
You need to put some technical conditions on this pi.
And one condition that I'll put that's technical
is I want pi to be regular algebraic.
And what this condition means is roughly it.
Well, it will tell you that the way
that we thought of F as giving rise
to a differential, a holomorphic differential
on the y-gammas on the modular curve.
And therefore, we saw that it contributed
to the beddy homology of the modular curves.
You can ask for something that will contribute
to the homology of the corresponding locally symmetric
space.
And that's what this technical condition that's regular
algebraic will achieve.
So you will see it in the homology
of the relevant locally symmetric space.
And you also, maybe the problem is
that that locally symmetric space may not actually
have an algebraic structure.
And if you want to find a direct generalization,
you want to go to the world of algebraic geometry,
maybe you want to be able to relate to one of these cases.
And then that's achieved by giving pi an extra condition.
So I'll say that pi is self-dual.
So if it has this sort of extra symmetry,
then you can relate it to an automorphic representation,
say, coming from a unitary group.
And you can relate it to Schmura variety,
so the world of algebraic geometry,
where you have access to etalc homology,
and the Baye conjectures.
And so under these conditions, you
know that pi satisfies the analog of the Romanian Peterson
conjecture.
So I'll say pi.
Yeah, maybe I'll just say this.
Pi satisfies the Romanian Peterson conjecture
at all finite places.
And so what this is saying is that you can look at,
so the modular form is really sort of one object,
whereas this is a representation you
want to think of the modular form as being just one vector
inside a big automorphic representation.
But from the representation theoretic point of view,
you want to decompose this somehow
into local components that have to do
with these Fourier coefficients given by prime numbers.
And those local components, those
have to be only slightly, so in terms
of their matrix coefficients, those have to be tempered.
And that's only slightly weaker than saying
that the matrix coefficients are square integrable.
So there's a precise notion for what you want here.
And I'll say that in this generality,
so using this kind of template in the case of the modular form
f, but using unitary Schmarl varieties,
this was proved by Harris-Taylor, and Klozell, Shin,
and one last case was done in my thesis.
All right.
And so that's something that we know
how to do for this direct generalization
of a notion of a modular form.
And as I said, this has to do with automorphic representations
that contribute to the cosmology of locally symmetric space
x gamma and maybe with complex coefficients
or with Qp coefficients, so something like this.
So this theorem is about the homology of such spaces,
but with complex coefficients or coefficients in Qp.
This sort of condition exactly allows
you to understand the singular homology or the Betty
homology of these spaces.
This kind of condition takes you here.
And something else that's been happening lately
is that people have been starting
to understand not just the homology of these spaces
with characteristic 0 coefficients,
but also the homology of the spaces with torsion
coefficients, so I could put FL coefficients.
And so what can one do in the case of torsion coefficients?
So that's a different story that I want to talk about.
First of all, I should say this is
one of the last things that you can prove about representation
satisfying these conditions.
And along the way, you construct Galois representations
and so on.
And people have been very successful lately
in constructing Galois representations even
so in higher dimensions and even in the case
where the spaces don't have an algebraic structure.
And so in particular, Harris, Land, Taylor, and Thorn
can understand the homology of such, say,
arithmetic hyperbolic three manifold
with characteristic 0 coefficients.
And Schultz and more recently Boxer
have constructed Galois representations
even in the case of torsion coefficients.
The kind of question that I want to end with
is not really directly about Galois representations,
but rather it's a generalization or it's
some sort of torsion analog of the kinds of ideas
that you see here.
And for that, I want to comment that kind of the key thing
improving this kind of theorem is
that the representation pi is locally generic.
So this is a technical condition.
But it's saying that these local representations that
make up the big automorphic representation pi are generic.
And so in some sense, as far away as possible
from the trivial representation.
And when you start with something like this,
you get this kind of condition for free.
And then what you need to do is, well, basically you just
use this together with the vay conjectures.
The vay conjectures gives you very precise information
about what degree, so not just the fact
that you contribute to homology in some degree,
but tells you what degree you contribute in.
It's typically going to be the middle degree.
And so really sort of this together with the vay conjectures
allow you to prove this bound that you want,
the one that the Ramanjan Peterson conjecture asks you to do.
And at the same time, these two things
guarantee that the representation pi
does contribute to the middle degree, homology.
And so I want to end with talking about torsion
from the point of view of controlling
what degree torsion contributes to.
And so the question would be, what about torsion?
And I want to say that I mentioned the Taylor-Wiles method.
It's about going the other way from the Galois side,
tracing back to classes in the homology of these spaces.
And there's a recent strategy due to Caligari and Gehrity,
a strategy for extending the Taylor-Wiles method
in higher dimensions, especially in the case
where your spaces are higher dimensional.
And you can have homology in lots of degrees.
So they outline a strategy for extending the Taylor-Wiles
method, say to the case of GLN, to higher dimensions.
And what they need for their strategy to work,
well, they need several things.
But one of the things that they need
is they need to know that non-degenerate torsion
classes are concentrated in one degree.
So for instance, if you could say that non-degenerate torsion
only occurs in the middle degree, then you'd be in business.
In general, say for a group like GLN or SL2
over an imaginary quadratic field,
they give you a precise range of degrees
where you need torsion to occur in.
So this is the kind of result that we can prove now
about torsion classes, at least in the case of compact
Shimura arrays.
So this would be the second theorem that I want to mention.
So I'll say x gamma be a compact, so not
like the modular curves.
You actually want it to be compact.
And you want it to be the locally symmetric space coming
from a unitary group.
And you have an algebraic structure.
So you have a compact unitary Shimura variety.
And then the question is about the homology of such a space
with torsion coefficients.
And so again, you understand classes
by really looking at all these extra symmetries
and taking really systems of Hecke eigenvalues.
So I'll say let psi in here be a system of Hecke eigenvalues,
well, really an eigenvector that has attached to it
a system of Hecke eigenvalues.
And the kind of theorem that we prove
is exactly relating generosity on the representation
theoretic side to the statement that you are only
occur in the middle degree.
So the kind of information that you
could extract there as well.
So if psi is sufficiently generic,
it's a technical condition, but it can be made precise.
And it matches.
It's a mod L version of the kind of condition you have there.
Then psi occurs in the middle degree.
All right.
All right.
And this is very recent joint work with Peter Schultzman.
Yes, yes, only in the middle degree.
That's right.
So it cannot occur outside the middle degree.
Yes.
That's true.
Yes.
Yes.
That's true.
So you could have a reducible Galois representation
attached to it, as long as it was generic.
I mean, there is an assumption, this generosity.
Yeah, I mean, otherwise it would be quite a, yeah.
I mean, in general, there can be lots of torsion.
So the question is whether you can sort of put some condition
on the torsion classes that will ensure that you kind of only
see the middle degree.
So I just want to end with drawing.
Well, it's mod L. But it's sort of saying
that any lift to characteristic 0
has to be a generic principal series representation
at some prime number.
So the way that we prove this is really
using piatic geometry and a piatic version of Hodge theory.
So Hodge theory came up earlier in the talk
when we were thinking about sort of understanding modular
forms and how they contribute to better homology.
This theorem is proved using a piatic version of Hodge theory.
So I just want to draw a complex picture and a piatic picture
that's analogous to it.
And I'll end with that.
And so in the case of modular curves,
we were looking at these modular curves
as complex analytic spaces.
And then those would be identified
with these quotients H mod gamma.
So the upper half plane is a universal covering
space of these complex analytic spaces coming
from the Y gammas.
And then the upper half plane was
equipped with this embedding into P1 of C.
And so all the symmetries really came
from the action of SL2R here.
And the action of GL2C here, now sort of this map,
is equivariant for these two actions.
And this kind of picture has been used in the past
to understand properties of modular forms.
For instance, to kind of show that they have the right
integrity properties.
That's kind of the complex picture.
It's been useful in the past.
The picture that we use is we instead
will think of Y gamma as a piatic analytic space, more
precisely an attic space in the sense of Hoover.
And we need to take some big cover of this space.
And what this cover does is sort of here
you would have your parametrized elliptic curves.
And at this point here, you're trivializing
the Dirac homology.
And what this map does is it's taking the Hodge decomposition
to the Hodge filtration.
We're going to take some big cover that's
going to amount to imposing more and more congruences
to our subgroups.
So we're taking smaller and smaller subgroups
where we're asking them to be congruent to one mod p
to the n for larger and larger n.
What the effect on the level of the moduli problem
is that here you parametrized elliptic curves,
possibly with extra structures.
Here you parametrized elliptic curves with extra structures.
And you're basically trivializing the H1 et al
of that elliptic curve.
And once you've done that, it turns out
that there exists a period morphism
that's similar to this one.
It goes to something sort of simpler.
Then this space is very, very complicated.
It's a perfectoid modular curve.
It kind of looks like a fractal.
This space looks nicer.
And it's just p1 of cp, where cp is qp algebraically closed
and periodically complete.
And this comes from the Hodge-Tate decomposition.
That's a decomposition on the et al
of the elliptic curve that's in some sense
dual to the Diron filtration.
So this is called the Hodge-Tate period morphism.
And so the way that we prove the theorem
is we compute instead of the comology of this space,
we compute the comology of this.
And rather, really, we understand first the fibers,
and then we compute the comology of this together
with equivariant sheaves.
And of course, all of this is equivariant for the action
of, say, gl2, qp.
All right, so I'll end here.
Thank you.
