I'm going to present some aspect of the work of Wojewódzki in type theory from a mathematical
viewpoint rather than from a logical viewpoint. Although logic is a part of mathematics, there
is still some kind of difference between what logicians like to do and what mathematicians
like to do. I think it is really worthwhile to understand type theory and to have a mathematical
presentation may be useful because I think that type theory is something everybody can,
every mathematician can understand. So this is joint work with Mathieu Anel, Georg Biedermann
and Erich Fenster. The first part of my talk will be about the presentations of type theory
and the work of Vladimir. But for the second part, and this is where this is the joint
work, I'm going to describe application of univalence. So I would like to look at type
theory or maybe homotopy type theory or maybe univalent type theory as an axiomatic system for
doing homotopy theory. Of course, there is also the possibility of having a foundation of mathematics
using univalent type theory, but I will mainly discuss the axiomatization of homotopy theory
from the point of view of type theory. And it may be worthwhile to read this sentence of Whited
in 1950 because homotopy theorists have been interested in developing axiomatic homotopy
theory since quite some time. There are traditional axiomatic system in homotopy theory, triangulated
categories, for example, Verdi, I guess we should also add Grotendik there. Another one is
homotypical algebra. And you have also another system introduced by Grotendik around 1984.
I'm not sure exactly what the day derivatives. Now, recently, more recently, there are new
axiomatic system. You may regard higher toposes of Charles Reck and Jacob Lurie as some
sort of axiomatic system for homotopy theory. And then you have this homotopy type theory
developed by Voivodesky and independently, Aboudi and Warren. And more recently, you have
cubical type theory by Koka and collaborators. There are big differences between these axiomatic
system. And I want to discuss that. Well, a univalent type theory is obtained by adding
the univalence principle to Martin Love type theory. I will describe the univalence, discuss
the univalence principle in some detail. And the goal of Voivodesky Univalent Foundation
program is to apply univalent type theory to the foundations of mathematics. And another
goal is to develop computerized proof assistant based on univalent type theory. Actually,
computerized proof assistant have played an important role into the discovery of
univalent type theory. Because if I get the story right, Voivodesky started to
play with the KAK system because it's a proof assistant that can be used to check the correctness
of a proof in mathematics. And while playing with this learning, actually he followed the course,
I think, on the system KAK at Princeton University. He told me that it was very painful to actually
learn this subject because it's completely different from the usual kind of mathematics that he was
doing. But eventually he sort of understood what was going on there and he saw that there was a
connection with omotopy theory. And this is where he had the idea of developing what he called
omotopy lambda calculus. And, of course, important advances were made at the special year on
univalent foundation program at the IAS in 2012 and 13. It was a fantastic year. I had the
opportunity to come. I was very enthusiastic about it. And there was an atmosphere of collaboration
during the whole year between everybody, their exchanging idea. It was a fantastic time.
And, yes, as I said, the development of cubical type theory is a huge step forward. But there are
many questions, many questions that remain to be solved before really giving a foundation
of mathematics using univalent type theory. Of course, one could give some kind of foundations
of mathematics. But the idea is that it should become really useful for mathematicians, something
that you should use like tech, for example. Imagine that you have a proof assistant, which is kind
of universal. And every mathematician sometimes just turned to this proof assistant and write down
a proof in there. And sometimes publish maybe a paper with that. This was the dream of
Wojewódzki, that these proof assistants using univalent foundation would be really available.
It should be user-friendly. That's very important. It should be user-friendly. So it's not only just
a theoretical foundation of mathematics that we are looking for, but it's a practical one.
Okay. So the goal of my talk is to present univalent type theory semantically, to discuss
Wojewódzki's univalence principle and to describe application. And I believe that every
mathematician is actually using type theory without being aware of it. I mean, this is,
so you know already type theory. This is not some kind of bizarre things coming from March,
but this is something very close to what you're doing in practice.
And that in some sense, Wojewódzki's univalence principle is to type theory what the induction
principle is to piano arithmetic. It's a very powerful and fundamental axiom. I prefer to call
it a principle than an axiom. Okay. And so I'm going to describe our univalence implied descent
in Ayutopuses. I will describe what descent mean in Ayutopuses. And then descent implies generalized
Blacker's Massey theorem. And the Blacker's Massey theorem is a fundamental result of
Fomotopy theory. You get the fredental suspension theorem from it and many other things. You know,
the Pustnikov Tower can be understood very, very well with using the Blacker's Massey theorem.
And with the generalized Blacker Massey theorem, you can understand a Goodwilly calculus.
And all this sort of come out from Wojewódzki's univalence principle.
So in order to present type theory semantically, I will describe an abstract notions of tribe.
A tribe is a category with a collection of maps called Fabration satisfying certain axioms.
And then I will go on and explain what is univalence, univalence and descent,
the Blacker's Massey theorem, generalized basic theorem, et cetera, et cetera.
Okay, a wide tribe, I will explain what the tribe is, but it was observed by
quite early on Gambino and Garner that if you take this syntactic system of type theory,
you can construct a category from it. This is called a syntactic category. And this syntactic
category happens to be what I am going to describe a tribe. And every tribe also is a brown Fabration
category. Okay, before tribe, there is a sort of more general notions called etlan. Etlan
is a category equipped with a class of carable maps called Fabration. Now, I define what is a
carable map here. A map is carable if you can pull it back. A map from X to B, P, is carable if
you can pull it back along any other map. Okay. And if you do that, the projection Pi 1 is called
the base chance of P along F. I think the terminology carable is maybe coming from Grothendijk.
Okay, now what is etlan? Etlan is a category equipped with a class of maps called Fabration
satisfying these axioms. Every asomorphism is a Fabration. The composite of two Fabrations is a
Fabration. Every Fabration is carable. And the base chance of a Fabration is along any map is a
Fabration. The category C has a terminal object. And the unique map from an object to the terminal
one is a Fabration. In the language of formative theorists, you would say that every object is
Fabrant. Okay, now, since we have notions of etlan, there is a notion of homomorphisms of etlan.
It's a functor that preserves Fabration and base chance of Fabration as well as terminal object,
the obvious thing. Okay, so that's somehow a basic notion, the notions of etlan. I will explain
the moment why, the terminology in the moment. Now, if you have etlan, you can introduce notions
of anodyne map. That's the definition there. It means that the map U, let's say, is anodyne,
if it has the left lifting property with respect to every Fabration. If you are familiar with the
notions of model category, you will recognize that anodyne map is just a trivial or an acetylic
cofabration. Okay, if, yeah, the lifting property means that every commutative square has a diagonal
fillet. Okay, now we are ready to introduce the notions of tribe. So, a tribe is etlan.
So, you need to have a class of Fabration, but then you have axioms. So, a tribe is etlan
satisfying some condition. There are two conditions. The base chance of an anodyne map
along with Fabration is anodyne. And also, that every map admit a factorization as an anodyne map
followed by a Fabration. Again, if you are familiar with the notions of
model category in the sense of quillen, you will recognize there some part of the axioms of quillen.
Okay, and now, a neomorphism of tribe is neomorphism of clang,
which take anodyne maps to anodyne maps, which preserve the anodyne maps. Okay.
Okay, so that's somehow the basic
notion that I would like you to look at, the notions of tribe.
Okay. Now, an example of this is the tribe of can complexes. So, I recall that a simple set
is a can complex if every horn has a fillet. And a map of simple set is a can Fabration
if every community square like this on the left has a diagonal fillet.
Now, the category of can complexes as the structure of a tribe where a Fabration is a can Fabration.
Okay. Maybe a remark is that in this category of can complexes, a map is anodyne if and only if
it is a monomorphism and homotopy quiverance or if it is a strong deformation retract also.
Okay. So, let's go to next. I will do a little bit of the theory of tribe and then I will translate
this into the language of type theory. So, I assume that the notions of tribe is something
you may be familiar with or you may have seen something similar.
So, the first thing is that given a tribe, E, you can construct another tribe by slicing the
category E over an object A except that you don't take all the object of E over A, you only take
the Fabration. So, you take the full subcategory of the category E over A whose objects are the
Fabration. Okay. And now, in there, you declare that the morphism is a Fabration if the underlying
map in E is a Fabration. Again, this is very familiar with things we do in the Cullin model
category. Okay. So, you get in this way a new tribe which is EA and I like to call that an
elementary extensions of E. In the sense that let me make an analogy, a tribe is a little bit like
a ring if you like. I would like to make this analogy and given a commutative ring, you can
extend the ring by adding new elements, for example, a variable polynomial ring
and new elements with a relation if you want. And this elementary extension here
which is just, here this is just the base change along the projection from
A, the object A to 1. So, this factor here is extending the tribe A by adding a new element
to A as we, I will explain later. So, this is the reason for the terminology. So, an example
of morphisms, of homomorphisms of tribe is just a base change functor. If you have a base
change functor, you have a new homomorphism. Okay. Now, I can describe the type theory
notation. So, if you have a tribe E, then you may decide to call an object of E a type. Okay.
If you do that, you have your first step in type theory. You just call the object of a tribe a type.
And you use this notation here or this one. Okay. This is like a form of atomic notation
in type theory. This is a statement. This statement here is declaring that A is a type. It's a
declaration. In a mountain love type theory, this is called judgment. So, this judgment is a
declaration that the symbol capital A is a type. And in addition to declaring type declarations, you
have declarations for elements. So, if you remember that the tribe as a terminal object,
so you can consider a map from the terminal to A. And then you regard this as an element of type A.
And this is maybe the notation that type theory are using, most of the right inside.
It means that the letter A, small a, is representing an element of the type A.
But that theorists, they often call an element of type A, they call that a term of type A.
Okay. That's fine with me. Mountain love told me that he was objecting with that, you see.
In set theory, when you say that an element, let's say x is something, x is an element of a set.
As you see in the element, you don't call x a term. You can, okay. So, I'm going to use,
to confirm with a mountain love point of view that you're really describing elements
as Professor Deline also was doing this morning.
Okay. Now, that's the important things here, is that every vibration has fibers. So,
given the vibration from P from E to A, you can pull it back along an element and you get an object
which I'll write EA. Yeah. And you get a family of types and decks by elements of type A.
Now, the object itself, the map P itself is defining an object of the elementary extension.
So, this pair here is an object here. This is called a dependent type in context A in type theory.
So, a type theory will write this thing, this judgment. They will say, okay, I have a fiber
which I call EX, which is a type, which depend on the variable X. So, this is called a dependent type.
Okay. But, it's very important to see that X is a variable here. X is not a symbol for a
particular map from one to A. It's a variable. Okay. So, it's the fiber of this map at a variable
element, X in E. Okay. And also, if you have a vibration, it may have a section. And if you have
a section, you will get an element in the fiber for every element of the base of the vibration.
And the type theorist will write this as saying, okay, I have an element, a variable element
of a variable type, which depend on the variable element of A. That simply is actually describing
the sections of a vibration. Okay. And in type theory, there is something called change of
parameters. So, this corresponds to actually base change. Sorry. I have to go back.
Okay. So, this corresponds to base change. So, if you have a map in a tribe, you can pull it back
of vibrations over B and get vibrations over A. And in type theory, this is called,
this is an operation of substitution. You have the map F and you're replacing the variable X by Y
equal F of X in the expressions. So, for example, here, you have a family of type over B
and you're replacing Y by F of X. So, you see, you go to the line under. This is a deduction rule
here. This is called a deduction rule. You go from this judgment to this judgment and there
is deduction rule, which is called substitution. And you have it for variable types on the left
and side and also for variable elements of variable types. Okay. Well, this is just pulling back
along a map, vibrations along a map. Okay. In particular, the elementary extension,
which is actually pulling back along the map from A to 1, the terminal object,
is called context extension. Okay. So, you start with a type B in E and you get a type
in EA. But the fiber, if you do B cross A, this is what the functor E is doing. The fiber is B.
So, what you did somehow is nothing to B. You just extend the context of the judgment. So,
you pass on the judgment with its context free. There is no, but here you have a context now.
Okay. And you can do it for types and also for elements. And this gives you the possibility
of defining a map in type theory because if you want to define a map between two types in
type theory, well, you see the map as defining a variable element of B indexed by a variable
element of A. So, a map is actually a variable element of B defined in the context X in A.
Okay. This is something we do all the time in mathematics. The difference I would say here
is that there is a precise notation associated to things that we do all the time. And the purpose,
one purpose of this precise notation is that a computer can read it. I mean, you can actually
type this on the computer and then the computer will start to do calculations on this. Okay.
And now, you have also summation operation that are there in a tribe
because if you have the elementary extension function pulling back has a left-hage one.
This is just about forgetting the structure map of the object AP. So,
what it means is that if you have a family of types indexed by an element A, you can sum
all these types. E here, we know that the total space of a fabrication is actually
sort of the union. Actually, it's a sum of all the fabrics. So, that's what is done here.
We replace the family by E. But E now has this notation because in type theory, what we have
are the fibers. And if you want to go to get E, well, we have this summation operation.
Okay. And more generally, you can do a summation along the fibers of a map. So,
if you have a fabrication, then the base change function has a left-hage one,
which is just actually composing with F. So, you can do summation. And in type theory,
this is what you're doing here. You have a family of fibers and you have a map from A to B. Well,
take a point in Y. Look at the fiber. F minus one are Y. Okay. F is a fabrication. So,
actually, I'm writing F minus one, but this could be called A of Y instead of F minus one of Y.
And you can do that. So, you can sum a fabrication along another fabrication. And this is just a
composition. It's the fact that a composite of two fibrations is a fibrations. Okay. No.
Okay. Now, in addition to have left-hage one to the base change function F star,
in type theory, you have also a right-hage one, which is product along a fibrations.
Okay. So, this is just a right-hage one. The right-hage one
satisfies some kind of strong conditions of being a right-hage one. First, it should take
anodyne maps to anodyne maps. And the Beckschevelli conditions should hold. Now, if you don't know
the Beckschevelli condition, it doesn't matter. It's just a condition that says that you
are taking product and base change commutes. You can do, if you do the product and then a base
change, you can do this two operations in a different order. Do the base change first and
do the product after. And in particular, the elementary extension function
here has a right-hage one, which is product. Okay. So, if you take a family of types and
decks by X, you can do a product and now you get into E, because it's no longer dependent on X.
Okay. And then, in a tribe, you have path objects. So, a path object for an object A
is obtained by, as in Quillen model category, by factoring the diagonal as an anodyne map
followed by a vibration. So, remember that in a tribe, every map can be factored as
an anodyne map followed by a vibration. So, if you do that for a diagonal, you get the notions
of a path object for A. So, you can define in a motor P between two maps using this path object
and you can show that the motor P relation is a congruence.
And so, you can define the motor P category as the quotient category by this congruence.
And then, you can define what is in a motor P equivalence.
If it is invertible in the motor P category and you check that every anodyne map is in a motor P
equivalence and you declare that an object is contractible if the map from X to 1 is in a motor
P equivalent. Okay, very standard stuff. Now, I come back to the motor P, the type theoretic
interpretation. In machine of type theory, there's a type constructor which associates to every type,
another type, actually a dependent type, which is called the identity of type A.
And what's important to know is that an element of this type is regarded as a proof
that the two elements X and Y of A are equal. And there is a reflexivity term
which proved that X is equal to X. And there are rules about that. There is something called
the J rules and et cetera rule. But the rule about the equality are completely
consequences of the axioms of a tribe. I mean, if you know, if you feel comfortable
with the tribe, then these axioms becomes very natural. So, we don't need to put any more axiom
if we know that we are actually looking at the tribe. And so, the identity type is actually
pet object. So, if you define the identity of A as the total space of this vibration,
then you have a factorization of the diagonal as a reflexivity term followed by
a map which you could call source and target. And it was observed by Awu-D and Warren
and independently by Waibatsky that this factorization is a pet object for it.
Okay. Now, a tribe is actually a brown
vibration category. I recall here what is a brown vibration category
just so that you can see the difference between the brown vibration category and the tribe
is that in a brown vibration category, you start with two classes of maps,
vibration and wiki equivalence. And then you put axioms on the vibrations on these two.
But these two classes of maps are kind of independent in the sense that
a given the class of vibration does not determine the class of
w. Okay. You could have, you could change w and keep the same class of vibration and you will have
two structures of brown vibration category. Okay. W is sort of relatively independent of F.
It's an extra structure. It's not enough to have E and F. You see, like here,
like here. You see, you have a clan, but then you, not these axioms, but in the case of a tribe,
you only start with the class of vibration. Okay. Tide theory is based on a class of vibration
satisfying some axiom. Okay. And the equivalences, the multiple equivalence are defined
from the vibration. W is defined in the case of a tribe. Okay.
Okay. Okay. Now, I come with the difference between type theory and the theory of tribes.
A tribe is sort of the semantic of type theory. Okay. Because you can interpret type theory in a
tribe. They are very close because actually the syntactic category of type theory is a tribe.
So actually it's, it's almost the same thing. Okay. But still there are differences. And
let's look at the notions of contractible object. I already defined the notions of contractible
object in a tribe because I had definitions of the notions of a multiple equivalence
and an object is contractible if the map from A to the terminal is an equivalence. Okay. So that's
the definitions of a contractible object in a tribe. But there is another definition
of a contractible object. And it was observed by Wojcicki. Okay. So the definitions of Wojcicki
for a contractible object in type theory is that you say that an object A is contractible
if this object here has an element. And the object is contractible is this.
It's, it's, it's the sigma pi identity f x y. Okay. Now, what does it mean? It's very good
to compare that with, you replace the summation symbol by the existential quantifier. So instead
of saying there exists a summation over y, you replace this by there exists y in A. And you
replace the product symbol by the universal quantifier. And you replace this by the equality.
And, and you, you see that it means that there exists a y so that every x is equal to y.
So this is saying that A is a singleton. Okay. And this translation of type theory to ordinary
predicate logic is called the Curie-Harvard correspondence. Well, that's a kind of fancy
name for a very simple idea that in type theory, the universal quantifier of classical logic is
replaced by a sum. And the universe, I'm sorry, the universal quantifier is replaced by a product
and the existential quantifier is replaced by a sum. Okay. And actually, Martin Love,
this was the view of Martin Love. Martin Love, this is a formulas of type theory here.
Ah, sorry, I'm about that. I have a, this is a formulas in Martin Love type theory here.
And this formulas is understood as a predicate, as a first order formula by Martin Love. It's,
it's the understanding, the interpretations of Martin Love is like that. Okay.
Okay. And now, also, what is predicate logic about? If you look at the formulas of predicate logic,
you can read it and it's a statement. It's a statement. It belongs to the language. It's like,
you can read it in English. You can read it in French. It's a statement. It says something. Okay.
So there is a big difference between formal logic where the basic object are statements
where you, and you want to know if these statements are true or not, things of the sort,
or if one statement implied the others, and a category because a tribe is a category.
And an object in a category is something passive. It's like a landscape. If you look at the landscape,
you have maybe a mountain on this left and maybe something on the right and etc.
These are objects. They are passive. Okay. And if you start to describe these objects,
then you get into sentences. You have to make sentences. Okay. So the sentences are about
the descriptions of, of a landscape and the category is more like a landscape that can be described.
I think there is a famous example due to Frigate. It is the, about the planet Venus.
The planet Venus is the morning star, the morning star. So when you say the morning star,
you're describing Venus, but it can be also described as the evening star. Okay.
The morning star is equal to the evening star, but there's only one star. It's Venus. Okay.
Venus belongs to the landscape, but the morning star and the evening star, these are statements
that refer to the language. Okay. And that's the marvelous thing about type theory is that
we can sort of see the objects as making statement. For example,
this is a statement that says that A is contractible. Okay.
And I would like, I need to describe what is the notions of equivalence. And Voivodesky
is describing an equivalence saying that the map is an equivalence if it's fiber,
if all its fibers are contractible. And this is the statement here. F is an equivalence
if for every Y, the fiber of F at Y is contractible. Okay. And
if you want to show that a map is an equivalence, you want to find an element,
a proof of this statement, which is an element of this object of this type. Okay.
Of course, there is also the, yeah, A implies B. In type theory, A implies B is the
objects of maps from A to B. This is defined as the product of B over X. And then you can introduce
the object of homotopy equivalences between A and B just by this formula. The object of
homotopy equivalence between A and B is the sum over F of, F is an equivalence.
Just amazing. I find it just marvelous, marvelous.
Excuse me, what do you call an object is a type?
An object is a type. Yeah. But here, the summation operation is over a variable F. Okay.
Okay. Of course, if you want to show that,
that to construct an equivalence from A to B, you want to find an element of this object.
Okay. Now, there is another construction you can, you can do with a vibration.
You took, you take two fibers of this vibration, you call them X and Y. And you look at the
object of equivalence between E X and E Y. And you take the sum over all X, Y.
And then you get the factorizations of the diagonal where U, the map U here,
is actually representing the identity map from E X to E X.
Okay. That's a mathematical construction which is kind of interesting because you're sort of
looking at the way the different fibers of P can be compared using equivalence.
Okay. And now, using that, you can introduce the notions of univalent vibration.
So, because using the lifting properties of underbind maps,
the reflexivity term of the path object, just called R, here you have a commutative square just
because, because for free, I mean, with no cost. And you get a diagonal filler because
the canonical map P1, P2 is a vibration by construction. On the left, you have another
line map and you etc. So, then you say that the vibration is univalent if this map
here is a motor P equivalence or is in equivalence if you like.
And now, if you look at it fiber wise, because a family of maps, this map gamma
is actually a map between two fibrations. You see, this is this map gamma. This is a
fibrations. This is sort of the path object. And this is a fibrations. This is also fibrations.
This is a map between fibrations. And a map between two fibrations is sort of globally in
equivalence if it is in equivalence fiber wise. So, to be univalent means that this map that
you just constructed is a number to be equivalent for every x, y. And now, you will recognize the
univalence maybe, I hope, because on the left hand side of this map, here you have x, the identity
type. So, we are looking at paths from x to y. And what this map is doing is that if you have a
fibrations and a path from x to y, then you can connect the fibers by an equivalence. And this
is what gamma is doing. Gamma is a kind of connection. So, maybe this is the, you can think of it
like this. It's a connection. I don't, I'm not saying that this is a connection without curvature,
but it is a connection, right? Given a path from x to y, you get an equivalence from the x to y.
And now, if this is a number to be equivalence, then the fibrations is said to be univalent.
Okay. Now, I want to discuss universal fibrations. And to have universal fibrations,
you need notions of small fibrations, because otherwise there is a problem with
like a Russell paradox, things of this sort. So, you need to distinguish between the fibrations
and the subclass, where the fibers are small in some sense. And here I'm putting axioms,
but you don't need to use these axioms, because they just want to express some property of
smallness, okay? So, there are axioms for small fibrations. Now, in the tribe of can complexes,
there is a notions of k small fibrations for every strongly inaccessible cardinal.
If you have can fibrations, you may say that the can fibrations is k small, if all the fibers are
have cardinality smaller than k. You do the sort of the obvious thing.
And for the notions of universal fibrations, I'm going to use the notions of homotopic
Cartesian square. So, commutative square is said to be homotopic Cartesian. Whatever,
I recall the definition here. I hope you are familiar with the notions of homotopic Cartesian
square, but it's just a usual notion. If j is a fibrations, you just pull back j along the map
from A to B, and you ask that the map from F to this pullback is in the equivalence. But if j is
not a fibrations, you have to do a fibrant replacement. Okay. So, universal fibrations.
Now, I would like to call a small fibrations universal. If every small fibrations is actually
put back up to equivalence of this universal one. And if, moreover, the pair, five five prime,
is homotopic unique. The pair five five prime is like the classifying map of your fibrations p.
So, u is a kind of modular space for small fibrations. And this is the universal fibrations
q itself. Now, Wojcicki observed that the uniqueness condition of the pair here is
actually equivalent to requiring that q is a univalent. Okay. So, univalence is just, I would say,
the correct condition to make sure that the pair five five prime is homotopic unique.
So, you may call u a universe if the Codeman, or maybe you call u q a universe. And in Martin
Love type theory has only pseudo-universe. They are not univalent. You cannot show that the
pair five five prime is homotopic unique. And this is what Wojcicki observed, is that
in Martin Love type theory, they had not given any uniqueness condition. They have
universes, but five is not unique in some sense. Okay. So, it was kind of very natural to add it.
But I would say natural, but in retrospect, it looks that this was obvious to do. It's kind of
strange that it had not been done before. And you may say maybe it has, it had not been done before
because type theorists were working on their side. Okay. Geometers and the motivators on the other
side, and they were not talking to each other. Okay. And, but Wojcicki, by starting to use the
Koch system, sort of began to understand what the type theorists were doing. And then he was able
to complete what they were doing. And this was, this is really a very important new axiom because
many things depend on it. Now you can do homotopic theory axiomatically using the fact that you have
universal fibrations. Okay. And of course, Wojcicki observed that the tribe of Khan complex has a
universe for every strongly inaccessible Karlsner. Okay. And he had the idea of completing a
univalent machine of type theory by adding the univalence principle that the, these universes
are univalent. You can complete machine of type theory by adding the univalence conditions as an
axiom. Okay. That's one way. But there's a better way to do it, which is with, for example, with
cubical type theory, because you extend the type theory in such a way that you can prove the
univalence principle. So the univalence principle can be proved in cubical type theory.
And cubical type theory has normalization in other words, every term has a normal form.
And this is not something that you will have if you just add the axiom of univalence to
machine of type theory, you lose the normalization. But if you modify the machine of type theory,
like in the cubical type theory, then you have a new normalization procedure and you can actually
prove the, okay. Okay. Okay. Now, I would like to describe descent. So I need to remember what is
in the Mottopi push out square, Mottopi Cartesian. This is just the dual of a Mottopi Cartesian.
But I need to move out of the theory of tribe for the moment. So you may think of it as being in
the model category, like simply says set, et cetera. So square is a Mottopi Cartesian, et cetera,
et cetera. I hope you are a bit familiar with this notion. And, okay. Now, I just, okay.
Given a cube, I describe what is the descent for cube or cubical descent. Given a cube in a category
E, if you look at the cube from the above, you see a square. So this is
one of the vertical corner of the square. This F here is actually a map going down from the top
of the cube to the bottom. And beta here is a face. It's the back face of the cube. Okay. This beta.
And this is another corner of the cube. This is a right-hand face. And this is the front face. And
this is the left-hand face. Okay. So it's, it's, I do this translation because
it's easier to express things in this way. Okay. So now there is a theorem that in the
category of simply says set with the model structure, with the equivalent model structure,
if you start with a square like this, so the square, it's a square in the category of arrows.
So you, you have the category of simply set set. And I exponentiate it with the post set zero one.
So we are here in the category of arrows. Okay. That's in the category of arrow category of.
And so if you have a square in the category of arrow, so it's really a cube, right?
Suppose that the square is a motor vehicle Cartesian. And now what this condition just
mean that the top face of your cube is a motor vehicle Cartesian. And the bottom face is a motor
vehicle Cartesian. So you have somehow push outs motor people shop. And then if the square alpha
and beta are homotopy Cartesian, then the square delta and gamma are also homotopy Cartesian.
Okay. That's the descent property for Q. Now, what does it mean? It means if you look at it closely,
it means that if you have a push out and a motor people shout in the category of spaces,
and you look at the fabrication over the space defined by this push out.
You look at the fabric, then this fabrication can be decomposed by pulling pulling it back
along the three pieces that that are defining the push out. Okay. And not only that, you could
do the reverse. You could actually construct the fabrication over the push out by doing the reverse.
Now, this is false in a topos for a general to push out this descent principle is really
homotopy theoretic. This is not true in in a topos. For example, this is not true in set
for certain kind of push out in set. It will be true. But they were a special kind of push out.
But here, this is true for general push out. It's just an amazing thing. And
now, Univalence and applied descent. And the proof is very simple. So I'll leave it as an exercise
to to you. But you will have to work a little bit. So but the idea is that
you want to show that delta and gamma are homotopic artesian. The conditions is that alpha
and beta are homotopic artesian. They are squares alpha and beta and they are
homotopic artesian. And you want to show that gamma and delta are homotopic artesian.
So what you do is that you construct a bigger diagram with phi, phi one and phi two homotopy
Cartesian. And you there's a general lemma that if you if the composite of two squares
homotopic artesian and this one is homotopic artesian, then this one will be also homotopic
artesian. So it's just a matter of constructing phi one, phi two and phi homotopic artesian map
to something. And it will be okay. So how do you do that? Well, you classify the
fabrations. You may suppose that all these F, H and K, G and K are confabrations. And you classify
them into some univalent confabrations. So it could be a universe. Q is just and you classify it.
And so you get you classify G and H. Okay. Okay. So these are classifying map here.
This is a classifying map. And now you use the fact that this is a nomotopic or Cartesian to get
a map here. But then you have a problem of showing that this is a homotopic artesian.
And there you have a little bit of work to do. And I will leave it to you.
Okay. Now, the notions of model toples was introduced by Charles Reck. And one definition
is to say that this is a left exact bus field localization of a pre-sheaf category with value
in simple set. Another description, and it's a kind of, it's a characterization theorem
of these combinatorial model category. So there are two conditions.
First, that the base change along a map preserve homotopic limits. And the second condition is
the descent principle. Now, if you start with type theory, you have the syntactic category
of type theory, maternal of type theory, there is a syntactic category, you get a tribe. Now,
you can do a nomotopic localizations of this. You get locally Cartesian quasi category. This is a
theorem of Kapulkin and Sumilo. Actually, there are two papers, one by Kapulkin and Sumilo and
the other by Kapulkin. But in other words, you can go from maternal of type theory to locally
Cartesian close category, quasi categories. This is just people sometimes also call it
infinity category and et cetera, et cetera. But if you start with chemical type theory, where
the, where the univalence axiom old, and if you do that, I'm not sure it has been published yet,
or if someone has written a proof, maybe Mike Shulman, but you should get into
infinity toposes and possibly into elementary infinity toposes. In other words,
there is close connection between a univalent type theory and the theory of elementary
infinity toposes. Although we don't know exactly yet what is in elementary, there will be a talk
by Mike Shulman at this conference on elementary infinity toposes. So, there is a connection
and therefore things that you can do here or here can be interpreted there. There is a connection,
you see, between these things. It's quite clear that many of the things that you can do here can
be lifted up here, but people have an opinion, et cetera, but it's not always totally obvious
how to do that, but okay. Now, I recall the Blakers-Massey theorem. You need to know what is
a connected map for that and connected map. So, the idea, assuming that you know what is an
n-connected space, which is defined here, then you may call a map n-connected here,
if its O2P fibers are n-connected. This is not totally the standard convention here,
because unfortunately, O2P theorists have been calling this n plus 1 connected,
and it's, from my point of view, I'm sorry for, it's kind of not a very good convention.
I prefer a growth in the convention, which is that if you want to qualify a map,
you look at the fibers, okay. So, a map is, we call the map n-connected, if its O2P fibers
are n-connected, okay. Now, the Blakers-Massey theorem is saying this. Well, there are many
statements, but this statement was given by Goodwilly, I think, that if you have a num2p push
out or a num2p cut is a square of same piece as z, and if f is m-connected and g is n-connected,
then the canonical map to the pullback, the homotopy pullback. So, you take now the homotopy
pullback of this part here, and you have a map from a to the homotopy pullback, and then this
canonical map is m plus n-connected, okay. Let me just give you, if you're not familiar with it,
consequence of that is the, is the fraudental suspension theorem, that if you have a pointed
n-connected space, then the canonical map from the loop to the suspension is too n-connected.
Oh, yes, right. I'm really, now, okay.
A type theoretic proof of the Blaker-Massey theorem was found by, here, during the
program, Univanet Foundation program in 2012-2013, by a team of four persons,
Favonia, Finster, Likata, and Loms-Lehen, and the proof is new. It's just amazing.
I would say it's a totally new proof. And it was reformulated in the language of model categories
by Charles Wreck, and because I think Charles Wreck wanted to understand it, because it's a
new proof, so Favonia, I think, also was helpful for doing that. And the proof is using descent,
of course. It's type theory. I'm using Univanet's descent for Q. And it was generalized later by
Anel, Biedermann, and Finster, and myself. And the generalized Blaker-Massey is,
in which sense is it generalized, you replace the class of n-connected map by
class, the left class of modality. So we need to know what is a modality. So,
yes, right. What is a modality? A modality in infinity totals is a factorization system. You
have the left class and the right class, in which the left class is closed under a base change.
And an example is a class of effective epimorphism in the totals, and r is a class of monomorphism.
Every map can be factored as an effective epimorphism followed by a monomorphism.
More generality, generally, you can take the class of n-connected maps and the class of n-truncated
maps, and you get a factorization system. And the left class is always stable under a base change.
I need the push-out product for the generalized Blaker-Massey. So this is a familiar operation,
the push-out product of two maps. This is a deconstruction. And here is the statement.
I need a diagonal of a map. If you have a map, you can construct this diagonal, which is
just the usual things. It's the diagonal of A as an object over B, you see. Okay. And here is the
theorem. You start with the modality in some infinity totals E, and you consider a push-out
square in there. You have a push-out square. And now the condition is that if the push-out product
of the diagonal of F and the diagonal of G is in L, then the map, the canonical map from Z
into the homotopy pullback, which is actually the pullback in the infinity totals, is actually
in L, you see. So it's very abstract. But let me give you a special case of this.
Suppose that F is monic, is a monomorphism. Then if F is a monomorphism, then its diagonal is an
isomorphism. Actually, this is how you can define a monomorphism. It has the diagonal,
the diagonal is an isomorphism. And it's very easy to see that the push-out product of a map
with an isomorphism is also an isomorphism. So a special case of this theorem is saying
that if you have a push-out, and if this map is monic, then the push-out is a pullback.
Because the class of asomorphism is the left class of a modality. It's somehow the smallest
modality. So this theorem contains a very well-known theorem in Topo's theory that if you take a
push-out in which this map is a monomorphism, then the map is a pullback. But here is the weaker
condition that the diagonal of F, et cetera. Okay. Now, of course, the generalized black hermese
implies the usual black hermese theorem. And now the proof of the generalized black hermese theorem
is using descent, some kind of generalized descent. And now let me finish with good really calculus.
Thank you for, maybe I'm a bit late. Yeah. I'm sorry about that. Okay. So how,
what's the application to good really calculus? Now, I see, let S be the quasi-category of spaces.
Well, you could think of it as the model category of spaces or of simply such set if you like.
And S dot the quasi-category of pointed spaces. And a functor from pointed space to space is said
to be a monopi functor if it preserve directed co-limits. That's the definitions of good really.
And what good really does is to associate to a monopi functor,
a monopi functor, a tower of approximation by what he called n-excisive functors. So it's a tower,
p0, p1, et cetera. He approximates the functor F by something called n-excisive functor.
I will not, I don't have the time to define what is an n-excisive functor. But the first
approximation is the constant functor with value F of 0. And this good really tower is very much
like the postnikov tower. There's an analogy between the two because given a space, you have the
postnikov section of that space as 0, s1, s2, et cetera. So sn is the enthronquated type which
approximates x. And the first approximation is the set of connected component of x. And the classical
blacker theorem is a powerful tool for studying the postnikov tower theorem. All the classical
result about the postnikov tower, et cetera, et cetera, can be proved using the blacker's
mass theorem. I have learned to appreciate the blacker's mass theorem by working on this. It's
really a gem of a monopi theory, the blacker's mass theorem, because so many results of basic
monopi theory are depending on the blacker's mass theorem. And then Biedermann asked the questions,
is there a blacker's mass theorem for good really calculus? I mean, could we study the
good really tower exactly as we do with the postnikov tower, but using
versions of the blacker's mass theorem? And the answer is yes.
You have to construct a topos. Well, the category of monopi
functors from s dot to s is actually a topos, because a monopi functor is completely determined
by its value on the finite spaces, on finite-pointed spaces. And the category of finite-pointed
space is actually an infinity topos. It's an appreciative category.
It's a result of good willy that the good willy pn, the approximation of a functor by an n-excessive
functor, is left-exact reflection. So it follows that the subcategory of n-excessive functor is
actually an infinity topos. Okay, now if you have an infinity topos and you have a left-exact
reflection, you can easily construct modality. And you say that a map is a p equivalence if it
reflects into an equivalence. And a map is p local if the following square here is Cartesian.
And this defines modality, which depends only on the reflection. This modality is called a
left-exact modality. It's a special kind of modality, which is very important.
Now the analogy that Biedermann was looking at for was to compare spaces with the monopi functor,
post-nicole tower to good willy towers, n-connected map with pn equivalence, n-truncated maps with
pn local maps, and the blackermacet theorem with a blackermacet theorem for good willy calculus.
And here is the theorem. The theorem actually is a straightforward consequence of the generalized
blackermacet theorem. As long as we use this lemma, and this lemma was kind of tricky,
is that the fact that the push-out product of a pn equivalence with a pn equivalence is a pm plus
n plus 1 equivalence. Okay, so some applications. There is a theorem of good willy saying that the
category of an homogenous functor, homotopy functor over a fixed base, is stable. Where an homogenous
means that pn of f is f, so it is n-excisive, and then also that pn minus 1 of f is just p0.
This is called the base. And you may say that the functor is reduced if pn of f is 0.
And now there is a theorem of Farron, Dwyer and Lesh saying that if a monopi functor is n reduced,
then it is 2n minus 1 excisive. This is like the analog of the first dental suspension theorem,
and this is a straightforward consequence of the generalized good willy blackermacet theorem.
And there is also a classifying theorem due to good willy. You can introduce k invariant
for good willy towers. If you have a functor f, which is n-excisive, and you project it down to
n minus 1 excisive functor, you have a fibration here. And this fibration is a principal fibration.
And so it has a classifying map with value into an homogenous, an homogenous
functor. And I guess, okay.
Okay.
So thank you.
