Thank you for the introduction and thank you for the opportunity to speak here.
So before going to the periodic setting, I would like to recall a result that has already been stated in the result.
When we have X, the variety of the chart, which is smooth and projective, and the homology of X, C, and X, C, and the isomorphic to X, the RAM homology.
The RAM homology here is, as before, it is the homology of the complex of differentials.
And we would like something similar over QP, so for the moment X would be algebraic.
So here we can still use the RAM homology, but here, in fact, so when X is the final option, please change this to QP.
Again, what we call the static et al homology.
But this is when we work directly over QP, this is what we will use on the topological side.
So what we want is some rings, such that we have an isomorphism between QP and the homology, and the RAM homology.
So, we want this for varieties over QP, and maybe some of these.
So, on the periodic homology, here we have an action of the algorithm of QP, I will call it G.
And again, what we wanted to study the et al homology as a general presentation. So we also want an action of G here, and so we have an action of G here.
And we want this isomorphism to be QP.
Okay, so the first thing is that we cannot be CP, so CP, it's the completion of an algebraic closure of QP, and it's like the periodic version of C.
And so it is different from the ultimate space, and we cannot have CP because in fact it does not contain some periodic version.
I mean, what I mean by that, is that for example, if you consider the psychotomy character of G, so this is defined by the action on the pivots of the unit, so we have that action of G is given by this psychotomy character.
And if I write QP1 representation of G, in fact, QP1 comes from the et al homology of the projective model of QP1.
And we need to take the G of Q1 here.
And so, if we want to have this algorithm.
So the element of this isomorphism, we need some element T in B, such that G of some T by this psychotomy character.
So this is this element, who will be able to write I, and there is a result of it, but there is no such element in CP.
So we need to consider the G.
And this is why we will use what we call the periodic range of content.
So the first one is the gerund periodic range.
And we have a uniform as T, and this T is this element 2 by I, so we have the G of the psychotomy character.
So we have an equation of T here, and we have the fixed points of the section of QP.
And also we have a filtration given by the power of T, and the graded pieces of this, and given by the twist of CP.
So we have this ring, and for this ring, we have this, this comparison, so this is a theorem of five things.
So for X, smooth and proper.
For the QP, we have this star for B is equal to B derangue.
So we take B derangue, it is the associated field.
And so this is the first thing, and also, so we have an action of G, and you can take the fixed point for the action of G on this side, on this side, and on this side, since we have that the fixed point just copied, we will get the derangue homology so we can compute
the derangue homology from the data one.
But we cannot go the other way with just B derangue, we cannot compute entirely compute data homology from the derangue homology using this isomorphism.
So we need to consider more three points.
So, there are several of them, because the line is like B is equal to B derangue.
So B derangue, we've seen that we have an action of G, with this action, we also have it on B crystalline and B semestable, but on B crystalline, we also have covenues, and on B semestable, we have the covenues, and on the derangue operator.
And using all of those trickles, we can do something better, so this is the term of prism.
And this is for any, we do not need just most of the covenues.
So we have this isomorphism star, B is equal to B semestable, in fact, this is not, this is not exactly that, here we need to use a refinement of the derangue homology, of the derangue homology, but this is some,
and in particular,
this time we can also be using the covenues and the monotony operator, we can also compute a path from there.
So this is for algebraic variations.
I know we want to study what we call rigid analytic variety.
We are like, we are some pretty version of analytic varieties, that is, we want to, we want the structure to be analytic functions to convert our series.
In the first case, it's the proper and small scale.
So, in that case, so it was studied by Thurston, by Kermann, and in that case, the derangue homology is finite.
So now we are over C.
And this is finite emotional, and we have the same result as before, as in the algebraic case.
Now for other variations.
So this is more complicated because now the derangue homology is not finite.
It's an effect portal, but for example, for the event for the disk, the open unit disk, for Cp, the H1 impact portal, but for P1, Cp, these two distributions,
is given by the portal of P, much Cp.
So we have all the converters and the open unit disk, this is P, but we, there are still some results.
So, for example, for smooth, or stein spaces, so stein spaces, this means that we can go about X by affinoid, U, N.
U, N is inside U, N this way, and we want the compactification of U, N to be inside U, N this way, so I will write like that.
And so this means that you have this union of affinoids, and in some, in some way, you can make this trickle ship over convergence, you can go a little over UL.
And in that case, we have this, I mean, the, what we'll make things easier is that the current homology is concentrated in the resume.
And so this one is stated by Thomas, the Spina school and Museum, and so there is no, we do not have that kind of isomorphism, but still, we can compute the Poital or Etac homology from the Ramon, and the Ramon, from the Poital one.
And so there are other results, so there are results for smooth, quasi-compact varieties, by Carl Mazzanisio, and also for, I mean, quasi-compact, quasi-separated varieties by Moscow, and to finish, so my work.
So I am working through relations, so extending these results by using, instead of the usual homology, the compactly supported homology, and also working on applications.
Of these results, and maybe just an example of application. This is a joint work with Carl Mazzanisio.
We have proof that our face is smooth.
Okay, so, so we are in the motion one.
We have a geology between the Poital homology of XQP, and the compactly supported homology.
We have a compact form, and quite fine, from XQP to the other side.
We have this geology.
I will stop here.
Just to clarify, in this last statement, you're writing these parentheses, do you mean there's two theorems?
No, no, this is quite.
It's all pro.
Yes, I did it.
What is the meaning of compactly supported?
So, so we are using, we are using the definition, which is based on some examples of Karel Otto, and we are writing the compactly supported homology XQP is given by the fiber of the co-commodity, the usual one.
And the map, the co-commodity of the co-commodity compact inside X.
X minus you has interpreted us wrong.
Oh, this is a pretty good analytics.
But like I'm back for the, for the disk.
I will remove all the, all the closed disk.
What's the meaning of, do I have anything?
There is a perfect feeling of solid, we need to solve formulas of solid QP vectors.
Do you have any expectations what happens on quasi compact first?
No.
At the beginning, we were thinking that it would work for all partially product curves, so.
But no, we have the strategy here will not work, but we are, we are trying to do something more general.
So we are trying to prove that.
Quite a lot of technology of X.
There is some twist.
This is the art form in, like the vector space, but I mean the, with a big V and a big S, the Vanarkon Mets category.
We are trying to prove that.
Shift here.
And hopefully this will work for every expert.
We don't know.
Just to clarify, we don't have any expectations of X is quite a compare.
No, if it's quasi compact partially part.
Yes, so here we have the QP and yes, we have some kind of go roundality and go roundality and we have to do a mix of the two.
Yeah, two from the table.
