So yeah, so I'm going to be talking about random coxsweter groups.
So I'm actually going to start off by telling you about random right angle and coxsweter
groups specifically and how that all works, and then I'm going to shift over into talking
about random general coxsweter groups, which is what my research is on.
So I'll start off by telling you what a right angle and coxsweter group is.
So definition, I'm going to let gamma be a finite graph, then the right angled coxsweter
group associated to gamma is just given by, so first of all we're going to call it w sub
gamma, and the generators of this group are just going to be the vertices of this graph,
so vertices v i of the graph gamma, and then for the relations we've got two things going
on.
So first of all, every generator squared is going to be one, and second of all two generators
are going to commute, so we've got v i v j equal to v j v i, exactly when there's an edge
between v i and v j in the graph gamma.
So when I talk about random right angle coxsweter groups, really what I'm doing is I'm taking
a random graph and then I'm looking at the right angle coxsweter group associated to
that graph, so let me write that down, so a random right angled coxsweter group, that's
how I'm going to abbreviate that, is just the right angle coxsweter group associated
to a random graph.
So I better tell you a little bit about what a random graph is, so typically when people
talk about random graphs, we're talking about the Erdos-Renyi model, so Erdos, I think that's
the way that goes, Erdos-Renyi model for random graphs.
So there's a couple of different things this could refer to, but what I'm talking about
is I'm going to let p of n, so p is going to be sort of the probability of an edge happening,
it depends on n, so it's I guess a function from natural numbers to the interval from
zero to one, and then I'm going to say the random graph
of n and p, so it has n vertices, so n here is the number of vertices, so it has n vertices,
and I'm going to look at each edge that could possibly be in this graph on n vertices, and
I'm going to say that it's there with probability p, so and each edge is chosen independently
with probability p of n, okay, and then generally the idea is like, so we have this random graph
on n vertices with our probability function that depends on the number of vertices, and
then we look at what happens as we let n go to infinity, so let me just write this down
mostly so I can use the abbreviation, we'll say a random graph, asymptotically almost
surely has, so and okay the whole point of this is so I can use this abbreviation, I'm
going to call that, I'm going to just write that as aas for the rest of this talk because
that is a lot fewer letters than the entire thing, so asymptotically almost surely has
some property that we care about, it's a property p, if the probability that the random graph
on n vertices with probability p has that property goes to 1 as n goes to infinity,
alright so we're talking about things that are happening as the graph is getting really
big, so the probability is a function depending on n, so typically what's going to happen
is the probability function is going to drop off as n gets really big, so you're getting
a lot more edges that could or couldn't be there because there are more vertices, there
are more edges to be had, and so if you don't drop off your probability you just get a lot
of edges and depending on what you're looking at that usually you want, at least some of
the probabilities to be dropping off, or this is only one probability, slight preview
on to the general coxier group case, okay so the general like to study random right angle
coxier groups, like the way the general procedure for doing this is first of all you identify
some interesting property you want to know about when a random right angle coxier group
has that property, so identify a property p, well identify an interesting property when
you care about that a right angle coxier group w gamma might or might not have, and
then so step two in this process is you're like okay well I've got this property of
my group but I really like and I know how to like look at random graphs and see what's
going on in the random graph, but I'm going to want to show that w gamma has this property
p if and only if the graph gamma has some property q, so I want to like figure out how
to see this property that I care about in the graph because that's how I'm going to
be able to do anything, and then part three is to find conditions on the probability function
p of n so that the graph gamma asymptotically almost really has the property q, and so yeah
so the reason I'm like breaking this breaking it down like this is just like to make it
clear that there are sort of our two like separate parts to doing every like any problem
that you might want to do for these random groups. Okay, any questions so far before
I get into specific examples?
So what's the difference between a random coxier group and a random right angle arting
group?
Oh yeah yeah, so you can you can do this whole thing for right angled arting groups too.
So what are they? They just don't have, they just don't have to be on screen.
Yeah, so if I was talking about right angled arting groups, they just this first condition
would have been left off.
I see, coxies that means that you're thinking of these things as reflections, like how you
put that in.
Yeah, yeah. Any other questions? All right. Okay, so what are some like cool properties
that right angle coxier groups might or might not have? Well, oops, I got a little bit ahead
of myself, I left my second page behind. So one example is hyperpolycity. So this is
the same you know doubt hyperbolic thing that like people have been talking about all week,
so I'm not going to define it again. But you know, sometimes right angle coxier groups
are hyperbolic and sometimes they're not and it'd be cool to know like when a random
right angle coxier group was or it wasn't. So helpful fact, which this is like basically
a special case of a theorem of Musang, which I'm going to, I'm going to give you the full
theorem in a little bit, but for now I'm just going to give you the right angle coxier
group case. So a right angled coxier group is hyperbolic if and only if the graph gamma
is square free. Actually, I think we've seen this back before. I don't remember maybe
it was coxier's talk. So that's just so your graph can't have an empty square like this
where these edges are missing. And then it's always hyperbolic. So all right, so this is,
so so far we've identified hyperbolicity as a property that we might want to have. And
Musang has hopefully showed that that's equivalent to this property in the graph. So then from
there it's a theorem of Ruth Charney and Michael Farber. The sort of the random part of this
is their theorem. So if NP goes to zero, then W gamma is asymptotically almost really hyperbolic.
And if NP goes to infinity and 1 minus p times n squared goes to infinity, W gamma is asymptotically
almost really not hyperbolic. Oh, and actually I left this out in my notes, but if this goes
to zero, so if NP goes to zero, or if 1 minus p times n squared goes to zero, so if this
goes to zero, then it's just finite. And so it's hyperbolic, but that's done. So this
is sort of nice. This is as good of a result as you could hope for, because if these two
things both go to infinity, then we know it's not hyperbolic. And if either of them goes
to zero, then we know that it asymptotically almost really is hyperbolic. So this is a
very nice theorem. My theorems are not going to be this nice. And so we'll see why. I mean,
part of it is because I'm not as smart as you people, but also it's more complicated.
So it leaves the case where those things go to something that's between zero and infinity?
Yeah, that's not something you could hope to. Yeah, so it's not a totally exhaustive
list of all the possible cases. Yeah, this is a threshold function. Other questions?
Okay, so something similar. I'm not going to write down that statement, but just something
similar to this can be done for general coccidic groups via edge-labeled random graphs. So I mean,
first of all, define a general coccidic group and then get into that. So we're going to let
gamma be a finite graph again. But this time, each of the edges is going to be labeled with some,
just some label picked from integers, at least two. And sometimes this is going to come up,
so if an edge doesn't appear, we'll say it's labeled infinity, just like sometimes I'm going
to refer to that. So I will sometimes refer to edges not being in the graph and sometimes refer
to edges being labeled infinity, and those mean the same thing. So then the coccidic group
associated to gamma this time is, so again, we're going to have, so I'm still going to call it W
gamma. Again, the generators are going to be the vertices. And well, again, we're still going to
have vi squared equals one for every, for every generator. But now we're going to have vi vj to
the m equals one if, so if the edge between vi and vj is labeled m. Okay, so going back to the
right angle coccidic group case, if you're more familiar with that, an edge in the right angle
coccidic group graph is the same as an edge labeled two in the general coccidic group graph,
because that's like, you get like vi vj, vi vj equals one, and vi and vj are their own inverses.
Okay, so, and again, you know, a random coccidic group, we're going to talk about picking a
random labeled graph, a random edge labeled graph, and then looking at the coccidic group
associated to that. So, so for the random edge labeled graphs, basically, it's just an extension
of the Erdos-Renyi model. So, I don't know, I'll call this the like extended Erdos-Renyi model for
edge labeled graphs. Alright, so now, this time, instead of just having one probability function
that depends on n, we're going to have a probability function for every m that depends on n. So, for
each, so for each possible label m, inner 2, 3, 4, etc., we'll let piece of m of n go from
natural numbers to integral from 0 to 1, and so we can't just pick any little probability
function this time. We have to make sure that they add up to less than 1. So, the sum from
m equals 2 to infinity of piece of m of n has to be less than or equal to 1 for every n. And that's
just because we're only, well, let me write down. So, the random graph. And this time, we're going to
call it gamma of n, and then I'm going to tag it with the sequence of all of the pms. Again, has n
vertices, and each edge is labeled. So, independently of like the other edges, independently of other
edges with, so wait, hold on, what have I written? So, has n vertices, and each edge is labeled independently
of other edges? So, it's labeled m with probability piece of m of n. Okay, and just the reason I'm being
a little bit careful about saying it's independent of the other edges is because obviously the probability
that an edge is labeled 2 is not independent of the probability that it's labeled 3, because those
can't both happen. There's only one label on each edge. But the labels are chosen independently for the edges.
Okay? Questions about this? Yeah? Oh, oh, yeah. So, if you didn't pick a label, so the probabilities add up to less than
one, or less than or equal to one. If you didn't pick any label, then there's an edge labeled infinity or like a non-edge.
Okay. Other questions? Okay. So, just like we talked about hyperboleicity for writing on
coccidic groups, you can talk about hyperboleicity in general with coccidic groups. So, again,
hyperboleicity. So, this time I'm going to state the full theorem of Mu Song. So, a coccidic group
with generating set S is hyperbolic if and only if the following hold. So, there's two
conditions. One is we can't have any, so there's no subset T of S, which generates an affine
coccidic group with at least three vertices. So, that means we can't have any of these
guys, except this one is okay, because it only has two vertices. But any of these other
guys we can't have, or else it's not hyperbolic. And then, oh, well, that's okay. My like dramatic
review is about to like, oh, yes, yes, thank you. Okay. I should, I should like tell you
what these pictures mean. So, in these pictures, the unlabeled edges are threes, and the edges
that aren't shown are twos. So, if there's not an edge, it is actually labeled infinity. If there
doesn't appear to be an edge in the picture, that means it's labeled two. Questions? Thank you
for reminding me to tell people about that. I always forget. All right. So, the other thing
that has to be true for it to be hyperbolic is there are no disjoint, you know, two disjoint
subsets of the generators such that both T1 and T2 generate infinite subgroups and they
commute. So, so sadly, I'm going to bring this back in a second, but, but these are the like
finite, these and like direct products of these are the finite coxer groups. And so, if you have
like two things that are not on this list, and every, and all of the edges between your two
separate things are twos, then that's bad and you're not hyperbolic. So, sorry, I'm going to hide
this again so you can see. Okay, yeah. So, so the vertices are still the generators of the group.
The edges that are shown that are not labeled in the picture are actually labeled three. If it has a
label, then that's like the label that it is. If an edge is not in the diagram, then there is an
edge and it's labeled two. And that's just done because there are so many edges labeled two that
like the picture would be unreadable, right? Yes, yeah, if there's no, if there's, yeah,
other questions?
Well, those are the, the Dinkin diagrams. These are like, sorry. I, these are the
Dinkin diagrams. Oh, are those also considered Dinkin diagrams? I don't, yeah. Sorry, I, I thought
the Dinkin diagrams are just the finite ones, but that, like, could totally be false. Other
questions? Yeah, I don't, I don't know very much about we groups, but, but yeah,
Dinkin diagrams classify a lot of things. So if you, if you think you've seen these before,
you're probably right. Other questions? Okay, but anyway, so the point of this is we've taken
this like condition of hyperbolicity that we're interested in, and we can now, we can see both
of these conditions in the graph. So now we, we can do some like random stuff and, and figure
out when that, when the group is or isn't going to be hyperbolic. So, all right. So, this I guess
is my theorem. So, we're going to let gamma and, and then this sequence of probability
functions be a random edge we able to graph. Then, so first of all, if n to the fourth p
to the fourth p infinity squared goes to infinity, w gamma is asymptotically almost surely not
hyperbolic. And that's basically, so I'm not really going to give any proofs here, but that's
basically because you get, well, you get like two infinity labeled edges that, that commute. So,
that violates this, this second condition. And then, if np3 goes to infinity, again,
w gamma is asymptotically almost surely not hyperbolic. And this time, that's because you get a
triangle whose edges are all labeled with threes. So that's, that falls under this first thing
over here, and these are also infinite. Okay, so, but then the third part, which is kind of the
coolest, so if u goes to zero and np3 goes to zero, then w gamma is asymptotically almost surely
hyperbolic. Okay, so, so yeah, you can see it's not quite, it's not quite as clean as the proof
for writing coaxial groups, but you almost like, I don't know, I don't like expect to see a
threshold function for this, because like, there's just a lot going on with the different
like probabilities of different labels and like, that would be hard. Any questions about this?
So, I mean, they sort of, they sort of come up, but they, those labels can be on the graph. It's
just that whether it's hyperbolic or not, doesn't like, it doesn't, it sort of doesn't depend on
that, except in the sense that like, if you have more edges labeled threes than you necessarily
have fewer edges labeled with other things. And so like, but yeah, it certainly doesn't matter,
like, specifically what the like, ratio of edges labeled four to edges labeled six is. Other
questions?
So, okay, so when I say it's, it's not hyperbolic, I mean, it's not like Delta hyperbolic. So, there
is also like, like, like, there are also like things called hyperbolic coccider groups, and
that's actually a different thing, and it's not equivalent, which is annoying. But I just mean
that it's not Delta hyperbolic. Does that answer your question? Kind of.
I guess, I mean, I don't know as much about, I basically only know affine coccider groups. Okay.
I'm finite coccider groups, but I don't really know much about other categories, but I'm just
wondering if this is the entire universe of everything that it could be, or are there some
like, positively curved things that it could also be? I don't think you're going to see anything
positively curved, but like, yeah, I don't, I mean, I know when it's Delta hyperbolic and when
it's not Delta hyperbolic and like, other questions. Okay. So, that is, that is one thing. I also have
looked at some like other properties of random coccider groups that are maybe a little bit more
technical. So, this like, I mean, in some sense, the hyperbolicity thing is sort of the flashy
thing that somebody might actually, you know why you should care about it, but like, it's also the
thing that I had to do the least work to prove, because like Mu Zhang did all the work of like
getting it down to the graphing and then actually like, the like, the proof of like, the random part
was like, not that hard. So, the thing I've spent more time working on is this property called
Fc type in, I guess, random coccider groups. All right. So, and I am keeping an eye on the time. I
promise some people I would be done by 1215. So, I'm aware of that. So, first I'm just going to tell
you what this property is. And then I'll like, I don't know, maybe I'll state the theorem and like,
maybe wave my hands out a little bit of like, what some of the work that went into the proof was,
but maybe not. So, a coccider group W gamma is of Fc type. If every induced subgraph
of gamma, which does not contain, it does not contain an edge wave at infinity,
corresponds to a finite subgroup. All right. So, this is sort of like some kind of a finite
condition, right? We're saying, okay, well, maybe our group isn't finite and maybe, so maybe, you
know, if you look at every induced subgraph, maybe the group you get from that isn't finite,
but whenever it's not finite, we should have this edge labeled infinity there to like,
show us that it's like really not finite. Okay. Of course, it corresponds to a finite subgroup of
the group. So, maybe this would be a good time to bring back up the finite diagrams. Okay. So,
I will at least write down my theorem. It's like kind of gross, but like,
so theorem. Oh, I guess I should point out. So, this is like, this sort of is really a
property of the graph. So, like, that first part where we go from the property in the group to a
graph property is like automatically done just by like, what the property is. So, yeah. So,
this is me again. We're going to let gamma be a random edge labeled graph. And just like for
notational reasons, I'm going to let p sub b be the sum from m equals 4 to infinity of p sub m. So,
I'm just, I'm adding up all of the big numbers into like one thing. And because it's going to
turn out that like, again, for this property, it doesn't really matter whether you have like a
4 or a 6 or like 28. So, if anyone of the following hold, w gamma is as in topically almost
that's the type. All right. So, here's where it's going to get kind of gross because I'm still
a little bit working out the kinks of like presentation of this. But so, you could have n to
the fifth p 3 to the fourth going to 0. And all of the big, probably all of the big labels just
can't happen. So, p m is just 0 for all m bigger than 3. So, in this case, our only labels are
2s, 3s, and infinities. You could also have nv 3 going to 0, and p 2 to the sixth just not going
to infinity. And again, big labels can't happen. So, p m is just 0 for all m greater than 3. Okay,
but we want like, sometimes you want to have like some big labels in there. We're not going to be
able to have too many just because of like what the property is, but we want to be able to have
some. So, we'll say, so if n cubed pb squared goes to 0, and n cubed pb p 3 goes to 0, and n to
the fifth p 3 to the fourth goes to 0. Also, it's going to be asymptotically almost really an FC
type. And if n pb goes to 0, and p 2 does not go to infinity, and n p 3 goes to 0, then it's going
to be asymptotically almost really an FC type. So, okay, so this is this is like half of the
theorem, and then the other half. Yeah, maybe I'll write that down first, and then I'll like,
maybe try to wave to my hand at some of this if it's not too late by that point. So, the other
half of the theorem is when it's when it's not FC type. So, if anyone of the following
holds, then w gamma is asymptotically almost really not of FC type. Okay, so this is a little bit
simpler. So, if n p 3 goes to infinity, it's not going to be an FC type. And again, this is
because of the like, we're getting the same triangle that's labeled with 3s. And that's
infinite, but doesn't contain edge labeled infinity. So, that's no good. Also, if n pb, so if n times,
like, so if, yeah, so pb is the sum of everything bigger than, bigger than or equal to 4. So, if
that goes to infinity, it's not going to be FC type for basically the same reason, except our,
like, our labels can be anything higher than 3, and that's still it's going to be infinite, but not
contain any infinity labeled edges. And the other possibility is that n pb does not go to 0 and
n p2 goes to infinity. And basically the same thing. In this case, you're going to get, you're
going to get, what are you going to get? You're going to get like, you're going to get a triangle
with, you're going to have two big labels and you're going to have, wait, is that right? Yeah,
two big labels and then an edge labeled 2. So, this, this part's like, maybe not super
thrilling, but, so I guess, yeah, so, and yeah, this is the, like, this isn't even like all of the
cases, these are just the, like, kind of nice ones. So, like, the, like, the probability part is,
like, kind of involved and, like, and, and, like, slightly complicated, but basically, sort of the,
like, broad, like, thing here is, like, there's a couple of different, like, cases you can be in,
either you have, either you don't have big labels or you do. The other thing is either we're, like,
either we're paying attention to what's going on with the two labeled edges in, in the second and
the fourth option, or we're not in case, in the first and the third option. And so, basically,
you get, like, a little bit of a cleaner, well, in some ways, cleaner thing if you're not, like,
you can have as many or as few two edges as you want, really, in cases one and three, but then,
if you, if you start thinking about what's going on with the two edges, you can, you can tighten up
some of this stuff. So you've got, so this is, like, this is, this is better than that. So,
yeah, I don't know. If anybody has any, like, suggestions for how I can, like, present this
information in a way that is not terrible, I would be happy to hear them. But, yeah, and I think
probably it's too late to do anything reasonable about waving my hands at a proof. So, we'll not
even try. Um. Thank you.
