It's our next speaker.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So this is funny to talk a little bit about this here because I sort of started thinking about the stuff when our box is Islandburg lectures at Columbia as a grad student.
It's a very distant connection to all that, but yeah, okay there.
So, so I suppose you have a symplectic manifold and with this some symplectic form, and we're going to say it's sort of a nice symplectic manifold so omega primitive.
And in that case, it's probably not compact so maybe it's sort of convex.
This is just conditioned for the compact and manifold.
So,
if you have an object and some type of typology geometry is just Hamiltonian dynamics so if you have a Hamiltonian function.
Then you get, well many things, one of the things you get is you get a function on the space of the action, which takes a loop to the integral of the one form over the loop.
Maybe minus the integral of the Hamiltonian over the loop.
Okay, so here I'll have this space of parametric loops in your manifold.
And, you know, you notice that the critical points.
This functional, so this is some sort of function on an infinite dimensional manifold.
And, you know, in some sense it's a smooth function, and you can sort of compute its critical points, those critical points are the same as the fixed points of the time one flow.
So if you have a function like this, then you can use this to get by solving Hamilton's equations you got the diffeomorphism but your manifold, that's the Hamiltonian flow.
And so people have studied.
So, this is a diffeomorphism, it's hard to study.
This is a function, it's also hard to study, but it turns out to be returned out to be some properties of this function which are independent of this data.
I mean, in turn, in particular you might want some kind of count or some invariant of these fixed points which doesn't depend on your particular choice of age.
And so there is a sense in which that exists. This is a fundamental objective for homology.
Morse homology.
Maybe I'm going to do cosmology everywhere.
I'm going to do some quotes because it takes some work to define.
But this is called the Hamiltonian flutter homology of H.
And I'm going to denote it by H F star H.
You know, you can put coefficients here, you want, but this is some homology group generated just like a Morse theory it's generated by the critical points with differential counting the gradient flow lines.
Okay, and then it turns out.
It turns out that H F H is does not change under compact derivations of H.
You know,
perturbations compact support so it depends a little bit on the geometry of H and infinity, but within any finite region, you know, you change this however you want and doesn't change.
So that's useful. So in particular, for a compact manifold. Well, it's a bit harder because this doesn't happen. So this is not a function. It's a one form.
In that case that ends up being just independent of your Hamiltonian. So that's very useful. So let me give you an example of one setting where we know this quantity.
So if you have M, this is like a fun, maybe one of the two fundamental examples. They have a cotangent bundle. And you know, you have this of a Riemannian manifold, then there's the function norm p squared.
So this is the Hamiltonian for a free particle. And if you have a free particle moving around on your manifold, then H F p square is the same up to some shift as the homology of the free loop space of your manifold.
Okay.
And
So, maybe a warning.
H F H is not, you know, the homology of the free loop space of your manifold in general.
So this is a special property of cotangent bundles.
There is a principle.
Algebraic structures.
Related to the homology of the free loop space.
Analogs on Hamiltonian for homology.
Okay, so for example, famously, this is a ring under the sort of a string product.
And this is by Sullivan, a family of loops in a manifold, another family of loops, you intersect those families by concatenating the loops when, like the marked points at zero touch.
Okay.
And here, there are some correspond related product, which takes the form of some count of pseudo homomorphic pairs of pants with some prohibition term.
And the general principle is that whatever you have here happens here, maybe with some mild modifications. That's very interesting.
These products.
That is a theorem that here was proven somewhat recently.
Yes, so this is a Gerstenhaber algebra, the algebra.
And this kind of.
Yes, essentially, up to some details of all the changing age, which I could discuss.
So there's a famous structure on here.
Which is the following. Well, first of all, S one acts on the free loop space by rotating.
Secondly, you know, you can look at the S one has various subgroups in it.
And if you take a loop and you send it to its default cover, or it's a fold cover, then you identify the free loop space with this, this fixed points of this action inside itself and it's sort of recursive.
And this is an S one equilibrium homotopy equivalence. So this is an interesting bit of data.
And it obviously has some relations with things like this, which people have worked out in parts. So, you know, it leads to various algebraic structures on various like this.
That's something to say.
Maybe let me make a remark that the free loop space is not as one homotopy equivalent to sort of the borel analog of this object.
So if you make a space with the contractable space of the free S one action, then, you know, this is, this is also an S one space, and this is homotopy equivalent to this but there's no map back, there's no maps both ways which are S one
and the contract of the identity, because this has no S one fixed points. So, on this dust, it's cute. Okay, so
this analog
of this structure
for HF
let me tell you some things that have been done, which are interesting.
So one,
so
I'm going to make say some conditions here which I will mostly explain to say and as you will
which is basically those conditions.
And
there's some class
in
K01 theory of the free loop space which vanishes.
This is called the polarization class.
Okay.
So then
maybe H nice
at infinity.
It just means that, you know, somehow grows appropriately with respect to the conical coordinate.
Then there is
some object.
This is a spectrum.
Okay.
And it has this property.
If you take the homotopy groups of the spectrum.
After smashing them with a z,
then this is
the floor,
homology groups.
Z coefficients. Okay.
So this is what's a spectrum. This is like a space
up to suspension.
Okay, so
this is this Cohen
general.
Okay.
Okay.
So now
so in other words, like I just said something about spaces here.
You know, it's nice that there's something like a space that you could at least talk about.
Okay.
Now I will say to this is very recent and kind of fun.
So there exists.
There
is an analog
of
E S one
cross
H F
H S
as
S one.
Okay.
So
you know, this is just a spectrum doesn't have an S one action a priori.
There is some other thing, which in some informal sense behaves like a spectrum with these properties. So it's an S one action.
S one action is free.
And for example, when you apply this object to it, you still get these quality groups. Okay.
So this is by
weeks ago.
Okay.
So now
I will say something that I thought about for a long time.
Yeah, really not much work to do.
Okay, so
maybe make a definition for stating something.
The definition
so
and
that's one spectrum.
So when you think spectrum, you should just think space of destabilization. It's very close to the way I think about them. I actually construct them.
Essentially by explicit columns of spaces
is key
topic.
If
there
is an S one
rules.
And we call this start from X
X
X
X
and these are geometric fixed points for people who know what that is.
This notion uses some geometric model of spectrum, but on spaces
perspective that come from spaces that literally is just about taking the fixed most was a generalization of just this usual fixed factor.
Okay, so here's a
progress.
Okay.
When
the polarization class.
So this is just a bit of algebraic apology data. You have to take it in
S O one
and
then this
column
is how much
some cyclotonic spectrum.
For the homology group.
Okay.
So let me say I have two more minutes. So let me say a couple words about this.
This is just, I mean, what does this really mean for a practical person. This is something that's like a topology study. This is called this.
This has lots of structure. This is the algebra of what you two out, you know, whatever you want.
This pragmatically should say that it comes equipped with a bunch of interesting
algebraic operations. You take some type of homology of the audit coefficients, and those should interact with the usual
operation in the same way that these sorts of products do. Some of that is now there are like all kinds of complicated formulas that various people have worked out.
So that's practically what that means.
So.
Okay, now.
So comment.
This really is something that took me a lot of thinking.
To do this.
For me.
One.
Works.
With.
Non.
Works.
So basically, what is the idea.
There is this action functional age.
And what is this sharp K. This just means you iterate your Hamiltonian. So you repeat the, this function a couple times to get a new function that's.
So, a H has this product, HK has this property that fix.
T.
One, well, just T one H.
Sharp K.
Is a time k flow of the original Hamiltonian. Okay.
And.
You want to then just say, well, like, let's look at the more small g's, or let's look at the sort of homotopy types associated to these functions.
These are all CK equivalent functions.
On the field of space.
The problem is that if you have an equivalent function, there's no way of perturbing it into a more smell functions for one for which the intersection lies the spaces of gradient flows or manifolds.
Without breaking the equivalence, but people usually do is they do borel theory. They do all this kind of stuff.
And that works. There is an aquavarian floor homology group. It's very useful for dynamics.
But, you know, I personally don't know how to make sense of that map while doing this kind of borel stuff. I thought about it for a long time. There's a very interesting analysis behind why it's difficult.
And what I'm trying to do with like certain operators looking for at home but not being travel.
You know, you naively just want to send a loop to its people cover turns out the analog of that. And for pseudo homomorphic curves is like not a friend home problem.
There's a formal adjoint, which is like not the actual adjoint so it's a subtle thing.
But you can kind of just build this homotopy type at this bad point, but this not for this very function, which is not more spent, that makes sense.
So that's the sort of technical stuff. It will be great to not need that.
It would be great to just use this borel construction, which is sort of I was already been done. I mean, that's without this actual map.
Okay, so I think that would make my time.
Okay, so you have this like what's on my spectrum.
Yeah.
What is it's T this one.
Um, so,
I mean so for am being a cotangent bundle this will all should agree with the sort of free loop space story.
So this as a cyclotonic spectrum will agree with the key complete. So this is this is a key completion. I kind of do this by a finite subgroups because I don't want to do more spot theory.
So, you know, this will agree with that for the free space and generally have to compute it.
So for general manifold this is not the same as the homology of free space that's something you build out all of this analysis.
Okay.
Any other questions.
Yeah, it's supposed to be. So, okay, I mean, this is where the dreams are.
When this class, well, when the one without this one vanishes. So that this thing, this evil domain, it has a focaya category.
Maybe wrap focaya category.
I'm just going to write.
This is an object that's been studied.
I'm just going to talk about it in the case where Amazon Stein domain, with a lot of work on that. And this is supposed to be just a sort of homology level shadow of some focaya category over the sphere spectrum.
Okay, so if you took THH of this, you should get a cyclotonic spectrum.
And then this is, you know, supposed to be this object.
But this object is annoying to define mainly for a lot of coherence issues I mean a infinity special the enriched categories are miserable object that people have been struggling with for a long time.
This is not a miserable object this is actually quite concrete to the way that I've tried to work with it. So this gives you some geometric so I mean, you know, sometimes your M, your symplactic manifold is related to some
algebraic variety. And in a bunch of interesting examples this thing has like some number field of definition maybe some parameter.
And then there's some dream that people have pursued for a long time when this focaya category is related to some category of coherent sheets of people have proven many instances of that.
And then there's these Gaussian connections.
The variation of drama comology over this parameter. So these turn out to be related to pseudohuller for curve theory. So to come up in theory.
But then, you know, there's more here is all this arithmetic structure associated to comology.
So somehow it's supposed to be related to this chh and ways that people here know vastly more than me. You know, I had sort of some dream a very long time ago trying to come up with something that might go on this side.
But at least there is some precise statement one can make.
From which one can then try to derive whatever it's possible. Okay.
