Thank you, so I would like at the end of this lecture to describe some joint work with Bargav
on what you might call a Riemann Hilbert correspondence over peatic fields. So let me begin
reviewing the classical Riemann Hilbert correspondence. So let X be a smooth
variety for the fields of complex numbers, and I'm going to write X analytic for the underlying
complex manifold effects. You can study local systems,
complex vector spaces on this complex manifold. So these are more concretely
representations of the fundamental group of X, if X is connected.
And well, first, just using the fact that Xn is a manifold,
you can identify these with vector bundles on X analytic with a flat connection.
But now Xn is not just any manifold, it's a complex manifold. And so any vector bundle
with a flat connection in particular has a holomorphic structure. So you can think about
these as holomorphic vector bundles on Xn with a flat connection in the holomorphic sense.
And then Sarah's GaGa principle tells you that if X is smooth and projective,
there's no difference between holomorphic vector bundles and algebraic vector bundles.
It actually can be identified. Algebraic vector bundles under that correspondence,
the flat connection just goes along for the right. So this is some incarnation of the Riemann
algebraic vector bundles on the original variety X. So this is some primordial
incarnation of the Riemann Hilbert correspondence. And it's been extended in a number of ways.
So one extension is something that Pierre did around 1970, I think.
He removed the word projective here. So now let's just say X is a smooth algebraic variety
over the complex numbers. There's a similar correspondence here. Now it's no longer true
if X is not projective that every holomorphic vector bundle has an algebraic structure.
But what Pierre showed is that if you have a holomorphic vector bundle with a flat connection,
it might not have a unique algebraic structure, but it has a canonical algebraic structure,
which is characterized by the requirement that the connection has what are called
regular singularities. So these local systems get identified with algebraic vector bundles on X
with a flat regular connection.
15 years later, this was extended further by Kashybara.
What I'm actually going to refer to as the Riemann Hilbert correspondence,
and I'm going to describe what's actually called the algebraic
version of the Riemann Hilbert correspondence, which is, I think, due to Bayesian and Bernstein.
It's a generalization of this. So local systems you can think of as sheaves of complex vector spaces
on this manifold, which are locally constant. And the right hand side is algebraic vector bundles,
meaning sheaves of OX modules that are locally constant. And Kashybara's generalization is to
remove the word locally constant from both sides. So there's a similar correspondence. If you want
to work at the level of a billion categories, reverse on this complex manifold, identify with what are
called algebraic models. Next, we should add some adjectives here. Regular and holonomic.
So regular means having regular singularities. It's an analog of that condition up here.
Holonomic is some kind of finiteness condition. So an algebraic D module, I'll say a little
bit more about this later, but you can think about this as a quasi-coherent chief on X,
which has a flat connection. Note, you're just dropping the requirement that the thing that
has a flat connection is supposed to be a vector bundle. Because there's an equivalence of a billion
categories here, but you better to state it as an equivalence of a derived category. So you can
look at the bounded derived category of constructible sheaves of complex vector spaces on X,
and this gets identified with the derived category of algebraic D modules that are required to be
regular and holonomic. Okay, this is a story over the complex numbers, and it identifies
two categories where the category on the left-hand side is defined in a way that really uses the
fact that a complex variety has an underlying topological space, using the fact that C has a
topology, and it gives you a topology on the set of complex points. But the right-hand side of this
correspondence is something that's defined in a purely algebraic way. You could start with
algebraic variety over any field of characteristic zero, and then really over any field, and you
can talk about sheaves with a connection, and it's a well-behaved theory for any field of characteristic
zero, and there's this nice theory of algebraic D modules, and that gives you a purely algebraic
way of accessing information about the category of sheaves on this underlying topological space.
So what I would like to talk about for the rest of the lecture is an analog of this statement
when you're not working over the complex numbers, but you're working over fields with different
kind of topology, something more like a paedic topology. Let me make some definitions that are
going to be enforced for the rest of this lecture. So K, capital K is going to be a field which is
complete with respect to discrete valuation. The characteristic of capital K is going to be zero,
and I'll write OK for its ring of integers. This has a maximal ideal, and this is going to be a
perfect field of characteristic P. So the question is then, what can you say about
having a correspondence like this if X is now a smooth variety? Wait, let me add the link.
But now it's going to be over this paedic topology.
You can still talk about things like algebraic vector bundles with a flat connection on X,
or more generally algebraic D modules on X, and there's an analog of the left-hand side that
you could consider, which is paedic etal sheets on the variety X. So the question that I want to
tell you something about is what is the relationship between
paedic etal sheets on X and algebraic D modules?
If this is a question mark, and I'll say something about it at the end.
So this is a question which has a lot of history. I'm going to spend most of the lecture just
talking about the history. So the first thing to observe is that this is an interesting question,
even when X is just a point. So let's talk about that example.
So let's say X is spec K itself. Is this this category of paedic etal sheets
is something interesting in that? So the left-hand side can be thought of as
representations, continuous representations.
And while vector bundles with a connection on a point, that's not so interesting.
It's dimensional vector spaces over K.
So these categories are not going to be equivalent. The category on the left-hand side is,
for example, quite a bit more complicated than the category on the right-hand side,
but you could nonetheless ask how they are related.
So let me
give you a very naive attempt that you could make to relate them. Just a construction which
goes from the left-hand side to the right-hand side.
Let's say you start with some QP vector space having an action of the Galois group G,
and you want to extract a K vector space from it.
But maybe the most obvious thing you could do is take V and tensor it over QP
with an algebraic closure of K, and then take the Galois invariance inside.
That's a construction. You input an object on the left-hand side, you get out an object on the
right-hand side, and probably this just gives zero. There's no reason that when you tensor V
with K bar that it has to have any Galois invariant vectors at all, or any non-zero Galois
invariant vectors at all. You can slightly improve this construction. Let me write
C for the rest of this lecture. It's going to be a completed algebraic closure.
It's going to be okay. The completion of K bar with respect to its
theatic topology, that gives you a slightly better chance of having some invariant vectors.
It's not hard to convince yourself that this is a finite dimensional K vector space whose
dimension is bounded above by the dimension of V, but usually it's smaller than V. This is a vector
space of the same dimension, I believe if and only if V is a potentially un-ramified representation.
Representations that you're interested in in practice are not going to be seen by this
construction very well. What kind of representations are you interested in in practice?
Let's think about Galois representations that come from algebraic geometry. Let X be again a smooth
projective over K. Then you can take your favorite homology group of X-based change
to this completed algebraic closure. Let's say with QP coefficients, and this is something
that will naturally carry an action of the Galois group G. This is a typical example of
something that lives on this category on the left-hand side. This naive construction,
what you're doing here is you're hoping that you start with some complicated representation of the
Galois group and when you tensor with C to make it into a C vector space with a semi-linear Galois
representation, then it becomes simpler. Representations like this, that is the case. Let me state this
as a theorem. If you take Hn of XT coefficients of QP after you tensor it with the field C,
this has what's called a Hodge-Tate decomposition. This splits as a direct sum over i plus j equal to
n of hi of X of coefficients in differential forms of degree j.
This is a K vector space and base change to C and with an appropriately added Tate twist.
What this is saying is this Galois representation, once you tensor it to C to make a semi-linear
Galois representation, it becomes kind of simple. It's not something that necessarily has a basis
of Galois invariant vectors, but it looks like a direct sum of pieces of Tate twists of representations
of that form. Maybe just a bit of history. This is a theorem of faultings from the 80s,
but this was conjectured by Tate in the 60s. Tate proved this in the special case where X is an
abelian variety with good reduction. It's called the Hodge-Tate decomposition because it looks
kind of like the Hodge decomposition in complex geometry and because Tate was the one who essentially
discovered it. Motivated by this, let's make a definition.
So P, a Galois representation, is Hodge-Tate.
If, when you tensor over QP, with C, this splits as a sum of Galois representations of the form
C, Tate twisted by X for different values of X. So then part of the content of this theorem of
faultings is that if you look at the etalc homology of a variety over K, base change to C, it gives
you a Hodge-Tate representation in this sense. And it's also a construction. If you have a Hodge-Tate
representation, I think the content's notation for this was D-Hodge-Tate, B-Vector space,
which is given by the following construction. We take the direct sum over all integers N,
for when and I say those are all integers K, of the tensor C Tate twisted by J,
and take the Galois variance inside there. So here the input is a QP representation of the Galois
group and the output is some graded vector space over K. And this theorem is telling you also what
happens in your Galois representation comes from geometry. This outputs the graded vector space,
which is just the direct sum over J of the direct homology of X with different coefficients in
differential forms of degree J. Now this is not quite what you might want the Riemann-Hilbert
correspondence to do. The Riemann-Hilbert correspondence, what you would want is something
where you put in something that relates to a tall co-amology and it outputs something having to do
with Durham co-amology. So here you're inputting something having to do with a tall co-amology
and it's outputting the Hodge co-amology of your variety or the associated graded for the Hodge
filtration on its Durham co-amology. So this picture is something that you might want to upgrade.
To a story about Durham co-amology and the appropriate formulation of that was
introduced by Fontaine. So Fontaine introduced something or a field
of
periodic periods. Let me tell you a little bit about
this field here, how this field B-Durham works. So first of all, this is a field which carries
an action of the Galois group G. K sits inside here as the subfield of G invariant vectors.
The field B-Durham has a discrete valuation. The valuation ring is usually denoted by B-Durham plus
and inside B-Durham plus you have its maximal ideal which is a principal ideal and B-Durham plus
modulo M is this completed algebraic closure of K.
And moreover, more generally, for every N you can look at the maximal ideal, modulo the maximal
ideal, switch to the power N, modulo the power N plus 1. This is a one-dimensional C vector space
which is identified with the M-Tate twist of C as a Galois representation. So B-Durham is equipped
with a filtration by powers of this maximal ideal and the associated graded of that filtration
are exactly these Tate twists of C that appear when you start thinking about the Hodge-Tate decomposition.
So another theorem of faultings
is an upgrade of the previous theorem to a statement about what happens.
We take the total homology of a variety
and tensor it over Qp
the field B-Durham. This gets identified with the
B-Durham homology.
If you're an original variety X, this is a finite dimensional vector space over K,
tensor B-Durham, and this is a isomorphism
of, well, B-Durham vector spaces
with the Galois action.
And moreover, it's an isomorphism of filtered B-Durham vector spaces
where on the left hand side you just give it the obvious filtration coming from the
amatic filtration of B-Durham and on the right hand side you give it a filtration
which is the tensor product of the obvious filtration on B-Durham with the Hodge filtration
on Durham homology. And in respect to that, this is actually an isomorphism of filtered
vector spaces and if you take the associated graded of this isomorphism you recover the
previous theorem of faultings, the Hodge-Tate decomposition of the homology of your variety.
Okay, so I think in order for the end of my lecture to make sense,
I'm going to need to tell you a little bit more about this field B-Durham.
I need to tell you how it's constructed.
So I feel like this is the kind of thing in a talk that pleases no one because
either people already know this well or it's just going to seem completely mysterious.
And for those of you who find this completely mysterious, like it was completely mysterious
to me for many years. So I commiserate. Okay, so let me just say a few words about how this field
B-Durham is constructed. Okay, so the essential point is that so inside this completed algebraic
closure C, there's a valuation ring, which I'll denote by OC. And the input is going to be that OC
is a perfectoic ring.
A general construction that you can do can apply this to any ring. If you want, you can take your
ring, you reduce it mod P to get an FB algebra, and then that has a fremanious endomorphism.
There's some map from OC mod P to itself, given by raising elements to the power.
Take the inverse limit of sequence of copies of OC mod P, transition maps given by the fremanious,
and that's a ring denoted by OC flat. And now this by construction is a perfect FB algebra.
So it has a canonical lift to characteristic zero, given by taking the ring of bit vectors.
And well, this ring of bit vectors has a universal property in this context.
This has a map to OC flat, and therefore a map to OC mod P. And this will automatically lift to
a homomorphism back into OC. This uses the fact that OC is periodically complete.
And now one of the first lemmas that you prove in the theory of perfectoid rings
is that if OC is a perfectoid ring and you run these commutative algebra constructions,
that this map is a surjection with kernel, the principal ideal,
generated by some element D, and D is not a zero divisor.
So this ring is
denoted by eight.
So what does this mean?
Well, if you take this ring, your valuation ring OC, that's what you get by taking
A nth and reducing it mod D. More generally, you could take A nth mod D squared, or A nth mod D cubed,
so on. This forms an inverse system whose limit is A nth.
But now OC is the valuation ring in this chaotic field C. This embeds into C.
And similarly, this embeds into A nth mod D squared with P inverted.
See if what you get by taking OC and inverting P. And you can do that to every stage in this
inverse system. Take this periodically complete ring and invert P. And now B diron plus
defined to be the inverse limit of, sorry for my terrible board work, the inverse limit of this system here.
To change the side that it appears on.
Okay, so this constructs for you a ring
with surgex onto the field C. And it's not hard to convince yourself if you believe the statement
that I made here that this B diron plus, first the image of D in B diron plus is a non zero
divisor. And if you mod out by D, then you get the field C. And moreover B diron plus is
deatically complete. So that means that this is a discrete valuation ring with residue field C.
And B diron is defined to be what you get if you take B diron plus and instead of modding out
by D, you invert D. Okay, so that's the construction of this field of periodic periods. And I'm
showing you the construction just because I want to call attention to one feature of it,
which is that it's a construction that you can do anytime you have a perfect way.
So that the usual B diron plus is what you get when you apply this construction
to the valuation ring and the completed algebraic closure. Okay, but
here you have perfect right spaces gets a lot of mileage out of considering this construction more
generally. So far, I've been talking about what you might call the Riemann-Hilbert
correspondence over a point. So let me just actually spell this out. Okay, so definition.
B is called a diron representation. Yes, well,
if you tensor V over QP with B diron and take the Galois invariance, so this is going to be a K vector
space. One can show that this is a finite dimensional K vector space whose dimension
is always at most as big as the dimension of the original representation V. And we say that V is
a diron representation if equality holds. That's the same QP dimension or another way of saying it
is V is a diron representation if after you tensor with this ring of periodic periods,
you can find a basis of Galois invariant vectors. And now
in this case, you'll define, actually why don't I call it Rh to be evocative.
Riemann-Hilbert correspondence. The Riemann-Hilbert correspondence
in this setting should take this Galois representation V and assign the K vector space given by the right
hand side of it. In this case, that's a bit of terminology. If you graph this bit of terminology,
then you can restate what Fulton's theorem was saying.
Fulton says that if you look at the QP-A path homology of your smooth proper variety X,
first of all, this is a diron representation. And if you apply Rh to it,
what you get is identified with analogous diron homology effects.
Okay, so the question is, how does this generalize to
varieties which are more complicated than them? So this is the Riemann-Hilbert
correspondence over spec K, not over X. I'm applying it to the vector model that comes by
looking at the homology. So this theorem was upgraded by Peter Schultz about 10 years ago
to a statement about local systems not over a point, but over a variety X or more generally
a rigid analytic space X. I'll stick to varieties just for the sake of
definiteness. So let X be a smooth protective variety over K.
Okay.
Fulton introduced a class for key local systems
X that we called diron local systems.
And definition of diron local system is rigged so that when you specialize to the case when X is
a point, it becomes the notion of a diron representation in fontane sense, in the sense of the
definition that I just gave. And he introduced a functor, which goes from
diron local systems on X,
and assigns vector bundles on X with a flat connection.
So this is an instruction which is analogous to what I over the complex numbers is the
sort of primordial version of the Riemann-Hilbert correspondence. When everything is smooth,
the input is something that is a local system on a smooth projected variety.
I guess he actually worked in the rigid analytic setting, and it was local on the rigid space,
but if you want an algebraic statement X has to be.
And while I'm not going to review his construction and the definition of diron
was essentially write down the construction, the local system is called diron if the construction
works. That is, given an arbitrary local system on X, there's something that you can write down
that kind of looks like it should be a sheath with a connection on it, but it's not necessarily a
vector bundle of the right rank. And if it is a vector bundle of the right rank, then you call
the local system diron. And that's a little bit of an unsatisfying picture because maybe the
class of diron local systems is quite small, but follow-up work of Lu and Ju showed that actually
that's not true, that this condition that Schultz introduced of being diron is something that's
quite often satisfied. So what Northeering says is let E be a QP local system on X.
Let's say X is connected for simplicity. All the connections are equivalent.
One is that E is diron, meaning that Schultz's construction works and associates to E
an algebraic vector bundle with connection. Two is that the stock of E is a diron-dawa representation.
Or every close point.
Variety. And it's condition three is the same thing, but just at your favorite point.
So this condition of being a diron local system is actually
not really any stronger in the case of a high-dimensional variety than it is in the case
of a point. It's just saying something about demanding some condition on the gawa representations
that you get by taking the stocks of your local system at the close points.
Okay, so this is something that you might call the analog of the
Riemann-Hilbert correspondence for local systems. And what I would like to do for the
rest of this talk is tell you about a, well, a different construction, which is equivalent
for local systems, but which makes sense for more general kinds of QP and tall sheets on X.
There's no feet. Yes, sorry.
This produces filtered algebraic vector bundles with the connection satisfying Griffith's
transversality. So this is going to be essential to the construction, to the generalization of
this construction that I'm going to describe. We're really going to take advantage of the fact
that we're not just supposed to produce D-modules in non-archimedean geometry. You're supposed to
get filtered D-modules. So this is really something that I think is very different in the non-archimedean
and the Archimedean stories. So in the Archimedean world, there's a story of the Riemann-Hilbert
correspondence, which relates constructible sheaves to algebraic D-modules. And there's
Hodge theory, which tells you that often the D-modules that you meet, carry filtrations.
In the Archimedean version of the story, the Riemann-Hilbert correspondence is going to produce
the filtration as well as the D-modules.
Yes, exactly. And well, if we're overseas, there's a construction which is going to give you something,
but it's not even going to be a flat connection. Let me stick to K.
So I want to take the last, what have I got, 20 minutes of the lecture and tell you about
an extension of this construction. But first, I want to go back and address a sort of technical
point. So let me just remark. So this is a construction which works at the level of
billion categories. But the Riemann-Hilbert correspondence of Kashiwara was some equivalence
of derived categories of construct. Left-hand side was some constructible derived category,
right-hand side was a derived category of D-modules. And so let's say we
are aiming for a construction
which works
at the level of
derived categories.
And so
let's just go back to the case where X is a point. And in that case, I told you what this
construction is supposed to do on a Galois representation. You're supposed to take your
Galois representation, tensor it with the field B-derum, and take Galois invariance in sight.
In other words, you define this to be H-naught of the Galois group with coefficients B and
V tensor over QB. This is not a construction which is friendly to working with derived categories
because here it's an H-naught and there are potentially other cohomology groups.
And actually there aren't just potentially other cohomology groups, there are other
cohomology groups. So let me just remark that in this setting,
we looked at H1 of G, acting on the tensor for QB-derum.
This is another vector space of the same size.
So just taking H-naught is maybe not a construction which makes sense at the
level of derived categories. An analog of that that you might try is to take the derived version
of G invariance in the tensor over QB-derum. But this would actually be a different construction
because it would see the higher cohomology of G acting on this vector space,
and well, cohomology above degree one vanishes, but cohomology in degree one doesn't vanish.
So a related technicality in working with these constructions is that the class of
derive representations is not closed under extensions. And so I'm just going to address this
point. What's the problem? So there's a calculation.
It goes back to Tate that if you take H1 of your Galois group acting on
completed algebraic closure of K, this is a one-dimensional vector space over QP,
meaning there's an interesting extension, one-dimensional vector space over K,
meaning there's an interesting extension of C by itself as a continuous Galois representation.
So what is that extension?
Well, let me just tell you how you can describe it. You take a two-dimensional vector space over C
with generators X and Y, and you let the Galois group act in such a way that
the element X is Galois invariant. So that corresponds to like the element one inside this
C inside question mark. And the element Y transforms by
G of Y is Y plus the log of the cyclotomic character on G times X.
So this is an extension. The trivial representation is a
DRAM representation. This is an extension of the trivial representation of itself,
which is not DRAM, because when you tensor this vector space with DRAM,
well, you can't necessarily get rid of the way the Galois group is acting on this element Y.
The ring of the periodic periods is not big enough to see that when you tensor this
with DRAM, that it has a Galois invariant. Sorry, it has a basis of Galois invariant effect.
But you can address this by working with a bigger period. So to fix this,
I'm going to replace C. Just a polynomial rings C brackets U
through the Galois group acts.
I want to C brackets U by declaring that an element of the Galois group acts on U
by carrying it to U plus log of the cyclotomic character on G.
So just take C and add something which
looks like the Galois enlarge it. So you see this representation sitting inside it.
Now, let me make some definitions.
So C is weakly arched. So V is some QP representation of the Galois group.
Yes, well, let's take the same construction as before, where you take V,
you tensor it with all the different K twists of C, and then take a Galois invariance inside.
But now let's actually just add this formal variable U.
This is now maybe a little bit less obvious that this is finite dimensional as a vector space over
K, but it is finite dimensional as a vector space over K. And in fact, that dimension is always
less than or equal to the QP dimension. V is weakly arched. Hey, if these have the same dimension,
and they're always in inequality.
So let me remark that it's an analogous notion of weakly dirom, just to find in the same way,
but using the dirom period ring instead of this direct sum. But it's actually equivalent to the
notion of being weakly arched. So this implies that if I take V and I tensor over QP with
the dirom, I'm going to add U, and here I'm going to put it in angle brackets to indicate that that's
a completed polynomial ring. It supplies the G invariance inside here. This is a vector space
of the same dimension. So let me call this RHV. And moreover, this is compatible with my previous
definition, what I called RHV. That if V is a dirom representation, then in fact, the
gaoua invariant vectors inside here are all things that can be written without the U.
Adding the U doesn't add any more gaoua invariant vectors. But this class of weakly
hodgekate representations is a little bit bigger. It includes, for example,
well, an extension of QP by itself with the gaoua group acting in this way.
Another remark, which is a consequence of Tate's calculation that this is essentially the only
cohomology class that you see, the one that's killed by adding this variable U, is that the collection
of weakly hodgekate
representations is closed under extensions.
So now let's go back to the setting where we have a smooth projective
variety X to find over the field K. And now let E be a QP, a constructable QP sheet.
So definition of weakly hodgekate.
If the skull could be at any point, is a weakly hodgekate as a gaoua representation.
Close point X.
And as in the Luju situation, it's not really something that you have to check at every point.
Spices to check at a single point of each stratum on which you choose some stratification
by connected subvarieties on which this sheet is locally constant.
So this is some class of constructable sheets, which is not everything, but it's pretty large.
And now,
so claim
where the input is
constructable derived category of QP at all sheets on X. And when I add a decoration here,
the columnology sheaves are required to satisfy this weakly hodgekate construction.
And it goes to the derived category of
bounded derived category of regular whole unit D modules.
And moreover, that this is compatible
with all the usual operations on both sides.
And that's push forward.
And actually, it's a little bit better than that. And we're going to take advantage of the fact that
it's a little bit better than that. It lands in the category of
filtered derived category of DX modules. And many of these compatibilities are at the level
of filtered D modules, like compatibility with Verde duality, compatibility with proper push
forward that holds at the level of the associated graded of the filtration.
Okay, so why don't I just tell you what the construction is?
What's that? Yes, exactly.
Okay, let me tell you the definition of this filter.
So we have our variety X, algebraic variety over K.
It has an associated rigid analytic space, which I'll write as X and
and there's various topologies you can put on that, you can give it the analytic topology,
you can give it the atoll topology. I want to give it a very fine topology introduced by
Pedro Schulze called the proatoll topology. So I'll emphasize that by giving it a different name.
Look at the proatoll side of X. So here you have the usual sheaf of algebraic functions on X.
The rigid analytic space has also a structure sheaf with the sub sheaf of integral functions,
which I'll write as O plus. And on the proatoll side, these have completed
completed pullbacks, which I'll emphasize that they've been completed by writing hats on top.
And now basic insight of Schulze is that this proatoll side is something that really lets you
treat X as if it's locally topologically very simple. Like in the world of complex manifolds,
the analytic space of a complex variety is a locally contractable topological space.
This thing is not quite locally contractable, but it has a lot of open sets that feel like
they have the topology of cantor sets. Another thing that is what I'm actually going to take
advantage of here is that this structure sheaf becomes in some sense locally very simple. So
X proatoll N has a basis.
U such that if you take this completed
structure sheaf and evaluate on U, this is a perfect one.
And this sits inside
X and U without the plus. This map is just given by inverting P.
And now let me remind you that this construction of B-doron was something that makes sense for
any perfectoid ground. So this
receives a map from something that you might call, I'll call it script indoron plus
for the proatoll to publish. These are very non-Moderian things.
So there's this
this sheaf B-doron plus of U. And well, the situation is a lot like what we saw over a point.
This has, it maps to the completed structure sheaf. The kernel of that map is an invertible ideal
sheaf. And if you invert that invertible ideal sheaf, you get a bigger sheaf which is called B-doron.
And now
there's a basic calculation that we can do here. Let me call this map. It's the usual name of this map,
new. I always forget. Okay, so
we have this sheaf of commutative rings on the proatoll site, script B-doron.
So, calculation, I'm not sure who to credit this to.
This language probably shalt say, but I think it really goes back to faultings.
Faultings figured out how to ask the question to which the answer is the doron complex.
So the claim is that if you form this push forward, what you get is the
doron complex of this analytic space. And moreover, this is not just true at the level of
some sheaves. It's true at the level of the filtered derived category. This B-doron has a
natural filtration by powers of the ideal sheaf on B-doron plus. And that corresponds on this side
to the canonical filtration on the doron complex by its sub complexes of differential forms of
you put some bounds on the degrees. Oh, sorry, this is wrong.
All that business earlier about adding this variable U was so that I could make this statement
that if you add this extra parameter U and do this calculation, then what you get is the doron
complex. Okay, so what is this?
So let E be a complex two pieces.
Well, I can take E and I can tensor it.
If I can restrict it to the pro, it will also be an elixpress.
And I can tensor it with this doron sheaf if there's a completion involved in this tensor product.
And I can push this down to the analytics base. And whatever I'm going to get,
oh, sorry, I need to add that extra parameter U, whatever I'm going to get, it's going to be a module
over this, whatever the analogous construction when there was no E. So this is going to be a
filtered complex. The filtration comes from the filtration of the doron by powers of its
ideal sheaf. In the filtered derived category, this has an action of the doron complex.
Let me tell you something else that has an action of the doron complex.
The doron complex, this analytics base, it also acts on the structure of the analytics base.
And it doesn't just act on it, it maps to it by quotienting out by differential forms of
degree greater than zero. And well, this O has a commuting action of the ring of differential
operators on the analytics base. And I want to use these commuting actions to convert this
into a D module. So now let me just give a definition and then I'll end the talk.
So here's the definition of RHV. It's defined to be what you get.
Well, this is the analytic version of the Riemann-Hubert correspondence,
is what you get when you take r-homes in the world of filtered
omega star modules. Super script. You indicate I'm doing this in the filtered world.
For omega star XM, OX seems to be the lower star of this doron complex.
Now, this OX is a left module over the ring of differential operators.
When I hom over OX, it becomes a right module over the ring of differential operators.
And this is a model for the normalized version of the Riemann-Hubert correspondence.
It lands in right D modules. And this is the construction that
it really takes perverse sheaves to things that are in degree zero.
All right. I think I will stop there. Thank you.
Do you see you also take perverse sheaves to just degree zero?
Yes. So that's in my list of claims that this is a wonderful thing to do.
That should have been one of the wonderful things about it.
What is? Sorry.
I did not hear. What is a wonderful thing that's beyond that list?
So one of the features of the classical Riemann-Hubert correspondence
is that it takes perverse sheaves to algebraic D modules that are concentrated in degree zero.
And the claim is that this construction has the same property.
Okay. And moreover, it's a little bit better than that because this produces filtered D modules.
And the fact that it lands in degree zero is not just true after you forget the filtration.
It's true for the associated graded of the filtration.
So can you repeat the last step? How do you get the U module structure out of this?
How do you get? Right. So just a general bit of formalism. Like if I'm in some...
Here's a formal setup. I have two rings that are acting, have commuting actions on some module.
And then maybe A also acts on some other module M. And then I form hums in the world
of A modules from M into M. So now A doesn't act on anything anymore because I've used up
the A actions, but B is acting, let's say...
Here's the B. It actually has a left action on... Oh, I see.
So, and then when I hum into something else, that becomes a right action.
Yeah, so maybe...
So there were a lot of failed attempts. So after Schultz had wrote down construction
for Durand local systems, Bargav and I had an infinite number of conversations where we tried
to do something like this by a formula that would specialize to exactly the construction
that Schultz was writing down. And we were... Things weren't making sense. We weren't coming
up with good constructions. And this is not exactly the construction that Schultz writes down.
This is what you would get if you took his construction, which produces a left demodule
and then converted it to a right demodule. And somehow the... If you tinker with the construction
to try to make it produce a right demodule instead of a left demodule, then everything
falls into place much more easily, let's say.
How does the Omega start acting on the phone?
It maps. So these are both commutative rings. And this is just projection onto
Gerziro of the hodge filtration.
The Omega starts also like pull back and push forward.
Sorry, say that again?
Sorry. So there's also this thing that you can push from the approach while you get this Omega.
Omega star
helps pecs. And claim was that this could be recovered as our new lower star of this
Keith B. Durham, as long as you add this extra parameter U.
So the map is not from like junk. It's just from like forgetting about it.
No, the map is visible there. So this B. Durham... Well, sorry. So first B. Durham plus.
This is a filtered isomorphism. So if you want to see, fill zero here is the whole thing.
And fill zero here is what our new lower star B. Durham plus.
B. Durham plus sits inside B. Durham. And it also projects onto OHAT.
And this map, when you take our new lower star, it's the one that produces this map here.
So if you, if you want to produce not a filter D module, but the associated graded of that filter
D module, there's an easier version of this construction, which is just you'd never think
to write down this ring B. Durham and you'd do everything with the completed structures.
When you speak of models, how do you work into the half category?
Yeah, I view it as a symmetric minoidal infinity category.
And then there's a good theory of commutative algebra objects,
associative algebra objects, modules, and so forth.
Probably you could do it in some more concrete way, but I'm not tempted to try to.
Sorry, is there an analogous, analogous story? Well,
how exactly is there some story if you start over like an object equals to you?
Um, yes, your thesis about that.
So maybe I should say, so I gave a lot of credit to people at the beginning,
but I didn't give credit at the end, but Bogdan's thesis is a crucial component of this story.
So one of the claims here is, you know, you do this construction and you produce something
that has an action of the ring of differential operators, but how do you know that it has any
finite properties at all? The claim is that it produces regular holonomic D modules.
How do you even see that it produces coherent D modules?
And the claim is that, first of all, that coherence is something that you can test
before you do this R-hom procedure, that you can just test by studying this object.
And so this object is a filtered module over omega star Xm.
So if you look at the associated graded level, it's an O module.
And the claim is that that O module is actually coherent, at least under the assumption that
E is a weakly hotchkate. And that claim is tested by or approved by proving something
analogous over, not for your variety over K, but your variety over C.
And the essential input that gives you the finiteness there is your thesis.
Okay.
There should be a prediction that, like, it should produce a Higgs bond over C, right?
Yeah, well, it produces something which is maybe not canonically a Higgs bundle, but locally
after making some choices, you can identify with the Higgs bundle.
And yeah, I mean, that's what happens at the associated graded level.
When you're over K, you produce exactly a Higgs bundle when you pass to the associated graded.
And there's something that replaces that over C.
Okay.
Sorry, but we don't know anything about a Higgs bundle, but...
We don't know any...
Sorry, if we started with something that was only defined over C.
Yeah, then we...
So I mentioned that you get regular holonomic debodges out of this.
An even better statement is you've got regular holonomic demodules with quasi-unipotent monodrome.
And that's something that you should definitely expect because the QPA tall sheaves,
when they're defined over a discreetly valued field, they have to have quasi-unipotent monodrome
by a theorem of growth antique.
But that's something that you would definitely lose if you were not in an arithmetic situation.
You can write down much sheaves with much more pathological properties.
And we don't know how to prove theorems about those sheaves.
Let's end Jacob again.
