So I'm going to talk about riding work distance in groups.
My focus area is auto-automorphism group.
So you've seen some free groups earlier.
One of the ways of working on a free group
is working on the auto-morphism group of the free group.
And one of the ways of working on this group
is working on this nice space it acts on.
Trying to do is trying to write distance between two elements
of the group in terms of the geometries of the spaces
this group acts on.
So let me just start by introducing you my objects.
There's going to be free group non-Aubelian on n letters.
First, one of my objects is the auto-automorphism group
on the free group.
So you take the automorphisms and model it out
by inner-automorphisms.
So to talk about something like this,
I'm going to give you two more other groups
as a background information also.
Also, the most of the research done in the auto-automorphism
group is done by comparing this with other groups,
linear groups, and mapping class group.
So the other object that I'm going to have today
is the mapping class group.
So S is going to be a surface, possibly, well, punctures.
The mapping class group is going to be
self-homomorphisms orientation preserving up to isotopic.
Again, the goal is writing distance, more distance.
Or maybe I should say actually estimating more distance
in these groups in terms of spaces,
or actually hyperbolic simplicial complexes they act on.
OK.
So my tools are going to be as follows.
So I'm going to have a geometric object.
I'm going to have a combinatorial object,
and this is going to be hyperbolic.
The third one, I will have a notional projection.
So let me tell you briefly the three examples
that I'm going to talk about.
One of them is the group is SL2Z.
The geometric object is going to be,
let me write this way, maybe, the geometric object is going
to be torus, or punctured torus.
Combinatorial object is going to be, it's called, fair graph.
OK.
So for the mapping class group, I'm
going to have something more complicated than torus.
This is just a surface with more genus.
Fair graph is going to switch to some more complicated
combinatorial object, curve complex, hyperbolic,
hyperbolic.
OK, when we come to the auto-automorphism group,
things are going to start getting a little shaky.
So I'm going to have a three-manifold here as my object.
Let me just briefly tell you what it is here.
It's called double-handle body.
Connect to some of S2 process one.
And then my object is going to be,
there's several curve complex analogs here.
They're geometrically different, but they're all hyperbolic.
So I'm going to, included in the research,
is sphere complex and free-factor complex.
OK, so this is my Zerminsky.
It's hyperbolic, it's given by them, 99.
Free-factor complex, so these are all hyperbolic again.
Best win of fame, and one is two group of people.
One of them, the first one, hundown motion.
OK, so this is briefly what's going on.
So the distance formula that I'm going to talk about
is actually Mazerminsky distance formula.
It's famous that way, and the intuition is coming from this.
They sort of generalize it to write the word distance
between two mapping classes using the geometry of the curve
complex.
And we're trying to do that for the out-of-end currently.
But we have just some partial results so far.
It's an ongoing project, ongoing work.
So this is the goal, but I'm going to tell you,
I'm going to talk mostly about this so that you
can see what I'm talking about.
So all right, so the first example, as I said,
is out-to-z torus and figure graph.
OK, so again, think about the torus maybe with a puncture
if you like.
The picture's not going to change.
All right, so here's what's going on.
So every curve on the torus is going to give you
a rational number.
So let me point this way.
A curve on torus, well, here when I say curve,
I'm talking about the homotopy classes,
and I'm talking about simple, closed, et cetera.
And then on the way, you need to make some equivalences,
adjustments, but this is pretty much what's going on.
If you take a curve on the torus,
then you get a rational number.
So this p and q are, actually, you get a pair of points,
lattice points, coming from the homology class of the torus.
So this p and q are relatively prime.
OK, so and also, this is the slope
of that curve in the given homology class.
To be more precise, so.
OK, and this curve here is the longitude curve, which
is the 0, 1 curve.
And or you can think of one, that's
going to be identified with the number 0.
All the other curves, p, q curves,
are going to be p times around and then q times
around the other one, OK?
So more over, what happens is, if you
take a couple of curves, pair of curves, p, q, and rs,
which intersect once, you get a matrix in SL2Z.
So you can just write them as columns,
and then you get a matrix, OK?
So that's the torus.
Actually, this is the mapping class group of the torus,
but I'm not going to get into that.
OK, so on the other hand, what else
can you do with these numbers is,
you can do some projection on the circle,
and they fit on the circle.
Each of these numbers are going to be a number on the circle.
So this number, then you can understand,
you can think about the curves as numbers on the circle.
So they fit on circle, and then I'm
thinking about the circle as the boundary of the hyperbolic
plane with the disk model, OK?
Boundary of the, all right, so now we have this picture.
Now you've got this curve here, p over q,
and then r over s, and then I'm just
going to connect them with the geodesic in the hyperbolic
plane, and then what I can do is the following.
Now I can get a third curve using this, too, OK?
So p, q, r, s, p plus r, q plus s over r,
you can just either add them or subtract them.
That gives you a third point, OK?
So if you take a triple of points like this,
those are all points on the, these are all points,
and if you connect them with the geodesics,
you get an ideal triangle, OK?
So this point here is something like that.
All right, so now you just keep doing this for this guy,
for these two, and keep doing it everywhere.
You will get a tessellation of the hyperbolic plane, OK?
By ideal triangles.
And the graph that you see here, and you don't look at the,
you just look at these points, the vertices and the edges,
that's the fair graph, OK?
So it is hyperbolic, obviously, and I'd
like to say one more thing about this, which is,
so this guy here, you can actually see that on the torus.
So it's called the interest.
So the third edge, in a given triangle like this,
a third, so you have two of the vertices, the third one,
third word or text is obtained by taking
a dain twist of one of them along the other one, OK?
So here's what a dain twist is.
So let me just throw this picture again.
So imagine that I'm going to take a dain twist
of this purple longitude curve along the green one.
So imagine that you're cutting this along the green.
So you've got this following picture.
Oops, I should have gone with the green.
OK, so you cut this, and now you give it
two pi twists to one side and glue it back.
So what happens is this green one is fixed,
nothing happens to that, but something
happens to this purple one, which intersects that.
So the picture here, I can throw this very well,
is the following.
So this is fixed.
The other one goes around this green one once,
if you do it twice once, and comes back, OK?
So in terms of matrices, what's happening is,
so if you have pqrs, when you do a dain twist along this pq
curve, so the dain twist gives you, OK?
So this is what's going on.
So these are related.
The group is now, you can try to understand the group
using this graph, also using the objects coming
from your geometric object, which is torus, OK?
So now I'm going to try to tell you, what do I mean
by walking on the group?
So let me just try to draw a better picture of this.
Fade a graph here, if I can.
So this is a slightly skewered picture,
because when you do this projection, actually,
it's not quite going to look like this,
but this is much better for our purposes.
So this is the point infinity here, and the point 0 is,
let's say, here.
And there are ways of doing this.
Let me take, so this is 0 over 1.
Positive 1's numbers, let's say, there.
Negative's are here.
OK, so they also say that you can draw this
without taking your hand off the board,
but I'm not that talented.
I'll try not to watch it, though, OK?
All right, so this just keeps going.
It's just a part of it.
OK, so maybe I'm going to put one more here.
All right, so observe that if you take a pair of curves
in which intersect ones, you got this matrix,
and corresponding, what you have in the graph
is an edge between those two.
So now my calculating distance between two matrices in SL2
is it turns into moving from one edge to another one
in this graph.
So how is this happening for this graph is the following.
Let's say I got this edge here.
I don't know if you can see my colors,
but let's say I got this one here,
and I want to go to something here.
There's so many colors, but OK.
So here's what's going to happen.
There are two moves on this graph, which makes you do that.
One is called pivoting.
OK, actually, this is the only thing that you have.
Pivoting is which corresponds to the actually
the interesting along one curve.
OK, so here's what's going to happen.
So what I'm going to do first is there's this vertex here.
I'm going to pivot on that vertex.
So this is the first edge.
I pivot once, I go to this one, and I pivot again,
I go to this one.
OK, so I pivot twice here.
All right, now this was my pivoting vertex.
I'm going to switch that pivoting vertex.
That's my second move.
OK, all right, so I did this one, two.
I was here, now I'm on this edge.
I'm changing my pivoting vertex if I did this correctly.
All right, so and then I'm going to pivot once, which is here.
OK, now I'm on this edge.
I switch again.
Now I'm here in the bottom, OK?
I pivot again once.
Now instead of this edge, I got this V edge.
And I change again.
OK, where was I trying to go?
I was trying to go here.
All right, now I have to do this pivot twice.
I got this one.
And then I think I have to pivot twice again.
OK, so you just pivot, which is the interest on that torus,
and then you switch the pivoting vertex.
You're actually switching the curve that you are taking
the day interest along.
So the distance estimate between this edge and this edge
is just the number of these edges plus the number of pivoting.
So what happens is, can we do this for objects,
geometric objects, which have genus more than one?
All right, so let me talk about the mapping class group
briefly again.
And then I will tell you a little bit
about the auto-automarketing group.
OK, so for the mapping class group, so in higher genus,
my SL2Z is going to switch with the mapping class group.
My torus is going to switch with some more complicated surface.
And my fairy graph is going to switch with curve graph.
OK, maybe here it's the time to say what a curve complex is.
So this is a combinatorial object that I'm one of the objects
that I'm interested in.
Divertices are, again, homotopy classes of curves,
simple closed curves.
Edges are given by disjointness.
OK, now you can see why fairy graph is a curve
complex for the torus.
So these curves are not really disjoint,
but they intersect once.
That's the minimum intersection of two curves on torus.
There isn't going to be non-trivial curves on a torus
which are disjoint to curves.
So I should say maybe minimal intersection here.
OK, so again, that's hyperbolic by Maser and Minsky's work.
And all right, so what's going on there
is a dain twist thing, the pivoting,
to switch with the, what I'm going to describe now
is what is called subsurface projection, which
actually includes this.
So turns into, so basically what's going on here
is you're taking two curves, and the notion
is called relative twisting.
So this relative twisting of all these two curves
along some other third curve.
So what's happening is you, again,
I'm drawing the simplest pictures,
you cut your surface along gamma.
OK, so what I'm drawing here is s minus gamma.
That gives you another surface.
So let's say this is the curve gamma to copies of gamma.
There's some other foliage there.
So you had some curves on s before.
Or now we'll take some first simple ones.
So alpha and beta are like that.
They were alpha and beta.
Now let's call this guy subsurface something,
like z.
Now you have another, now you had s,
now you cut s along this curve.
And now you have arcs.
Now you can continue with the arcs,
but what I'm going to do is the following.
I'm going to take a neighborhood of these guys,
and then complete with the neighborhoods of these gammas.
And then each of those regular neighbors
is going to give me two options.
For each arc, I'm going to get two curves, which
are this joint.
So basically what I'm doing is I'm adding these curves,
the boundary, this gamma, and make them curves.
So I can do that.
But that's a curve now in the subsurface.
So let's take, here's what I did.
I took alpha intersection z and beta intersection z,
and then complete them to curves, whatever that means.
And then now, let's call them alpha prime and beta prime.
Those are curves in the z subsurface.
Now we can calculate the distance
between them in the curve complex of the subsurface.
Distance between alpha prime and beta prime in curve complex
of z.
The notation here is just funny, c here, for the curve
complex, by the way.
So what do you have out of this is
the Miski formula, which actually has a lot more than this.
But I am just not talking about most of the stuff.
This is the simplest way that I can tell you about this formula.
I've got 2,000.
All right.
So distance in the mapping class group
between two mapping classes can be approximated
by distance.
So there are going to be a bunch of curves correspond.
You can approximate f with curves, set of curves,
basically, on the surface, which is called marking.
And then there's a corresponding combinatorial
complex, which is called marking complex.
So this distance is approximately that distance.
And then this distance is, now I'm just
going to use those, let's just call them something,
subsurface coefficients.
So now I'm going to look at all of those subsurface
coefficients.
So I'm taking these sets of curves,
projecting them to the subsurfaces,
all of the possible subsurfaces.
And that gives me these distance in curve complexes
of subsurfaces.
And I'm adding them up.
But I have to take only the big enough ones.
There's some threshold here.
And once you have that threshold,
you know how close this estimate is.
There's some k and c so that this estimate is valid.
So here, again, z is subsurface.
All of the subsurface is including the z itself,
as s itself, actually.
So this is the distance formula, actually,
that I'm talking about.
Here, for the fair graph, this was just exactly what
I told you, the number of those edges and the twistings.
Here, you have those twistings are going to appear here,
too, because they're anuli.
Plus, they're more complicated subsurfaces.
They also are here.
OK.
OK, so I guess I will talk a little bit now
about the autofend case if you guys are OK with everything.
So I hope that I at least gave you
some intuitive idea of what's going on.
All right.
So let me tell you a little bit about the autofend case.
So the question is the following.
Can I just take an automorphism of the free group
just like this and then get some formula like this?
The answer is no.
Well, not yet.
So is there a similar distance formula?
No, because the subgroups of autofend
are much more complicated than the mapping class group.
There are certain subgroups which do not appear there.
So we have no control over them yet.
So we don't know.
But we have partial, something partial.
We have partial solution to this problem, let's say.
So this is my ongoing project with my Taysley advisor
and another collaborator.
OK, so our solution is the following.
So I have something nice for mapping class group.
So I'm going to tell you what we are working on
and I'll tell you what it is.
So there's a distance formula.
Only for certain type of automorphisms,
which is called geometric automorphisms.
So these are the automorphisms coming from mapping class
group shortly.
OK, let me tell you one of the reasons that we actually
try to understand autofend using the methods that we
understood the mapping class group.
So there's a homomorphism.
So let me just start with taking S
to be a surface with pi 1 free group.
And then there's a map, automorphism actually.
Sorry, a homomorphism.
So this is coming from the action of the mapping class
group on the pi 1.
So there's a sort of morphism here.
Let's call this I of f.
So this is one of the reasons that we
think that autofend maybe is like mapping class group,
might have similar properties.
So the second result that we are getting here
is that that map is actually quasi-isometric embedding.
So this mapping class group is undistorted in autofend.
OK, so the geometric automorphisms,
auto-automorphisms are these guys,
the images of mapping classes under this map.
These are geometric.
So to get some sort of distance, form
a notion of a distance, we actually use something like this.
But then what happens is there we were adding them,
so completing them to curves.
I'm just going to take them as arcs.
And then what happens is I thicken them,
and then somehow I turn them into spheres.
OK, so let me tell you about that.
So the autofend case here, as I said,
instead of mapping class group, now I have autofend.
Instead of surface, I will have double-handled body.
OK, and then instead of the curve complex,
I will have sphere complex, mainly vertices are spheres.
Again, these are isotopic classes of spheres
in this free manifold.
Let's give it some name.
And again, the edges are given by this jointness.
OK, let me tell you what the formula is,
and then introduce you this guy, and then that's
going to be it, because I'm not going
to be able to give you any more details.
OK, so the formula is the following.
OK, so we think the following.
Distance in autofend between two geometric auto-automorphisms,
well, what's going to happen is I'm
going to now approximate the midgraphs.
I'm going to realize them on roses.
There's going to be a rose corresponding to this.
There's going to be a rose corresponding to this.
And then those roses are actually
also certain sphere systems.
So there's a lot of details here that I'm not telling you.
But OK, so this distance is, so there's
a similar notion to the subsurface projection, which
is called subfactor projection of best venoffane.
Let me just write it here.
OK, but the problem is that does not
include the rank one case, meaning there's
no analog for the dain twist case.
For the dain twist case, what you're doing actually here
is you're projecting onto an annulus,
and then you do the dain twist.
So those coefficients are inside.
I mean, the estimate includes those subsurface coefficients
in the Mazer-Minsky case.
Here you have to work harder.
So what we did was our contribution is actually not
this, but we defined some notional relative twisting
for conjugates classes, and we introduced that,
and we calculated those numbers.
And again, with some threshold, you
need to take only the big ones, otherwise you're
going to have to deal with infinite sums here.
But when you do that, there are going to be numbers here.
This is multiplicative error, and this is the additive error.
Up to these two, this distance is going to be this.
So that's our current work on progress.
OK.
So I think I haven't deleted it yet.
Yeah.
What are the differences in the underbund spaces?
Here you have all the subsurfaces, including annuli.
Dain twists are included.
So by annuli, I mean you're actually
projecting the curves on annuli,
and you calculate the dain twists.
So those are included here.
But current technology in the out-of-end case,
there's something called subfactor projection,
which you cannot project onto rank one free factor.
So you have to do something else, define something else.
So that's what we did, and we combined those numbers.
All right, so I got a tiny bit of time.
I'd really like to introduce this three manifold.
OK, don't hate me.
All of a sudden, in the groups and free groups,
and all of a sudden, there's going to be three manifold.
It's actually turned out to be very useful.
I was able to construct, let's say,
find a way to understand dain twist automorphism.
There's a dain twist automorphism in the out-of-end case,
but it's a very large group of automorphisms, which
includes the dain twists coming from the mapping class group,
but it has more stuff in it.
So using this manifold, I was able to actually
understand those geometrically.
So that's why I have a special interest in this manifold.
So let me just introduce you to that.
OK, so maybe start with the analogy.
OK, so the analogy is the following.
So how should we understand this?
So you take this sphere and take disks on sphere, pairs
of disks, OK, and then just empty inside, OK?
And now, what do you have is a circle.
You used to have a disk, now you have a circle.
There's nothing here.
You created holes now on the sphere.
Stretch them and then identify these circles.
So identify them pairwise.
That's why we took pairs.
So each time you do that, you've got to handle.
So this is one way to understand surfaces.
This is you're constructing right now genus 3 surface
out of a sphere.
OK, this is not a pretty picture, but so this is S2.
So and then this would be 3 connected sum of S1 cross S1.
Now I'm going to do this in one dimension up.
And let's say the board is S3.
So it's not really, I'm not going to be able to draw it, but.
So the board is S3.
Now I'm taking pairs of balls, OK?
I'm scooping out balls out of S3, let's say.
Now I have the sphere boundaries.
So I got this with this, this and this with this.
Now I identify them.
Each time I do that, I've got to S2 cross S1, OK?
And why is this useful?
So this is it.
So let me just draw a set of generators,
just a regular, I don't know.
Now let's just pick a point here.
Here's one generator.
Goes there, comes back from here,
because these are identified, OK?
Another one and another one.
OK, the fundamental group is free group.
So that's the important thing for us.
So pi1 is free group.
So this is one of the models that we
used to understand the free group, OK?
Another way of understanding this is,
why is it called double-handle?
This is a picture that I like using.
Oh, the other thing is there, so this is reducible.
So there are spheres in this manifold, non-trivial spheres.
We meaning you cannot just squeeze them into a point.
So for example, this is a sphere.
But you can draw very complicated things,
like something going out of this, coming back from here,
and then going, something like that, OK?
So there's spheres.
So you use the spheres.
The sphere complex comes from this.
You use the homotopic classes of spheres as vertices.
And then you use the, you just create edges.
The other thing is you can see graphs also here.
You see that?
I mean, I could have just done this very nicely here,
and then draw this.
And if I forget about the spheres, you see roses, et cetera.
OK, so another picture to use to understand this
is the following.
This is actually what we used in here.
So you take it, I'm going to take a surface with one puncture,
a one boundary component.
So if I have an arc like that, so what I'm going to do
is the following.
I'm going to take this, first, take this to handle body.
So I'm just going to take it, crossing it with I.
And then when I do that, again, the picture
is not going to be nice, but.
All right, so this arc is going to turn into a disk,
something like that.
Oh, didn't do it good.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going
to take another one like this and then identify two of them.
I'll get a double handle body, which is the same thing.
But what happens to this thing is you take one disk
and another disk and glue them.
You've got a sphere.
So in that way, you take these arcs and turn them into spheres.
And then you can now try to understand this.
How to switch.
You can think about that.
OK, well, as I said, there's a lot of things
that I cannot say right now.
But my time is up.
I'm going to stop here.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Do you have questions?
We're from there.
Yes.
Is there an analogy of Maas going to the manifold?
Like, do you take the whole time?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
The one important thing about this three manifold is the mapping
class group of the three manifold.
You can still think about the homeomorphisms,
and the mapping class group of this three manifold
is almost out of N. So it's not mod anymore.
I should say mapping class group.
So there's a sequence, short exact sequence like this.
There's a kernel here, but the kernel is finite.
It's z to d, some finite number.
So this is, the mapping class group is almost out of N.
And also, this is surjective.
Yeah, I mean, the short exact sequence.
Yeah, yeah.
There it is, yeah.
Yep, z to, I'm not writing this, z mod 2 to the k.
Sorry.
No, no, that's not, sorry.
Those are dangerous.
There's a notion of a dangerous in this manifold, too.
There's a, there's a danger, you can do dangerous along a sphere.
You can just throw in some objects here in this manifold
and try to do, you know, some, some sort of the interest.
That's what I did to, to generalize the interest,
to get a geometric picture.
But this is coming from dangerous along spheres.
So if you do it twice, somehow it just, just goes off.
And there are only, you know, finite many of them.
So, yep.
So I had a question about the previous record.
So is it known this group of geometric, how it can be,
how it is inside?
It's big.
Big, what, I mean, what, in what sense?
The kernel in that case is not, if you compare it with other fan,
the kernel is huge.
It's not, it doesn't give you this, for example.
You're not going to have this nice kernel there.
So, and there's a lot of research being done on that kernel, so.
Okay, so we'll break for tea.
And at 4.30, we'll have an introduction session.
Thank you.
