How can economics be connected to religion?
Isn't it well sort of sacrilegious to connect the two of them?
Many people start off with a belief that the main relationship between religion and economics
or even morality and economics is one of opposites.
This view starts from the idea that religion is about virtue and spirituality.
On the other side, economics is about money-grubbing behavior that shades into greed and vice.
From this view, religion should be a haven from economics, a time of rest from economics
where economics shouldn't intrude.
But there are economists who are perfectly willing to walk in where angels might fear
to tread.
I promise I'm not going to try to say something silly about how Adam Smith's argument about
the invisible hand, that argument about how people pursuing their own self-interest can
act in ways that benefit society as a whole, I'm not going to say that the invisible hand
proves the existence of God or anything like that.
However, there are two big reasons why religion is a topic for economic research.
One is that Adam Smith wrote about it, and if he wrote about it, economists claim it
as our own.
The other is that economists today study the relationships between economics and religion,
and an old saying goes, economics is what economists do.
I want to talk about both of these reasons for a moment.
I've mentioned the name Adam Smith before.
Smith wrote a great book published in 1776 called The Wealth of Nations, which is widely
regarded as the founding text of economics as a systematic way of thinking, and that
book has a substantial discussion of religion.
Smith raises a concern that if religion is large and centralized, as was common in his
time and in many countries of the world today, there's always a tendency for government to
worry that religion might be opposed to government, and you end up with a power struggle between
these two large institutions.
On the other side, if government subsidizes or supports a religion, then organized religion
will also become centralized and a part of the power structure, and in this way, government
might be able to stop organized religion from being a threat to government power.
Now, two problems arise, as Smith discusses in this point of view.
When centralized religion is subsidized and sort of brought in with the government in
that way, that religion also becomes a monopoly that stops having incentives to please people.
It becomes full of bureaucracy, not about meeting the needs of worshipers.
When a large religion is established, it's also not entirely controllable, so you can
end up at some point with a conflict between state and religion, perhaps even a struggle
for primacy which in centuries ago could lead to certain kinds of civil war.
In contrast, if you have many smaller religious groups, then these problems go away.
Decentralized religion is going to try and meet the needs of people.
Indeed, it has to compete to do so in a sort of marketplace of religion.
And decentralized religion is ultimately in no danger of becoming a strong, society-wide
organizing force in a way that leads to a state religious discord or even a civil war.
Now, if all this smacks of the kind of free market competitive ideas for which Adam Smith
is known, that's no coincidence.
Smith liked the idea of bottom-up organizations competing for your allegiance, whether those
were businesses producing something or religious organizations.
The ideal for Adam Smith was Presbyterianism.
He was from Scotland.
Presbyterianism came out of the reform movement led by the Scottish clergyman John Knox in
the 16th century.
That religion's constitution emphasizes a popular election of ministers and officers,
wide dissemination of authority, and local property rights.
And Smith liked these ideas about what was built into Presbyterianism.
He liked it that it was competing with the other main religions of his time, like Anglicanism
or Catholicism.
Adam Smith wasn't alone in liking competing religious organizations.
Thomas Jefferson, writing about the same time that period as Smith a few decades later,
also liked small competing religious groups.
Jefferson wrote that in matters of religion, the maximum of civil government should be
reversed to read, divided we stand, united we fall.
As we'll discuss throughout this talk, the U.S. is a major outlier in religious belief.
There's far more religious attendance and belief in the United States than you would
predict for a high-income country.
A lot of that has to do with Adam Smith-style competitive religious markets in the United
States, not supported in any direct way by government and thus needing to rely on attracting
people from the community.
Modern research on economics and religions has echoed some of Smith's themes about
competitive behavior between religions.
In modern economic research, the connections from economics to religion goes both directions.
That is, you can talk about whether economics is affecting religious participation or how
religious participation affects economic behavior.
The first big category is how economic development might encourage or discourage religious belief
and how circumstances of economic and political development in a country affect the willingness
of people to join different religious groups.
For example, some countries might have an established national church or religion, others
might not, and what difference do these kinds of things make to actual participation in
organized religion?
Another example is that you might need to be part of the main state organized religion
in order to be an effective player in business or government, or you might not need to do
so, and that's sort of a category we need to get into as well.
Our second big category then would be how religious behavior or participation changes
the behavior of individuals, either in their own lives or in the way that they might treat
and trust others.
If that happens, then religious behavior could affect economic behavior and perhaps even
long-term economic growth.
Again, you can find the roots of these points of view in the writings of Adam Smith, and
I love reading Adam Smith because he's such a pragmatic and insightful old moralist, just
makes me grin all the time.
Smith writes about two different kinds of tastes for religion, the liberal and loose
kind of religion or the strict and austere kind of religion.
Smith is first writing about how people of fashion, he calls them, would follow a liberal
or loose morality, and Smith writes, in the liberal or loose system, luxury, wanton and
even disorderly mirth, the pursuit of pleasure to some degree of intemperance, the breach
of chastity, at least in one of the two sexes, provided they are not accompanied with gross
indecency and do not lead to falsehood or injustice, are generally treated with a good
deal of indulgence, and are easily either excused or pardoned altogether.
So that's liberal or loose morality.
On the other side, common people, Smith argues, need to follow a different system of morality,
which is the strict and austere kind.
And here Smith writes, the vices of levity are always ruinous to the common people, and
a single week's thoughtlessness and dissipation is often sufficient to undo a poor workman
forever, and drive him through despair upon committing the most enormous crimes.
The wiser and better sort of common people, therefore, have always the utmost abhorrence
and detestation of such excesses, which their experience tells them are so immediately fatal
to people of their condition.
The idea here is that what Smith is calling the strict and austere religion helps common
people follow the work habits that might help them lead to being more successful in
life, prudence, saving, responsibility, and hard work.
The catch phrase a lot of people have in mind when they hear this is the Protestant work
ethic, a phrase that emerged from a book published in 1905 by the sociologist Max Weber called
the Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.
Now, as we'll discuss later, there's not actually a ton of empirical support for the
exact details of this argument that Weber made back in 1905, but there are other ways
in which the broad spirit of connection from religious belief to hard work, saving, and
other behaviors that might lead to a way that would help capitalism flourish and survive.
So what we want to do in this lecture is first start off with the arguments about how the
economic situation affects religion, and then about how religion affects economic behavior,
and at the end we'll return to this idea of what is virtuous and what is sinful and
offer some thoughts.
You know much of the 20th century, the most prominent argument in the social sciences
about the link from economic to development to religion was called the secularization
hypothesis, and that hypothesis was that as the economy develops, religious belief and
practice will fade.
The reasons for this weren't always given explicitly, but at some risk of oversimplifying,
a lot of the supporters of this view thought of religion as a sort of superstition, and
they felt that as a science-based modern economy grew, religion was just sort of fade away.
Whatever the motivation behind that argument, however, we can look at the facts about the
connection from religion to economics and see if it's true.
Two economists who work in this area are Robert Barrow and Rachel McLeary of Harvard University.
In one of their studies, they compiled a large data set with data on 81 different countries,
and there's lots of economic data, lots of survey data on religious attendance and religious
belief, and also other things like the type of political system, how much political freedom
there is, whether there was a state-supported or subsidized national religion, all sorts
of factors like this in this data set.
They then tried to use statistical methods to help separate out cause and effect what
was leading to what in all of this data.
And they found, looking across this data, that when a country has higher per capita
income, that's correlated with lower religious attendance.
Sort of an illustrative finding from their work is that as GDP per capita, the gross
domestic product per capita, rises from about $8,000 a person, which is roughly, say, the
Russian economy, to something like $21,000 per person, which is more like, say, the economy
of Italy, the result would be that monthly attendance at formal religious services drops
off from 41% of the population to 24% of the population.
Now, it's hard to get long-term data across countries that match together religious participation
and the size of the economy.
But an economist named Larry Iannaconi does a lot of interesting work in this area, and
he put together a data set from a number of different sources that goes back to the 1920s,
where you can look at levels of religious participation in 30 different countries.
He finds over time that there is a general pattern of mild decline.
However, he points out that this overall pattern is really a mixture of different patterns.
There are very, very large drops in religious participation in a lot of countries of Western
Europe, like Britain, France, and Germany.
A number of other countries are more or less holding steady.
The United States is an exception to the overall pattern of high-income countries having less
religious attachment.
Lawrence Iannaconi, who I mentioned a moment ago, compiled an interesting set of facts
about U.S. religious participation over the long term.
For example, he found that American church membership was 17% of the population at the
time of the American Revolution.
It was 34% of the U.S. population by the mid-1800s, and it's more than 60% now.
So over the very long term, religious participation in America has been growing.
He also found that about 40% of Americans attend church in a given week, and that's
been about the same level since survey data goes back to about the 1930s.
Surveys back to that time also show about 95% of Americans say they believe in some form
of God or divine spirit, and steady numbers, if slightly lower numbers, believe in the
existence of heaven, the existence of hell, and afterlife, and other religious-related
facts.
Now for the record, rates of religious belief and activity in the United States are not
particularly related to income.
However, it is true that those who have more education tend to be more likely to be religious
believers.
Now, it's true that those with different income and education levels in the U.S. often
belong to very different kinds of denominations, or they worship in different ways.
But it would not be true in the United States to say that religion is primarily focused on
those with lower incomes or on those who are less educated.
The fraction of the U.S. population employed as clergy has been roughly constant for the
last 150 years.
It's about 1.2 people for every thousand.
Overall, the U.S. has much more church attendance than you would expect given its level of income.
As I mentioned a moment ago, the work of Barrow and McCleary on the connection from income
in an economy to religious attendance.
On their calculations in the United States, we attend church roughly like a country which
would have about one-third as high a per capita income level as the United States does.
What about the future?
In particular, what about developing countries that are expanding their economies?
What patterns will their religious beliefs follow?
It's unclear whether they will follow the Western European model of religion becoming
less central as their economies grow, or the U.S. model where religion remains a strong
force and expands as their economies grow.
It is true that religion is a powerful force in many low and middle income countries today.
It's also interesting that according to data from a few years ago, 2005, Europe and North
America accounted for only 35% of the world's Christians.
Most of the world's Christians live in the southern hemisphere and in East Asia.
So when you think about Christianity as centered in, say, Western Europe and North America,
that viewpoint is no longer true.
In fact, in Africa, Christians outnumber Muslims.
Most Muslims are in the northern Africa, Middle Eastern region, but over the continent as
a whole, there are more Christians.
And there's some modest evidence of religious resurgence in various religions in China and
in Eastern Europe.
It's also true for Islam that Islam has spread outside its original geographic area.
Most Islamic people don't live in the Middle East, but they live in South Asia, East Asia
or parts of North Africa.
It's hard to figure out the future trends about economic development and religion here,
but it is interesting to notice that this future trends are not going to be determined
by what happens in Europe or in the United States.
They're going to be determined by what happens in Asia and Africa.
To some extent, the future trends will also be determined by what happens to government
constraints on religion.
In 2009, a branch of the Pew Foundation put out a report on global restrictions on religion.
And they found that almost 70% of the people in the world live in countries with high restrictions
on religion.
They were including here both government restrictions and social restrictions.
These two aren't always the same when they don't always work together.
For example, in Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and Iran, those are places with both government
and social restrictions on believing a religion other than Islam.
In contrast, places like Vietnam and China have high government restrictions on certain
religions, but they don't have much social hostility toward those religions.
Places like Nigeria and Bangladesh are places which have high social hostility to certain
religions but are fairly moderate in the explicit government restrictions.
It's true that over time, the existence of state-supported religion does seem to be associated
with higher church attendance, maybe as you might expect, but this really raises the problem
that Adam Smith discussed.
When government favors a certain kind of religion, that religion over time might lose touch
with what ordinary people are looking for.
It may also become its own kind of power structure that challenges the government, and in thus
in one way or another, it will become part of a broader social discord.
One last issue with connecting economic development and religion is that it's surely possible
to be a religious believer without being a church member or a regular attender.
This may explain part of what's been happening to church attendants in Western Europe.
There could be people who are still believers, they're just not church belongers.
There's some data in the United States that suggests something like this might be happening
here.
That today, younger adults are less affiliated with any particular religion than their parents
or grandparents were at the same age.
If you ask young adults questions about their beliefs about life after death, or heaven
or hell, belief in God, whether they're absolute standards of right or wrong, those sorts of
questions, they actually answer about the same as previous generations did.
However, they do have lower church attendance.
So, will young Americans become believers and not belongers in the European style?
Or will they, as life goes on and they marry and form families, will they join churches
as well?
If it does end up being a world of believing without belonging, then you have to think to
yourself, is that really the same thing?
Will religion affect people's lives in the same way regardless of whether they actually
attend a church?
Or is this believing without belonging sort of a generalized good feeling that doesn't
work in the same way as being an active participant in a more organized form of religion?
I don't quite know the answer to this, but it leads on to our next question, which is
How do the choices about how we actually act as religious people affect the economic behaviors
of our lives?
And of course, my emphasis here really is on economic lives, not on other kinds of behavior
or on inner spiritual lives.
It may seem odd to talk about choosing religion as if it were a rational choice.
After all, religious belief in some ways stands apart from rationality.
But most religious traditions recognize at least an element of personal commitment and
decision that's involved.
And most religions have varying degrees to which people could be active within their
religious community.
So it's useful to ask why a greater degree of religious commitment might be chosen.
For example, when we choose religion, is that just about the risk of some negative outcome
after death?
Maybe that's true for some.
Is it just true that the church is a form of civic gathering?
A hundred years ago, the church was in some ways the main form of entertainment.
There wasn't broadcasting of television and radio.
People didn't live as much in cities.
And so to see and talk with people, hear music, hear a speech, all that sort of stuff happened
in church.
Another part of religion would be, though, about investing in your community, giving
something back to the community that you live in, and in some ways also benefiting yourself
on earth by reinforcing certain kinds of habits.
If you have that, they call the Protestant work ethic, whether you're Protestant or not,
working, saving, being thrifty and prudent, being part of the community, might be good
for you economically as well.
So let's think about this Protestant work ethic.
What was Max Weber's argument back in 1905?
It started with the old mindset we've talked about before.
We're back in the Middle Ages.
People filled their role in society and worried about whether they were right with God.
There wasn't a heavy focus on bettering themselves economically in the world, with all of that
means.
Weber went on to argue that the Protestant Reformation changed this mindset.
It emphasized personal diligence, frugality, and thrift.
It encouraged risk taking, and it really said it was OK to have personal financial gains.
A classic example of this would be in the work of John Wesley, whose writing and thinking
are the starting points of the Wesleyan offshoot of Protestantism.
One of Wesley's famous lines for his congregation was, gain all you can, save all you can, give
all you can.
But even back in 1760, there were some concerns.
Wesley at that time regretted, he seemed to be a lot better at inspiring the first two
pieces of advice, that is, gain all you can, save all you can, but he didn't feel like
he was being effective with give all you can.
Wesley also noted with concern that, as his flock had more material wealth, they tended
to become less devout, which is a version of what we were calling the secularization
hypothesis earlier.
Max Weber, writing around 1900, was offering an explanation of why the countries with big
Protestant majorities, like the United Kingdom, parts of Germany, the United States, seemed
at that time to have stronger economies than primarily Catholic countries of that time,
Spain or Ireland.
However, modern historians have quarreled pretty strong with Weber's evidence.
For example, the area of what is now in Germany called the Rhineland was actually very economically
advanced, but it was actually more Catholic than Protestant.
Belgium was one of the early countries to industrialize, but it was much more Catholic
than Protestant.
So, given all the different estimates about economic growth at different times over the
centuries and exactly when Protestantism kicked in, it actually, for a modern economist,
is difficult to make the case that Protestant Europe grew more quickly over the centuries
than Catholic Europe did.
And if you look around the world today, it's hard to see a link from Protestantism to capitalism
when you think about the rising economies in places like Japan a few decades ago, China,
India, Brazil in modern times, other places that aren't exactly bastions of the Protestant
Church.
It's hard to show in a research paper that religious commitment causes productive behaviors.
Imagine some people are just more interested in self-improvement than other people.
So they go to church, they take classes, they eat right, they exercise, they try to do foolish
stuff and so on.
But it's not that church causes these behaviors, it's just that it's part of the overall package
of those behaviors.
It's hard to sort out the cause and effect here.
Now, researchers have long recognized this issue and they've tried to use various research
methods to disentangle cause and effect.
For example, there are studies on teenagers who, for one reason or another, need to move
between communities.
They are involved or not involved with churches in different communities.
They can be compared to other teenagers who didn't move to communities and find out whether
or not religious participation as you shift communities has a causal role in changing
their lives.
It does seem like there are certain aspects of life, physical and mental health, more
to parent families, more persistent work activity that are to some extent associated
with more religious practice.
But interestingly, religious belief in survey evidence seems to have no overall effect on
attitudes about capitalism, markets or government regulation.
To put that point another way, people with the religious beliefs have attitudes all over
the place on these issues, and so do people without religious beliefs for that matter.
But religion does, in some ways, offer a network that can help economic activity.
There's a friend of mine who studies medieval history and told me that some centuries ago
you could deposit your gold with a Benedictine order in one part of Europe, take a letter
from that order to another part of Europe, and when you arrive you could withdraw an
equivalent amount of gold there, sort of the automatic teller machine network of medieval
Europe.
There's a network there that can form a kind of trust and that can benefit the economy
in that way.
Often those people from certain minority religions knew they could trust each other, and this
reputation for trust sometimes spread to others outside their religion as well.
One can think of the communities of Jewish folks around the world or Mormon folks around
the world where there's a community of trust interacting.
My wife is a member of the Religious Society of Friends, the Quakers, and my wife's Quaker
friends sometimes say about their immigrant ancestors to the United States back in the
18th and 19th century, they came to do good and ended up doing very well.
And part of the reason was there was a widespread belief that a Quaker wouldn't cheat you and
as a result their businesses flourished.
In the more modern world there are studies of Islam that make a similar point.
If you are in an economy that's developing, it doesn't have a great legal system for resolving
contract disputes, and you want to participate with someone in a market, you'd like to have
some extra reassurance.
And knowing that someone is an active practicing member of a religious community, Islamic or
Christian or other, provides some of that additional reassurance, and this helps the
economy to function.
Now, I don't want to overstate the role of religion in economic life here.
Religion is one of the network of social institutions, government, nonprofits, family, businesses
and others all interacting with each other.
And economists have long argued, for the point of view, that the incentives in the market
environment are often more important than the incentives that directly come from religion.
One famous example of that is the famous British economist John Stuart Mill, who back in 1848
wrote about the paradox that in Ireland, Irish workers seemed what Mill said were indolent
and insouciant.
But then when they came to America, Mill wrote, no laborers work harder.
Why was it that they had this change?
Their Catholic religion stayed largely the same, but the economic institutions changed.
The economic setup in Ireland made it not worth working.
The economic setup in America made it worth working.
And of course, you could make a similar point about the experiences of Japan, China, India,
Brazil and others, where the religion stayed largely the same, but when the economic institutions
changed, economic behavior changed quite a bit too.
So there does seem to be some evidence that religious institutions can support economic
activity, especially in the earlier stages of economic development when other institutions
of contract law perhaps aren't so well established.
But people of all the major religions and a lot of the smaller ones also seem to react
really dramatically to changes in economic incentives.
Let's try to sort out this connection from virtuous behavior to economic behavior a little
bit more closely.
There's an economist named Deirdre McCloskey, who's been based for the last decade or so
at the University of Illinois at Chicago.
And she's argued that there are three main sets of virtues that we talk about when we
talk about virtues.
The first one McCloskey argues is called aristocratic or patrician virtues.
And these are honorable virtues in the sense that the people seek justice even at great
personal risk.
When you think about these aristocratic virtues, you think about people who are sort of great-hearted
with their friends and their guests, and they're ferocious in anger.
They seek out truth and honor.
You sort of think about some of these folks in the modern world as kind of movie action
heroes have this set of virtues.
These people may be total losers in other ways, like not necessarily the greatest spouse
or co-worker or boss, but there is one set of virtues that they do have.
A second set of virtues, McCloskey argues, are the plebeian or peasant virtues, which
are the virtues of fortitude, humility, faith, the reverence, hope and charity, solidarity
with others in your situation, the pride of living in your place in the world.
In popular culture, you sort of imagine the image of a family farmer standing against
the horizon with their crop growing behind them, or an assembly line worker of a few
decades ago with dirt on their hands standing in a black and white picture with the crew
at the end of the shift.
Or maybe someone who's sort of a modern state, someone like Albert Schweitzer or Mother Teresa,
maybe a little less famous like that, maybe someone who's at a non-profit, facing really
hard social problems and doing their best to comfort and solve them without really being
in the limelight.
So that's a second set of virtues.
The third set of virtues, she argues, are the bourgeois virtues of prudence, thrift and
responsibility for oneself.
But it's not about being proud of being noble or proud to do one's duty.
It's taking action and new action, seeing yourself in a world of equals, having to deal
with them in a self-possessed way, and having a certain amount of enterprise and following
up on things and doing things, and trying to do good in the world around you.
Now my point here, and McCloskey's point, is not to sell you on whether this three-part
distinction is essentially correct, or whether it should be rephrased in one way or another.
My point is, we have a long tradition in Western culture of recognizing these virtues of aristocracy.
And we also have a tradition of recognizing the sort of endurance virtues of the plebeian
or peasant point of view.
But we also sometimes treat the bourgeois virtues as a kind of a sin of self-interest
or being too focused on yourself.
This is odd because in a modern economy, most of us have bourgeois jobs, most of us
live our lives in that way.
It seems to me that many modern virgins of religion offer a strong form of support for
these bourgeois virtues of prudence and thrift, responsibility, self-possession and enterprise
doing the best you can for yourself and your family.
Now I'm not saying this is necessarily the most important part of religion, indeed I'm
focusing here on relationships from religion to economics, so they're large parts of religion
that aren't necessarily covered here.
But in understanding the real world economy, institutions like religion that help to build
its underpinnings are clearly one of the important pieces of the puzzle.
