The study of fertility choices has a long history in economics.
It reaches back at least to the writings of the late 18th, early 19th century economist
Thomas Robert Malthus.
Malthus is so famous that his name is turned into an adjective.
If you refer to someone as a Malthusian or a prediction as a Malthusian prediction,
people know that you're talking about the problem of overpopulation.
Let's talk a little bit about Malthus and what he actually said.
Thomas Robert Malthus might have been the first person ever to have been an official professor of political economy,
but economics was often called back in the 19th century.
Malthus was born in 1766 and died in 1834.
He was the son of a prominent lawyer, and his family had friends like David Hume, the philosopher, and Rousseau.
He was a very well-educated guy.
He had a Cambridge degree.
He became a minister in the Church of England and a professor of history and political economy at East India College.
Malthus is an interesting figure in the history of economic thought for a number of reasons.
For example, he was one of the very first to recognize and write about what he called a glott,
and what we would today call a recession.
But Malthus is most famous today for an essay first published in 1798, called an Essay on the Principle of Population.
Malthus' essay started by arguing for what he saw as a couple of basic truths.
Today, we might view them as hypotheses that need to be tested.
One truth was subsistence increases arithmetically, but population increases geometrically.
Now, when Malthus says subsistence increases arithmetically,
he meant that it adds each year a certain fixed amount to the supply of food and other basic needs of life each year.
When he says population increases geometrically, he means it increases at an exponential rate.
For example, if population rises 3% per year, then the level of population would double every 24 years
and then double again and double again and double again over time.
Now, if you have one factor which is growing arithmetically at a fixed amount over time
and another which is doubling over certain periods of time,
then it's inevitable that the geometric rate of growth for population will outstrip the growth of subsistence.
And there are not many options here to avoid a human disaster.
For example, people could not have children because of moral restraint and knowing it wasn't a good idea,
but as a good minister, Malthus hoped for such restraint, he didn't really expect it.
And so he predicted inevitable misery and starvation as population outstripped subsistence.
It's certainly true that population has increased dramatically over the last several centuries since Malthus wrote,
and certainly true there have been times and places of widespread malnutrition.
In round numbers, the world population rises relatively little from, say, the birth of Christ to about the year 1800.
There are about a billion people on planet Earth at any given time.
But then the population increases dramatically to 6 billion by the year 2000 or so,
and current predictions are that world population will top out at about 9 billion in 2050,
and after that will decline somewhat modestly after that.
The Malthusian prediction or hypothesis, though, wasn't just that population would rise,
it was that population would rise faster than subsistence, that population would be limited by starvation,
and that isn't the pattern that we seem to be seeing.
In the United States, for example, the total number of births for an average woman was dropping in the 19th century.
The average number of births for an American woman was about 7 in 1800.
It was down to about 3.5 births per woman by 1900, and by 2000, up to the present,
it's a shade over two births per woman on average.
This isn't just a pattern in the United States.
The entire world has seen a similar pattern of birth rates dropping sharply.
Most countries of Europe, Russia, China, Japan,
birth rates are below the replacement level of about 2.1 children per woman that would keep the population level.
In fact, Japan's population actually topped out a few years ago, around 2006,
and has started what should be a long, gradual decline in size over the decades to come.
Now, this is just a huge change in the human condition.
In 1800, many women spent about 70% of their adult years bearing and rearing young children.
By the year 2000, with fewer children and longer life expectancies,
in much of the world, women are spending maybe 14% of their adult life in that way.
But at least so far, it's not true that population is outstripped subsistence.
On average, people today have enormously more income and enormously more wealth.
We live in a world that still has considerable malnutrition,
but for the world as a whole, obesity is actually a problem for many more people than lack of food.
In addition, it's not true that starvation is what is reducing the birth rate.
Now again, I don't mean to say there aren't some genuine problems with how the world will feed 9 billion people
and what the long run environmental effects of a high level of population may be,
but it's not Malthus' prediction.
It's not a prediction of never ending population growth ending in mass starvation.
It's not starvation that's reducing the birth level,
but rather it's higher income levels and improved technology in various ways.
This interaction of income levels and technology with fertility
suggests that an economic exploration of fertility and of parenthood as a whole may be fruitful.
Let's think about an economic framework for the decision to have children.
There are immediate costs and benefits of raising children.
The costs tend to fade out after the children are grown,
but there's still potential long term benefits if the children look after you during sickness or retirement.
There's also a quantity quality trade off.
More kids means family resources of time and money need to be divided in more ways,
whereas fewer children means the possibility of focusing more resources on each child.
The immediate costs of raising children can come in two categories.
One are out of pocket costs, the money you spend directly on raising children.
The other is opportunity costs, the value of the other uses of time that you spend raising children.
In a low income, low skill, primarily agricultural economy like the U.S. economy in the early 19th century,
the out of pocket costs of raising children were fairly low,
because other opportunities for earning income, especially for women, aren't that plentiful.
You're not giving up a big outside salary to raise kids at that point in time.
In fact, a lot of the immediate costs of having kids during the 19th century
were offset by the fact that children provided an economic benefit for the family,
they provided labor for the family.
Lots of tasks related to farming or storing food, gathering wood, getting water
could be assigned to the children.
Later in life, children were then a form of retirement assistance.
Some evidence from the early 20th century, for example,
says that households headed by men over the age of 65 got about one-third of their income from their children.
Those who study evolution in general and human evolution in particular
have emphasized this trade-off between the quantity of children
and the quality of investment in children.
If parental investment in general isn't too important for offspring,
then it makes evolutionary sense to have lots and lots of offspring.
This is true, for example, in some species like frogs and fish.
If parental investment is really quite important to the offspring growing up,
as is often true in large mammals like bears or elephants,
then that species tends to have fewer children and more parental investment in each child.
Now, we don't have quite that range in human society, of course,
but in low-income countries, most people don't have a lot of education.
There are not a lot of ways to take advantage of that education, if you get it.
So they tend to lean more toward the quantity side of this quantity-quality trade-off.
It's better in a way for them to diversify by having lots and lots of kids
rather than to try and invest a lot in a smaller number of kids.
Reverse tends to be true in higher-income countries.
Let's think about the modern cost-benefit calculation.
What do the out-of-pocket costs look like in a high-income country like the United States?
The out-of-pocket costs of having a child are fairly high,
but they aren't rising all that much over time.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture started in 1960
producing estimates on what costs to raise a child.
So now you can look back over about a half-century of these estimates.
In 1960, for example, the average expenditure on a child
in a middle-income husband-wife family amounted to $25,000 in 1960.
If you adjust that for inflation over time,
that would be the equivalent of $183,000 in 2009.
In 2009, it cost, according to their figures,
about $222,000 to raise a child, so the real growth was about 22%.
In fact, because of economic growth since then,
spending on kids has actually grown more slowly than growth in the overall economy.
Housing was the largest expense on a child in both time periods, 1960 and in the present,
and it increased in real terms over this time.
And health care costs were also up a lot.
Food was one of the largest expenses for raising children in both time periods,
but in real terms, after adjusting for inflation,
the costs of food have diminished over time.
So overall, nearly a quarter million dollars in out-of-pocket costs per child.
And this doesn't count college tuition
or having the child live in your basement until they turn 30, either.
That's the sort of number that makes me look at my three children
just a little bit differently, not better, not worse, just differently.
In addition, this cost typically is no longer offset by children working in the family business.
Household jobs like clearing the table after meals or emptying the dishwasher
aren't quite the same as telling the fields,
gathering wooden water or doing laundry and canning food from the days of old.
The trade-off for the parent is that you're paying much more
and you're not getting the same direct labor benefit from your children while they're young.
The opportunity cost of women's wages has also changed.
The opportunity cost, remember, is what you give up in order to raise children.
It used to be that a woman working at home looked after the kids.
Now, both parents are often working outside the home,
so they need to make other trade-offs in terms of hours or less pay
so they can find time to look after the kids themselves
or else they need to find a daycare option that has costs of its own.
As we've talked about, women are entering the labor force in much greater numbers.
There's a huge change happening in women's career paths
and a sort of cycle of reinforcing incentives.
If you're going to be in the labor market, get an advanced degree.
Once you've got the advanced degree, you've got a bigger incentive to be in the labor market.
If you're around college campuses like I am,
you notice that most colleges now have notably more female than male students.
Back around 1970, for example, about 10% of all medical students were female.
And if you look at other professional degrees like law and business,
women were in single-digit percentages.
By the early 1990s, women were about 40% of all med law and business students
and women law students now outnumber men.
You can look at women born back in around 1960 to 1964.
See when they had kids and how many they had.
Women with more education and thus more job opportunities
tend to have their kids later and have fewer children.
For example, 64% of the women with only a high school education had a first child by age 25.
By comparison, only 20% of the women with a college degree had their first child by age 25.
Now this evened out some by age 40.
At that point, 83% of women high school graduates had a child
and 74% of women college graduates had at least one child.
But the average number of children per woman is dropping over time.
Women who are high school students, high school dropouts had 2.5 children per woman,
whereas college graduates had only 1.6 children per woman.
An obvious explanation for this from an economic point of view
is that the opportunity cost of having children,
that is costs measured in terms of the wages that a woman may give up
during the time she's pregnant and dealing with kids, especially small children,
are much higher for those with more education and more options.
In fact, in the United States, we're seeing sort of a split in marriage infertility patterns.
For college educated women, they typically marry first, have kids a few years after.
They might stop out for a while when they first have the children, but then they go back to work.
For women with only a high school degree,
it's much more common to have kids after an early marriage or no marriage,
and the gains from marriage to this low-skill group aren't necessarily as large.
In the language of the previous lecture,
the gains in marriage from the productive complementarities
aren't high for low-skilled folks in a modern economy.
If you don't have education and income,
you're not in the best position to share risk or consumption complementarities either.
In my own family, clearly the biggest cost to raising our children isn't the money we spent on them.
It's that my wife, who has a college degree and a high-powered MBA,
decided she would stop working in an investment bank
and take some years out of the labor force, take the lead on raising our children.
Now, I think she made the right decision from the standpoint of her lifetime happiness,
which is what I care about,
but from the standpoint of her lifetime monetary earnings in our family financial position,
there's no question that that choice is just a huge hit.
Moreover, it's not just the income from years not working.
There's strong evidence that when women stop off the career track for a time
and then go back maybe five or ten years later,
their pay is permanently lower,
maybe 15% lower than it would otherwise have been
even after adjusting for the years that they've worked.
Sometimes economic decisions change substantially as a result of technological changes.
One example is the ability to generate electricity in the electrical grid
or the automobile or computers in the internet.
In choices about fertility,
the giant technological change is the contraceptive pill.
The pill is just very widespread.
Almost 80% of American women between ages 45 and 55
have taken the pill at some point in their life,
and its effect has been huge.
The Economist magazine published a millennial issue in January 1st, 2000,
and they chose the pill as the greatest science and technology advance of the 20th century.
Interesting choice.
Without going into great detail on the history here,
the pill was medically available around 1960,
but at the time it was very hard to get.
There were a lot of state laws blocking the use of birth control at the time,
and it took about a decade and changes in state laws and doctor attitudes
and some Supreme Court decisions
before you could just get the pill as a healthy woman or a single woman
without claiming some special medical ailment
that the pill was supposed to be able to cure.
Before the pill, women often had to choose.
They either had to choose sex and a very good chance of motherhood
or college, grad school, and a career.
If they chose early marriage,
that was also in effect choosing sex,
and there was a very good chance they were therefore on the motherhood path
and therefore not choosing the grad school college type career.
Sure, there are other forms of contraception back in the 1960s, late 1950s,
diaphragms, and condoms,
but the pill was just vastly more effective,
especially for young adults who didn't have a whole lot of experience
in using these other forms of contraception.
Claudia Golden and Larry Katz,
two economists at Harvard University,
have made a detailed case.
It's not coincidence that the age of first marriage
is a lot later for women born in 1957 than in 1950,
and college completion rates are a lot higher
for those born in 1957 than in 1950 as well.
Women born in 1957 hit adolescence with the pill as a real option.
Women born in 1950 mostly didn't hit adolescence without option.
Technology changes options.
It changes choices, and ultimately it can change attitudes as well.
The economic benefits of children in the long term have diminished too.
Compared to the 19th and early 20th century,
the need for children to say support you in your old age has somewhat diminished.
For example, now we have social security for income.
There's Medicare to look after health care costs.
There's Medicaid.
Also, many people have pension plans or IRA or 401K plans.
All of these taken together have taken on much of what used to be a family rule
of assuring income for the elderly.
Now, of course, there's still an important role for adult children in elder care,
both hands-on care and also managing finances and things like that,
but it's not the same sort of dependence that there used to be.
Finally, the quantity-quality trade-off for children has evolved as well.
One really dramatic change in labor market since the late 1970s
is that the rewards for skill have increased.
For example, those in the 25 to 34-age bracket with college degrees
earned about 1.2 times as much as high school graduates in 1980,
but now they earn about 1.6 times as much.
As a result, the rewards for parents to invest more per child while having fewer children
while investing less per child in more children have increased.
And this plays out, I think, in all sorts of ways in our broader culture.
A common term you hear is helicopter parents,
parents who are always hovering over their children.
There's tons of extracurricular activities and scheduling,
often with parents who are present at all.
You don't send your multiple kids off to play sports or play in the park.
You actually have one or two children and you attend every game
and every practice for those children.
The idea that kids should spend the summer running around
with their friends at the playground seems crazy.
Aren't there more productive ways for them to spend their time?
There are more rules about safety.
Things about child seats never, ever, ever leaving your 10 or 11 or 12-year-old alone.
In some states, leaving an 11-year-old alone at home is treated as child endangerment now.
It's all part of a larger movement,
which is part of a greater quality of investment in fewer children.
Now, this may well go overboard sometimes.
As a parent, it sure seems like it's overboard to me every now and then.
But the rewards to having your child end up at that better college
with that higher-paying job are bigger and bigger than ever before.
People see that happening and parents react to those kinds of incentives.
This surge of investing more in fewer children is really interesting to me.
It raises fundamental questions like how to think about spending time and money on children.
Specifically, is raising a child a form of home production, sort of like preparing a meal?
Or is it more like a leisure activity, something I do for pleasure and enjoyment?
Economists have experimented with both of these views,
thinking about home production as a way of raising children
or thinking about children as a sort of luxury consumption.
But no theory quite seems to fit the facts.
Time spent with children seems to be rising for parents of all education levels.
For some years, economists have been doing time-use studies,
where people keep records of how they spend their time.
In fact, starting in 2003, there's now an actual American time-use survey
done by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
At the end of the day, a group of people write down what they did hour by hour.
And since it's a nationally representative group,
you can extend this sample to predict what everybody's doing in the U.S. economy.
These time-use studies show the average amount of time providing childcare
has increased since the 1960s.
Among married fathers, it's doubled up to about an hour a day on average.
And among married mothers, it's gone up to about two hours a day.
There's also something called the multinational time-use study,
which got data from around 1960 and compared to data around the year 2000
for lots of high-income countries.
They find a similar pattern of rising time spent on childcare over time.
This pattern of more time spent with kids is especially strong
for those with higher education levels.
There was a study a few years ago in the Journal Iedit,
the Journal of Economic Perspectives,
by Jonathan Gurian and Eric Hurst at the University of Chicago,
together with Melissa Kearney at the University of Maryland.
They found that higher-educated parents spend more time with their children
than parents with less education.
Mothers with a college education or more spend about 4.5 hours per week
more in childcare than mothers with a high school degree or less.
And this general pattern holds across all sorts of subgroups.
If you look at non-working moms, compare those with more education and less.
Or look across categories of time, basic childcare,
educational childcare, recreational childcare, travel related to childcare.
It always seems true that women with more education
and parents with more education
are spending more time with their kids than parents with less education.
The same pattern holds internationally as well.
For ordinary humans and people who've heard about high-achiever
helicopter parents hovering over their children,
maybe these findings aren't a big surprise.
But for economists who want to have a clear grip on how things fit together,
there's some conceptual problems here
in how to think about what parents are doing
when they commit resources to raising children.
For example, one interpretation of child raising in some economic models
is you treat child raising as a form of household production.
A typical pattern with most household production,
as you get more education, you can earn more wages,
you tend to buy more stuff in the market and produce less of it at home.
That is, people with more income tend to buy more prepared foods.
They buy more house cleaning services.
They're more likely to buy long services to hire a home decorator,
all those kinds of things.
So if childcare is a form of home production,
then, this logic holds,
you should buy more childcare as you get more education and income.
But people don't.
They buy less childcare and spend more time with their kids instead.
So it seems like childcare is not best viewed
as similar to other kinds of home production.
Alternatively, you can think about children as a pleasurable form of consumption,
sort of like a leisure activity.
Now, I may be struck down by lightning for thinking of children as related to leisure,
but the point is a lot of leisure activities
have some sort of aspect of sweaty and sometimes uncomfortable effort to them,
like going to the gym or working out with a personal trainer.
It's harder to spend money to buy leisure time.
And so it's also true that for those with higher education and incomes,
when you take leisure time,
you are giving up more income that you could have earned.
As a result, it tends to be true that those with higher education
report fewer hours spent in leisure activities.
If childcare is leisure, it's a weird sort of leisure,
because you do more of it as this opportunity cost,
as this price of what you're giving up rises.
Yet another alternative is to think of children as a kind of luxury good.
In economics, luxury good has a very specific definition.
It's a good where as your income rises by a certain percentage,
the consumption of that good rises by a larger percentage.
So if your income goes up 10%,
you would buy more than 10% extra of that good.
Restaurant meals, for example, fit this pattern.
Those with more education, more income,
spend more on restaurant meals,
and that rises as they get more income.
What does it mean to say that raising children is a luxury good?
Well, this could come out of a belief
that parental time spent with children has a really high return.
Economists might say,
it's just fun to spend time with your kids
when you have a lot of education and resources to do so.
It could also be thought of that parents
are making an educational investment in their children's future.
There's a lot of things you can buy and hire,
lawn care, home care.
It's a lot tougher to hire really good educational investment
in your own children.
Higher education parents are providing a high level of tutoring
and support and enrichment experience for their kids.
They may really feel like you can't get that from the people
you would typically hire for childcare.
This theory also fits with the idea
that the world is a place of ever greater competition.
You need to give your kids a little bit of an edge
in a world where meritocracy is tougher.
If you want to send your children on to success in the future,
you need to make big investments in them right now.
After I got over the shock of thinking about children
as a luxury good, I confessed the idea made some sense to me.
There was a time 50, 100, 200 years ago in the United States
when having a bunch of children could be thought of
as a sort of diversified investment
that had relatively low upfront costs
and offered substantial returns in both the short run and the long run.
However, in a modern economy,
children have become something closer to a consumption good.
The costs are higher and the short run financial terms
from having children as household labor,
the long run returns from having them as financial security
are greatly reduced.
Now, of course, like any consumption activity,
some will tend to enjoy children more than others.
Some will choose to consume something else,
but overall, these factors, when they're all put together,
end up meaning fewer children.
Those who face a really high price
for consuming this good of parenting
and giving up other income do tend to have fewer children.
But those who like the children that they have,
and they have the income to do so,
treat raising their children as a sort of luxury good.
As their income rises,
they spend a rising share of their time
and more of their income on raising their children.
