Let's start by asking you for a quick reaction.
I'll give you a word.
You give me a word that means the opposite.
Word I give you is competition.
What's the opposite?
Well, for a lot of folks, the obvious opposite to competition is cooperation.
And if you got nervous about my question and you cheated by looking it up in a thesaurus,
you probably got that same answer.
It seems obvious enough.
After all, cooperation is about acting together as a group.
Competition is trying as an individual to beat the others in the group.
This belief in an opposition between competition and cooperation,
of course, has big implications for how people feel about the subject of free markets and economics.
After all, competition is in a way a basic principle of economics,
tracing back at least to the writing of Adam Smith in his classic 1776 book, The Wealth of Nations.
That book has a famous passage about what Smith calls the invisible hand.
The idea that when people act in their own self-interest,
it turns out they are actually promoting the interests of society.
For example, if I work hard, my hard work benefits society.
If a firm produces new goods and services of high quality, it builds a reputation.
Consumers hunt around for the best deal,
banks try to figure out the best business plans and make the best loans,
and as all of this happens, the economy grows and people overall benefit.
But even if that idea of how selfishness promotes overall welfare works at
sometimes in some places for some people in some industries,
isn't it pretty clear it doesn't always work well at other times in other places?
Doesn't this impetus toward competition sometimes lead not to overall benefits for society,
but to one set of losers and one set of winners?
For this reason, a common emotional reaction to the study of economics
is that it overemphasizes the competitive side.
In fact, there's often a feeling that the competitive side is morally atrophied
and economists are moral midgets for focusing on it.
This argument is that a better goal for humans is not to give them excuses
as to why selfishness might be good,
but instead to instruct them in the need for cooperation
and how it will make both them and society as a whole better off.
My own sense is that competition and cooperation are not actually opposites,
but they're interrelated in some complex ways.
I want to try to explain why I think this is so
and maybe scramble some of your mental categories a bit,
which is always a refreshing experience.
One of the most versatile and intriguing ideas in game theory,
which is a branch of mathematics usually used by economists and other social scientists,
is the idea of the prisoner's dilemma.
This particular branch of game theory, this idea,
is usually attributed to mathematicians at the Rand Corporation
named Merrill Flood and Melvin Drescher.
Now, you might have heard of Rand, but not quite know what it is.
It started off as a military-funded think tank.
It was part of the Douglas Aircraft Company in 1946.
Then after World War II, it was spun off in 1948 as an independent think tank.
The name Rand actually is based on R&D.
Rand still had a lot of military contracts after World War II,
but it did all kinds of research, some science, some engineering,
also a lot of basic research with economists and mathematicians and operations research.
Anyway, here's the story of the prisoner's dilemma.
Two thieves are captured while escaping from the scene of a crime.
The police immediately split them up into two different cells
with no communication possible between them,
and they start trying to get them to confess.
The police come to the first prisoner, who I will call Aaron,
and they say to Aaron,
OK, Aaron, we're going to lay it out for you.
Next door, Bethany is confessing.
The result is she's going to get off with one year in prison,
and you're going to get eight years.
You're already sunk, but we'll cut you deal.
You confess too, we'll give you five years.
Take it or leave it.
Now, the other prisoner, who I'll call Bethany,
is getting the same treatment in her cell.
Do you confess?
You're not confess.
What's the right strategy here?
Well, one obvious question that arises is,
are the police telling you the truth?
After all, maybe the other person isn't confessing at all.
If the two prisoners, Aaron and Bethany, had a way to cooperate,
and to be certain that they both remained silent,
maybe they could both get off with lighter sentences.
Let's say that if they both could cooperate with each other
by remaining silent,
there's some evidence against them, so they don't get off free,
but they would only get two years each.
But because of this threat,
the other person is confessing you'd better confess.
They're likely to end up with both of them confessing,
and they each end up with five years in prison as a result.
Now, the way I've phrased the problem so far
might seem like a bit of a cheat.
The police aren't revealing the entire problem.
If both Aaron and Bethany understood what was going on,
they might understand that they shouldn't panic
and that they should cooperate and remain silent.
So let's really see how the screw of self-interest works
in this situation.
Imagine that Aaron and Bethany really are told the entire situation,
which is this.
If they both remain silent,
they each get two years in prison.
If they both confess,
they both get five years in prison.
If one confesses and the other doesn't,
the one that confesses gets one year
to encourage them to confess
and the one who didn't gets eight years.
Now, let's think through the situation.
Aaron thinks this way.
I don't know whether Bethany is confessing or not.
So first I should think about what will I do if she's confessing
and then I'll think about what I should do
if she isn't confessing.
What if Bethany confesses?
Well, then Aaron says,
self-interest says I'd better confess too
because after all, if she confesses and I don't,
I get stuck with eight years.
So if she confesses,
I'd better confess also.
Then Aaron thinks what if Bethany doesn't confess?
Well, then narrow self-interest says I should confess.
If we both stay silent, I get two years.
But if I confess and she doesn't,
I only get one year.
So if she doesn't confess,
I can cut myself a better deal by confessing.
Conclusion.
Whether Bethany confesses or doesn't confess,
Aaron will decide it's better for him to confess.
He'll be better off.
Bethany is in the same position logically
and whatever Aaron does confess or not confess,
she'll want to confess too.
Now, I hope at this point,
the trap of the prisoner's dilemma is becoming clear.
The two prisoners would in a way want to coordinate
on having a cooperative solution.
But both parties reasoning in their own self-interest
will tend to choose otherwise.
Let me try to build up this intuition a little bit further
by applying the prisoner's dilemma
in two other classic contexts.
One is nuclear weapons strategy
and the other is anti-competitive behavior by a cartel.
Exactly the same underlying logic applies in both cases.
The original application of the prisoner's dilemma
came up in thinking about nuclear deterrence.
Among economists,
maybe the best-known work in this area was done by Thomas Schelling,
who's mentioned in an earlier lecture,
someone who will share the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2005.
His Nobel Prize citation said,
for having enhanced our understanding of conflict
and cooperation through game theory analysis,
like the one we're talking about here.
Schelling thought through the situation
where you had a prisoner's dilemma with two countries,
call one of them the Soviet Union
and one of them the United States.
And they have a choice.
One is to build nuclear weapons.
One is not to build nuclear weapons.
Now, for our purposes,
if they decide to build weapons,
we'll call that the competitive solution.
That's what leads to an arms race between the two countries.
If they decide not to build,
we'll call that the cooperative solution.
Now, consider the logic of the situation
when viewed from the point of view of either country.
For concreteness,
let's think about through from the viewpoint of the United States.
If the USSR, if Russia decides to build,
then the US, in its own self-interest,
needs to build to keep up.
If the USSR decides not to build,
then the US, in its own self-interest,
should build so that with superior nuclear arsenal,
it'll be a stronger force in world events.
Of course, the USSR reasons the same way.
And so both parties are trapped by their own self-interest
into a build-build situation of an arms race
unless they can find a way to cooperate with each other.
Another classic example of the prisoner's dilemma
from the core of real economic subjects
is how it applies to cartels.
Cartel being a group of companies
tempted to cooperate
so they can raise the price consumers have to pay.
Again, let's think about two companies
and just for the sake of the example,
say they sell steel.
They compete when they cut prices against each other.
They cooperate when they work together to act like a monopoly,
hold down output and make higher profits.
Now, again, consider the logic.
From the standpoint of company A,
say company B decides to cut prices and compete.
Then self-interest says to company A,
they'd better also cut prices and compete
or else they'll fall behind.
Now say company B decides to cut back on its output
and try to raise prices.
Then company A's self-interest would say,
let's cut prices and take away some of the customers
from company B.
And of course, company B is reasoning in the same way.
This is the underlying reason why it's difficult
for companies to cooperate and form a long-lasting cartel.
A cartel is a cooperative situation,
but there's always a self-interested incentive
for individual members of a cartel to break away
and to start cutting prices
and try and take over more of the market.
The prisoner's dilemma logic explains
why it's hard to keep a cartel in one piece.
And now, using that prisoner's dilemma
to analyze the behavior of economic cartels,
is typically something that's taught
in most introductory college economics courses these days.
And then you can explore other situations
more vigorously in future courses.
The prisoner's dilemma has been applied
to a very wide range of situations.
On some of the other applications,
we think about climate change.
If others emit carbon, we might as well do it too.
If others don't emit carbon,
we can get an economic advantage by emitting
and benefit from their lower emissions.
Steroid use among athletes.
It might be good for all athletes
if all of them could agree not to use.
But self-interest says,
if others are using, I need to.
And self-interest also says,
if others aren't using,
I could get an edge from doing so.
There are a number of applications
of the prisoner's dilemma in biology and animal behavior.
There are bats that cooperate by sharing blood,
monkeys that cooperate by sharing food.
Many more kinds of examples.
The prisoner's dilemma is truly one of the breakthrough ideas
used across all of the social sciences.
So the question becomes,
how can the prisoner's dilemma be avoided?
How can you avoid the pull of self-interest,
which in this case makes you worse off
and get to the cooperative solution,
which makes you better off?
And in listening to all of the examples
I've presented so far,
I wouldn't be surprised
if you've already thought of some ways of doing this.
I'm going to talk about some specific ways
in the three main examples
of prisoners, nuclear weapons, and cartels.
But as we talk through them,
I want to emphasize the overall point.
All of the solutions to the prisoner's dilemma
involve a common ingredient,
which is they involve thinking
not just about the immediate decision,
but about interactions in the future as well.
If there's just one decision at one moment in time,
then you might sell out the other party.
But if there's a possibility of future interactions,
then it can make sense to give up short-term gains
for the long-run benefits of cooperation.
In the case of two prisoners, for example,
one way to enforce the cooperative solution
is through threats.
If you rat on me, I'll hurt you or I'll kill you.
Another way would be to have a long-term personal relationship.
Perhaps I only rob banks with my brother,
and so we have personal ties
that might encourage us to trust each other
and not to rat each other out.
What about the case of the nuclear arms race?
An obvious way to enforce a cooperative solution
would be through an arms control treaty,
what's been called a trust-but-verify approach.
You could also consider other ways of sending signals.
For example, you might do something like
aim all of your missiles at one city.
Say the U.S. would name all of its missiles at Moscow,
but nowhere else.
If you do that, it's clear you can't make an offensive first strike
because you would be hit by retaliation from everywhere else.
And by making clear you aren't doing a first strike,
you then hope for the other side to leave a clear weakness in its attack plans.
Whereas another approach, you can have a device
that would make retaliation automatic,
thus attempting to dissuade an attack in the first place
because such an attack could never succeed.
And of course, these kinds of automatic retaliation scenarios
have been the basis for many books and movies
like Doctor Strange Love and Fail Safe.
The automated retaliation gets out of control for some reason.
But just because automatic retaliation isn't a good idea for nuclear war
doesn't mean it won't work in other contexts.
Imagine the two criminals in the prisoner's dilemma.
Maybe they could be in a situation
where they have information that could implicate their partner
in a huge number of crimes.
Maybe they leave a letter with a lawyer there.
And they could say that if you confess,
if you turn me in,
I will threaten to get back at you with that kind of overall retaliation.
In the case of an economic cartel,
sometimes there's a treaty that helps to enforce the cartel,
like the Treaty for the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries or OPEC.
Within a country, in theory at least,
you could have an agreement between companies to act like a monopoly,
but that would be illegal.
It does happen every now and then,
but when caught, the executives end up doing some jail time.
So what are the alternatives for a cartel?
Well, one alternative is to have the government set prices.
For example, from the 1930s up to the 1970s,
the federal government set the prices for airline travel.
That was essentially a government dictated cartel.
You can also imagine more subtle ways of sending a signal to other competitive firms.
This is sometimes referred to as predatory pricing.
Imagine that one or a few big firms in an industry
respond every time a smaller firm cuts price
by cutting prices really dramatically.
If the small firm keeps prices high,
the big firm doesn't undercut them.
But if the small firm cuts prices,
the big firm slashes the price until the small firm loses a lot of money
or is driven out of business.
Big airlines have been accused of using this strategy
when a small discount airline starts entering their market.
They don't care that much if the small airline sells tickets for about the same price,
but if it slashes fares, there's a price war,
the small firm goes broke, and the big firm goes on.
Often when this strategy is pursued,
the small firm learns a lesson,
and so does the next small firm to come along.
Economists and other social scientists have analyzed the prisoner's dilemma
in theoretical and mathematical terms.
They've often run tournaments
with one computer program playing against another.
Essentially, you play the prisoner's dilemma game over and over and over,
maybe 200 times or 1,000 times,
using computer programs.
The program can see what the other side did in previous rounds
and react with whatever strategy you program in.
These sorts of studies can be a way to evaluate strategies
for preserving cooperation.
Maybe the most prominent strategy that comes out of these sorts of studies
is called tit for tat.
That is, basically do what the other player did.
If the other player cooperates, you cooperate.
If they don't cooperate, you don't cooperate either.
The really good thing about a tit for tat strategy
is with two players, if they start cooperating,
they'll cooperate forever.
The strategy effectively sends a message that cooperation will be rewarded.
It won't be undercut.
This strategy performs very well
in these sort of computer contests of different strategies,
but it does have some problems.
One really bad thing about a tit for tat strategy
is that if you start off not cooperating,
you will not cooperate forever.
And in the real world,
sometimes you get mixed signals.
You can do this on a computer program, too.
You can do something where in the program,
say the signal from one of the players gets randomly switched,
maybe one time out of every 20 or one time out of every 100.
So you can imagine you're playing tit for tat.
You think you're cooperating, cooperating, cooperating.
All of a sudden, you get the,
they're now competing with you strategy.
And so if you play tit for tat,
all of a sudden you're tumbled over into the compete-compete situation.
This leads to a second strategy,
which is called tit for two tats.
That is, you go tit for tat,
you keep going as long as there's cooperation on all sides.
But if one party doesn't cooperate once,
you keep cooperating one additional time.
If the other party doesn't cooperate a second time,
that's when you stop cooperating.
Now, this tit for two tats deals with the problem
of maybe getting the wrong signal.
But you still have the difficulty of,
if you're stuck in a cycle of not cooperating,
how do you break out of that cycle?
You can see here that we're getting into some relatively
tricky strategic issues.
If you're stuck in a cycle of not cooperating,
the only way out of that is sometimes
if you randomly offer to cooperate.
Now, maybe the other side doesn't reciprocate
and you go back to not cooperating as well.
But if the other side does reciprocate,
then you have some chance of getting into a cycle
of repeated cooperation after that.
But of course, you need to worry about other possibilities.
For example, you might be going cooperate,
cooperate, cooperate, cooperate.
But you need to worry that the other side is figuring out
how long you're going to do this.
And at some point, they're going to take advantage of you.
Or if you're doing tit for two tats,
the other side might figure every now and then
they can do something competitive.
They can get an advantage from doing that.
And you're going to let it pass by.
But if both sides are following the strategy,
trying to slip one by every now and then,
cooperation is going to deteriorate pretty quickly.
You also have to worry about what's sometimes called
the tranquilizer strategy.
You cooperate for a very, very long time
and suddenly stop doing so.
If this is a contest to see who ends up ahead
at the end of the game,
that can be a winning strategy.
Cooperate, cooperate, and at the very last moment,
stop cooperating.
So the short lesson of all of these sorts of discussions
is that even when cooperative behavior is good for all parties
and even when competitive self-interested behavior
is bad for all parties,
you can find ways to sustain cooperation
but none of them are foolproof.
I'm hoping at this point you have a decent grip
on the prisoner's dilemma game.
It's fascinating to economists
because it's clear within that game.
It's a situation where self-interest leads to a situation
where not where I win and you lose,
but where everybody loses.
Where I'm worse off and you're worse off.
And the prisoner's dilemma is a game where cooperation
means that we both win.
Now I want to take these ideas one step further
and ask about the boundary between cooperation and competition
and about the relative values involved in these two ideas.
I would start off by saying that cooperation and competition
need to be judged on their outcomes in specific circumstances
and not on their labels.
I think for example about the virtues of cooperation
and I would say they depend really on what the goal of cooperation is.
Nations cooperating to avoid an arms race seems like a good and worthy goal
and there are lots of socially cooperative projects
like building public infrastructure which have worthy goals.
However, you can imagine cooperation which isn't so nice.
Is there an in-group cooperating to get benefits for itself
at the expense of all others, at the expense of some out-group?
The original example of the prisoner's dilemma after all
is two guilty criminals cooperating to stay out of jail.
The cartel example is firms cooperating to price gouge consumers.
If you think about it, organized crime has a lot of cooperation
both within the group and enforced on others.
People of one ethnic group cooperating to discriminate against another group
is a form of cooperation.
In some ways, war is a pretty cooperative enterprise.
After all, two big groups of cooperators are fighting against each other.
Perhaps the labels of competition and cooperation
are sort of missing the real point.
The real point is one can't avoid making judgments
about the goals of competitive behavior or cooperative behavior
and you need to think about the context in which competition or cooperation matters.
In this way, I sometimes think about the Olympic Games.
Are the Olympic Games, for example, competitive or cooperative?
At one level, the Olympic Games are competition in its most straightforward form.
Their contests, their winners, their losers, their medals,
what could be more competitive than that?
At some broader level, though, coming together for the Olympic Games
is a great cooperative endeavor.
When you have an Olympic Games that's boycotted by one big group of countries or another
where huge nations don't participate, the event meant less.
If nations follow different rules like a few decades ago
when some countries allowed essentially pro-athletes to participate
and others didn't, then the outcome of the competition was somehow cheapened.
The value of the competition is higher
when the level of cooperation within the event is also higher.
However, if you try to push cooperation further
like by making sure every nation won some fair share of prizes
is determined by a big committee, it would wreck the Olympics altogether.
If the Olympics can be thought of as a blend of competition nested inside a web of cooperation
what about the economy as a whole?
Say I've got two ways to make a living.
One is to cooperate by working within the rules of the legal economy.
The other is to go after my own self-interest
by lying and cheating and embezzling and stealing and all the rest.
There's an obvious prisoner's dilemma argument here.
If others are stealing and lying and cheating and embezzling
then I would be foolish not to do it also.
I'd come out way behind.
If others aren't stealing and lying and cheating and embezzling
then my own self-interest would be to try to get away with those things
whenever I could, when it's possible, when I'm not likely to be caught.
But of course, if everyone pursued their self-interest in this way
we would all end up worse off than if we cooperated
and followed sort of law-abiding, more productive behavior.
Ultimately, the competitive behavior in the context of the economy only works well.
It only works well for benefiting society as a whole
if it's viewed as part of an underlying cooperative activity
of following a rule of law and focusing on productive economic outcomes.
If you try to push the value of cooperation a lot further
so some group process decides who gets all the jobs,
who gets all the rewards, what industries will rise and fall
so competition is taken out of the picture
then experience from all around the world over many decades
suggests the results of an economy controlled in this way
kind of a forced social cooperation
are not very good for the standard of living of the country.
They're not very good for personal freedom either.
My fundamental point here is that the very ideas of cooperation and competition are interlocking.
Cooperation typically needs to be enforced by some possibility of retaliation.
It could be social retaliation, it could be legal retaliation
which gives the whole idea of cooperation if you think about it a less friendly feeling
if it needs to be enforced in some way.
Competition on the other side needs to happen inside a set of rules
that are agreed on cooperatively or else it's just randomness
and it won't have the same productive outcome we'd like to have.
In other words, competition and cooperation aren't opposites.
They work together.
The opposite of cooperation isn't competition.
The opposite would be something like anarchy or lawlessness full of theft and violence.
The opposite of competition isn't cooperation.
Instead, the opposite would be something like a world where what you do
or what your talents are or how much effort you put in
has no effect on whether you do better or worse in society as a whole.
Indeed, the roots of the word compete are revealing here.
The word compete is rooted in two Latin words.
One is the word come which means together.
The other is peter which is to aim at or to try to reach or to seek.
So if you take those meanings together, compete means to strive after something
in company or together.
The very meaning of the words suggests that competition and cooperation
aren't opposites but are interlocking.
Market competition only happens in a structure of rules
that are more or less commonly agreed upon.
In that sense, market competition can be thought of
as one of the ultimate examples of socially cooperative behavior.
