Charitable contributions and personal gifts always raise a difficult question for economists.
Are these really just altruism or is it some kind of self-interest all dressed up in a
friendly-looking disguise? Once you step into the motivations behind altruism, it's all a little
tricky. Are people giving out of altruism or out of hope and expectation of return gift or perhaps
out of a desire to get social influence or perhaps because if you don't give, you feel guilty.
Economists tend to be better at looking at what people do and at what incentives cause them to
react and change behavior rather than trying to peer into their souls. But of course that doesn't
stop economists and other social scientists from trying to sort out these kinds of issues.
When most of us think of altruism, the first thought that comes to mind is what we call
warm-glow altruism, where what you get in exchange for your gift is just a warm glow. If you donate
money to the Red Cross to help tsunami victims in Japan or earthquake victims in Haiti, it's pretty
close to pure altruism. It's done just for the warm glow. You're not building your immediate
community. You're not giving to anyone you know. You're just giving. Of course economists, being
who we are, have sometimes tried to shoehorn this kind of warm-glow altruism into a self-interest
framework. For example, I may say my self-interest sometimes includes helping other people. But at
least to me, this just seems like playing with words. It's sort of like saying sometimes when
I'm really hungry, what I want to do is not eat or something like that. There's a theory which we
might also call random acts of kindness. The theory is that you should do random nice things. And
part of the hope is that even if others don't pay back such actions to you directly, they will
pass the kindness forward. So in some sense, you're hoping to have an amplified effect of your good
action and make the world a better place. Now, this is maybe not completely pure altruism because
you're hoping for something other than a warm glow, but it's darn close to it. However, there are
a lot of other reasons for altruism that aren't nearly so pure. In some cases, gifts are given in
the expectation that a recipient will feel obligated to respond by giving a gift in return. One
classic example of this behavior is from a prominent anthropologist named Colin Turnbull. Back
in 1972, he published a book about the Icke tribe. It's spelled I-K, a tribe of a few thousand
subsistence farmers living in northern Uganda. The Icke tribe was extremely poor, near starvation,
and very, very self-interested, to the point of disregarding children and family ties when
necessary for survival. But at the same time, this tribe had a very strong ethic that if you
received a gift, that gift needed to be repaid. So what people in this tribe would do is, on the
one side, work really hard to give gifts to each other, to build up future obligations. And on
the other side, try really hard not to receive gifts from others because then you would end up
owing in the future. In this society, gift giving obligated the recipient, and so it had a
kind of potentially aggressive edge to it. Let me quote Turnbull here, describing the Icke.
The object, of course, is to build up a whole series of obligations so that in times of crisis,
you have a number of debts you can recall, and with luck, one of them may be repaid.
Someone quite unasked may hoe another's field in his absence, or rebuild his stockade,
or join in the building of a house that could easily be done by the man and his wife alone.
At one time, I've seen so many men fetching a roof, the whole roof was in serious danger of
collapsing, and the protests of the owner were of no avail. The Icke are an extreme example,
of course, but certainly this motivation for altruism happens in modern life too.
For example, it's not uncommon to hear about a bride and groom who calculate what they will
be spending for each guest at their wedding reception, and they figure they are owed a wedding
gift that at least offsets their costs so they can come out ahead on their wedding day. Less
extreme behavior, even with dear friends and family, often there's a bit of keeping score.
How much got spent on a gift? Was that amount reasonable? Did you give them a similar gift?
For many of us, it would seem potentially odd or uncomfortable to have a situation
where one party continually gave substantial gifts to another party, and there wasn't some
reciprocity coming back in the other direction. Even if you're giving to an arts organization,
or a college, or a charity, it's a little bit different, but it's not uncommon to get something.
You might get your name in the annual report, or maybe prime seats for the opening of some big
event. You might feel like your children have a better chance at admission to a college if you're
a regular donor or a large donor. Perhaps a charity has a big party as an annual fundraiser,
and you might get some special admission or treatment at that party. Charities actually
play on this notion of exchanging gifts in the other direction. They send you something like
a bunch of pretty stamps, or postcards, or address labels, or a mug, or a pen, or a calendar,
and the expectation then is you're more likely to feel compelled to reciprocate by sending them
something as a result. Some altruism has the effect of buying social standing or prestige.
A classic example from the anthropology literature is called potlatch,
the custom among indigenous American tribes of the Pacific Northwest. In potlatch, the leader of
a tribe or the prominent families would have a big gathering, and they would give lots of gifts
to all the members of the tribe. The families that gave away the most had the highest status.
If there was a top family that had suffered perhaps deaths from disease or something like that,
and there was room in the social structure for a new top family, holding a really big potlatch and
giving away a lot was a way to stake your claim to being a top family. This bound the community
together in a way that reinforced loyalties and status. It's interesting to me that in the late
19th century, potlatch was actually banned by both Canadian law and US law. The reason seems to be
that Christian missionaries felt this business of giving away lots of stuff was discouraging people
from becoming good Christians, and so you needed to stop them from that social practice. Now I won't
try to untangle the moral arguments here. 19th century theology is not my strong suit, but it sure
seems a little strange. Of course, they're modern versions of charity for social standing too.
When you set up a personal foundation with your family name on it to give away money,
there's some social standing involved. When you give money to a university or a hospital to have
your name on a room or on a building, there's an element of social standing. Indeed, it always
strikes me as interesting that lots of stadiums are named after corporations. In my hometown of
Minneapolis, we have the Target Field where the professional baseball twins play named for Target
Corporation, the Mall of America field in the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome where the professional
football Vikings play, and the college football Minnesota Gophers play in TCF Bank Stadium.
Now for companies, this is an advertising expense, and we'd laugh if the company said, oh, that's a
charitable contribution. But if the same company sponsors a wing of an art museum or a production
of a stage play, then somehow it sounds like a charity. I think there's some social standing
issues in either case. Finally, shame and guilt can be reasons for what looks like altruism.
Some well-meaning person, maybe the child of your neighbor, shows up on your doorstep soliciting for
some cause. If you give money to that person, is that altruism or is it guilt and shame?
A group of three economists, John List at the University of Chicago, Stefano Della Vigna and
Ulrike Momendier at the University of California Berkeley did an experiment where they did door
to door fundraising for two different institutions. One was a well-known local children's hospital,
the other was an out-of-state charity that almost nobody had heard of in the Chicago area.
They had fundraisers, people knocking on doors, go to over 7,000 homes, and they randomly divided
them up in various different ways. Some of the fundraisers were raising money for the local
hospital, some for the out-of-state charity. Sometimes the fundraisers just knocked on the door.
Sometimes the fundraisers went a day early and left a hanger on the doorknob saying when they would
come to knock the next day, which opens up the possibility that the person at home might not
open the door that day. Sometimes they went and left a hanger saying what time they would return
and also had a do not disturb option that the homeowner could check off if desired.
Because they did all these actions randomly across large numbers of households,
you can meaningfully compare the outcomes that resulted. Sometimes this kind of procedure is
what economists call a social experiment. With the data on what people gave in all these different
circumstances and some careful thinking about what it all meant, some interesting patterns
emerged. For example, when people got the flyer saying when the person would be coming the next
day, about 15% fewer people actually opened the door the next day. When the flyer had the
do not disturb box, giving ended up being about 30% lower. And most of this was that people didn't
give small donations. These often meaning less than $10. So you can think here about some model
of behavior where people have different motivations. Some are giving because of warm glow. Some are
giving because they feel social pressure, which is sort of a cost if you're giving money. It's a
non-monetary cost, but somebody putting you under pressure is still a kind of a cost. Another sign
of social pressure is that these flyers, many of them, had an email address on them and a snail
mail address. But people mostly didn't get any money in those forms. Those who knew the people
were coming and open the door were fairly likely to want to give. However, a number of those taken
by surprise wouldn't have opened the door if they had known, but they ended up giving something
anyway because of the social pressure. Under plausible assumptions, which they try and work
through in their research paper, you can actually make a decent argument that on average, the costs
to the donors from being pressured are bigger than the warm glow benefits from those who were just
longing to give when somebody knocked on their door. At least this study argues that door-to-door
fundraising resulted in a net drop in happiness for the overall group of all the households involved.
Let's take a half-step back at this point from why people give and look at some basic facts about
charitable giving. Let's start with some U.S. information. Charitable giving is often based,
the data on this is based in part on data from tax returns and in part from data on other kinds
of giving, but roughly total giving in the United States is about $300 billion in a year.
Roughly speaking, you could call it 2% of the total size of the economy as measured by the
gross domestic product. Now, there are no official statistics on private gift giving, one person
to another person, but we do know that the end of the year holiday season by itself accounts for
several hundred billion dollars in retail purchases. And if you added, you know, birthdays,
Valentine's Day, other holidays, private giving probably accounts for another 2% to 4% of the
overall economy. Of course, it's also possible to give time as well as money. In survey data,
about one-quarter of adults over the age of 25 report volunteering time in a given year,
and the median amount of volunteer time is about 50 hours for the year. If you multiply that out,
that's something like 3 billion hours of volunteer time each year. And putting a dollar value on
this is hard, but if we took some round number like $20 an hour on average, this time that's given
would be worth another $60 billion. Taking all of this together, we find that U.S. charity,
charitable giving, and other private giving is probably worth something like 5% of the total
economy or more. This isn't quite the healthcare sector, which is 15% of the economy, but it's
really a large part of economic activity. The main recipient of charitable giving is religious
causes, but this also includes a lot of things that churches run, like food aid, social services,
in some cases, healthcare, education, and things like that. When you look at the pattern of giving,
it's common to find a U-shaped pattern of charitable giving as a share of income.
Those with the lower income levels often give about 5% of income. The middle class gives maybe
2% or 3% of income, and then millionaires give something like 5% of income. Why might you have
a U-shaped pattern like this? Well, one possibility is that a lot of low-income households who give
money are elderly households who don't have much income in a year, but they have a fair amount
of retirement wealth. They get money from a pension and social security, so it's a little
misleading to think of them as low-income families. They're low income, but they do have a reasonable
amount of personal wealth. Another explanation is that many low-income families give a modest
amount to their church, but a modest amount is still a sizable share of their income since their
income isn't very high. It seems true that the working poor are more likely than the middle
class to be in religious congregations where tithing and high levels of giving as a share of
income are common. It's also true the poor in the working class often get something back from
their church. There may be group meals or social support, child care, the ability to exchange
household items between members of the congregation, and other services of that sort.
U.S. charitable activity seems markedly larger than in other high-income countries.
It's really hard to get good comparable international data on charitable giving,
because charity means different things in different countries. But one good survey done in the mid-1990s
found that on average, Americans give three and a half times as much to charity as the French,
seven times as much as the Germans, and 14 times as much as Italians. Americans are maybe 20 or 30
percent more likely to volunteer their time than people in these other countries as well.
Why is this difference so large?
But one possibility is that it goes to deeper issues of political culture. Government in most
European countries is a lot larger. It does more looking after the poor, more support of
arts and education and health care than U.S. government, and often the government is pretty
centralized. In the U.S. on the other side, government is relatively speaking smaller.
There was a time back in the 1930s and earlier when many U.S. charities focused primarily just on
assisting the poor. But by the 1960s, the U.S. government at the federal and state level was
doing a lot more to look after the poor, and charitable institutions shifted over more to
thinking about health and education and the arts. In the U.S., health care, education and the arts
remain much less centralized than in Europe, and the U.S. political structure encourages this in
various ways, like the authority and power it gives to state and local governments,
and to private sector non-profits. As part of this, the U.S. has much more lenient rules offering
tax breaks for charitable giving than in most other countries. In a lot of other countries,
relatively few organizations are even eligible for tax breaks. This is true in France, for example.
And in other countries, there are often limits on how much of your income you can deduct for
giving to charity. In the U.S., you can think of it as this generous treatment of tax breaks for
charitable giving is a kind of encouragement. Instead of having government collect tax money
and spend it for social purposes, as happens in Europe much of the time, you're essentially
encouraging individuals to donate money for some of those similar purposes.
There's a deeper implication here worth considering. If you can affect the level of
charitable giving by the incentives that are offered, whatever the motivation for giving,
then the fundamental economic logic begins to hold. People are responding to incentives,
and that applies with charitable contributions as well as in other areas.
Now, some people recoil a little bit at this statement, because now we're again in this
world of mixing together an altruistic motive with a self-interested, what am I getting for
my money motive? But in a lot of contexts, the response to incentives is pretty clear.
I mean, for example, imagine you knew for certain that a certain charity was wasting all of the
donations. It was spending them on office space and glitzy fundraisers and not helping anyone.
In that case, your incentive to donate to this charity would be reduced, right?
It's possible for an act of charity to be made less costly or to be made more powerful.
So, what we want to talk about is how societies might choose to vary the price of giving,
and how these variations in the price of giving will affect the amount of giving.
Perhaps the most obvious way this is done is through the tax code. In the U.S. tax code,
those who itemize their deductions on their taxes are allowed to deduct from their taxable
income their contributions to charitable organizations, that is, they don't have to pay
income tax on the amount given. The value of a tax deduction is determined by the tax bracket
you're in. Say you're in a 35 percent tax bracket. That means every dollar you earn more, you'd pay
35 cents in taxes. If you can contribute $1 to a charity, you avoid paying that 35 cents in taxes.
If you're in the 15 percent tax bracket, then if you contribute a dollar to charity,
you avoid paying 15 cents in taxes. If you don't itemize and list out your deductions,
but just take the standard deduction instead, like the majority of Americans do, and then you
contribute a dollar to charity, it doesn't reduce your tax bill at all. Now, if you think about
this mechanism for more than a moment or two, it does seem like a peculiar way to encourage
charitable giving. You could instead, for example, have some kind of a rule that for everyone,
every dollar you give to charity above some basic amount, like maybe 1 percent of your income,
is worth, I don't know, 10 or 20 cents off your taxes, regardless of income or whether you itemize.
I should also mention that other parts of the tax code affect incentives for giving. The estate
tax affects giving, the alternative minimum tax, state income taxes, there's a whole literature
looking at all these different effects. In the U.S., there are about 300,000 tax-exempt organizations
which can accept these kinds of contributions, and that total number is up about 60 percent over
the last 15 years. These charitable organizations do a lot of different things. Some might be food
for the poor or arts programs or colleges or healthcare, but as a broad statement, it's not
unusual for a charitable organization to spend 10 or 15 percent of their donations on additional
fundraising. The total cost to the U.S. Treasury of the lower taxes collected because of contributions
to these organizations was about $50 billion in 2011. Now, of course, if charitable giving was
so purely altruistic that it didn't respond to incentives, there'd be no public purpose in
having this special tax treatment for charity. There's no serious dispute in the economics
literature that people react to this incentive, but there is some dispute over how much they react.
So here's some of the possibilities. One possibility is that if you have a tax break which
makes giving 10 percent cheaper, people give 10 percent more. Or it could be that if you have a
tax break that makes giving 10 percent cheaper, people give less than 10 percent more, or
makes giving 10 percent cheaper, people give more than 10 percent more. The actual evidence on how
giving reacts to the price of giving is all over the map. It used to be back in the 1980s that
people thought that there was a huge effect, a really quite substantial effect of giving
of the tax break on charitable giving, but more studies done in the 1990s have tended to come
up with a smaller number. The current wisdom is actually that making giving 10 percent cheaper
gets people to give just about 10 percent more, at least for people at higher income levels.
It is always interesting to remember the biggest single day of charitable giving in a year is
December 31st, the end of the tax year. It's also interesting that the country with the most tax
incentives for charitable giving in the United States is also the world leader in charitable
giving, which clearly suggests that incentives matter. Matching grants are another way to make
charitable giving effectively cheaper to the donor, and there's some evidence that offering
matching grants does increase giving. I mentioned, for example, John List of the University of
Chicago earlier who's done work in this area. He did an experiment at the University of Central
Florida where they sent out fundraising letters that offered different levels of matching.
For example, one letter would say, every dollar you give is matched by 50 cents from another donor.
Another letter might say, every dollar you give is matched by a dollar from another donor,
or matched by two dollars from another donor, and so on. And they found that more matching
raised the number of people who are willing to donate. Other work by List and co-authors looked
at fundraising for other groups and found when the match gets a lot higher than about a one-to-one
match, it doesn't seem to make much additional effect. There may be sort of a sweet spot here.
That is, a small match doesn't help increase giving very much, and above a certain level,
a bigger matching grant doesn't add very much to giving either. Economists have also carried out
a bunch of laboratory experiments. For example, you give one player ten dollars and have that player
give some of it to the other player. It could be that every dollar you give gets multiplied by
some factor, say a factor of five. So if you give one dollar, the other person gets five dollars.
It could be that every dollar you give gets cut in half. So if you give one dollar, the other
person gets 50 cents. And that kind of gain helps tell you something about how people react to the
incentives for giving. You can have games where the other person has an option to return the gifts
too, as we talked about in previous lectures. We find that people do respond to whether giving
is easy and cheap or more difficult. In games where the other person can give a return gift,
you find some reciprocity in the gift giving as well. You even find when there are strangers
playing the games. So altruism between strangers is not out of the reach of incentives and trade
offs that economics studies. Now what I want to do here is shift focus a bit from charitable
contributions over to the area of personal gifts, and I'll try to tie it all together at the end.
When you give money to a charity, the charity then has money to spend. But when someone has to guess
what you would like to receive for a personal gift, they will often miss the mark. So the gift may end
up being worth less to the recipient than what the giver paid for it. Joel Waldfogel, who's an
economist now at the University of Minnesota, has done a series of studies on the value of gifts to
recipients, starting back in the early 1990s. In fact, that paper had one of the great titles of
any academic paper. It was called The Deadweight Loss of Christmas. Waldfogel surveyed groups of
students about gifts they had received. What did the gift actually cost? What was the gift actually
worth to the student? You often found the pattern you might expect, that sort of peculiar looking
sweater received from your great aunt, or the embossed leather date book from the distant cousin,
or the unabridged dictionary from your parents, was worth less to you personally than the giver
had paid for it. The survey data suggests that on average, gifts were often worth about 15%
less to the recipient than what had been paid for them. Economists call this situation deadweight
loss. It refers to a situation when what was paid for something is more than what it was worth
to the person who actually received it. Given that there are several hundred billion dollars
spent on gifts every year, deadweight loss of these gifts would be measured in the tens of
billions of dollars. What are the alternatives? Well, one possibility is give cash instead.
Well, of course, cash seems somehow cold and thoughtless and heartless, but there's an in-between
option, which has gotten quite popular in recent years, which is how about a gift card
preloaded with a certain amount of value? Can this be an answer to the deadweight loss problem?
Well, about a hundred billion dollars per year is now spent on gift cards.
To many people, these cards seem more personal and socially acceptable than just paying cash,
and they let the recipient pick out what the person actually wants, so deadweight loss is less
of a problem. But gift cards are imperfect in various ways, too. They often go into a drawer
somewhere and can end up unused. One estimate is that at least 10%, maybe 20% of the value of gift
cards is never used, so that's just pure profit to the seller. And of course, that's one of the
reasons you can sell those cards at a discount to face value. Moreover, giving a gift card sort of
delays the actual gift. Maybe a third of gift cards are used in the month after they're given.
The rest are used much later. This is of course nice for the store, which already has the money
from the gift card, but it doesn't always feel very much like a personalized or thoughtful gift,
especially if it's a gift card to a really big, well-known store with an exceptionally
wide selection of merchandise. So what kind of gift works best to balance these things out?
Well, what are the alternatives? In the simplest case, I could go to my wife and give her a gift
card on Valentine's Day and tell her to feel free to pick up a card, some roses, and a box of
chocolates. Hey, she could pick up the flowers and chocolates she really wanted. She could pick
out the card she liked, and I'll even sign it. Now, if I were to do this, it would seem a bit
peculiar, a bit unromantic even for an economist, and that's saying something. What works in my
own marriage is that for relatively costly things, where my wife has very particular tastes, like
jewelry or clothing, it would just be foolish for me to try to buy them for her. Clueless does not
begin to describe my lack of knowledge in these areas. So my wife picks those things out, sticks
them in my closet, and when a birthday or a holiday comes around, I give them to her. Now,
this may seem weird, but it works for us. She says it feels new and fun when she gets it. A few
months later, I'm glad to have some of the gift giving pressure reduced, and the idea that I'm
going to come up with multiple new original gift ideas for every holiday, every year, for decades
of our marriage all through my life, just is not all that practical, if there's going to be a lot
of dead weight loss if we go down that road. However, if I only gave my wife the things she
picked for herself, I'd feel badly about it. I want to pick out some things for her, I think
would at least make her smile or bring back a memory of time spent together, or it would help
us look forward to something that's going to happen, or maybe just something she mentioned in
conversation. It's the kind of gift that lets her know I'm actually thinking about her and doing
my lung-headed economist best to show her that I'm thinking of her. Now, picking a big gift,
which isn't quite what the recipient wants, might be more subject to the dead weight loss problem
than picking a smaller, well-considered, and perhaps quirkier gift. It seems to me that a lot
of successful gifts are things we wanted, but perhaps we didn't really know we wanted,
and then that way they give us a boost of emotional or social connectedness. Or sometimes,
it's the kind of gift we do know about, but our idea of ourself doesn't really let us spend money
on it. For myself, I almost never buy myself a massage, for example, but I've been given a gift
certificate for a massage several times, and I've always really enjoyed it. A prominent economist
named Herbert Gintus, who spent a lot of his career at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst,
has spent a lot of time looking at issues of altruism, and he once wrote,
altruism isn't irrational, because if it were, the only rational people would be sociopaths.
A sociopath, of course, is someone with an abnormal lack of empathy for others,
separate from other rest of humanity. But I think Gintus is fundamentally right.
Altruism and gift-giving and charity are too central to the human experience to be treated
as if they were some strange aberration. I also think we set too high a standard for altruism
if we insist that it be completely pure, warm, glow, disinterested, or else it has to be in
the category of selfishness. We all play multiple roles in our lives, a family member, friend,
member of a workplace, member of a local community, member of clubs, organizations, church, member of
a state, a country, and a human being in the world. The flow of gifts and charitable contributions of
time and money are one of the ways in which these social ties are expressed. Sure, altruism and
gift-giving are to some extent self-interested, but they are also a recognition that we aren't
isolated individuals preoccupied with nothing but our own self-interest. Instead,
we're recognizing our roots and our roles in all of our broader communities.
