Sports involves competition on a field or a track or a pool or sometimes a snowy hillside.
While athletes are often reimbursed in some way, the contest of sports itself is not about
buying and selling. Indeed, from a narrow economic point of view, focused on the overall
economic output of society, sports is just not terribly important.
This might sound counter-intuitive. After all, don't we keep hearing about athletes
who get paid millions of dollars and see cheering stadiums full of people? Every now
and then it seems as if half the channels on cable TV are showing sports at some point.
Back in 2004, for example, the National Football League announced $8 billion in contract extensions
with Fox and CBS to televise Sunday afternoon games over a six-year period. The National
Football League also has contracts with ESPN and other contracts for what they call the
sports ticket that lets you watch any game anytime, add it all up, and it's several
billion dollars a year in television rights just for pro football, which sure sounds like
a lot.
Or to give another example, in 2010 the NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament signed a contract
reported at $14 billion over 11 years, call it one and a quarter billion per year. Now
these sorts of sums would be a lot of money in my personal checking account, but from
the standpoint of the overall economy, they really are a huge factor.
With these kinds of numbers in perspective, in 2009-2010, one company, Procter & Gamble
is probably the world's largest advertiser, spent $8 billion on advertising worldwide.
You could take the entire National Football League contract, the entire NCAA Men's Basketball
contract, some other sports too, and in economic terms, it would be less than what one company
spends just on advertising its products.
Overall, U.S. advertising revenue was up around $200 billion a year before the recession
hit in late 2007. It's sagged a little since then, but it's still true that advertising
and the industry of advertising is a vastly bigger economic value than sports is. If you
took all of U.S. spectator sports industries combined, everything from basketball, football,
baseball, hockey, racing cars, racing horses, you put it all together, U.S. government statistics
tell you that the total money taken in is something like $35 billion per year. Now the
U.S. economy is roughly $15 trillion, so we're talking about an industry that is just not
that important in the overall broader picture. Spectator sports are a few tenths of one percent
of the U.S. economy. Sports could go up or down a lot, and in the overall economic statistics,
we're basically talking about rounding error. The other time when sports and its economic
impact comes up, when it's time to build a stadium in a city. You'll hear lots of talk
about how the stadium will resuscitate the downtown and bring lots of business, all sorts
of terms like that, and there certainly are a few examples for a few years where a new
stadium did seem to attract a lot of folks. But over time, if you go and you look around
at stadiums and the neighborhoods around them, they're not usually booming areas. The truth
is that a stadium can be a part of the overall portfolio of things to do in a city. It can
be a distinctive attraction, but the economic effect in total revenues, a stadium is probably
about the same economic effect as having a really large department store downtown. Of
course, it hurts a downtown when a really large department store closes too, but no
one expects one department store to resuscitate the economy of a city either. So why look
at economics and sports rather than looking at some other fairly small scale industry?
Part of the answer is that we live in a sports crazy world, and economists are part of that
world. So economists do give sports a closer look than they might give the industries of
manufacturing patio furniture or temporary office services. But in addition, sports has
some special features that make an attractive for economists to study. In a lot of economic
settings that are more important, say a giant advertising firm, it's quite difficult to
get detailed information on specific jobs people do, on performance of each individual
in that job, on wages each person is paid, on the strategy that's being used, and other
things that are important to economic decision making. But in a sports setting, we know a
great deal about what participants are paid and what incentives they face and when their
pay is renegotiated. Performance is measured with great care and we discuss at length what
strategies are used. So economists can often get some insights about the broader issues
like pay and strategy by looking at the microcosm of sporting events.
Basic economic theory argues that what people are paid should be linked to what they produce.
The logic is simple enough. If you pay workers more than what they produce, on average, your
company will go broke. If you pay workers less than what they produce, then other employers
can swoop in and make those employees a higher offer so wages will gradually be bid higher.
Now of course, this relationship is not precise. It's easy to think of exceptions where the
link isn't as clear. For example, it's not shocking in the sports world to make a case
that the very top cream of college athletes could be paid more if colleges had to bid
for their services. Top college athletes are kind of like the coal miners of long ago stuck
in a company mining town who weren't all that well paid either. It's not shocking that
pro athletes made more money after they had the right to become free agents. Sports economics
has uncovered a number of examples of how workers aren't quite paid in a way that reflects
their productivity.
Very gifted writer and journalist Michael Lewis wrote a book about this subject and
especially if you're a baseball fan, I can't recommend the book more highly. Lewis set
out to answer this question. The Oaklandays baseball team, for a number of years in the
late 1990s and early 2000s, always seemed to have one of the lowest payrolls in baseball,
but they also always seemed to be winning a lot of games. They were either in the playoffs
or near the edge of the playoffs. How did they do that? To put it another way, how
were they finding a group of players who the baseball market said wasn't worth a lot
of money, but when those players played, they did quite well?
To tackle this question, they thought about what makes a baseball player valuable? Well,
obviously there's a list of things hitting and base running and catching and throwing,
but at the risk of oversimplifying, the A's discovered a couple of things. Looking at
hits and home runs was leaving something very important out of batting statistics. If you
get four balls, you get to walk to first base. Now, walks do two things. One is you have
a base runner, which is as good as hitting a single. The other thing is that it forces
your batters to emphasize not swinging at bad pitches. That forces the pitcher to throw
a lot more pitches, and so the pitcher is likely to tire out at an earlier inning of
the game. So instead of focusing on hits and home runs, what the A's focused on was how
many times a player walked, and on average, how many pitches did that batter make the
pitcher throw during each at bat? Now, the A's weren't saying other things aren't important,
like feeling and throwing and base running and hitting home runs, but they were saying
that at that time, teams were paying too much for those other characteristics and not paying
nearly enough for those players who just took a lot of pitches and walked a lot.
So, the A's went out and signed a bunch of those guys who were very patient batters,
walked a lot, saw a lot of pitches, and the team did very well with a low payroll. That
story illustrates a couple of facts about markets. Markets are not perfect at measuring
value. There often can be opportunities to firms to spot a particular kind of talent
that may be undervalued and then make use of that talent. A vivid illustration here is
an old lesson in baseball. When baseball was segregated by race, it certainly wasn't taking
advantage of the available talent. The first baseball teams to bring in substantial numbers
of African-American players, like Jackie Robinson joining the Brooklyn Dodgers, tended to win
a lot of games. There was undervalued talent being brought in. In the current labor market,
my guess is there are at least two kinds of workers who are somewhat undervalued. One
is professional women with kids. Another is older workers who are close to the retirement
age. In both cases, these are often workers with a lot of skills, and workers who don't
necessarily need super, super high pay. What they really want is a high degree of flexibility.
And I suspect that companies that find a way to tap into these groups may find they have
a real competitive advantage, at least for a time. Because this episode also shows that
markets do eventually adjust. In the economics journal that I edit, we published a paper
showing that the amount teams were willing to pay to get players who got a lot of walks
and took a lot of pitches, went up dramatically right after the Money Ball book was published.
Others learned the lesson. And ever since then, the Oakland days have been struggling
to find a different kind of edge with only modest success.
Another example of how contracts can alter incentives in such a way that pay and productivity
don't line up is courtesy of Kenneth Lane, who's an economics professor at the University
of Pittsburgh. He looked at the issue of, when a pro athlete gets a long-term guaranteed
contract, is that athlete more likely to be injured and not play? Lane looked at baseball
players at about the time that long-term contracts first became prevalent, around 1980. In the
mid-1970s, almost no players had long-term contracts in baseball. By 1980 or so, about
40% of players had at least two years of pay guaranteed. It's also true that in the mid-1970s,
only about 15% of players went on the disabled list. And by the late 1970s, that suddenly
went up to about 21% of players who were on the disabled list.
Now, there's no other obvious reason why players should suddenly have started getting hurt more
often. Those who signed big free agent contracts are often younger, stronger players, but after
signing those guaranteed money contracts, they seem to go on the disabled list more often.
Now, one interpretation of this finding is, it wasn't so much that players actually got
injured more, the chance of being injured stayed about the same over time. But when
a player doesn't have a long-term guaranteed contract, that player finds a way to gut it
out and keep playing. When a player does have a long-term guaranteed contract, it seems
like a better time to go on the disabled list and not play. It's all for the future. It's
all safety for the future.
Sometimes teams try to protect themselves by having incentives built into the contract,
like having a certain amount of at-bats or pitching a certain number of innings before
you get more money. The same kind of work has found that those who had incentives to
play, more innings or pitch more, get more hits, those players got hurt a lot less than
those who had the money guaranteed whether they got hurt or not. And this of course illustrates
a broader economic point. Drawing up incentive contracts is hard. If you guarantee people
money, you may not get the same effort. But if you link pay to some very particular objective,
you may not quite get what you want either. For example, a lot of top executives were
hired on the basis of we want the stock price of the company to go up, so they linked the
pay of the executive to that stock price. It's not surprising in that situation that
the executive starts managing all the news about the company to influence bumping up
that stock price. And some executives will even be tempted to start shading the truth
about the company to bump the stock price up sooner and faster.
As another example, say that you are rewarding the sales force according to how much they
sell. What might happen is your salespeople might emphasize sales to current big customers,
but not bother finding and developing new customers. Or you could reward the number
of sales calls, but if you do that, maybe you're not rewarding attention to long term
sales relationships. Getting a labor contract right is always a tricky business. It's easy
to give incentives for some of the things you want, but it's very hard to give incentives
for all of the things you want appropriately balanced, and contracts and sports help think
about this problem. Up to this point, I've focused on pay and productivity issues, and
a lot of the work in sports economics has focused on that area, but let me talk about
some other sorts of issues that come up. Sports often involves making a choice of strategy
with uncertainty about what will happen. It can be tricky to analyze a company's business
plan. It's not quite clear exactly what strategy they're following, but sports provides a well
defined set of strategic situations you can analyze.
Here's a well known example from pro football, well known among economists anyway. On fourth
down, should a pro football team go for it, or should they kick either a punt or a field
goal attempt? Well, David Romer of the University of California at Berkeley, who's a fine macro
economist, but also a football fan, studied this question of whether a football team should
punt on fourth down and try to get a first down. He collected data from all the regular
season national football games from 1998 to 2000. And football fans will have some idea
here of the situations that often arise several times in a game. Say it's fourth down in one
foot to go. Maybe if you go for it, you'll get it four out of five times, and you'll
gain that foot, but of course that means one out of five times you won't get it, and the
other team gets the ball. So should you try for it? Should you take the risk? Well, it
will depend on a lot of different factors. If you're way back in your own end of the
field, maybe on the 15 yard line, if you don't make it on fourth down, the other team has
a very good chance of scoring. But if you punt, the other team gets it around the middle
of the field and still has a pretty good chance of scoring. If you're near the other team's
end zone, maybe on their three yard line, you could kick a field goal now, or you could
gain that extra foot, and maybe go on and get a touchdown. If you're in the middle of
the field, all of these factors are in play. Going for it might mean giving the team a
decent chance to score, but keeping it means that you're not quite sure what will happen.
You're hoping to get a touchdown later on. Another factor might be the score of the game.
If you're way ahead, the risk of going for it isn't worth it. If you're way behind,
you might as well go for it. And Romer just sort of ignored this last factor. It's best
to think of his results as thinking about what you should do in a fairly close game,
or maybe in the first half of a game where there's lots of time for things still to play
out. Now, one can describe Romer's results in a lot of different ways, but here's an
overall summary. He basically found that based on his analysis of the data and the probabilities
and all the rest, if you're on your own half of the field, you're better off going for
a first down than punting if you have fewer than four yards to go. If you're at the other
team's 45 yard line, you should go for it on fourth down if you have less than six and
a half yards to go. If you're on the other team's 33 yard line, go for it if you have
fewer than 9.8 yards to go, and if you're at the other team's five yard line, always
go for it. Never kick a field goal. Now, to a lot of football fans, this finding
seems just wildly aggressive. But what Romer's analysis emphasizes is that giving up the
ball is a pretty bad outcome, so don't do it lightly or casually. Sometimes your sports
casters say things like, hey, you just punt it away and try again later. But this attitude
puts way too little weight on what happens when you give up the ball. If you've got even
a modest 50-50 chance of succeeding on, say, fourth and three, punting it away is an action
with real costs. What actually happens in pro football compared to Romer's rule? Well,
when Romer's rule says to punt, pro football team's pretty much always punt. But when Romer's
rule says to go for it, pro football teams kick about 90% of the time anyway. In other
words, Romer's rule suggests that most football teams punt way too often and don't take nearly
enough risk in going for it on fourth down. Do we have any evidence that taking more risk
might work? Well, at the high school level, a high school team in Arkansas a few years
ago took this philosophy to an extreme. They did not punt or try a field goal the entire
season and every kickoff was an onside kick. In 2008, this team also won this Arkansas
state championship in their division. There's also some weak evidence that in the last couple
of years at least, pro football coaches are a little more willing to try for it on fourth
or one or fourth and two. It's a very mild change compared to what Romer's strategy suggests,
but as coaches sometimes say, no one ever got fired for following conventional wisdom
and playing it safe. There's actually an ongoing classic issue in business management here.
Say you have some money invested in a number of different companies, maybe through the stock
market or mutual fund. It turns out that you often have reason to be concerned that managers
of the individual companies aren't taking enough risk. To understand why, let's think
about this first from the perspective of the business manager. Here's a manager. They've
got a good job running this firm. They've got high pay. The manager has to say, if I
take a big risk, I could get fired. If I don't take a risk and I just keep doing more or
less the same thing with no big failures anyone can point to, I can maybe keep this job for
a long, long time. Now think about it from your perspective. You aren't invested in
just one company. I hope you're diversified through a group of companies. But from your
point of view, if all of these managers take the safe road, your overall return may not
be so good. What you really want them to do is take various levels of risk. Some of them
will do well. Some of them won't. But for a diversified group of investments as a whole,
you personally will come out better. You would like managers to take more risk than managers
often have an incentive to do. And this problem often comes up in sports. On average, over
time, you want your football coach to take more risks. But there's not incentives in
the system to encourage that kind of risk taking behavior.
Let's talk about soccer penalty kicks and the strategy there. To oversimplify a bit,
a soccer penalty kick can be aimed left, right or center. So what should the shooter
do? For most shooters, their strongest shot is kicking across their body. That's their
strong side. And at high levels of soccer, the goalie essentially has to decide which
way to dive before seeing where the ball is headed. The ball is kicked too hard for the
goalie to watch it be kicked and react to it. So the goalie has to guess. So this is a strategic
situation. The shooter has three choices. What should the goalie do? The answer is the shooter
should take their strongest shot most of the time. Game theory teaches us. But sometimes
at random intervals, they have to try one of the alternatives to keep the goalie guessing.
Now what should the goalie do in this situation? The goalie should guess in turn that it will
be the strongest shot most of the time. But at random intervals, the goalie also has to
try something different to keep the shooter guessing. Now the exact percentages of how
often to try will depend on the degree of success for making each kind of shot and what
the goalie does. Economists have sat down and worked out the percentage here. And the data
actually seems to back up that roughly speaking, this is the game that's being played and this
is how the players see it. Some simple examples. The single most likely outcome in a penalty
kick is the shooter goes to the stronger side and the goalie also guesses and dives to that
side. The second most common outcome is the goalie guesses the strong side and dives to
it, but the shooter goes the other direction. And in fact, the actual choices that shooters
and goalies make seem to reflect fairly closely the predictions of game theory, which in a
way is what one might expect at the very top levels of soccer.
Let's look at one more example of economic insights from sports economics. This is about
how the structure of competition can affect outcomes and particularly about sports tournaments.
Let's think about a sports tournament like a tennis tournament or a golf tournament.
And maybe you've watched a tennis match that goes on for hours or a golf tournament that
stretches over several days. You watch the top players gut it out shot after shot after
shot. One of them barely wins at the end. But then they hand out the checks to the prize
winners and you see that the winner often gets twice as much as second place. And in
turn, second place often gets much more maybe twice as much as the third fourth place finishers.
Now the first place finisher was definitely not twice as good. At the very top level barely
winning means they're just a tiny bit better. Maybe just even a little luckier on that given
day. So why should the winner get paid twice as much if they're not twice as good?
Mull that question for a moment and consider a parallel to the business world.
The legendary chief executive officer Jack Welch left General Electric in 2001. That
year his base pay was $4 million. He was succeeded by Jeffrey Imelt who the previous year had
been a vice president and had a base pay of $1 million. Imelt became chief executive
officer and his base pay in the first year jumped to 2.75 million. Now remember the basic
economic theory here that pay is linked to the economic value of what you produce based
on your skills and experience and things like that. Is it really true that Jack Welch the
year before he was retired was four times as productive as Jeffrey Imelt? And then the
day that Welch left did inelt skills and experience suddenly increased by so much that he was
worth three times as much to the company so it made sense to nearly triple his salary.
Are these numbers based on productivity of individuals? It just seems implausible on
so many levels. After all, most big companies have several people who conceivably can do
a pretty good job as the CEO. Say some company has five possibilities. An economist might
suggest why not ask these five people to bid on how low a salary they would take in order
to take on the CEO job. Why pay one of them a whole lot and the others a fraction of that?
Well, it's a common pattern in many companies. The CEO gets far, far more. Two economists
who were then at the University of Chicago, Edward Laziere and Sherwin Rosen, back in
the 1970s and early 1980s had been studying executive pay and thinking about why this pattern
was observed. They started drawing connections from sports tournaments and talking about
a tournament model of pay. After all, getting promoted to Chief Executive Officer is kind
of like winning a tournament. You might only be one percent better than the second place
candidate, but you won the tournament. Now, tournament pay structure can have both positive
and negative incentives for everyone else in the organization. Imagine, for example,
you were a pro tennis player. You play all over the world almost every weekend to tournaments
somewhere. All the fans of whatever town you're in come out to watch you. But maybe that day
you're feeling like crud. You've got stomach flu. You've got a blister on your foot. The
kids are sick at home. Last night at the hotel, there was a big fight in the hallway at one
in the morning. You've been on the road for a month. What makes you dig down and play
your absolute hardest when that happens? Well, sure, there's some professional pride.
There's some competitive grit and those are nice words. There's some truth in them. But
for a lot of pro athletes, that big check for winning one more round is also a very
real motivation.
You can draw parallel here to a group of top executives at a company. If pay is pretty
much the same for all of them, who's going to work the incredible hours, travel all over
the world and take the stress and strain in an effort to be a top executive? Now, sure,
these folks at the top levels of business are driven to some extent by duty and by ego,
but that whopping big paycheck is a real incentive too. And of course, it's not just
top executives here. Law firms get people to work hard. You see, if you make partner,
you get a huge pay raise. Academic institutions, if you get tenure, you get a big pay raise.
The key point here is that the hope of getting promoted motivates people and getting promoted
means struggling to be the one who is perceived as 1% better than those who might otherwise
have won the contest.
On the other side, there's a real danger here. It's like some medieval tournament where
if you don't win, you get executed. People might try really hard in that setting, but
ultimately it's not a good use of human talent. Working 90 hour weeks for years on end isn't
good for humans. It's not good for everybody at a company to be at the ragged edge of exhaustion
all the time. Moreover, if the rewards are too large, there will be incentives for a
lack of teamwork at an extreme for sabotaging or undercutting the efforts of others.
This kind of pattern explains why companies often recruit from within. If you recruit
from outside, then those in the company know they're not in a position to win the tournament,
the promotion tournament, at least not at that company. After all, it's not just winning
the top executive spot. When somebody moves up to that slot, often everyone else reshuffles
too and moves up a little bit. Some of those who hoped to get that position but didn't
move to other companies, many people will get moved up into those available slots. So
this corporate tournament doesn't just have one winner at a time, it has a bunch of winners.
If you can't be promoted internally, that kind of a tournament will lose some of its
effect. This helps explain why so many companies promote from within and why it's such a big
deal when a company brings in a new top chief executive officer from the outside.
I hope I've persuaded you the connections from sports to economics can run in both directions.
The tools of economics can help to analyze particular issues in sports. Now, maybe this
isn't really a surprise. After all, economics is about people who purposefully pursue their
goals and make choices in a situation of trade-offs, and decisions in sports often share those
traits. But ultimately, sports is great fun, but it's small potatoes in the broader economy.
More interesting, I think, is that certain lessons from studying sports have a resonance
for understanding broader themes in the economy and in society as a whole. For example, the
very real possibility that certain kinds of talent are undervalued in the market, and
the potential advantages of figuring out where that undervalued talent is, is a lesson from
sports economics. The difficulties of setting up contracts with the right incentives for
hard work comes out of sports economics. The temptation to play it too safe, because
hardly anyone ever gets fired for playing safe, and thus the need to provide incentives
for taking risks, even though the risks will in some individual cases backfire, is a lesson
from sports economics. You're better off providing those kinds of risk incentives, and also how
the structures of pay and promotion across a company or an organization provide incentives
for effort, not just for the one person who wins the prize in the promotion tournament,
but for people all the way down through the chain of the company. Sports is unlikely ever
to be a truly central concern of economics. But thinking through all the implications
gives you a set of issues and examples which can help to organize your thinking.
When studying economics and learning economics, it's often hard to find really crisp, clear
examples. The worlds of business and government are complicated places. There are all sorts
of decisions and choices happening. It's hard to get data on them. Sports can provide
nice, clear-cut illustrations, and in that way, sports economics can be a considerable
help in thinking through and learning about economic principles.
