Public arguments over the merits of free market economic forces versus government actions
often set up an unfair opposition.
On the one hand, an ideal market economy is sometimes praised with none of the potential
real world problems, warts or flaws that we all know exist in such an economy, things
like poverty, inequality, unemployment, environmental stresses and all the rest.
On the other hand, a hypothetical vision of government policy is often offered in which
government is a distilled representation of the pure public interest.
We also know this isn't true, of course, but this vision of government has all the information
and ability it needs to make wise decisions without mistakes, in which voters and elected
officials and regulators are not self-interested and never respond to the incentives and the
trade-offs that they personally face too.
This is an unrealistic opposition because both positions are unrealistic.
One of the classic statements of a more realistic view of government is from James Madison,
who during the years leading up to the writing of the U.S. Constitution, was one of the group
who wrote the essays, Meditating on Appropriate Forms of Government, that became known as
the Federalist Papers.
Madison famously wrote, If men were angels, no government would be necessary.
If angels were to govern men, neither external nor internal controls on government would
be necessary.
In framing a government which is to be administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies
in this.
You must first enable the government to control the governed, and in the next place, oblige
it to control itself.
As one example of how to make the government control itself, Madison and the other architects
of the Constitution set up different branches of government, executive, legislative with
two separate houses, and judiciary as a way to check and balance each other.
And of course, there are also state and local government structures as well, all of which
have a set of interlocking responsibilities, to create a structure in which the hope is,
at least, that government will be obliged to control itself.
The public choice theory of economics looks at how self-interest in a world of trade-offs
expresses itself in voting and politics, and it picks up on a number of these themes.
People need government because they aren't angels.
But government can also go wrong and needs to control itself.
Voting helps separate branches of government help, but it doesn't ultimately resolve these
kinds of issues.
Let's dig into the idea of voting a little more.
At one level, there's a lot of positive buzz around voting.
Most politicians and public commentators encourage everyone to get out and vote their
publicity campaigns for voting.
Congratulatory and self-congratulatory essays get written every election day.
Typical statements are that voting is a right and a responsibility and an honor and a privilege
and what separates us from tyranny and probably more than that.
Now I'm smiling a bit at this kind of talk, but I don't really need to be dismissive about
voting.
In a long-standing democracy like the United States, voting is one of those little miracles
of life that a person can take for granted a little bit too easily.
The idea that the most powerful politicians must regularly put themselves before the public,
that the average people taken as a group, determined who is in power and who gets booted
out of power, is a notion that would be incomprehensible to all sorts of kings and queens and tyrants
who've played such a large role throughout history.
In the modern world, even autocrats and tyrants hold elections for show, which in a way is
the tribute that vice pays to virtue.
It's interesting that those autocrats and tyrants feel a need to claim popular support.
It shows the mindset of the modern world.
But it's a fact that not everyone votes.
In U.S. presidential elections over the last few decades, between about 50 and 65 percent
of voting age citizens actually vote.
That rate tended to be higher in the 1960s and then declined for several decades.
The share of the voting age population that actually voted was slightly below 50 percent
in 1996.
More recently, it's been rising a little bit, 51 percent in the 2000 national election,
55 percent in 2004, and up to 57 percent in 2008.
In congressional elections, when there's no presidential race or in local elections,
the turnout is typically much lower, often less than half of eligible voters.
In pure city elections, when they aren't happening at the same time as a national election, voter
turnout is often as low as one-third or one-quarter of the voters.
Other high-income countries often have higher voting rates than the United States.
In the United Kingdom, for example, voting participation declined from 84 percent back
in 1950 down to about 59 percent in 2001 for ticking up to 65 percent in their 2010 election.
In national elections, since the 1980s, in places like Germany, France, and Spain, about
75 to 80 percent of those who are of voting age cast balance.
In some ways, the practice of holding elections on Sunday may contribute to higher participation
rates in those three countries.
A number of other countries have laws that require voting, among them Australia, Belgium,
Italy, Greece, Turkey, Singapore, and many Latin American countries.
Of course, not everyone complies with the law, but it does tend to push the voting rate
up into about 90 percent range.
At the time the United States was founded, voting was mandatory in certain states, including
Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, and Georgia.
But the more modern view is that the right to vote is also in some sense the right not
to vote if one chooses not to do so.
When many people don't vote, despite the romance and the public encouragement, an obvious question
is why not?
Well, for some decades, economists have been pointing out that although the costs of voting
are not large, the chance that your vote determines the outcome of an election is so tiny that
in practical terms, it might as well be zero.
One classic statement of this work is from a 1957 book, An Economic Theory of Democracy,
written by an economist named Anthony Downs.
As an economist, Downs of course started from a point thinking about how extremely rational
people would approach this question, why vote?
Well, if you vote to influence the outcome of an election, you have to ask yourself what
are the chances that your personal vote will change the outcome of the election?
And the chances are close to zero, very, very close to zero.
Before voting, you need to take time and energy to get informed on issues, and then you have
to take the actual time and energy of going to the polls to cast a vote.
Given that your vote has such a small chance of change in the outcome, what real incentive
is there to get informed?
What real incentive to actually vote?
If an election is supposed to be super close and it's a small district, you can make an
argument your vote might matter.
And there certainly are a few historical examples of one-vote margins of victory in very small
districts, but for voting in national elections or elections where the polls show there's
very large margin of victory likely to occur, there just doesn't seem much reason in these
terms to cast a ballot.
Well, Downes put this argument into formal, logical and mathematical terms, but it's not
a new insight.
An earlier statement of the same point was from the psychologist B.F.
Skinner in his 1948 novel, Walden II.
One of the characters in the novel says at one point, the chance that one man's vote
will decide the issue in a national election is less than the chance he will be killed
on his way to the polls.
Now I haven't actually seen the calculation done of how many people are killed or injured
when they were on their way to vote, but in any country of decent size, transportation
has risks and I'm sure it's true there are some accidents and even deaths that occur.
Moreover, if you look in elections in countries that are quite unsettled with a high level
of violence like Afghanistan or Iraq in recent years, it's certainly true that 10 or 20 or
more people are actually killed on their way to the polls.
So why would any reasonable person bother to get informed or vote?
Of all the arguments that economists make about self-interest, in my experience this
argument about voting is the one that non-economists dislike the most.
Saying it's not rational to vote is sort of like being against motherhood and apple
pie and patriotism.
As with the rest of these lectures, I'm not trying to convince you of a point of view.
I'm certainly not telling you you should never vote.
I vote and so do most economists as far as I know.
As with so many economic arguments, then the idea of people doing something that might
not seem reasonable when viewed from one direction is the beginning of a search for other perspectives
that could help to explain in what circumstances and for what reasons the decision to vote
might be a reasonable one.
After all, people are more complicated than rational calculating machines.
One way to get at the question of why people vote is to look at patterns of voting and
then to try to understand what might explain these patterns.
Let me start off with a pattern noted by David Campbell, a political scientist based at Notre
Dame University.
One of his insights is that voting turnout is highest in the extreme cases.
At one extreme, voter turnout is highest in places where population is very homogenous
and as a result, the political race is not very close.
At another extreme, voter turnout is higher in places where the population is very heterogenous
so that the political race is very close.
It's the in-between places where voter turnout tends to be lower.
Campbell suggests this pattern leads to two main reasons for voting.
One is that people get interested and excited when a political race is close and you can
call that reason political engagement leading people to vote.
There can also be a sense that in a close selection, people are more likely to get excited
and root for a certain candidate and enjoy the idea that their vote might matter, sort
of in the way that people think when they personally root for a sports team, it helps
that team win.
The other argument for voter turnout is that people who are well established in a common
community get in the habit of doing a lot of things to make that community function well.
You can imagine that people in these kinds of communities support school fund drives
and they volunteer, they keep their sidewalks shoveled, they host the neighborhood cookout,
they keep an out for each other's mail and newspapers when people are on vacation, they
celebrate life milestones with their neighbors and so on.
And for this kind of a community, a high level of voting is just one part of overall civic
involvement.
One of my favorite comments that captures some of the civic view of voting comes from the
author G.K. Chesterton who wrote in an essay in 1909, a man ought to vote with the whole
of himself as he worships or gets married.
I kind of like this sentiment because it sees voting not just as a matter of voting for
your favorite team or party, not just as a trade off of hours of studying, 30 minutes
at the polls versus whether your vote influences the outcome, but as part of a broader set
of community oriented actions.
People's arguments suggest that if we want more people to vote, then either we need more
civic involvement or we need closer political races and I'll come back to those ideas a
little bit later.
Another pattern in the voting data is that those who are older and have more education
tend to vote more and you can come up with a number of reasons for this.
These are the people who tend to feel as if they have deeper roots and responsibilities
in their communities and their people for whom the cost of becoming informed is relatively
low because they move in a social world with this kind of information all around them.
They know where to cast a vote and those sorts of issues.
So if you look at the decline over recent decades in voter turnout, you find that a lot
of it can be traced not to this group, but to lower voting rates among young adults.
The young of all was voted at lower rates than the rest of the population, but at various
points in recent decades, the gap has gotten larger.
For example, if you look at U.S. voter turnout for those under the age of 24, back in the
1964 election, it was 16 percentage points less than voter turnout for those over the
age of 65.
In the 2000 election, voter turnout for those under the age of 24 was 35 percentage points
less than for those over the age of 65.
More recent elections have seen a bit of reversal of this trend, with young voters participating
a little bit more.
If you define young adults as those under the age of 30, voter turnout for that age
group was a fairly pathetic 40 percent in 2000, but it was 49 percent in 2004 and slightly
higher at 51 percent in 2008.
Much of the rise in voter turnout from 2000 to 2008 I mentioned earlier is these younger
voters.
In fact, the 2008 election marked the third highest turnout rate among young adults under
30 since the voting age had been lowered to 18.
Young adults are apparently a pretty volatile group when it comes to voting.
There's more political information out there on the Internet.
Perhaps it's true for this group that the costs of getting informed and feeling connected
are lower than they were before.
Even if one hates the strictly rational view of voting, it clearly has some nugget of truth
in it.
When three-quarters of the people in a city don't vote in a local election, it suggests
they don't feel it's worth it to get informed and find out what's going on and head to
the polls.
Now, setting participation rates aside, there are a number of reasons for concern as to
whether the outcome of voting will lead to the outcome that fairly represents the will
of the people.
Let's consider a few of these possible reasons.
What about ignorant voters?
Voters often are pretty ignorant if you had to ask them specific questions.
If you ask about the unemployment rate or U.S. foreign policy or naming the vice presidential
candidates, a lot of people just don't know.
But remember, in the earlier discussion of prediction markets, it was often true that
large groups have a certain kind of wisdom to them.
If you get a very large number of people and that group hears endorsements, hears people
talking on the radio or television, hears from friends and family and coworkers, sees
things online, sees how politicians perform here and there throughout the campaign, they
will gather a lot of information.
So the fair question here isn't really, do individual voters all make wise decisions,
but does the outcome as a whole offer a fair representation of voter desires?
There's some studies in psychology on what's called confirmation bias.
They suggest that when people learn more, it tends just to confirm their preexisting
biases.
So it's not clear in that sense that voters learning more or having less than full information
is leading to some systematic bias in the outcome of elections.
The bigger concern perhaps is that some beliefs of voters are systematically biased.
For example, if you ask voters about what share of the federal budget goes to foreign
aid, you usually get estimates that are way too high.
It's not uncommon to get an answer that foreign aid is 20% of the federal budget when it's
really more like 1%.
Or if you ask people how much their employer is paying on their behalf for family health
insurance, you typically get answers that are way too low.
It's not uncommon to get answers that are a few hundred dollars a year or maybe just
over a thousand dollars a year.
Not the multiple thousands of dollars a year, which most employers really are paying.
And of course, this is referring to people who do have employer provided health insurance
in the first place.
Just thinking about these two issues, you can imagine these biases filtering through
to public discourse in various ways.
You have a hard time solving issues if it's based on poor and systematically biased information.
Another common complaint is that campaign contributions and money in politics have gotten
too extreme.
However many economists and political scientists too have failed to see this as a major problem.
Let's start off with what's the right amount of money to spend on political campaigns?
What should we expect to happen?
Some of my old economics professors used to start this discussion by asking this question.
If you start giving away $20 bills on the street, what determines how long a line will
form?
And the answer in economic terms would be, standing in line involves a cost of time.
The longer the line, the more you're paying in terms of time.
If the line is so long that it costs $10 worth of time that you get $20, more and more people
will get in line.
So eventually, the line to get a free $20 bill will be long enough that the value of
time for the last person in line is just a bit less than $20.
Now let's take this insight and apply it to the government.
The government makes decisions about taxing or spending.
These have effects measured in hundreds of billions of dollars every year.
If that kind of money is being discussed, actors in the economy are going to make an
effort to influence it.
Given the magnitude of federal spending, taxes and regulation, what's really remarkable
to economists is that the amount spent on politics is so very, very small.
In the 2008 elections for President, Congress and all the state and local offices, a total
of about $5.2 billion was spent on the election campaigns.
That includes all the advertising, fundraising, travel and staff.
Total government spending in 2009, including all the federal and state government, totaled
about $5.1 trillion.
So the cost of choosing the people who would determine how this money would be spent cost
about one-tenth of one percent of government spending.
Here's some other comparisons.
Consumers in the U.S. economy spend about $2 billion a year on toothpaste.
Consumers of hair care products are about $7 billion a year.
It may not be sensible to believe that the United States can decide its elections for
President and every other office in the country for an amount less than what we spend on toothpaste
and hair care.
A famous economist who studied public choice issues named Gordon Tullock observed this pattern
decades ago in the early 1970s, and he used to ask over and over, why is there so little
money in U.S. politics?
Tullock argued that the reasons for so little political giving are similar to some of the
arguments about voting.
If lots of folks are giving lots of money, then many will choose not to contribute because
after all, their little contribution is unlikely to make much of a difference.
Contributions from individual voters are large enough that they really do swamp the effect
of a company that tries to throw in a bit of money here or there.
More detailed studies that try to separate out how much money affects election outcomes
always run into a common problem.
Those who can raise more money are also those who are more popular, so this raises a chicken
and egg kind of question.
Is the money that's going to popular politicians leading to them winning, or is it their popular,
which in the first place leads to them getting more money?
After all, there are plenty of examples of well-funded campaigns where a millionaire
spends scads of money but ends up losing.
A few years ago, an organization in Washington called the Center for Responsive Politics
put out a list of candidates in elections in 2002, 2004 and 2006 who spent at least $500,000
of their own money on their election.
In 2002, for example, there were 32 candidates who put at least $500,000 of their own money
into their campaigns, and three of them won.
In 2004, there were 30 candidates who put $500,000 into their campaign, one-one.
In 2006, 42 candidates put at least $500,000 into their campaign, and five-one.
What seems to be true is that legislators vote based on their own beliefs on the voters
in their district and on their party.
Instead of money buying votes, it's more like a charitable contribution.
It's giving to a cause you favor, maybe giving yourself a little bit higher profile in
that cause.
Another interesting comparison is to look at campaign contributions versus lobbying.
If you look at lobbying, that is not campaign contributions but other efforts to influence
legislation, you find that lobbying is much larger than you might expect.
It's true that full-time registered lobbyists now have to disclose what they're doing but
not part-timers, and there are a lot of part-timers.
This study looked at big interest groups and compared their campaign contributions to their
lobbying, and for these groups, they found that the lobbying expenses of these groups
were larger than their campaign contributions by a factor of 10, which suggests at least
for them, lobbying is maybe 10 times as important as the campaign contributions.
Now, I'm not staking out any hard position here about public finance of campaigns, about
disclosure, limits on giving, role of corporations, role of unions, role of other groups.
What I do want you to take away from this is that taken as a whole, there's a lot of
evidence that campaign contributions are a less crucial factor in determining political
outcomes than is often argued.
Another possible concern is that there can be problems for the political process caused
by special interests, earmarks, pork barrel legislation.
Maybe some of this is inevitable but some of it verges on the scandalous or maybe even
crosses that barrier.
The total cost of these kinds of features is not what drives the federal budget.
Let me give you some examples.
Earmarks refer to specific provisions added to a law that direct money in a very specific
way to a certain congressional district or maybe state.
They're usually added by a congressman or senator from that state.
It's not exactly an open public review.
But in 2010, there were about 10,000 earmarks that had a total cost of $16 billion.
And of total federal spending of over $3 trillion, that's less than a tenth of a percent.
Some of it seems scandalous but it's a rounding error on the total.
Or say for the sake of argument that all farm subsidies are an example of a special interest
lobby.
It's a bit of an exaggeration but go with it.
The total cost of all farm subsidies is about $15 to $20 billion per year.
In contrast, big ticket items like health care spending on Medicare and Medicaid, health
benefits for federal employees, social security, defense spending, interest owed on the past
federal borrowing, these are enormous amounts that are spent.
And in some ways, they're special interests too.
For example, defense contracts might go to a certain firm in a certain congressional
district but they're not exactly narrow special interests.
Now I'm all for putting on the pressure to expose special interest politics and earmarks
to the light of day, try and save a few billion dollars here and there.
But those are not the main thing driving the federal budget in the last few decades or
in the next few decades.
In fact, I sometimes feel as if by focusing on earmarks and special interest, we're avoiding
that when it comes to the giant government spending programs, defense, social security,
health care, a huge share of the U.S. population is really involved.
Another reason to distrust whether elections could give a good representation of broad
public opinion can happen in three-way elections.
Use a scenario that sometimes happens.
Say that in a certain area, the voters are majority Democrats and minority Republicans
and normally the party with the majority wins.
But in this race, say it's a race for governor, there's a three-way race with two candidates
acceptable to a majority and one preferred by a minority.
In this case, it's quite possible that the majority will split and the minority can
win and this happens from time to time.
From my own state of Minnesota a few years back, we elected a former pro wrestler and
radio talk show host Jesse Ventura to be governor.
The main reason he was elected was it was a three-way race and everyone got less than
40%.
I suspect he would have lost against either of the other leading candidates if it was
a one-on-one contest.
But in the United States, most elections are between the two main parties and these three-way
problems only turn up occasionally.
It's only in really close elections that democracy in a U.S. forum seems to have these problems.
But it's worth remembering there are at least some knowledgeable people who argue that the
2000 election would have turned out differently if Ralph Nader had urged even some of his
supporters over the last few weeks of the campaign to vote for Al Gore over George W.
Bush.
Close elections bring us to a final concern raised about the democratic process, which
is the parties all tend to cluster together in such a way that no real change happens.
A University of Chicago economist named Harold Hotelling, one of the most prominent economists
of his time, wrote about this back in 1929.
Hotelling offered a useful metaphor of vendors selling food out of carts on the beach.
He said, say your food cart is mobile but you need to set it up once a day.
You're looking at this long strip of beach and you're trying to figure out where to
set up your food cart.
You know, most people will just buy food from whatever cart is closest to them.
What do you choose?
Well, the first person to the beach chooses the middle of the beach, right?
They'll be closest to everybody.
What about the next one who comes to the beach?
That person might be tempted to choose a position part way down the beach, but if you do that,
sure you can get all the business from one extreme end of the beach, but the middle and
the other half are all going to your competitor.
So where's the likeliest place for the second competitor to locate?
Well, actually, it's right next door to the first.
If you get food carts spread out all over the beach, this kind of competitive pressure
gradually causes all of them to move toward the middle.
Hotelling argued this clustering together was common in a lot of competitive situations.
New cars often look similar, new clothes often look similar, and in politics, he argued, everyone
tends to move to the middle.
Of course, when you're running on your primary campaign or running in a certain district,
voters will tell those audiences what they want to hear, but after being elected, they
often talk somewhat differently.
Now, it would overstate the case to say there are no differences at all between parties,
but it's often noted that political discussion in the United States tends to happen to use
a football metaphor between the 40-yard lines, not from one end zone to the other.
For those who want substantial change in any political direction, this can be really frustrating,
and frustration can lead to votes for outsiders.
But it also offers a kind of stability.
You have to have a really broad movement among the public before you get a big change, and
that may be a feature of a political system, not a bug.
Let's say, for the sake of argument, we would like to have higher voter turnout, and that
should be a public policy goal.
I'll quickly add it's not obvious that vastly higher turnout, no matter what, should be a
goal.
For example, I don't think there should be a law requiring people to vote or paying people
of bonus to vote.
There are a lot of elections where an incumbent wins by a lot.
If that happens with a 50% turnout or an 80% turnout, the incumbent still wins by a lot.
I should also say it's not obvious how a raised voter turnout.
The United States over time has voters who are older and better educated, and many areas
have made it easier to register to vote and actually vote.
These kinds of factors have tended to lead to higher voting, but even with all of these
things happening, and even with the recent mild uptick in U.S. voter participation, we
haven't yet returned to the levels of voter turnout that were common a few decades ago.
If there are sensible reforms that would be good for higher voting, it's worth thinking
about them, though.
An example might be to reduce the costs of registering in advance to vote.
That's why some states allow same day voter registration, and it seems like in a high
tech information age it should be possible to do this and to check to make sure the
registrations are honest with reasonable speed.
Taking time away from work to vote might be a bigger cost than in earlier decades, so
perhaps we could have voting on some sort of weekend or civic holiday.
You could also think about ways to get more competitive political races, like drawing
up more competitive districts on a bipartisan basis.
The youth vote has been a little bit higher in 2004 and 2008, but it's not clear that's
going to continue over time.
It's important to build a sense of civic engagement, but it's beyond my competences
and economists to say just how that should be done.
You don't want to glamorize the free market.
It creates dynamism and opportunity, and it sustains a good standard of living for many
people.
But you don't want to glamorize government either.
After all, democratic governments can make mistakes.
They can avoid tackling tough choices and put them off till they're worse.
They can have situations where decisions of governments don't really reflect the beliefs
of a broad swath of the people.
Legislators and regulators are likely to pursue their own power and self-interest.
They may focus on small symbolic acts that stir up certain groups, rather than trying
to figure out how to solve broad issues that affect all voters.
You can get tangled up with outside lobbyists and confused about who the public really is
that they're supposed to be serving.
But it's also ultimately true that legitimacy of a democratic government rests on the
consent of the government, and that consent of the government is renewed and demonstrated
in each election by the acts of citizens who take the time to vote.
