Alright everyone, so today I want to talk about this book called Platonism and Naturalism,
The Possibility of Philosophy, by the Platonist scholar Lloyd Gerson.
Now this is an interesting book to cover because this actually presents a very good introduction
to Platonism, you know, Platonism as it's thought in sort of introductory courses and
colleges and so on.
We don't really get a full perspective on Platonism, right?
We get what's sort of in the dialogues, you know, the Republic and Plato's ideal form
of government and the forms and so on.
But the kind of Platonism Gerson presents is, you know, Platonism as it was a school
of thought.
So, as well as what's in the dialogues, you know, there is a deeper sort of more esoteric
reading of the dialogues and of Plato that includes Plato's so-called unwritten doctrine
as it was taught to Platonists, it includes the testimony that Aristotle gave of what
Plato believed.
Plato also had a number of epistles where he further explained some of the sort of more
esoteric elements of his thought and then of course there's the whole school of Platonism
or what we call neo-Platonism, people like Plotinus and Proclus and that's often presented
as kind of a separate school of philosophy, right?
It's neo-Platonism.
Something like Gerson would say, no, this is just Platonism and what usually separates
them is, again, you know, Platonism we think of the forms, the separate forms, this world
of forms and we think of neo-Platonism as this more kind of religious philosophy where
the one is very central and it's this kind of mystical view of the world where everything
unfolds from the one.
Well Gerson argues that this was always central to Platonism, that central to Plato's philosophy
is what he calls the superordinate idea of the good or the one and that Plato's whole
philosophy is really built around this and a lot of scholars kind of missed this point
and they have a much more sort of exoteric reading of Plato.
Now this book is interesting because Gerson, as well as presenting the whole outline of
the Platonist philosophy and given this deeper reading of Platonism, he actually argues that
when we understand Platonism this way we begin to see that essentially philosophy is a kind
of binary choice between Platonism and naturalism and we can actually read the whole history
of Western philosophy as this conflict between Platonism and naturalism because what Gerson
argues is that this whole system of Platonism, it all fits together, the key elements of
it inform the elements and if any one of those isn't possible then philosophy itself isn't
possible because without the Platonist viewpoint philosophy basically wouldn't have anything
to tell us and we would just be limited to what science can tell us about the world.
Now to back this up Gerson starts this book with a cover in Richard Rorty who's quite
a well-known post-modernist philosopher and he's a good background to this because Rorty
basically argued the same thing and philosophy in the mirror of nature, he argues that Platonism
and philosophy are identical because if one rejects Platonism one has no specific knowledge
to contribute. If you reject the tenets of Platonism you really can't claim that philosophy
can tell us anything unique about the world. Although philosophers from Aristotle onward
made philosophical criticisms of Plato, Rorty claims that they did so from a Platonic starting
point they shared with Plato basic assumptions of principles, the questioning of which was
never the starting point of any objection and so it is possible to read all of classical
philosophy as this kind of dialogue within Platonism. Aristotle is a Platonist, of course
you have the Neoplatonist when you have Christian philosophers, scholastics like Aquinas, they
too are starting from these kind of Platonist starting points. Rorty maintained that the
fundamental divide between Platonists, whether this is self-declared or not, and anti-Platonists
is that the former believed that it's possible to represent truth in language and thought
whereas the latter do not. Rorty is known for this book Philosophy in the Mirror of
Nature and this is basically his argument, the argument of the post-modernist is that
our thought can't accurately represent truth and that there's a fundamental divide between
these and this is his rejection fundamentally of Platonism. Rorty says that Platonic thought
is systematic, that is it believes it has a distinct subject matter. So what binds Platonists
together is their belief that philosophy can discover unique knowledge and so this is the
central question to this book and to this whole inquiry is does philosophy have unique
knowledge, can philosophy tell us something about the world? And so we get to this conflict
of Platonism versus naturalism. Gerson agrees with Rorty that Platonism just is systematic
philosophy and this means that we can look at other systematic philosophers like Spinoza,
Hegel or Leibniz and we can actually see them as constructing versions of Platonism.
They have many of the same assumptions, the same kinds of conclusions and when we introduce
this conflict of Platonism versus naturalism we can see that philosophers fall on some
side of this divide and some try and kind of synthesize the two positions although Gerson,
another one of his central arguments is that a synthesis isn't really possible. In the
end you have to make your choice between Platonism or naturalism. So he says Platonism first came
under attack from Christian philosophers who wanted to identify the first principle of all
with the God of Scripture and so the kind of theism that would have come out of early Christianity
would have been in conflict with the idea of divinity that's present in Platonism with the one
but he sees the second wave of attack as more significant. Of course there's a conflict here
but this is kind of remedied or synthesized by people like Thomas Aquinas and Saint Augustine.
Eric Perl in his book Thinking Bean which we covered on my book club this year basically
argues that Thomas Aquinas should be read as a Neoplatonist philosopher and that he really takes
his whole philosophy of divinity and its relation to the world from Platonists and he synthesizes
this with Scripture and with the Christian God but the second wave of attack is more significant.
It comes into 17th century when Platonism which had by then become wedded to Christianity came
under attack from naturalism and the history of philosophy since then has been various failed
attempts in Gerson's opinion to marry naturalism and Platonism. So of course you know the 17th
century we get the the scientific revolution the rejection of the kind of Aristotelian approach to
nature and new philosophies and new defenses of forms of naturalism and then Gerson's reading of
enlightenment philosophers like Hegel or like Leibniz is that they're trying to synthesize
naturalism and Platonism trying to come up with some kind of middle position.
And so the first part of this book Platonism and Naturalism is dealing with the important question
of what actually is Platonism. As mentioned earlier there is a sort of standard introductory reading
to Plato that Gerson feels misses a lot of important points so let's begin. Understanding
Platonism requires historical investigation. Although there are historical divisions among
Platonists the divisions occur under the umbrella of shared principles. Platonism is this school of
thought that has worked out over centuries and there are many influential important Platonists
and we have to look at the sort of dialogue between them and how that unfolds to really
understand Platonism. Platonism insists on the distinctness of its subject matter which is nothing
but the subject matter of philosophy. This subject matter is the intelligible world or what is
available to thought as opposed to sense perception. This is a very important aspect of Platonist
worldview is that philosophy has a distinct subject matter because it's concerned with
the intelligible world and this is something that's separate from mere sense perception.
Plato sought explanatory reductivism. He believed there were ultimate explanations for things that
were as simple as possible. This explanatory reductivism is ultimately satisfied by the
ultimate explanation of a superordinate first principle the idea of the good. Much modern
scholarship on Platonism ignores how central this is to the Platonic system so as mentioned this is
why the work of Gerson is really interesting is because he centers everything around the idea of
the good and how central it is in Plato's system. The idea of the good or the one as it was called
in later Platonism and this is in the dialogues but it's only pointed to in some brief passages
so people really miss the importance of this in the opinion of Gerson. Platonism must also be
understood as a rejection of philosophical precursors and specifically of materialism,
mechanism, nominalism, relativism and skepticism and you see each of these positions represented by
different precursors to Plato in the dialogues who Socrates argues with and these are the five
Antes as Gerson calls them so in constructing this kind of Ur-Platonism in finding out what
Platonism is he does this as a kind of negative inquiry where he says that it's a rejection
of these five Antes and from this rejection you get the positive worldview of Platonism.
The five Antes are firstly nominalism. Plato rejects nominalism which is the view that if
two or more things are the same then they must be identical. Nominalism there's no conceptual
space for sameness that is not identity. Essentially nominalism is the rejection of
universals. It's a rejection that there are things common to things like you know redness
or you know tuness that they're common to them but not identical so again it's essentially the
rejection of universals. Materialism is the view that the only thing that exists are bodies that
is three-dimensional solids and whatever supervene's on or is epiphenomenal to these bodies so this is
obviously the dominant way of thinking about the world today with our sort of scientific view of
things that it's just kind of matter and motion and these three-dimensional solids sort of slam
together and out of that we sort of accidentally get complexity and this is how everything really
is explained in a sort of scientific worldview. The third principle Plato rejects is mechanism
which is the principle of causal closure it's the view that all causal explanations available to us
are found within a naturalistic framework. Everything is determined by naturalist principles
and there's no getting outside of this naturalist causal chain. He also rejects relativism which
is the view that there exists no normativity independent of the interests or beliefs or desires
of one or more human beings so we have no way to adjudicate any kind of moral judgments any kind of
objective hierarchy of values it's all just subjective preference. Finally he rejects skepticism
which is the view that there exists no infallible cognition and it's interesting or it's important
to remember that all five of these aunties basically come about as a part of the naturalist
worldview and in the view of Gerson if you are a naturalist you have to accept all five of these
positions and so Platonism in rejecting and arguing against all of these is showing the
untenability of naturalism. So if you're a naturalist if you believe that all there is
is the objects of this world you would have to be a nominalist there's no space for something
like the number four or the color red existing in some kind of ideal or conceptual space beyond
its instantiation in the world. You'd have to be a materialist because again if you're a naturalist
how can you posit some kind of ideal forms or substances beyond the things we observe in the
world as kind of implied by naturalism. You'd have to accept mechanism because again what kind of
things would play a causal role if not for things observed in the world in a naturalist
worldview you would have to be a relativist because what kind of you know what kind of thing would
an objective moral good or some kind of objective standard be that's not presented to us just by
what we observe by nature that's something that comes about true cognition true value judgments
and making that objective in a naturalist worldview is basically untenable.
And we also see that naturalism often leads to skepticism I guess the best example is the
philosophy of David Hume and you could look at someone like Rorty himself and this kind of
skeptical attitude that if naturalism is true why would we suppose that our minds can access some
kind of infallible cognition you know we are just evolved apes with brains that are evolved for
survival rather than for truth and it would be a very strange thing if we had access to some kind
of ideal space of objective truth. So Plato rejects all of these in his rejection of naturalism.
Now what's also necessary to understand Platonism as well as the rejection of these five principles
is Plato's explanatory reductivism. So throughout the dialogues a positive and systematic position
can be sketched out in opposition to these views this is that was the negative side this is the
kind of positive side of Plato. According to Gerson the central pillar of the positive construct
on the basis of this foundation is clear and unambiguous it is an unhypothetical first principle
of all called in the republic the idea of the good and according to Aristotle's testimony
identified by Plato with the one. If Platonism doesn't have this systematic unity then the
individual elements must fall apart. Each of Plato's arguments against his predecessors relies on the
coherence of the other aspects of his philosophy and each relies on the explanatory role of the
first principle of all. Gerson emphasizes this a lot that when people try to understand say Plato's
view of ethics or his view on the forms or his view on knowledge something like this and they
take this in isolation from the rest of his philosophy and even ignore something like the
first principle of all the idea of the good that it starts to not make sense and it all
becomes very kind of arbitrary so you have to understand this as a complete system there's
an all or nothing binary between Platonism and naturalism either every element of Platonism
holds up as a complete alternative or they all collapse and this is the central argument of
this book it's one or the other it's Platonism or naturalism. Platonism and philosophy are identical
if naturalism is true there is no role for philosophy.
So now since we've constructed this binary between Platonism and naturalism it's worth
looking at what actually is naturalism. So naturalism maintains that there is no realm or subject
matter that is unreachable by the natural sciences specifically the realm of the immaterial. Now we
should be well acquainted with naturalism today because it's really the dominant mode of thought
when it comes to questions of philosophy you can think of like something like the New Atheist
movement right people like Richard Dawkins are just preaching naturalism and kind of basic
arguments for naturalism in the naturalist worldview but there are examples in antiquity of
course there's the atomism of Democritus and Lucretius and the Stoics also attempted to synthesize
Platonist and naturalist principles for example they accepted mechanism and materialism but they
did maintain a kind of teleology in attempt to overcome relativism which we'll look at later.
Modern naturalists often admit elements which naturalism cannot explain for example consciousness,
intentionality, truths of mathematics but they either claim that these are a mystery or that they
will eventually be explained by natural science. This is something that's probably become a lot
more common in recent times is the naturalist kind of accepting the limitations of the naturalist
worldview but saying look this worldview works it's better than any of the alternatives and
we often get this extreme faith and kind of scientific progress where they don't really
have a good account of something like consciousness but they put their faith that well eventually
science will be able to explain all of these things not recognizing that sometimes there's
a kind of qualitative gap to be bridged in explaining these things that can't just be
explained by sort of quantitative additions to our knowledge through science. Gerson says quote
my working hypothesis is that there is no stable rapprochement between Platonism and naturalism
I'm certainly not alone in thinking that this is the case though I suspect that I would have
more support in this thought from naturalists and from Platonists. If I am right then the
possibility of philosophy understood as a source of knowledge independent of the natural sciences
depends on a defense of Platonism. Platonism entails the subordination of the sciences but
not their elimination naturalism entails the elimination of Platonism and so the elimination
of philosophy. Now of course any discussion of Platonism has to include the forms and this is
how we begin our explanation of Platonism which is a Plato posits the forms as explanatory entities.
The theory of forms is supposed to explain identity and difference. How can numerically
different things be the same? How can we say that two things are both red or both beautiful
even though they're different? The relationship between sensible objects and the forms is one
of participation for Plato so Helen participates in the form of beauty and so you can have multiple
people participating in the form of beauty and so this is how many things can be the same.
Because thinking and sense perception are irreducibly different the object of thinking is
not a particular object of a particular sense but a form or structure of whatever it is that is
also available to the senses. So this is what thought does uniquely is disability to kind of
universalize things and forms are neither universal or particular. They're universal in
relation to the thinker of the form and particular in relation to a particular object having an
instance of the form. So the forms don't really exist this way it's often thought where there's
this like world of forms where there's a perfect chair and a perfect circle and the perfect color
red. They are both universal and particular so they are instantiated in the world but when we
think them we think them universally. The forms allow for what Gerson calls non-exclusive
predication allowing us to cognize things which are not uniquely possessed. So this is kind of
the same thing said a different way that if Helen is beautiful the statement is true
then it is both true that Helen's beauty uniquely belongs to her and her beauty does not uniquely
belong to her. The main argument for this is that without it re-identifying sensibles would become
impossible and this is the basis for Plato's rejection of Heraclitianism the philosopher
Heraclitus. Re-identifying something at another point in time requires a metaphysical identity.
If all you have is flux, if all you have is process without any kind of forms that this
flux enters into then your worldview would become completely unintelligible. Now Plato also believes
that this is necessary to explain false predicate of judgments. So saying something like Socrates
is sitting requires one to understand what it means to say he is standing. False predicate of
judgments are only intelligible owing to the intelligibility of true predicate of judgments.
So now we get to the idea of the good which as mentioned Gerson sees as absolutely central to
the whole Platonist system. The whole system is really built and downstream of the idea of the good
and this is something that is left out of many accounts of Platonism. So what ties all the
elements of Platonism together is a metaphysical first principle of all the idea of the good.
The good is beyond essence or wattness and can only be inferred from its effects. Anything that has
been is an effect of the good. All philosophical explanation converges on the good. We know from
Aristotle's testimony another fragments that Plato identified the good with the one. The good
is the one because it must be beyond any principles of limit and therefore unqualifiably simple.
And the forms are good like because they are principles of integrative unity.
However the forms are not ultimate explanations because none of them are qualifiably one.
The ultimate first principle of the one or the good is what makes Plato's philosophy hierarchical.
The greater unity there is the closer something is to the first principle.
Identifying the one with the good means unity is also an index of goodness.
Now why does Plato even posit the idea of the good? Well we don't find anywhere in the dialogues or
in the indirect tradition of Platonism an actual argument for depositing of this superordinate
first principle of all that's beyond existence and essence. But Gerson argues that we can discern
Plato's reasons for doing this based on the assumptions of his philosophy and these are that
first he assumed that there were explanations for things and secondly he was an explanatory
reductivist which is a term used earlier which is just to say that he sought first principles
that were foundational and simple. The sought for principle must be different to that which it explains
and lastly if the first principle of all is the source of everything it must also be the
explanation for the end or goal of everything. Quote if the good is the source of essence it
is also the fulfillment of essence. This idea is very central to Platonism that the greater
generates the lesser and then the greater is both the source and the end of the lesser and so the
end of everything is the good or the one and then of course this gets us this way of measuring
hierarchy where hierarchy is to move towards unity or integrative unity and the ultimate unity
is the one and so the one generates or emanates the world and then the world is kind of directed
back towards unity and goodness in this way. So this is central to the Platonic system and this
is where we move to virtue and its relation to the idea of the good because as mentioned earlier
accounts of Plato's ethics and other aspects of his philosophy when they're divorced from the
idea of the good there ends up being all sorts of contradictions and it becomes very arbitrary so
we have to re-examine Platonic virtue in light of the centrality of the idea of the good.
Aristotle critiques the form of the good in Nicomachean ethics. His main argument is that the
good is not univocally predicable like other forms which is just to say that good in the context of
when means another thing to good in the context of how there are different forms of goodness.
There are a number of places in the dialogues in which Plato seems to group and differently a form
of the good along with other forms and yet in the Republic the idea of the good is said to be
beyond essence. So Proclus later Platonus his explanation for this is that Plato posits both
a form of the good among other forms and also this superordinate idea of the good or the one.
Plato argues that the idea of the good is the source of the goodness of every particular good
this would mean that there's no conflict between what is good for an individual and what is the
good just as it would be incoherent to ask if a mathematical truth which is true for me is also
true. If that which appears to be good for oneself is really good it is because it indirectly manifests
or instantiates the idea of the good the principle of measure and the source of truth and beauty.
So this gives us kind of a better understanding of this idea from Socrates that no one owes willingly
that evil is just caused by ignorance and if we knew the good we would all pursue it because
in this Platonus scheme the good and the good for the individual are identical.
Now this is interesting goodness as integrative unity this is really central to understanding
ethics from a Platonus perspective but again something that's not discussed so much when
this topic is typically covered. So because the good is the one the good manifests an integrative
unity. Now that's a term you won't see much it's one that Gerson uses what it basically means is
the imposition of unity by a higher function on a lower without the elimination of the ladder.
Something is good insofar as it is an integrative unity and the one is the cause of the being of
the integrative unity of everything. Integrative unity is what makes anything at all intelligible
to understand anything it is necessary to see the unity of its parts. The ideal integrative
unity of the soul consists in cognitive identity with all that is intelligible. The integrative
unity of the soul is that of the parts of the soul ordered according to the rule of reason.
This is how integrative unity works the higher integrates and transcends the lower. One of the
things it means to say that the good is the one is that the good for a person is achievable only
via an integrative unity the sort of unity appropriate for a human being. Built on this
metaphysical foundation ethical prescriptions can be judged according to whether or not they
inhibit or promote integrative unity. Everyone has his or her own way of unifying their lives
or constructing an integrative self-narrative. One life can be judged better than another because
it's closer to the good itself. The absolutely simple first principle of all.
Music, physical training, mathematics, astronomy and dialectic are concrete ways of achieving the
good that is producing an ever greater integrative unity in the human being.
Now Eros and the good. The connection between the good as principle and the good as end is made
explicit by Plotinus in the Enneads. He says and it the good is itself an object of love and love
that is love of itself in as much as it is only beautiful by reason of itself and in itself
and indeed whatever is present to itself would not be so if that which is present
and that to which it is present were not one or identical.
So the good is identified with Eros and the good is beautiful because it is Eros. Of course the
Greeks use this term Eros to mean certain kind of passionate, desirous love.
Plato says that all things strive for the good and Eros for possession of the beautiful is the
same thing as for possession of the good. Everything desires that from which it comes.
All beings desire the good and so strive for integrative unity. Plotinus says the good is
also Eros of itself that is the good is essentially an activity of self-loving but the good as Plato
says is overflowing therefore this self-loving is essentially productive. So this is the Plotinus
idea of creation as an emanation of the good of the absolute directed as it were back towards
itself by the activity of love and what that looks like concretely being directed back towards
source back towards our ultimate end or good is unity integrative unity.
Now after having looked at the system of Platonism and how it presents an alternative to
naturalism, Gerson turns to historical Platonism and looking at how Platonism unfolded through
other Platonists that came after Plato himself and of course where else to start but with Aristotle.
Gerson does have a separate book called Aristotle and Other Platonists so this is something he's
argued a lot is the proper way to understand Aristotle as a Platonist. Plato's work was
still ongoing at the time of his death and Platonism as a systematic philosophy was completed by
Aristotle, Plotinus and Proclus. Aristotle shares Plato's five anti's that's the five positions
Plato opposed earlier on that we talked about Aristotle also poses all of those and he also
shares Plato's positing a metaphysical first principle of all. Scholars often point Aristotle's
rejection of the immortality of the soul as a reason for excluding him from Platonism. Gerson
argues that none of the fundamentals of Platonism actually require a belief about the immortality
of the soul. Also Aristotle believes in the immortality of the intellect which may not be
different from the immortal part of the soul that Plato identifies. Aristotle believes that
super sensible or immaterial being exists necessarily in which case the denial of its
existence entails a contradiction. If immaterial entities did not exist physics would not fill
the role of metaphysics as naturalists claim rather there could be no such thing as metaphysics
or a science of being qua being. There could only be a science which quote cuts off a part of
being and studies that but does not examine being universally. So Aristotle clearly has the same
conception of philosophy and what philosophy does in terms of studying intelligible being that
science can't study and he clearly has the same perspective on the unique knowledge offered by
philosophy. When we look at Aristotle's discussion on first philosophy, Aristotle implies that physics
is second philosophy while Plato reserves the term philosophy for what Aristotle calls first
philosophy, refusing to designate what naturalists do as philosophy at all. Both of them deny the
autonomy of physics. Aristotle unlike Plato thinks that there is only knowledge of what is universal
and necessary. What Plato calls philosophy, Aristotle calls first philosophy and both identify
its subject matter with the intelligible, nonsensible world. Here is a quote from Gerson on the topic.
Since the sign of being qua being is the science of the properties of being
and these can only be understood when they are understood as derived from the primary
referent of being namely the unmoved mover. All metaphysics is saturated with the immaterial.
It is the explanation for the necessity and universality of science and the dependence
of physics on the primary referent of being that makes it practically impossible to recruit
Aristotle to the ranks of naturalists. Aristotle also contributes the idea of potency to the
Platonic project holding that it is not possible to understand any process in nature without
understanding the potency which is its terminus. But potency is not sensible and can have no
role to play in a naturalist account of nature. So we see a lot of reasons why this approach
that is sometimes taken of presenting Aristotle as a philosopher that is friendly to naturalism
runs into a lot of problems. And this idea of potency was taken up by later Platonists.
Plotinus draws on it quite heavily. Now another thing that Aristotle argues for
that is very Platonist but he actually argues for this more explicitly than Plato is the
immateriality of the intellect. So Aristotle more than Plato makes arguments for why the
intellect must be immaterial. Since we can think of form universally, if intellect was not immaterial
then our thinking of form would just be another particularized version of it.
Aristotle argues that thinking universally for example of mathematics defies naturalist
reduction. Particularized forms are sufficient to serve as guides for survival for plants and
animals. So you know the argument is if the naturalist perspective was true why can we think of
something like abstract truths of mathematics. This argument is certainly still relevant today
when we have accepted Darwinian evolution as the means by which our minds evolved because
again the same kind of argument could be made that if that is the case why would our minds,
why would our brains be attuned to anything but survival value? Why would we be able to cognize
truth or cognize form universally? The universality of thinking requires self-reflexivity.
If this were not the case then thinking would just be one part of the brain monitoring another
but this would only be a new brain state and universality would not be achieved.
Presence of form and the awareness of the presence must be in the same subject and this
can only happen if the subject is immaterial and capable of bending back upon itself. Something
that material entities with parts cannot do. This is basically an argument that you know the mind
must be something other than the brain. When we think, when we cognize, it's not just individual
parts of the brain experiencing other parts of the brain but there is a self-reflexivity there
in the words of Gersen. Now of course another concept that Aristotle is very closely associated
with is his idea of the on-move mover which was quite influential on the development of
theism and theistic philosophy. Aristotle agrees with Plato on the subject matter of
first philosophy as mentioned which is the intelligible world and that a plurality of
principles should be reduced to a unity. Aristotle has the same kind of explanatory
reductivism as Plato but their disagreement comes in identifying the nature of the first
principle. Aristotle explicitly rejects as the first principle the superordinate idea of the good
along with the rest of the forms, the demiurge, and also to claim that the one and the unlimited
are the principles out of which the forms are made. However the on-move mover can arguably be
held to fulfill the functions of the above. Aristotle agrees with Plato that the first
principle is both the source and goal of creation. From the perspective of later plateness the problem
with Aristotle's version of that system sprang from his identification of the first principle
of all with intellect but they saw Aristotle as someone whose insights could be mine to support
a systematic platonic framework. So Aristotle does posit the on-move mover as an eternal intellect
and this is certainly different from Plato's conception of the superordinate idea of the good,
the one, and later plateness are obviously much closer to Plato on this but we can see that he
posits this eternal on-move mover, this eternal intellect to really solve the same kinds of
problems that Plato was trying to solve. It's the same kind of explanatory system. So you can see
what Rorty meant earlier when he said that even people that disagreed with Plato did so on kind
of plateness grounds. Now of course we have to look at Plotinus who probably more than anyone put
together a Platonism as a complete coherent system. Plotinus regarded himself and his philosophy as
introducing no novelty into Platonism. Instead of discarding Aristotle he integrates many of his
insights into a platonic system. The three basic principles of Plotinus philosophy are the triad
of one the intellect and the soul which he claims are present in Plato's dialogues. Gerson sees
Plotinus drawing out the implications of a necessary first being as his greatest contribution to the
Platonic project. Plotinus claims that the first principle must be above being and not as Aristotle
claims identical with it. Plotinus argues that being is not unqualifiably one but is a one many.
Being cannot be absolutely simple because being means being an existent of some sort.
Instead the oneness of being is just the unity of multiplicity. This only makes sense because
there is a first principle which transcends being and is unqualifiably one.
One thing that Gerson focuses on is Plotinus argument against the Stoics because he thinks
this is very relevant to his broader discussion of Platonism and naturalism and his belief that they
are incompatible. So Plotinus criticism of the Stoics presents an interest and insight into the
opposition between Platonism and naturalism because the Stoics are one of the best examples of trying
to deny their incompatibility. Stoics were naturalists that had some elements of Platonism.
They believed in materialism, mechanism and nominalism but like the Platonists rejected
skepticism and relativism. Plotinus agrees with the Stoics that the rational life is the best life
but Stoics cannot explain why rationally participating in the cosmos is superior to
participating in the way non-rational creatures do. Plotinus believes a satisfactory answer
requires the idea of the good to great achievements. If Stoics accepted this and added relativism to
their worldview then reason would just be an instrumental servant of the passions. Stoics
can't maintain both materialism and universal normativity. So really although Plotinus is
sympathetic to the Stoics because they have this kind of platonic insight of privileging
reason and the life of reason and a more kind of ascetic approach to things it's really hard
to base this in a materialist worldview. Again why you know if nature is what's to be worshipped,
celebrated and if you have this mechanistic materialist worldview why would reason be
superior to any other form of life? So although the Stoic approach to things is coming from
positive intuition and many of the prescriptions they would make on the ethical life are very
similar to Platonism they can't ultimately ground this without some absolute, without something
that is superordinate in order to grade ways of living and to explain why reason and the
rational life is superior to irrational life. Why would the sage be in any way superior in
the way he lives to non-human life that behaves irrationally? So the Stoics don't really have
a good explanation here. Now another very influential later Platonist is Proclus.
Proclus is probably best known as most important contribution to Platonism is he kind of comes
up with a full theology of Platonism that he feels could be married to Greek polytheism.
Now Proclus is dealing with the problem left by Plotinus which is how does this
absolutely beyond being version of the one and how does this generate multiplicity? How
does this generate the world without really being directly related to it without being itself
determined in any way? The central problem left by Plotinus was how multiplicity could
proceed from the one while it remains without multiplicity. The answer of Proclus is to posit
intermediary henads or unities and these really are the gods. So Proclus argues that these energies,
these henads are greater unities than the forms and so they can explain how the one can generate
multiplicity much better than the system of Plotinus. As participated unities the henads bridge the
gap between the one and multiplicity. They're more unified than each form but less unified than the
one and as mentioned this allows Proclus to unify Platonist metaphysics and the traditional gods
of Greek religion. Now it's still not really clear if this solves the problem Proclus was
dealing with. There's still the issue of how the one generates multiplicity even if there are these
greater unities in between. It seems you could get some kind of infinite regress where there'd be
more unified things all the way up. There'd be something more unified than the henads between
the henads and the one and dealing with these really fundamental questions about the one and its
relation to existence is what came to occupy later Platonists and specifically Damascus who
was the last head of Plato's Academy. He raises problems with the very intelligibility of the
idea of the one. The first principle of all must be absolutely simple but if it is absolutely simple
it is impossible for it to be causally connected to anything. Damascus makes these arguments in his
work Problems and Solutions Concerning First Principles where he really draws out all of the
implications and kind of dialectical contradictions that happen whenever we try and intellectually
conceive of the absolute and its relation to ourselves. Another argument he makes is that if
the first principle of all is disconnected from all things then the universe would not be the
totality of all things but if the first principle is part of the totality of things it is not a
first principle. But also we can't say that the totality of things is its own explanation
because unless there is a distinction between what is explicable and what is not then there's no such
thing as an explanation at all. Here Gerson says we're left with a profound apuria. There must
be an ultimate explanation for everything but such an explanation can neither be disconnected from
everything nor a part of everything and Damascus takes away even the possibility of negative
predications to the one. All discourse or intellectual grasping concerning the one is
subject to dialectical contradiction. Damascus thus emphasizes the importance of not attempting to
grasp the ineffable by means of any language so although Damascus does certainly believe in the
necessity of positing the one of positeness absolute first principle of ultimate reality
he really resembles a lot of buddhist and later mystical thinkers in emphasizing that reason
thought and language is just really limited in what we can say negatively or positively about
the nature of this and so he actually advises a kind of learned ignorance again a kind of mystical
sentiment that he advises his followers not to try too hard to intellectually grasp this but to
kind of live in the mystery and to understand a true intuition and through a kind of live knowing
that he believes is accessible to everyone. Again Platonism is bound up with a kind of mysticism
and with an experiential aspect to its philosophy and this seems to be really emphasized in Damascus
but as demonstrated by Damascus, Platonist successors came to appreciate perhaps a resolvable
tension between the absolute simplicity of the one and its explanatory adequacy for the many
and Gerson concludes that quote the alternative to naturalism of any sort and along with that
the possibility of philosophy depends on the resolution of this tension. So Gerson rejects
naturalism he presents Platonism as really the only alternative to rejecting the tenets of naturalism
and at the close of the book he does say that these difficulties presented by Damascus and this
sort of fundamental difficulty in Platonism is the one potential crack in the system or it's the
one thing that needs to be resolved that needs to be dealt with is how this absolutely simple
first principle relates to creation relates to the multiplicity and Gerson kind of leaves that as
an open question at the end of this book but that is Platonism and naturalism by Gerson.
I hope this was helpful as an introduction to Platonism as mentioned a lot of the introductions
and discussions around Platonism don't really deal with this deeper sort of Platonic framework
that emerged and that was common to Platonists it doesn't deal with things like the centrality of
the idea of the good the one to Platonism and so I thought this book and a presentation on it is
a good way to put the whole of Platonism as a system into perspective and also to present this
conflict that I do believe exists between Platonism and naturalism and it's an interesting angle it's
an interesting way to read for the history of Western philosophy as basically a conflict between
Platonism and naturalism and then you can read philosophers since the Enlightenment you can
read them as trying to synthesize it in some way so for example you just take the example of the
five anti's that were outlined so someone like Schopenhauer would reject materialism he rejects
skepticism as well but he does maintain mechanism or determinism so you can see you can read various
philosophers in this way and see their systems as attempt to marry Platonism and naturalism by
bringing together some of these anti's a rejection of them with an affirmation of others
and I think this is actually quite insightful I think this is quite an interesting way of
viewing philosophy because as Rorty says without this sort of fundamental union between thought
and being and the potential of our intellect to commune with being and with the intelligible
world in a very fundamental way that we can trust then the whole possibility of philosophy
becomes difficult to maintain and it seems like one would have to commit themselves to
skepticism and to a naturalist materialist view of the world so going back to these
arguments and looking at how they unfolded and really boiling it down to the fundamental
conflicts that exist here I think is is quite helpful but that's all for now I hope you enjoyed
this if you did make sure to subscribe and check out my links in the bio and all the other places
you can find me or support me if you wish to do so and yeah thanks for listening in and take care
everyone
