All right, I'm live, I'm here with Ervol, and we're going to be discussing
Platonism. How are you doing, Ervol? Not too bad, yourself? Yeah, not too bad. I
finally, we were meant to do this last week, actually. I didn't give people a
reason why we cancelled, but I ended up getting that illness everyone has been
talking about. And, you know, I heard the latest strain was meant to be quite
mild, but it's definitely was one of the one of the worst viruses I've had. But
yeah, doing pretty good. But yeah, as far as Platonism, I mean, some people
know you as like the Plato guy, you know, you're, but you're doing a reading group
on it now, which you could chill for later if people are interested in that. But
yeah, I mean, I guess the first question is why do you think going back to
Plato is of relevance or of such importance? Right. Well, in a lot of ways,
Plato was in a similar situation to the one that we're in. The traditions of his
time had been breaking down. You know, if you look at the behavior of the
Sophists, it resembles that of postmodern academics today, deconstructing things,
saying the truth is relative, having no reverence for the gods or eternal
realities and things of that nature, reducing everything to kind of flux
and accidents of the one kind of true material substrate materialistic monism.
And Plato found a way of harmonizing the gods, his tradition, his the ways of his
people with this rationalistic current. And the historical influence obviously
alone justifies going back to Plato. I don't think you can really seriously
claim to be a philosopher or to seriously study philosophy unless you go through
the works of Plato, not just because there are so many fundamental ideas introduced
into the history of Western philosophy through Plato, but because the rest of
the philosophical tradition is responding to Plato in one way or another, often
uncharitably, you know, unfairly Nietzsche's critiques of Plato I see is so much
question begging. I know Heidegger has some critiques and often people in these spheres
will have read some of these critiques or have heard about some of these critiques of
Platonism. And then without actually studying Platonism, they write it off because
the people that they respect write it off. I think it's a similar phenomenon to the people
who get into like alternative physics you'll often find or at least I often find these people
on YouTube who have this, you know, new model of physics like vortex physics or physics derived
from like the 10 basic numbers, kind of like Pythagoreanism. But the reason people go for
those things is that the people putting forward these radical alternatives at the same time are
saying the entire history of mathematics and physics up until this time has been wrong.
And then you watching the video say, oh, well, that's convenient because I don't know any of that
anyway. So now I can just listen to this guy and get it all from him. So I think this kind of anti
Platonism offers an out from doing the real work of learning the Western philosophical tradition
from the ground up. You can't understand any of antique philosophy without understanding Platonism.
You can't understand scholasticism. You can't understand the thinking of the Renaissance.
You really just can't understand anything in the history of Western philosophy without Plato.
And like I said, the main reason, though, is that we're in a similar position where if we don't
harmonize the scientific knowledge that we have today with metaphysics, with our traditional
theological conceptions, many of which basically all of which derived from Platonism, we're not
going to have something to unify us going forward. It takes more than just kind of
emotive, you know, something a, you know, ineffable quality that people have in a particular sphere
that galvanizes them. Like that's not what actually builds long lasting historical movements.
There has to be a kind of crystalline ideological core that keeps an organization going keeps a
group going and motivates them. Pythagoreanism did that. Platonism did that through institutions on
the one hand schools and a core philosophy that people shared in common that explicit
philosophical consensus is the only way to get ethical consensus. So, you know, political
practicalities, learning the history of Western philosophy, and then also, which I didn't mention
yet, I do think that Platonism has the metaphysical toolkit to address the metaphysical deficiencies
of modern physics, right? We have excellent understanding of dynamics in modern physics,
but we don't know very much at all about the substrate. What are these things that are behaving
in the ways that the wave function behaves? You know, what is the stuff that the universe is made
of? And what categories can we draw metaphysically to make sense of all of that? So, Platonism is just
one of the most well developed metaphysical frameworks in history. And I think anyone who's
trying a theory of everything these days, like I saw you had Chris Langan on, you know, he's
a key example. I mean, a lot of his ideas are similar to Platonism. I think he would recognize
that. So, yeah, I mean, I think to understand the past, to put us together, gather us together
today in a harmony, and then moving forward for better scientific groundwork for a worldview.
Yeah, well, there is that quote by Alfred North Whitehead that the safest generalization of
Western philosophy is the series of footnotes to Plato. And I saw an exaggeration like Richard
Rorty, who's the famous American pragmatist, or like a, you know, a complete relativist,
moral relativist, he rejects philosophy. And I forget which one of his books it was,
but he wrote in the introduction that his task was basically to get rid of Platonism.
And he also, he made some, might seem like a radical claim, but he said that all philosophy
since Plato was Platonism, because his claim was that even the people that have rejected Plato have
done so with kind of Platonist starting point, and even just the idea that, you know, thought and
reality, cohere in the way Plato imagined. But yeah, I mean, I do think it's a problem,
especially in like sort of, you know, the St. Raider where you want to call it circles, that
people, people obviously come at philosophy, you know, at other motivations, they're not necessarily
trying to get a great grasp of the whole Western canon. I guess they generally have a more instrumental
view of things. And so I find you get too much, you get a focus on, you know, thinkers like
Evella, Spengler, Nietzsche, obviously. But people want to kind of, you know, they want like
to kind of a simple metric to kind of read all of Western thought through some kind of based
metrics like Nietzscheanism, or even like kind of a very simplified, like a Heideggerian critique
of techniques and of philosophy. And yeah, that definitely leads to oversight. I think there is
a kind of like, you know, meme Nietzscheanism that permeates the right a lot, especially as it
comes to Plato. So I mean, the basic kind of Nietzschean critique of Plato, you see something
like Spencer said this a lot that Plato was like the, it was the start of this nihilism that came
to fruition with Christianity, where we started to kind of lessen the value of the physical world,
and imagine this perfect world of forms. And that as soon as that, as soon as we started that endeavor,
as soon as we started to try and find some perfect world of pure thought, or, you know,
so there's some other world that we started on the path to nihilism, and it was kind of inevitably
going to lead to all of the kind of life denying philosophies we have now and some of the, even
like the sort of extreme liberalism, some people argue that like in the, you know, the kind of
transhumanist ethic. So I'm curious, like, what do you think of that kind of basic kind of quasi
Nietzschean criticism of Platonism? Yeah, like, so again, I don't know exactly how true that is to
Nietzsche himself, but it is characteristically Nietzschean in the sense that it's not really an
argument, strictly speaking. It's saying, you know, I don't like the conclusion that you came to.
I'm sentimentally averse, like saying that it leads to nihilism is a kind of moral consequentialism
from a moral nihilist, which doesn't even make sense. But yeah, I think the the issue that
Nietzsche has with Platonism is not unique to Platonism. You go all the way back to, like,
Siberian shamanism, presumably from the Paleolithic period, and they had this idea that the world
was divided up into different realms, you know, like you see in Norse mythology on Yigitrasil.
There are various realms that you can travel between. And there's good reason why people had these
beliefs. There has been a history of spiritual practice that led a lot of people around the
world to common ideas about what sorts of realms are accessible, what sorts of forces
are there to tap into in that realm. If they were all completely wrong, if there is no,
you know, supernatural realm whatsoever, then why did these beliefs all persist? And it's just,
you know, question begging saying there isn't any such thing. But you can't just presume that you
can't just presuppose the world simply is time, space, causality, and what we see around us. And
that's it. If you buy an evolutionary explanation of perception, which I assume most people who
would buy that pseudo Nietzschean critique would, you wouldn't expect evolution to select for the
perceptual apparatus that would perceive the genuine like ontological substrate of reality.
You would expect evolution to select for perception of fitness payoffs above all. So we'll be
myopically focused on certain facets of reality, like this narrow spectrum of the electromagnetic
spectrum that's narrow bandwidth, visible light. But we don't actually, you know,
know reality just because we see things. This is the way that we navigate is like a user interface
that has developed to help us survive as biological creatures. There's no reason to think that
the categories, the basic intuitive naive categories like matter naively conceived just
is what reality is at base. According to evolutionary theory, wouldn't expect that an
evolutionary game theory, Donald Hoffman came up with the, the fitness beats truth theorem.
And he modeled various evolutionary scenarios and demonstrated that, you know, evolution does not
select for perception of the true nature of whatever system this evolution is taking place in.
It selects for like myopic perception of fitness payoffs. And the key insight of Platonism and
Pythagoras before him was saying that actually, you know, the way that the world seems at face
masks, a deeper harmony that operates according to, you know, different logic than the logic of
everyday reality, you know, bumping into stuff, things colliding like base naive materialism.
Actually, when you investigate the things of the material world and kind of draw down to their
syntactic core, the underlying logic behind mundane phenomena, we find these mathematical
structures. And that line, that Platonizing line of putting an ontological status on
universals and mathematical objects led to taking those things seriously, building out a
mathematical model of the world. And that actually led to scientific progress. Right. So the idea
of another world is not prima facia ridiculous. It would kind of be strange if the universe in
its entirety was simply what we see around us, like the observable universe just is reality.
We don't have an explanation if we just go with this kind of naive perception of the world as
it seems, we don't have an explanation for where the laws of physics reside. We don't have an
explanation for what universal properties are what ontological status they have. Right. It's
just a very incomplete model of the world that like, and we know that that kind of perception of
the world as being fundamentally flux, you know, inevitably tied to matter, didn't actually build
the math science technology that the modern world is based on. It was the the Platonizers
through our history. You mentioned Alfred North Whitehead, you know, he worked with
Bertrand Russell, who also studied Plato. He criticized Plato in his history of Western
philosophy book. But a lot of his mature developments are obviously inspired by Platonism,
including this kind of intermediate status of mathematical objects. And so they tried to work
up something that was actually in the spirit of Leibniz, a kind of characteristic universalist
universal logical language with their Principia Mathematica, which was largely successful.
Their kind of systematizing of logic mathematics led to developments in computer.
So it was practically useful. But Russell, who was inspired by Platonism, wouldn't have had
this idea unless he was a scholar of Leibniz, which he was, and Leibniz was a Platonist. And
his ideas fit very neatly into Neoplatonism, up to including the idea of the monad, this kind of
fractal embodiment that the monad possesses, we can maybe get into a little bit, a little bit of
that later. You know, Frege, who started analytical philosophy, was a Platonist. And then Goethel,
who disproved the basic intention of Principia Mathematica, which was inspired by this computationalist
theory of mathematics, where if we just have the right set of axioms and algorithms, we can have
full systematic proof of all propositions. Goethel said, no, you can't. And, you know, that was because
Goethel grasped an aspect of our cognitive faculties that the Platonist grasped that
Russell wanted to leave out, which was intellect, properly speaking, or the mathematical intuition,
which is not exclusively mathematical. But anyway, it's just you see the influence of
Platonism through and through with the history of modern philosophy, ancient philosophy. And to say
you don't like the idea of some other realm or that there's something beyond the world that we see,
like, where does that come from? I get the kind of instinct to say, like, you know, the way I've
always thought about the world since I was three, the basic way I perceive things, that's just what
it is. And we don't have to go beyond that. And all this math, well, we like abstract the math from
the world. And while that may be in a certain regard epistemologically true, not wholly true,
because we also have these intuitions that are not via induction. Yeah, we, nevertheless, you
can't make sense of that kind of account of mathematical objects of universals without, at the
same time, relying on their ultimate validity, like to express the position of nominalism,
you're going to have to use Platonic realism or a belief in the reality of universals. I might be
using a bit too much philosophical jargon for people who are not already into Platonism. But
well, I mean, it's a very, it's a very nihilistic position in a way to take this kind of
sort of meme, natuionism approach to everything where you're kind of judging,
you're judging theories based on like how life affirming there, like you're treating philosophy
as this sort of therapeutic existentialist cure to the human condition. And you know,
you're already presupposing that there's there's no objective truth to be found or you're already
presupposing like this metaphysical anti realism. But someone in someone in the chat said,
you know, we're going to be discussing Platonism. So he said, you know, and get ready to hear loads
of things that aren't epistemically justified. So I guess that that would be another attitude.
You definitely find it a lot in people that study philosophy now that they kind of assume
that well, you know, you have classical philosophy here. But you know, something happened along the
way. And these people didn't really interrogate their kind of epistemological starting point,
you know, they didn't they didn't really interrogate like what the mind can can really
know about the world. And you know, we've had Hume and Kant and these people sense and, you know,
the kind of Copernican turn turn in philosophy. And so this kind of naive kind of approach to
metaphysics is is very outdated. And you're kind of better starting with with more sort of
analytical stuff. So like, what would you say the the starting point is for you as a Platonist?
Like, you know, do you assume a kind of naive, you know, are you just sort of start with the
assumption that there's this coherence between the mind and ultimate reality? Or do you think
that there's like a series of sort of smaller scale justifications along the way that have to
bring you there? Like, do you start with epistemology? Yeah, well, I'm not a foundationalist
in my own philosophy. So there's no one starting point, you know, I like
Quine Willard Quine's Holism, where, you know, inevitably, one proposition, one theory will
implicate other theories in your kind of toolkit. And so ultimately, a whole worldview has to develop
organically. And in terms of internal consistency, and then in terms of explanatory power, in terms of
predictive power, all of these metrics, and then you evaluate whole frameworks on that basis,
rather than the foundationalist attempt at epistemological grounding, where like empiricism,
all knowledge is built up from sense data. And that's, you know, this kind of model of how we
come to have knowledge was really, you know, devastated by Willard Quine in, I think, the 50s.
So in analytical philosophy today, that's not a popular epistemological position. Actually,
that innovation, this kind of Holism and pragmatism, Quine was a pragmatist, was already there in
the old academy, under carnities, I think, when the Platonists took a turn towards skepticism,
academic skepticism, was very different from the other ancient, the other popular ancient
skeptical school of Pyranism, which basically held that all knowledge is simply impossible. And it
was mostly about just kind of reaching a this catharsis and, you know, comfortable state of
mind, resting in a poria, resting in uncertainty, you know, what, what are you going to do? You
can't really figure out anything anyway. Whereas academic skepticism was about like, let's put
forward hypotheses and build up this theory while admitting our own fallibility all the while.
Now, within Platonism, there are theories about the basis of higher level knowledge. I think the
most famous example is the divided line from the Republic. So if you remember in book seven of the
Republic, when he discusses the cave, he illustrates the example of the cave afterwards with this
concept of the divided line. So you take a line, which symbolizes the unity of mind as a whole,
divide it in two, but unequally. So one part is larger, one part is smaller, the largeness of
this segment of the line represents the security and, you know, firmness of our grasping of
intelligible. So the larger segment is intelligible reality. And then the smaller segment is sensible
reality. And we have faculties associated with each of these targets of knowledge. So we have
two discrete faculties that deal with intelligibles and two discrete faculties which deal with
sensibles. And so you divide the shorter segment according to the same ratio, which is the ratio
of bi, and the smallest of all segments will have to do with our recognition of images as such.
You know, Schopenhauer had a similar distinction between, you know, pure sensation and perception.
So for, this is already there in Neoplatonism by the time of Iamblichus and arguably, I mean,
by the time of Plato himself, Iamblichus actually ascribes the concept of the divided line and these,
this theory of cognitive faculties to Architas of Tarentum, who is an elder contemporary of Plato,
early member of the Academy, you know, genuine, you know, old Pythagorean contributed to development
mathematics and all of that. But yeah, this, so at the bottom, we have this faculty of basically
sensation or imagination, which has to do with recognizing similarity and dissimilarity. That's
the distinguishing feature of that cognitive faculty, which is Icazia in Greek. And then we have
doxar belief, which is what Schopenhauer would call perception, where instead of just treating the raw
kind of phenomenological appearance of form and distinguishing forms in that lower sense,
like the shape of things in their similarity, we have the, you know, hypothesis of some underlying
reality, which we only know by inference, just as Schopenhauer says, we don't know the objects of
material reality directly. We infer from the presence of sense data, you know, Locke basically
agrees with this, this model of things as well, and they got it from the ancients, you know,
this stuff was already there in Plato. And then on the intelligible side, the smaller faculty
is Dianoya, which is discursive reasoning, which is step by step procedures, you know,
similar to the computationalist project of Russell and Whitehead. And then above
that kind of reason, there is intellect or noose, which is an intuitive faculty, and you have to
have this idea to make mathematics work. There has to be something in our mind that allows us to find
correct axioms for mathematics, right? You can't prove the validity of an axiom in math through
any mathematical formal system. So there has to be something beyond Dianoya that we're using there.
So this basic, you know, schema of the psyche, I think holds pretty true, you know, and it's
interesting that Dianoya has a kind of dual role. So there's a strict sense of Dianoya where we see
its peculiar energies, activities, most starkly, which is in mathematical and logical reasoning,
but also the literal translation is through thinking. And it is what basically moves us
from Icazia to Daxa to Dianoya, strictly speaking, to the intellect. And yeah, so there's something
mathematical or logical or like Turing machine like about human cognition, broadly speaking. And
yeah, that's it's a very interesting notion that ties in with the idea of the soul, the composition
of the soul, the essence of the soul that you see in the Timaeus, when the Demiurge constructs
the world soul, he constructs that soul out of ratios. He takes the powers of two and the powers
of three, and through a set of kind of algorithmic procedures, builds all of the ratios that we get
in music of the perfect fifth, perfect fourth, octave, and so forth. And, you know, this is
the composition of the essence of the soul in some way. So math is on the same level as soul.
Some people might have heard in Platonism that mathematical objects are an intermediary level
between the forms, which are unitive, unextended, and then material reality, which is divisible
about body. So math is an intermediary. So is soul. So soul and math are very intimately related. And,
you know, if we're going to follow the prescription of the Delphic Oracle to know
thyself, we also have to know math, which kind of ties into this idea, like people criticize
Plato for turning his back on tradition. Well, I mean, he references one commandment from the
Oracle to double the size of a particular altar, and they realized that they couldn't do it
mathematically, because they didn't know how to calculate double the volume of this shape.
So it revealed a kind of defect of mathematical reasoning. So in that instance, Plato refers
to what are the gods telling us? They're telling us we don't know enough math yet.
And, yeah, I kind of ramble a little bit at the end there. But
I'm sorry, I didn't realize I was muted. Yeah, that's another kind of interesting
disagreement is the time when Plato came along. So again, this is where you get there's kind of
a Nietzschean version of this versus kind of a more traditionalist version of this. So
the kind of Nietzschean version of it is that, you know, Socrates should have been put to debt
because he was questioning the gods. He was undermining the social order of where he lived.
And, you know, he was trying to apply universal reason in this way that was kind of undermining
the particularist paganism of his society. And again, that this is like a very nihilistic enterprise.
Now, if you read Julius Evela actually criticizes this few a lot, he says that this is like a
really bad reading of things that actually what Plato was doing was in a current where
Sophism and Humanism had become kind of dominant intellectually, he says it's actually very
similar to our own time that what Plato was actually doing was kind of,
you know, he's kind of revivifying like a traditionalist cosmology. So again, it's kind
of interesting. It's two very different readings. You know, Plato is this sort of
libtard revolutionary that's like subversive Socrates subversive versus actually, you know,
Plato is seeing like the nihilistic elements thought of his time and he's trying to have
things on this more solid foundation and I kind of ground a proper view of things again.
So, yeah, can you speak to that a little bit like the, you know, the time frame where Plato
was operating like kind of the popular current of thought that he's responding to and what you
think of that idea of it being kind of subversive to the society at the time?
Right, yeah. Well, the reason why Socrates probably was actually put to death was his
connection with members of the 30 tyrants, the puppet regime that Sparta installed after the
end of the Peloponnesian War. There's a lot of quotes throughout the dialogues where Socrates
seems to reverence the Spartans, you know, mentioned that they are actually really good
philosophers and that's why they have these laconic sayings. They're so pithy. So it was
probably a matter of questioning Socrates' loyalty and, you know, the charge of impiety
and was he questioning the gods? I mean, if you look at, you know, again, in the Republic,
Thrasomachus or in the Gorgias, Calakles, the way these characters, the kind of protonegians of
their day, were talking about the gods was far more sacrilegious than anything Socrates ever
indicated. And I think Plato had a sincere piety. I mean, Neoplatonists all the way down to late
antiquity were, you know, practicing their rights. They were worshiping the gods. So this charge of
sacrilege or impiety or denying the existence of the gods was probably just an excuse to get
rid of someone who the, you know, Democrats in power in Athens, viewed to be a threat to the
state because of their questionable loyalty. And then the large influence they had on
prominent young noble citizens, you know, Socrates would go around the city finding,
you know, the Alcibiades is the competent, talented young men, not to indulge whatever
pederastic impulse he may have had, which he never endorses explicitly. Plato never endorses that
it is acknowledged as a common sentiment, you know, among many different Greek city states.
But Plato rejects that anyway. But it wasn't for that reason that Socrates associated with
young men, it was to influence the future thinking of the political class of Athens.
So yeah, I mean, I see Plato basically is trying to save respect for the gods,
respect for this higher realm from the deconstruction of people like Gorgias or
Protagoras. I mean, the Sophists are really one of the chief currents that he's responding to,
but also the rationalistic philosophy of the Ionian school, you know, the best example
that directly influenced Plato was Anaxagoras, who taught Pericles, the great Athenian statesman,
and also Socrates studied the works of Anaxagoras. And what Plato liked about Anaxagoras was the
put this principle of mind first, which none of the other Ionian preseocratics did. They
kept things very kind of physical in their conception, although I do think that's an oversimplification.
But with the actual writings of Anaxagoras, according to Socrates in the, which dialogue was
this, might even be Thedo, not sure. But anyway, he says that Anaxagoras, the writings had to do
with like physical laws. He was more like a physicist than a philosopher, strictly speaking.
And it was this rationalism combined with the deconstructing Sophists and
rhetoricians of his day that Plato had to respond to. And they were sacrilegious. I mean,
the Orphism was just a kind of history of the
tendencies in that day. Orphism spread from around 600 BC in the wake of basically a dying
off of respect for the older, you know, perhaps Mycenaean way of worshiping the gods. So they
already broke down their their previous religious rituals. And Orphism came in the wake of that
with this kind of more mystical, more experiential brand of religion. And of course, the mystery
schools were still popular. But there was a kind of irrationalism introduced. And, you know, an
emphasis on individual experience. And basically, Plato had to fit that brand of spirituality
together with this rationalistic philosophy. And then the Pythagorean influence coming from
the Eliadex, the Italian school. And yeah, I mean, he just kind of found the best harmony to bring
it all together. I think we might actually be overestimating how much is original to Plato,
because we don't know very much about his Pythagorean associates, we have a couple fragments of
Arcatas, of, you know, Philo Laos, or some of the other people, or Aristocenus or something in his
school. But Plato was originally interested in writing plays, he wrote poems. And then when
he met Socrates, he decided, this isn't the way to go, I have to do something in the vein of this
emerging trend of philosophy, which he correctly foresaw, would have this massive influence on
society. And so he shifted his artistic endeavors, but he kind of remains like,
really tied to the format of the dialogue, to constructing these organic holes, you know,
his concepts and aesthetics, many of which were probably original, can be seen today still in
concepts like what makes an integrated work of art. But that's, I think, where Plato's heart was,
and he fit all of these tendencies of thought into one harmonious whole. So he was really a
synthesizer of the ideas at his time. And, you know, he did it successfully, he built the institution
that needed to be built, and his way of thinking largely won out. Although, of course, Aristotle
disagreed in certain ways, he was still largely a Platonist, you know, the agreement between Aristotle
and Plato is much greater than the disagreement. And so Aristotle gets kind of more credit,
perhaps because, as Alexander spread Hellenism, you know, Aristotle had a pride of place for a
couple centuries, and then later Platonism had a resurgence. So, you know, there's an argument
to be made that maybe Aristotle contributed more in certain respects than Plato. Again,
I'm kind of digressing from your point. But yeah, I think Plato is trying to harmonize the currents
of his day, and save the gods and save his traditional ways of worship, and at the same time,
arrive at the truth underlying reality. It's like this nihilism that you mentioned,
you can't just want the world to be a certain way, and then like,
blind yourself to what may actually be out there. You can't know the nature of underlying
reality unless you question these basic concepts. If you just presume that there are no universals,
there are only particulars, and realities, this basic flux, like, why do you think that,
how do you justify that? If you're going to try to build a rationalistic framework,
you're going to have to basically go along with what Plato did. Plato was the first one to do it
in a serious way, the Pythagoreans, and then Plato. And there's, everyone kind of followed in his
train because there's probably one true nature to reality. And, you know, this is the perennial
philosophy idea, you're not going to digress from that very far. And so if Plato put it adequately,
then kind of have to take the tools that you're given. And Plato is very traditional for us.
I mean, you can't understand modern Western civilization without him. So, yeah.
Yeah, Platonism is, it is the kind of metaphysics of the perennial philosophy. I mean,
I think Shu'an of the traditional school basically considered neoplatonism,
like kind of a divine revelation to the West, like it's the Western version of the perennial
philosophy. But you mentioned Pythagoras. I remember, I don't know if you saw,
like a decade ago, they supposedly uncovered that there was like a secret Pythagorean message
in the Republic that every 12 lines, there was a mention of music and they were speculating that
you could, you could create like musical notes out of out of messages he'd inserted in there
with numbers. And that this was a sign that Plato was like a secret Pythagorean because the Pythagorean
sect was persecuted at the time. Now Pythagoras, you know, obviously like the vegetarianism and
some of his ideas, I think there is a popular idea that he got his philosophy from India, right,
that he traveled to India and he kind of brought back Vedanta. There's also, I don't know if this
is confirmed, but there's also theories that Plato took his philosophy from like mystery schools in
Egypt. So do you have any insight in terms of like kind of like an esoteric element to Plato or
kind of a religious origin of his teachings? Or, you know, is the similarities to the perennial
philosophy? Is that just kind of a testament to, you know, reason brings you to this system if you
follow it fair enough? Yeah, my basic model of the axial age as a whole is that it diffuses from
the Punjab basically. The Upanishadic philosophy originates around year 1000 BC,
and then we see movements towards rationalistic, I mean, Upanishads are written in dialogue form,
that's healthy something, many of them. So these ideas of perennialism I see is coming out of India
primarily, although there may be more ancient, similar systems out of Egypt. So like we have
to remember this time period in the aftermath of the Bronze Age collapse, right? There was a
2000 year long civilization from 3000 BC to 1000 BC, very roughly speaking, that was on a larger
scale in many ways, better organized than the state of things in the Greek Dark Ages, for example,
which is the times that, you know, classical antiquity comes out of. And those Bronze Age
civilizations had a common source, right? Prior to the civilizations properly speaking, there were
advanced, you know, city based cultures in Syria, in Iraq, you know, the Fertile Crescent, and,
you know, in Egypt, starting around 5000 BC, arguably a little bit older, but going all the way back
to 10,000 BC. And this happens with the spread of Neolithic technologies generally, they're
identifiable gene clusters that are associated with this, that we are related to in many ways. So
like a lot of people want to go back to the Bronze Age and learn as Aryans or whatever. But like
we're also this kind of ancient Neolithic, Neolithicizing force, like a third of our
ancestry is associated with that Anatolian hunter-gatherer population that was integral to the
spread of the Neolithic. And it's that bundle of technologies that seeded what would later become
the civilizations in southern Iran, in the Indus Valley, so Indus Valley civilization. And I imagine
that, I mean, they were all in contact, there was trade between the Indus Valley civilization
and Egypt via, you know, Fertile Crescent intermediaries. But ideas spread during that whole
preceding arc of civilization. So it may be then that what we see coming out of Upanishadic
philosophy is really a resurgence of older Indus Valley traditions, not that all of them, all of
the beliefs of Vedanta come out of that. Obviously, the rest of the Vedas are still significant, the
ritual forms, the ideas contained in the older sections of the four Vedas matter religiously to
Hindus. But some of these ideas, like maybe reincarnation, although there are some Indo-European
precedents, it's far from a settled matter. But yoga, for example, I would say very likely comes
from the Indus Valley civilization complex rather than an Indo-European innovation.
So maybe some of what we see in Plato that looks Indian, I mean, that's what I recognize,
that's why I was able to understand Plato as well as I was when I first read it. You know,
I got into the Neoplatonist later, I read Plato directly, and I saw it basically through a lens
of Vedanta, and it made sense through that lens fairly easily. Like a lot of the ideas are the
same up to and including the tripartite soul, you have basically, you know, intellect,
thumos, epithumia, or appetite, which equates to Satva, Rajas, and Thomas in Hinduism.
So anyway, some of this stuff that looks Indian might just be the ancient Bronze Age layer
that Plato and Pythagoras got from Egypt, from the Chaldeans, you know, the Syrians basically.
And there's, you know, one more esoteric aspect here that might be in the background,
which is Plato's idea of Atlantis. And if you look at the beginning of the Neolithic,
I have a four-part series on prehistory, the fourth part deals with, you know,
the emergence of civilization. It's probably the most condensed anthropology lecture you could watch
on that period of time from like 15,000 BC down to 3000 BC. A lot happens, you know, and we're not
sure how these developments take place, or why, and why they're so fast, why they're so concentrated
in one particular region, like how the people who built Gobekli Tapu, for example, learned how to
deal with megaliths overnight, and then they got worse at it, which is not what you would expect,
right, if they just came out of a hunter-gatherer society. So people have often speculated that
there was a more advanced civilization prior to the Younger Dryas, which runs from, you know,
basically 11,000 to 10,000 or 9,500 BC. And that was a kind of mini ice age. So it had been warming up
from 20,000 years ago until, you know, 13,000 years ago. And it's very likely that, you know,
just as with the Holocene warming, we saw the emergence of larger populations, you know,
larger settlements, you had a similar thing happen at the end of the Upper Paleolithic.
And then that was upset by the Younger Dryas very suddenly, you know, in a matter of decades,
the temperature dropped, you know, five, six degrees globally, something really extreme.
And that lines up with the timeframe that Plato actually gives for the myth of Atlantis.
So, I mean, you can make of that what you will. I give credit to those theories of an
advanced ancient civilization, because there are archaeological anomalies that just have
no explanation whatsoever. You can obviously ignore those like the Baalbek,
Megalith, or some of the structures in Egypt that seem to predate other structured people
speculate about a date of the Sphinx being older. You know, I'm not sure about each particular piece
of evidence, but an expert in archaeology, but there are many such sites. There's a Megalith
underwater between Sicily and Italy, I think, and no one knows. It seems to be 13,000 years old,
no one knows who built it or how. Some of these anomalies that point to the possibility of some
advanced culture, we could go further into that obviously, but it's a long digression. But if
there was this ancient high civilization, they just think about what kind of technology they
would have developed. They were different genetically than later peoples. They had higher Neanderthal
admixture, and the structure of the Neanderthal brain was quite different. Their cerebellum was
larger, the human, the Homo sapiens, cerebrum is larger. Neanderthals were very intuitive in
their ways of doing things. The forms of their tools didn't change very much over hundreds of
thousands of years, and yet they were successful. We have a hard time replicating their tools.
It was like they had an extreme ability to get the knack of something. What humans are good at
is innovating and thinking analytically and combining things in different ways, whereas the
Neanderthals kind of felled their channel and their groove and really just settled into it.
So that might have been more like the way of thinking of this ancient high civilization,
and people speculate whether it had something to do with acoustics, the rise of advanced
upper Paleolithic cultures in Europe coincides with the first musical instruments. Many of the
important ritual sites are also coincidentally caves that have great acoustics. So you could
speculate some kind of acoustic-based technology in the upper Paleolithic, culminating in a high
civilization that maybe did have an empire, basically, like Plato says that Atlantis had,
and then it was rapidly destroyed by the onset of the Younger Dryas, which may or may not have been
started by a comet. Right now, the evidence does look like it started with a comet.
So that's the most esoteric side of Platonism, is Platonism through the Pythagoreans that he knew
and through his own travels. He traveled for 10 years after Socrates died. So Plato himself may
have actually made it to India. So there is probably some Indian wisdom in there, some vestigial
bronze age wisdom via the Chaldeans and via the Egyptians, and then perhaps this most ancient layer,
which we can only speculate about, but it is fun to speculate about that.
Yeah, I used to be really into Atlantis archaeology stuff as well. I think the most
interesting angle is there was a guy, Schwaller de Lubitz, who was like an Egyptologist and a mystic.
And he inspired John Anthony West, who's a really good book on Egypt called Serpent in the Sky,
where he gets into like the cosmology of the ancient Egyptians and how that was reflected in
their architecture. But he speculated that, both of them speculated that the Sphinx was like eroded
by water. It's the back when there was rain in the Sahara Desert. The second guy West actually
hired this guy called Robert Schock, who is like a geologist who's an expert in stuff to actually
study the pattern of erosion on the Sphinx. And he did conclude that it was from rainfall,
and he actually ended up dating it to like 9,700 BC, which was the date when Plato gave for
the fall of Atlantis. So yeah, there's a lot of interest in esoteric red pills there.
But yeah, I mean, I guess to get into like the sort of meat and bones of Platonism,
obviously, you know, one thing you've touched on a bit and that people obviously associate most
of Plato is this idea of the forms. Now, just before we get into it, I mean, can you give like a
basic background of why does Plato propose the forms in the first place? And how do they
help him make sense of the world in a way that he thinks other philosophers are missing?
Right. Well, a lot of it is tied to the ethical focus of Socrates, right? I think if you read
Xenophon, Socrates does come across as more of this strictly moral philosopher. Plato maybe puts
a bit more Pythagoreanism into the mouth of Socrates than Socrates actually held to. But
the way we are introduced to the concept of the forms through the dialogues is often Socrates
asking about the nature of something like wisdom, or just virtue in general, and trying to get down
to what actually is this that we're talking about. If there are only particular
virtuous men, but no true virtue, then the idea that there are particular virtuous men becomes
vacuous, right? If you're going to take the existence of good seriously, if there is such a
thing, if there is justice, they have to have some kind of metaphysical status, right? Like,
it's nonsense to ascribe a label to a particular society or man unless that label has a meaning.
Like, what is it ultimately referring to? This gets fleshed out kind of analogically with
math, right? We have to believe that there is some perfect circle, because we never, like,
where do we get the idea of perfect circularity? We can mathematically define it precisely,
up to the point where you get the value of Pi coming out of it, which is irrational and goes on
infinitely. So infinite, potentially infinite specification of this perfect circle. And yet,
we don't see that in the empirical world anywhere. There's just, you know, there's no way of making
sense of the labels that we apply to universal phenomena, moral concepts like justice or courage
or things like that, or mathematical phenomena. So it's really, in the dialogues, it's presented
in terms of, well, we're trying to explain what this thing is that people in common parliaments
are referring to. You can keep it at that level and just say, well, this is the way people use
this word. But if you never trace it back to some universal property or universal characteristic
that all of these particulars actually have, and that universal has an independent ontological
status, then there's no accounting for the similarity of the particulars. Why does the
linguistic reference work? That is what nominalists miss. So, like, the thing is, we don't actually
get great arguments for the theory of forms in many of Plato's dialogues. He leaves it at this
kind of rudimentary stage. And many people would say the reason for that is that Plato reserved
the more Pythagorean doctrines for his inner circle, for the people within the walls of the academy.
And Thomas Taylor, the 18th and 19th century Platonist, wrote a book on Aristotle, where he
basically said that Aristotle, just like Plato, was actually cloaking his real ideas, and that
this was a tradition that went back to the Greek sages, to the Presocratics as well. It was viewed
as taboo, for example, to expose the goings-on of the mystery cults. You couldn't tell people what
happened at the mysteries of Lucis. And so similarly, because the philosophy of the Ionians comes out of
a culture where these mystery schools had this preeminent place, the philosophy was tied with
the doctrines of the mystery schools. And so certain elements of philosophy then were, you know, not
for the masses. They were not for mass consumption, not for the Voipalloi. So, Aristotle cloaked his
ideas through this kind of very dense and hard to parse prose, which is unprecedented in literary
history, like the way that Aristotle wrote is unique. And he didn't just write that way because
he was autistic, although it seems like he probably was, but because he was trying to cloak
the kind of core metaphysical doctrines that he was actually talking around in some way,
according to Thomas Taylor. Plato also cloaked his ideas by putting, you know, some parts of the
core doctrine in one character's mouth, and then another part of the core doctrine in the
mouth of Socrates and leaving the picture incomplete, often ending the dialogue in Aporia.
And so this is a criticism that people will make of the theory of forms is that, well, exactly how
does participation work? You know, what's the dynamic here ultimately? And the answer is it's
actually a very complex technical system that you can abstract out of it. Proclus wrote a commentary
on the Parmenides that spells this out. Nicholas of Cusa said that this was the most important
book in the history of philosophy. Parmenides comment, sorry, Proclus' commentary on the
Parmenides. But then on the other hand, Schopenhauer said it was the most tedious book in the world.
So, you know, take that for what you will. But in this commentary, he, Proclus, spells out that
Parmenides is not, as it first appears, just shooting down Socrates' theory of forms. In the
dialogue, Socrates is young in his early 20s, maybe Zeno is about 40, and then Parmenides is older,
60, 70, or something like that. And Socrates listens to the arguments of Zeno for monism,
basically. Zeno argues against multiplicity. Parmenides argues for unity. It's two sides of
the same coin, and they represent the same basic philosophy, which is an offshoot of Pythagoreanism
itself. And so if you read the Parmenides, which is very difficult to read, it's not
like the other dialogues in a lot of ways. The beginning is easy enough, and then it gets into
these long chains where Parmenides is meant to explicate the dialectical method. And it proceeds
in a kind of mathematical way where you look at the kind of hypothesis, and then it's opposite,
and then another set of opposites. And so you just get very lost in all of these considerations,
like if there is no one, then there is the very high level of abstraction the whole time. So it's
like, I read it the first time before I had read Proclas, and I basically just gave up trying to
understand it about halfway through. I think anyone who's honest with themselves will say-
Yeah, me too. I never finished Parmenides.
No. Yeah, it's a different kind of thing. Well, Proclas makes it clearer. And so at face value,
it seems like Parmenides is shooting down Socrates' theory, but what he's actually doing is pointing
out that Socrates needs to introduce certain kind of fine distinctions, subtle distinctions in
theory of forms to make them work. And the core doctrine that Proclas argues for in his commentary
is the idea that there is the the unitive and imperticipable aspect of the form where they
exist in themselves in the same way that like, you know, in physics, the Schrödinger equation,
the universal wave function kind of has its own form and existence eternally. It's a standing wave
and particular things relate to it, relativistically, but it is this permanent reality. Well, the forms
have to have an element like that. It's not that the forms extend like the analogy that Socrates
ends up using is actually, I think Parmenides provides it for Socrates in the dialogue, but is
like, okay, so the form of justice is like a sail, you know, a big piece of cloth that spreads over
many particular men and touches them all. And Socrates is like, yeah, I guess it's something
like that. But that doesn't work because it doesn't preserve the unity of this one thing
that you're referring to, because obviously, the entire cloth has extension. So like, if the forms
are only in particulars, that, you know, looks like Aristotle's hyalomorphism, then how it doesn't
actually get you any closer to explaining this unitary characteristic that is seen in the multiplicity.
That's the basic problem of the forms. How do you account for the similarity, the oneness
in multiplicity? There has to be an element of the forms that is unitive, that is exempt,
and for Plato, that does basically exist in a kind of realm independent of this realm.
And this realm is dependent on it. And so it's not exactly that there's like a separate realm
of forms, and then this realm, it's rather that this realm is an outgrowth of the realm of forms.
And so there's a prior ontological status to these universals in the same way that there's a
prior ontological status to the Schrodinger equation, or whatever medium it describes,
right? The ether is older than any particular configuration of matter, let's say. Another
analogy might be like in chess, you know, a particular position on the board, when like
Nakamura and Carlson are playing, hasn't been reached before, it's still real, but it's not
as essential to chess as like the way that the knight moves, or the number of squares on the board.
Those more fundamental, more syntactic, more internal features of chess have a prior ontological
reality. The particular position reached in Nakamura v. Carlson is dependent on the way
that the knight moves, and the number of squares, and stuff like that. So you have to have this
prior ontological status to general syntactic features of reality. Otherwise, good luck trying
to explain how similarity works, how the laws of physics work, where they subsist, why math
describes the world. It's just like there's really no coherent rational picture you can
make unless you take this leap of saying, yes, there is an independent ontological status to
these universal characteristics, which we describe and indicate in particulars in the world.
All right, so if I just like play the nominalist for a minute, I mean,
you could say why do the forms have to exist outside of our sort of shared abstraction?
Well, the question is, why did we come to that shared abstraction? The question is,
why does the abstraction work? It seems like nominalists always just ignore that question,
like it doesn't get you any closer. Well, in the case of, like I said, we look at the form of
hoarseness. Perhaps they would argue that with what we know about evolution, species are much more
in flux, so we might recognize, and there's kind of intermediary species, and there isn't really
a final end for species. There isn't a final hoarseness. So we're seeing many particular
instances of horses, but what would a perfect horse be in that scenario? You could say like the
most adaptive horse, but then that's like different, you could say for each horse dependent on like
their geographical location or something. Yeah, well, that kind of raises the question of whether
this system, this evolutionary context, had from the outset certain states, certain stable states
that it could reach, right? If you're tied to like an a theory of time, if you're tied to like the
world just is what's happening right now, and there's no eternal reality whatsoever, then you
can try to skirt this question. But you'll be, if you try to do that, you'll be left with no theory
of counterfactuals. David Lewis, contemporary philosopher, put forward the theory of modal
realism to account for the truth status of counterfactual propositions. Statements like if
Johnny had made the last basket, his team would have won the game, that can be true, like we can
all recognize that that's true, but what is the referent? What is it that makes that statement
true if there's no counterfactual thing that is being referred to? So Lewis just bites the bullet
and like accepts the, yeah, these other worlds are out there. But anyway, what that allows you to do
then in terms of identifying species is say that, okay, there is this evolutionary matrix, there's
certain patterns of behavior that themselves have a universal reality, like evolution itself
is a universal phenomenon. Okay, now where's that in the nominalist picture? Like again,
any time you try to justify nominalism, you're going to have to fall back on
some realist concept to ground it, because pure nominalism just dissolves into nonsense,
because there can't be any like true reference ultimately, because things are changing too much.
But anyway, you can say that there is a stable state within an evolutionary system by comparing
all of the possible paths of evolution. And then you can describe basically as we do in quantum
mechanics, a wave function that has the kind of probability of this stable outcome, which will
have a particular center, there will be an archetypal member of the species that like most closely
approximates that stable state that can find that stable solution, you know, evolution,
it's their objective features that allow you to either succeed or fail. And you have those
features or not. And they are there are a set of features that for a given environment are that
most stable position. And we do see in evolutionary systems, not this gradual transformation between
infinite intermediary forms. Instead, we see people and species locking into these stable types,
archetypes that work, you know, geometrically, in terms of blood flow, like their physical
constraints that define a range of variables. And there are stable, you know, values for that
those sets of variables and unstable values. And again, across the spectrum of all possible worlds
in which this evolutionary context happens, you can draw that kind of probability distribution,
which will have a center on one ideal, most stable structure.
All right, as far as let's say as far as it's applied to morality, like the
you're talking about justice. So, you know, perhaps the modern nominalist would would say that
your argument is kind of similar to the nature in one earlier, and that you're kind of pleading
that well, you know, we need to have an objective morality, like it would be terrible if we didn't.
So, you know, there needs to be some objective form of justice. And then, you know, they could
come in with the evolutionary psychology and that kind of thing and say that these are just
adaptive behaviors and whatnot. And you're trying to abstract that into something objective.
Yeah, right. Well, the Plato is moralizing is very different from deontological moralizing.
It's really like a statement of the matter of fact, like the way that Plato disproves
Thrasomachus' claim in the Republic that justice does not always align with individual advantage
that actually sometimes like its base to be just because you're just following basically
falling for the slave morality of your time instead of like transcending and looking after
your own individual benefit. But so you get down to an analysis of what exactly is meant
by advantage, what is meant by the good of a particular actor. And the so an issue with
platonic definitions, because he presumes there is this realm of stable archetypes out there,
then we should be able to cut up our definitions to correspond to these like consistent features.
And justice, for example, he defines in terms of the alignment of the three aspects of the soul
where you are in charge of your lower nature. So platonic reasoning in the dialogues is often
kind of messy because he's appealing to the particular preconceptions of the people that
he's interacting with. That's like Socrates' Mayutic method. He takes people from where they are,
uses the concessions that they make from their current state of knowledge and then draws them
kind of upward from there. And so you don't get these like apodictically certain perfect
demonstrations in the dialogues, more like what Aristotle sometimes aims at. But yeah,
so this definition of justice just eliminates the possibility that you can be benefited while
being unjust. Because like, do you care about your possessions? Do you care about your body? Or
do you care about the state of your soul? All other mental states, whether pleasant or painful,
depend on that configuration of soul in the first place. And if you accept that there is a best
state of soul, to facilitate your own kind of proper enjoyment, which I think everyone accepts,
there's like preferable mental states, preferable ways of thinking that lead to greater happiness,
then justice is going to be the way to attain that unity within yourself. So it's really that
he's giving a theory of what justice is, where these notions come from, because it can't be
convention all the way down, right? It doesn't make sense. Again, going back to like an evolutionary
context, in the set of all possible worlds where societies evolve, there are going to be stable
structures that equate to some underlying feature of the nature of reality, and then there will be
unstable structures. When evolution gets it right, when social evolution gets it right, and morality
equates to this dharmic structure, which you could say is the kind of archetype standing behind the
particular instantiation when it gets it right, it's stable. When it gets it wrong, it fails.
So justice is a more claim of like a matter of fact, not we should have this, but you won't be
happy unless you are just, and justice means each part of your soul doing its proper business,
right? So if you don't accept that, then the claim will be that you will just suffer as a result.
It's not that you need this justice, it's that you don't know what advantage actually is, and if
you studied it methodically, and really evaluated what you mean by what is good for you, like if
you want to make a consequentialist argument against Platonism and say that it leads to too much
extraction, and actually it's not going to help your nation. Okay, well, what is going to help
your nation? What is advantageous for your nation? That is a philosophical question that you can either
presume that you already know, or you can investigate it. And if you investigate it, the
contention would be if you properly investigated it, you would eventually come down to this
Platonic theory of value of the good, of justice, of these particular moral qualities that people
instantiate. Yeah, I don't really understand the argument that, you know, that evolution
would kind of necessarily, that it would end up aligning our moral sensibilities with,
you know, what's what's deramik, or what's objectively right?
Right, well, the claim would be that there has to be an equivalence at some level, or correspondence,
let's say, between the features, the objective features of reality, and the states that an
evolutionary system takes up. So if you are not in line with the nature of reality, you're obviously
going to make mistakes, right, your knowledge will not be well grounded, your behaviors will
not be adaptive, adaptive behaviors will survive in a greater number of contexts overall than
unadaptive behaviors. So it's perhaps, it's not right to say that evolution leads to
moral perfection, or, you know, correct moral behavior all the time. But in order to survive,
there has to be some correspondence between the way you're behaving and the structure of reality,
right, your karma, individual conduct is tied to the dharma of your society, which is tied to the
art or underlying nature of physical reality. These have to correspond, right, and particular
evolutionary states will accord with that like proper dharma, or they'll deviate from it. And
the claim is, if you deviate from that proper dharma, from that like stable evolutionary condition,
then you're going to be selected out eventually. Yeah, I just don't see how that leads to
an argument for, like, an objective justice and morality within that, because, you know,
why can't it just be like adaptive behavior all the way down, right? Why does there have to be
any objective content to, you know, the good behavior that results from that?
Well, what's objective in it has to do, again, with that structure of underlying reality.
So because there are only so many viable states, an evolutionary system can take up
and survive, that constrains the range of what is going to be considered adaptive.
That what is adaptive is tied to the nature of reality at base. Now, you know, couldn't it be
that what led to thriving, what led to survival of evolutionary systems had no moral content?
Well, the definition of morality we're coming up with here has to do with
advantage, not evolutionary advantage, primarily. I mean, primarily, we're looking at
individual experience. And when we talk about the benefit of individuals, it's in phenomenological
terms, whereas in populations, we're talking about the benefit in genetic terms, you know. So
it's kind of taking it out of its proper context. But we're saying, like, the claim is that what is
adaptive is simply what's right. At the level of evolutionary systems, that applies, like,
the proper Dharma is going to lead to flourishing of your community. And there is a proper Dharma,
there is a way of doing that. So that's objective. Right. And then also at the level of the individual,
if you think that you can reject the platonic concept of justice, and you can,
and temperance, and you can let appetite run out of hand, and not rein it in with reason,
and that'll be successful. Platonists would just say, no, you're just wrong. You're not going to
be successful if you do that. So morality is, like, tied to advantage. That's the step that
Socrates takes in reasoning in a few different dialogues, including the Alcibiades, which my
reading group just went through. Does that make it any clearer? I mean, to work out the apparent...
Well, it's just as soon as you tell it to what's adaptive, can't you just get really
consequentialist about that? And, you know, maybe torturing babies from the other tribe
is most adaptive for our immediate benefit, right? I mean, it just seems like as soon as you tie,
as soon as you try and tie an objective good to what's adaptive, it just seems like, you know,
everything is in flux at that point. Yeah, if you kept, that's why I mentioned this kind of
distinction between evolutionary benefit, which is itself based on abstractions, like the gene
itself is an abstraction. There's no single material entity that equates to a gene. The gene
is defined differently depending on the context in evolutionary biology. So genes are an abstraction
already. And the kind of evolutionary context is within a set of mental parameters of human
theory, right? The reality is more well integrated than that, right? The individual morality component,
the well-being of the soul of the creatures in these populations also factors into adaptivity.
So our reductionistic material description of what is adaptive is incomplete. And like, you
can't just think of morality in terms of evolutionary benefit. You also have to integrate it with the
well-being of the individual soul. And I think what gets the, like, what is objective there,
and not just hedonism, is where you get into this idea of the independence of the soul,
making arguments for the fact that the human being is not the body. The human being isn't even the
combination of the soul and the body. The human being uses the body to do his work. We could run
through different thought experiments. We can demonstrate that. Plato has several arguments,
but once you accept that the human being is the soul, and if you accept that the soul is
immortal, which many people don't today, right? Because they haven't really dealt with this
concept sufficiently, in my opinion. You know, I have my own arguments that I've developed. Plato
has arguments. But once you take that step, then the consequences go beyond just an individual
life filled with hedonic experiences. It goes into the structure of the soul that you are
building through your action. And I think just empirically, that comes across in what makes
people successful. Like, people who simply pursue immediate pleasure, if that's our concept of
advantage here, are generally less happy on the whole than the people who structure their psyches,
who like, do hard work to enforce justice in their own soul. Those people, whatever happens,
they will be more resilient. Because the way that you experience whatever happens in the
mundane world is filtered through the structure of your psyche. And so if you can build a positive
structure into yourself, align the structure of your mind with the structure of reality,
like through this logistic on through like logos guiding the rest of your activities,
then you'll just be more content overall. It doesn't have this kind of ultimate moral force
unless you speculate about consequences after death. And that's why like, all of these facets
have to be combined in order to make sense of Plato's equivocation between advantage and justice.
So basically, when people make the claim that in any particular case, what is really just differs
from what is really advantageous, that's evidence for Plato that you just don't actually understand
what justice really is or what advantage really is. Right. So there's, there's no like,
Kantian idea that, you know, there's no like contrast between doing what's right and doing
what's good for yourself. In a way, like you're always kind of pursuing your own good when you
pursue the good. But so just back to the idea of the forms, right. So the way you were kind of
speaking about the merrier and when you kind of contrast it with Aristotle. So it sounds like
you do have kind of a view of like, so there's like, there's, you know, there's different
interpretations of Plato, but there's a kind of two worlds interpretation of Plato that the forms
exist in like another realm, so to speak. The book I'm reading currently is a book called
Thinking Bean by Eric Pearl. You actually passed me on the recommendation from someone else,
but he basically totally rejects this and says that this is a bad reading of Plato.
And that in a way, like the way we commonly interpret Aristotle, he kind of attributes
that to Plato and he says that Plato and Aristotle didn't really disagree at all on the nature of
the forms. And then this passed on to Plotinus and Thomas Aquinas. He says there's like a
kind of a straight thread the whole way through. But it's sort of like the way you were talking
about the forms that you do accept more of like a sort of two worlds interpretation. So like,
what is the nature of the forms? Are they on kind of a higher level of reality?
Yeah, I would say they are on a higher level of reality, but it's not two separate worlds. It's
more like the world branches from a root in the one, and then through the highest level
categories and forms and the gods also and Plotinism, and then through specific differentiated
structures. I would say if you're going to have a rational model of the world, it's going to have
to look something like this with unity at the top to explain generic similarity of higher level
features of reality, and then descending through particulars to more contingent, less ontologically
fundamental aspects of the world. So our world here is less fundamental than those highest level
features of the world. I mean, any particular state of a system is less ontologically fundamental
than the syntactic arrangement of that system itself, the laws of the syntactic medium. That
has to be prior. Particular states of any system are inconceivable unless there's some kind of
previous order to the syntactic medium in which those states subsist. So it's not exactly there's
two separate worlds. It's that there is, I mean, ultimately kind of one fundamental reality,
the one contains the rest of being and the separation and distinctions that we observe
are perspectives on that being and don't have a kind of fundamental independent ontological
existence. You know, our perceptions now aren't fundamentally grounded in the way that the one
is. Like obviously, it's inevitable that we exist, we are here, but are in order for our being to be
there higher level features have to be the laws of physics have to be there. You know, other features
of the world, the nature of soul in general has to be there, like a particular soul can't exist
unless the structure of reality is such that this nature of soul does actually subsist in some way.
Otherwise, what is that soul that we're talking about the ontology will have the only alternative
is to make a totally bottom up ontology. And then once you take that step higher level theorizing
really just becomes impossible. And it's not that like I rule out on foundationalist grounds,
that kind of inductivist bottom up approach, it's that it's never been demonstrated to build a
comprehensive model and Platonism has, you know, like Plato, for example, said the world may be
in the shape of a dodecahedron. And, you know, in 2003, French team, analyzing, you know,
the background microwave radiation imaging said that, you know, you can make sense of
certain patterns in the background radiation by saying that the universe actually has the shape
of a dodecahedron, or like the idea of the platonic solids providing a groundwork for the
five elements in the Temaeus, you know, the tetrahedron being equivalent to fire and so forth.
Well, the platonic solids do come up in particle physics, because that is the only possible shapes
for the wave function of electrons in their orbits, for the wave function to kind of wrap
around nucleus of an atom in three dimensions, the only possible shapes that can equate to the
peaks of the wave functions have to be the vertices of platonic solids. And so like this method of,
you know, assuming real ontological status to these higher things allows you to build a rational
system with explanatory power. It has like, it worked for live nets, it worked for people who
have done serious work. And this, the alternative, a totally flux based bottom up irrationalism,
whatever, can't do that. Nobody's ever done, nobody's ever built the complete system without it.
And you can reject it on pragmatic grounds alone by saying, okay, well, what are you going to build
with it, man? Like, you have to build a complete theory in order to compete in this world, not to
bring it all down to the pragmatic justification. But what's that? Did I answer your question or?
Yeah, so, so my understanding of the forms is that, you know, in Platonism and Aristotelianism,
the certain point is that being is intelligible. And so there's, there's no,
you know, there's no like ultimate duality between subject and object and, you know,
knowledge in the world. So the forms basically are the intelligible aspect of reality. And so
they're more real than sensible objects. So sensible objects aren't a lesser copy of an invisible world.
But it's basically like degrees of reality, going from absolutely nothing
to pure ideas, which is, yeah. Yeah, am I am I getting that right so far?
Yeah, I think probably a part of it is the language that the Greeks used for these different concepts,
like all elements of the spectrum have reality. There's I mean, reality is kind of like a binary
thing. It's either real or not. So degrees of reality doesn't make a lot of sense. But degrees
of essence does make sense, right? And essence is the word Usia in Greek that is often translated as
being misleadingly in English. And so this leads people to thinking that there's only one, you
know, real being. And this is all just fake, like the world's fake, then that's not what it means.
It's that the realities here are contingent on higher realities, they don't have self-subsisting
essences, which is the definition of a new sea, right? So yeah, in essence is one example of this
kind of metaphysical framework that the Platonists generated that can be helpful in thinking about
these things, just like Aristotle's category categories are helpful for thinking about metaphysics.
And also if people think that, you know, you don't have to replay them, you can't like evaluate,
you can't, or rather you can evaluate this stuff based on a couple of people talking about it.
It's ridiculous. Do your dang homework and go and like learn the foundations of Western philosophy,
because you can't cram it in there and then like think you're going to understand it.
But this system was built out of metaphysical distinctions. So you have energy or energy
equated to activity, which is dependent on essence. So that's one kind of metaphysical
relationship of contingency there. And essence is associated with particular energies.
And then the energies of that being, you could break down into the different powers of
capacity and actual behavior. And then above the essence of a thing, there is its hypothesis,
the summit of its essence, which is the kind of existence, qua existence of that thing.
And these words have meaning, these Greek terms actually do make sense in terms of like just
the way that Aristotle's categories make sense of things. So it helps you make sense and it allows
you to build up this comprehensive system. So you, I mean, it kind of makes sense that if you're
going to be a Platonist, you have to take these terms seriously and really investigate what they
truly mean. So the idea of an essence or an Ussia is tied to the idea of a definition, right?
So that's why in in Platonism, you'll often hear the idea of something beyond being, right? The
Henads, the gods or the one itself is beyond being. What does that mean? Well, they're beyond essence.
So it's misleadingly translated into English as being, but it really means Ussia or essence,
which has to do with like defining features of that thing. And it's not only defining features,
but a set of defining features that is self-consistent and kind of self-grounding in a way, similar to
the idea of an integrated information theory in, well, IIT, which is a modern theory of mind.
I think it's basically the leading theory of consciousness out there. It's the one I subscribe
to. And you can basically equivocate between an IIT and an Ussia. So it's a particular kind of
structure that has ontological self subsistence. That's what a soul is. That's what forms have.
And then beneath the level of soul, material things aren't IITs. They're not integrated
information systems. They're incomplete and they're ontologically contingent on more fundamental
realities. Those more fundamental realities being souls and then intellects slash forms and the one
itself above it all. Yeah. So in this book, I'm reading Think and Beans. So he says that
he thinks forms has kind of been badly translated. And he says that the ways used
in the original Greek is very similar to a word like appearance. And that basically he's getting
the forms there. He says that this word is used a lot in Aristotle and Plato, like the
wattness of sensible things. So sensible objects are appearances. But it's like the reflection
of Socrates. In a sense, you would say that is Socrates. But it's like a lesser reality
than Socrates himself. And so as you move up levels of reality, you could go from like
inorganic objects to creatures that have a consciousness, that have
a level of intellect. And then you could go to humans that can think more abstractly. And so
the hierarchy that presents itself in being is going to more intelligible forms of being.
Basically, his argument is that the whole of classical philosophy,
the basis for metaphysics at a certain point is to be intelligible and that there's no
distinction between mind and reality. And so you don't get something like idealism or
materialism. Because being is just that which appears in awareness, it appears in thoughts.
So it's always an intelligible reality. It's always rational. And thinking is always thinking
of being. He actually thinks that phenomenology lines up quite well with classical philosophy
actually. But what I find interesting about it is, he basically says that this is what you
need to understand as the whole basis for classical philosophy, Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, Aquinas,
that the whole basis for it is this idea that to be is to be intelligible,
that there's no distinction between subject and object. So basically, he would place the beginning
of modern nihilism at the rejection of this idea. And he says that it's one or the other. Either
being is intelligible and to be is to be intelligible, or else you can't do metaphysics
and you just have to be a skeptic and ultimately a nihilist. So he says the basis for nihilism
is rejecting that certain point of to be is to be intelligible. So that's a very,
you know, that's something I guess discussed a lot as well is like, what's the, you know,
where did it all go wrong in the West kind of thing, these kinds of discussions of like,
well, when did nihilism sit in, you know, was it Christianity? Was it Plato himself?
Was it scientific revolution? And you kind of to very different perspectives when it comes
to Platonism, because so in the case of Eric Pearl, who obviously respects Plato, he'd say that
and that losing that starting point of the harmony between thinking and being
that that gives you nihilism, because then you've no basis for any metaphysics or any objective
claims. And the post liberal theologians who get discussed in these circles sometimes would say
that, you know, with dynamicalism crisis, where we lost the sense of, we lost the belief in
universals that once we abandoned that, that God became this kind of arbitrary thing, you know,
you didn't really need God, because a lot of the justifications of classical metaphysics disappeared.
And the idea that there was an objective good, you know, the good just became like completely
contingent on God's will. But then it's like, when when you adopt that worldview, you kind of,
you're kind of already adopting, you know, 90% of what is like a modern sort of
relative worldview, but you just still have this entity of God, who has kind of an arbitrary
will. And it's like, at a certain point, you know, you've no need of that extra hypothesis.
So the post liberal sort of strand of thought that's quite popular now, especially
among some of the Catholic intellectuals, is that, you know, nominalism, which is the same thing,
kind of a rejection of Platonism, that that's the root of modern nihilism, and of the modern world.
And then that's, that's completely contrasted with like, these sort of, oh, sorry, I'm getting
a scout call right now. That's completely contrasted with like the Heideggerian view,
which is basically that everything went wrong with Plato. And Plato was the beginning of modern
nihilism. And it was precisely because of this attempt to kind of subdue reality and subject
reality to thought and to reason. And as soon as we started doing that, it kind of, you know,
it was the beginning of this kind of technical way of viewing reality where we try and, you know,
we try and abstract it, we try and bend it to our will. And that we, you know, we should be
approached in being more as a mystery, more as a poet than a philosopher. So you have two like
diametrically opposed views that the problem is that we are presupposing this unity between
intelligibility and reality versus, if you don't have that, the only option is nihilism.
So yeah, I'm just kind of spitball now, but I'm just curious what you think of that kind of
debate around the root of nihilism and what you think Platonism can tell us about that.
Yeah, I sighed much stronger with the post-liberal theologians and I think the beginnings of
nominalism, you know, like maybe a lot of the client of the West actually can be pinned on
Peter Abelard and the fact that he couldn't like keep it in his pants and then also his disrespect
of existing scholastic methods, you know, is kind of, and I wouldn't say that Peter Abelard
was a full-on nominalist yet, but like I think in his conduct, in his life, you can see just a
discontent, a desire to move beyond the limitations of his time and yeah, this like overwhelming
hubris. So I think a lot of it comes down to moral failures, you know, it's not so much
an intellectual current specifically, it's like there's always been this option available to
people to reject Dharma, reject the law of their society as sacred and inviolable and to try to
kind of cut their own path and use whatever sophistical justifications they can come up with
to that effect. That's the behavior of a lot of the Sophists in the dialogues. So they were,
there was already nihilism, you know, before nominalism and certainly before Plato. So you
can't blame it as a phenomenon entirely on Plato. You also can't blame the rationalism
entirely on Plato. With anything, Plato brought, I mean, Plato wasn't a rationalist. He completed a
rational system that was around in his day and harmonized with it rather than like completely
dismissing it, but then he went beyond it, beyond rationalism to kinds of mysticism,
including mystic practice that guided the spiritual development of high antiquity,
you know, for 800 years and led to the invention of mathematics, you know, building of
Roman architecture. You don't have the academy and, you know, all this stuff. You don't have
Archimedes. You don't have Roman engineering. You don't have all this beauty that we associated
with the classical world. And Plato is responsible for that. He's not responsible for
rationalism as such. And also, okay, Heidegger, like, what do you want exactly? Do you want us to
see the efficacy of mathematics, see what it can actually do, and then just say,
yeah, but it's a bad idea. Don't mess with it. That seems to be his approach to technology,
generally, but it's like the philosophy of an ostrich, like putting your head in the sand
and thinking that that'll allow you to kind of avoid the structural elements underlying
reality that these rationalistic philosophers are trying to tease out. And certainly, that kind
of rationalistic vein can lead to a feeling of alienation, but only if you hypothesize the wrong
entities in your theories, you know, like materialism, hypothesizing crude matter and putting it as an
ontological fundamental without even having a good definition of it, like that produces alienation,
not through rationalism, but from a failure of establishing a well-grounded rational system
philosophy. And I don't know a lot of Platonists who have, like, nihilistic tendencies,
and you can't pin rationalism on Plato. There was already rational philosophy going on
in the Eliatics with Pythagoreans, with the Ionians. So you can't just put it back in the
bottle either. It's like, this is a mode of human consciousness that had an advantage in its time.
You know, the Greeks didn't discover a lot of principles in astronomy, or even, I mean,
they ended up discovering a lot of principles in geometry, but as of the 6th century BC,
it was mainly the Egyptians responsible for knowledge in geometry, the Phoenicians responsible
for knowledge in astronomy, and the Greeks emulated what they knew, but then found that,
you know, there was no ground for that knowledge. The Egyptians grounded it in, you know, revelations
from Toph, right? The Phoenicians were not sure how they grounded their knowledge in astronomy or
whatnot, but, you know, it didn't work for the Greeks who didn't believe in the Phoenician gods.
The Greeks, once they received this knowledge, practical, rational demonstrations, or sorry,
rational tools, basically, from the Phoenicians and the Egyptians, they had to ground why they
worked themselves, and they came up with this deductive method, and that's the distinguishing
feature of Greek civilization. They systematized deduction, right? Aristotle gets credit for
logic, but like dialectics, logic existed prior to Aristotle, and it's what led to what gave the
Greeks their advantage, these new ways of thinking. It led to advantages in law, right? Plato was an
innovator in law, his ancestor Solon was an innovator in law, partly because through their
emphasis on deductive methods and like really analyzing justification in declarative speech,
they just, you know, they moved to a new mode of thought, and it's not fair to pin that on
Plato. Plato tried, once this new mode of thought emerged, he tried to harmonize it, he tried to
put it in its proper context and use it, and like in our position today, you may not like technology,
but if you just become, you know, a hermit in the woods, you're out of the game, you know,
you're not going to do any good for the world just because you have this antipathy to technology,
and that's mainly the way Heidegger seems to talk about it, and I haven't read Heidegger in years,
but like neither Nietzsche nor Heidegger, in my opinion, offer like a substantive argument
against anything that Plato's saying. At best, you get this kind of, but I don't like it point,
which is ridiculous, and as far as like modern nihilism, you know, Nietzsche himself is responsible
for a lot of people taking nihilistic turns, but mainly the nihilism in the modern world,
I think. Partly it's nominalism, but partly it's just the failure of Christianity in our
civilization, so we had a metaphysical foundation and it was lost, and now what goes in that hole?
That's really the sort, that's where you get nihilism. People don't have a groundwork for
morality. I think the average atheist, or just anyone who isn't a Christian, basically in our
societies, if they say they're a moral realist, they probably don't even have very good arguments
for it. You know, you need a system underlying your civilization to make sense of metaphysics,
ethics, epistemology, what grounds claims, like all of this stuff needs to be there to have the
whole moral structure operate, and like we undercut the foundation of our system, of our OS in the
West, and so of course you're going to get nihilism. Blaming on Plato is just kind of ridiculous.
Yeah, I think the high-deagorean critique could be applied to like Cartesian philosophy
and a lot of modern metaphysics, but yeah, I really don't think it applies to like classical
philosophy or medieval philosophy at all, because you know, that idea that it's like
autonomous reason trying to subdue the world. Well, I mean the, you know, most of classical
philosophy, like Platonism kind of ends up with a kind of apophatic, like ineffable source of
being, you know, neo-Platonism kind of starts and ends in mysticism. You know, philosophy was
considered the handmaiden of theology in the Middle Ages. You know, so the idea that like
it's kind of speculative reason trying to present like a perfect sort of rational system of reality,
again, I think that's like maybe a fair criticism of some modern rationalist philosophy, but I think
if you try and put that back onto Plato, I think you kind of missed America. I think you're missing
something that changed, you know, after Descartes and after the Scientific Revolution. So yeah,
I think that misses America. And that's, again, I'd recommend that book by Eric Perlis. It's very
expensive, it's drawn by a hard copy of it, but I'm sure you could find it, but you know, because
he shows how, you know, a lot of these problems that we associate with modern nihilism and with
the way that philosophy kind of lessens the world in terms of, you know, creating dualities like
the mind and the world and subject object and kind of skepticism about epistemology. A lot of this
was kind of solved by the platonic view of the world. And so yeah, the idea that metaphysics kind
of inherently desacralizes the world. I don't think that's true at all. I think Platonism is
is very much a counter to that. Maybe I'll just answer a couple of super chess just so we're not
super pushed for time at the end if I read them. Sorry, one second. Hunter Stern said thoughts on
Hennosis. Unification. Can you explain a bit what Hennosis is? Yeah, so the Hennads are the unities
in, well, I think the distinction is first made explicit in Iambicus, but Proclus makes it a
complete system. I have to explain a lot of, like, Proclus metaphysics here. I do incidentally have
a roughly four and a half hour video describing every one of the propositions in Proclus'
elements of theology. It's more condensed than reading it itself, but it's a bit tough. I'm
in the process of editing it. But anyway, that might help some people get the full picture if
they can put up with like four and a half hours of, you know, pre-scholastic Neoplatonism. But
the idea for each realm or hypostasis of being, there is the one exemplar of that realm, and then
this exemplar emanates imitations of itself. If it didn't produce the example, like the one itself,
for example, if it didn't give off likenesses, then it would be inert and it wouldn't be as
great as it could otherwise be. And for other arguments, we have to put goodness in the place
of this kind of ontological first principle. And so in each category, you have like the prime
intellect, for example. The hypostasis of intellect is also being life intellect. So the prime
intellect is technically being itself, Lucia itself, the archetype of all Lucia. A lot of
technical details in this that I probably don't need to go into. And then soul, there's like one
RK of all souls, the monad of souls, and then a declension through imitation, through likenesses,
moving into greater diversity and lesser powers. So in that first hypostasis of the one, the one
gives off Henads, which are often equated with the Greek gods. And they are super essential. They're
beyond intellectual definition. You know, this Eidos being translated from, or etymologically linked
to the idea of a look, I think is appropriate. All of this can be interpreted phenomenologically,
like Eric Pearl does. I think that is totally appropriate. But there's an element of phenomenological
reality that is definitional, well-defined, intellectual, strictly speaking, formal. And
then there's something beyond form, right? Form doesn't make sense unless form is contained
in a transcendental unity. So unity is higher than the application of form. And so we were
received through participation, our particular characteristics from the universals that we're
partaking of at that level. So soul receives from hypostasis of intellect through participation.
We receive unities, our unification of ourselves and unity with others through
genosis, which is a higher energy than the energy of the forms, strictly speaking.
Well, that's something I wanted to ask you, actually, about in terms of what's beyond the form.
So what's the status of the good in Platonism? Is that kind of outside of the forms? I mean,
that seems like one thing that there's an awful lot of debate about in terms of interpreting
Plato. It seems like there's an awful lot of different interpretations of exactly
what the good is and how it fits into his philosophy.
Yeah. Yeah, that's true. Sucipus, the direct successor to Plato in the Academy,
seems to, and there are very fragmentary remains of his work, but he seems to have rejected
the Platonic account of the one in the good being the first principle. Aristotle, when he talks about
Plato's hidden doctrines, I think, includes the good and the one in the definition of that kind
of first principle according to Plato. But I take, and when I read Plato and when I read Proclus,
I mean, it's, Proclus justifies his positions in his commentaries extensively through quotation,
and I mean, he's pretty compelling making his case that this is actually what Plato thought.
So I lean towards like the Proclus was right school of Platonic interpretation. So yeah,
the good is the same with the one. And this is informative for us because we can kind of
define the nature of goodness through the nature of unification. Anecdotally, it kind of corresponds
to what we think of as our well-being. Like someone is in a bad state mentally when they're
at odds with themselves, when they have inner conflict, when they're not unified,
cognitive dissonance is uncomfortable, whereas harmony and unification in the mind is positive,
or our bodies suffer pain when they're disconnected. You know, if you tear a ligament,
it's not a good feeling. If you're more well integrated, you allow yourself to heal,
then you become more unific and better at the same time. So all union, qua union is a good
because the good and the one are one, in my view, in the way that I see things. But yeah,
that's above the form. So you have the good and the one, and then peros and apairon,
or the principle of limit and unlimited, which are also super essential. And then you have the
head adds, the species of unity, which are equated to the Greek gods often. And then you have the
realm of being, life, intellect, the realm of forms in that second hypostasis.
Okay, what about, you know, we hear about the, you know, the tree transcendental is true beauty
goodness, but it seems like the good has a, an especially unique place and play those philosophy,
but what about beauty then? So beauty isn't just beauty isn't is the form is that something
forms as well. I believe. And so part of the system, like the general principle, once you
want to accept, there are forms, you have to kind of put them in their proper taxonomy. And
that's a lot of the work that neoplane necessary engaged with. So I can't remember where I read
it, but somebody calls beauty like actually the chief form. I don't know about that. Exactly. I
don't know precisely where to put this idea of beauty, but it's certainly in the rumble forms.
Okay, that's interesting. Because there's also, I forget that it was at the Tabungan school,
like there's there's this German school of interpretation of Plato that, you know,
to summarize really simply, I guess they, they said that there's like, there was
an unwritten doctrine of Plato that was preserved through some other people and that you can find
from from oral accounts and so on. And if you put it together, basically, it looks remarkably
similar to what we would call neoplatinism, like platinus. And if they're correct, then, you know,
if you add in like the kind of oral teachings of what how Platinism was taught and the unwritten
doctrines, then there's actually very little difference between Plato and platinus. So yeah,
well, what do you think of that interpretation in terms of what we're missing from the dialogues
that's kind of necessary to make sense of Plato's metaphysics that was likely there that we've missed?
Yeah, I basically agree with that school of thought. When I read the dialogues before I had
read neoplatinism, as I said before, I interpreted it in in terms of Advaita Vedanta, and I saw no
real conflict there. So I mean, I do see Plato as a kind of monist, you know, maybe not, you might
say he's like a qualified non-dualist, perhaps rather than like unqualified monism or monism,
whatever. So yeah, platinus, I don't agree with on everything some of his doctrines.
Proclus disagrees with, I tend to side with Proclus on those, like for example,
platinus, when looking for a principle of evil, goes to matter itself. Whereas,
you know, for Proclus, matter is the lowest entity ontologically, the most contingent,
most dependent entity, least productive itself, but it's not a principle or archaic evil. For
Proclus, there isn't an archaic evil. So platinus can lead to this more like mannequin view in some
ways. So yeah, I mean, I would see platinus more as like an unqualified non-dualist. Proclus and
Plato would be more, you know, qualified non-dualists. But I do see an essential continuity there,
for sure. And again, like people, if you want to argue that Plato wasn't a Pythagorean, it just
seems to me you can't have actually read through the dialogues. Because many of the characters
who are most respected, Parmenides, Zeno influenced by Pythagoras, maybe not technically Pythagoreans
themselves, but Timaeus in the Timaeus is Pythagorean. And then if you look at the roster of the first
students in Aristotle schools, his school was effectively a Pythagorean school. I think the
mainstream consensus among scholars is that Plato was a Pythagorean. And there was a Neo-Pythagorean
tradition that kept running all the way through until the beginning of Neoplatonism. And there's
also more continuity between Middle Platonism and Neoplatonism, I think, than many people suspect.
It's just that not as many of the writings of the Middle Platonists survive. And I don't,
I haven't gone through all of them, like I need to read Plutarch's Moralia, which isn't all about
morals. A lot of it actually has to do with, like, more Platonic cosmology and metaphysics.
So I'm curious what, you know, I respect Plutarch's sense of style, at least, from his biographies.
But yeah, he had some Platonic doctrines to relate to his own in his day. So I, yeah, I think an
unbroken line of Pythagorean slash Platonic influence is the way to interpret these philosophies,
their antiquity. Although, yeah, there were innovations in Neoplatonism. But there's so
much in the dialogues that it's often possible to kind of go back and interpret even things that
seem to be very late additions, you know, like this dichotomy between the one and the hen ads,
but within the first hypostasis, like that's a kind of proto-scholastic fine distinction that
doesn't seem to be there in Plato. But, you know, if you read carefully enough, like Proclas tends to,
maybe you can see a justification. So I would say overarching continuity with some development,
especially in late antiquity.
All right, I want to ask you as well about Plato's conception of God. So obviously,
in the Tamaeus, he puts forward this idea of a demiurge that created the world according to
mathematical principles, but it's not the kind of God of classical theism, right? He's a creator
God, you know, he has a bit more agency. It's not the kind of ultimate transcendent sort of
apophatic being that we might be used to Platonists, you know, how to describe God in theology. So is
there like two gods in Plato? Is there the demiurge and a more sort of transcendent classical
conception of God? Or, you know, is the good something that is kind of above God in that sense
as the ultimate principle? Or, you know, are we to understand that as it relates to like classical
theism? Right, if we're going to go with Proclas again, then there will be a relationship of the
one and the good to the Greek gods that equates to the relationship between the monad of like,
say, triangularity to all particular triangles. So the monad of Henads is the one itself, and that
because of that, we can call that the first God. Proclas does in the elements of theology,
call the one itself the first God. So in that way, you could say, I know, Proclas would identify as
a polytheist, but you kind of say there's a cult monotheism there. But anyway, so you have that
kind of divinity beyond participation, pure unity. Like, and things don't directly participate of the
one, they participate via intermediaries, the one remains in itself, never affected by what's
outside of it, but containing everything outside of it, always from eternity, emanating out copies
of itself. And then we participate of those unities. Now, the demiurge is at a lower level.
He's not even the summit of the second hypostasis, which is being as such, the chief among
intelligibles. And being has to be superior to intellect, because intellect aims at particular
beings. Intellect isn't like, it only makes sense if it has a target. And because something that is
aimed at a target is subordinate to its end, right, it is trying to get to its end, it can't be the
ultimate thing. So intellect is not ultimate. In that second hypostasis, being that the principle
being being itself is is preeminent. But so you have the principle being the principle of life,
and then the principle of intellect. And that that member of this, this set here would be where you
find the demiurge as such. And his peculiar feature is that he's the intelligible intellect. So
within intellect, you have a spectrum of the chief intellect, and then subordinate imperfect,
less complete intellects declining from there. In the demiurge himself, his objects of
intellection, what he's looking at with his intellect is one in the same with his essence.
So he contains all the forms in in himself, all intellects contain all forms, but in different
ratios. So like the form of, I don't know, say a triangle again, or whatever, will contain in some
sense, seminally, all the other forms, but it will emphasize the one that is its peculiar identity.
What's unique about the demiurge is that he contains all the forms unfiltered in himself.
And his act of creation is also kind of similar to the way that the one creates. He remains in
himself. And through his self contemplation, generates these likenesses that then as intermediaries
kind of do his work. So there's actually not just one demiurge. There's a whole
series of demiurgic intellects, which engage in the fabrication of the world in Platonism,
or according to Proclus at least. So yeah, it's so in some ways, like the demiurge in Proclus
looks like God in Aristotelianism, you know, for Aristotle, God is thought thinking itself,
and that is kind of what the demiurge is. It's the prime intellect as such, reverting to itself,
and intellect is an essentially revered function in each of these, just to kind of
complexify it a little bit more, in each of these hypostases, there is abiding, progressing,
and reverting necessarily. So each moan out of a series, for example, abides in itself,
progresses to its last members, and reverts to itself. So intellect in the being life,
intellect hypostasis is the revered function. Being is abiding, life proceeds, proliferates,
differentiates, and then intellect in gathers and brings back, you know, what was disseminated.
So the demiurge is that chief of the revered, revered of function in gathering everything in
the realm of forms, and then through that kind of emanates the lower realms of reality beneath
himself as his product. Yeah, the, the idea of like, positing two gods or two natures of God is
actually, you actually see it crop up again and again, like, again, Alfred North Whitehead
theorized that there was like an imminent and a primordial
nature to God, that there was a, you know, God as he acts in the world, and sort of directs,
you know, the concrescence of the world versus the God that kind of, because Whitehead kind of
was a Platonist, he's presented as like a process philosopher, but really I see this like updated
Platonism, but you know, then he had the primordial aspect of God that he needed to pause it to like
uphold the, what he called them, eternal objects, which are basically his version of
Platonic forms. But it's kind of, maybe this is, you could tell me if this is a good analogy, but
you know, in Hinduism and Vedanta, they have the idea that, you know, there's Brahman, which is
obviously the complete ineffable source of everything that, you know, apophatic
descriptions apply to, but then as it concerns the world, Vedanta actually has like a kind of a
second God, which is more like the kind of personal, theistic creator God that they call Ishvara,
and they say that, yeah, that you have to have, you know, that that's basically Brahman's interaction
with the created world, like somehow generates this like absolute mind. So would you say it's a
fair analogy that like Demiurge is like Ishvara and Vedanta, and then the Platonic idea of the one
is, you know, could be equated with like the Hindu idea of Brahman?
Yeah, unqualifiable, yes. Okay, that's interesting. And another thing is, would you say then that the,
from a Platonic conception of things, does the good have any creative power? Like,
I know that might sound like a weird question, but I've been, I've been reading this book. It's
very interesting called Universes by John Leslie. I don't know if you're familiar with it. But he
basically argues for a modern version of the defined union argument, which I do find very
convincing. You know, just take a modern physics, things like the cosmological constant. And
you know, I'm sure you're familiar with like the kind of modern updated version of it. But then
at the end, it's kind of interesting. So he's not committed to any religion. But he thinks the
fine tune in argument basically is a convincing argument for God. And it's a much better argument
to multiple universes. But then at the end, there's an interesting chapter where he's speculating,
well, okay, what, what created this? And he says that he finds the Platonic answer
the best. But the way he presents it is that the universe came into existence because it was an
ethical good that it would exist. So that's, I mean, that's kind of a, the way we're used to
thinking in Western philosophy, I think that's kind of a, that kind of hits you as a very left
of field idea that somehow something being good itself, like gives itself creative power,
like because it was good that the universe would exist. That goodness itself created the universe.
It's a very strange idea, but he says that this is like a platonic conception of the good. So
yeah, I'm just curious what you think of that.
Hmm. These arguments, like, basically pre Anselm ontological arguments are found in Neoplatonism.
I don't, I've never really liked ontological arguments. I do side with Schopenhauer on that.
So it's, it's difficult. You know, in some ways, I'm kind of like getting into Neoplatonism just
in the last two years. I read Plato, you know, many years ago, I've always considered myself
a Platonist, but I never really took the literature seriously and tell more recently. So I can't,
I can't speak like in specificity on, on precisely that point.
But I mean, does Plato suggest that the good has some, has some creative power? Like, is it just
this, you know, because when you think of the good, it's this kind of static, you know, unchanging.
But the idea that it could have like creative power to generate the universe,
Leslie calls that a Platonic idea. That's a, it's a very different way of thinking about that,
isn't it? Yeah, I mean, there is, there is talk of like the generation from the one in the good.
The question is like, how do you justify that argument? Right? One argument that Proclas makes
is similar to a kind of ontological argument where, you know, once we've identified
the first principle as the good, and his, I could go through his arguments for why,
but they're a little bit convoluted. But anyway, once you get that identity of the first principle,
then okay, what is better, something being inert and static, or something overflowing itself and
having abundant infinite powers? Well, clearly the latter, right? Appealing toward intuitions.
So I haven't really seen like an excellent argument on that point. I have my own way of
thinking about it, which has always been like the kind of ultimately permedean, more this is
where the monism really comes in or monism comes in, where the one is inconceivable unless it subsumes
the rest of reality anyway. And then the description of reality being emanated out of it is really
just a factor of like limitations and separations being temporarily imposed through perspectives
on this one, so that you're never outside of the one, the one has to contain everything.
But in another manner of speaking, we can say it has to overflow itself and create likenesses of
itself. But like a pure one, a pure simplicity is inconceivable outside of the categorical
distinctions that we use to arrive at the notion of simplicity, like the simplicity, complexity,
dichotomy is built into our minds. And so we can't think simplicity without complexity. And so you
can't put forward a hypothesis of the first principle of being that is this perfect simplicity
with nothing else involved. No matter what, you're always kind of just leaving unspoken the rest of
the categorical schema of like what exactly defines it as simplicity. Pure simplicity is completely
ineffable, completely unthinkable, and doesn't make sense logically. But if you take this step to
say that like everything is the same as simplicity at some level, a kind of holographic containment
where complete undifferentiation is always and only at the same time, like all all differentiation
smushed into one. All differentiation has to be the same as the undifferentiated in a kind of
paradoxical way. So this is obviously we're dealing with the very summit of, I would say being, but
that's not strictly speaking correct, platonic terms, the highest level of reality. And so in
mystical systems, in perennialist systems, there's always antinomy, seeming paradox, seeming contradiction
because we've run up against the limits of dynoia, rationalistic thinking. We can't touch that element
of reality through abstractions because they are inherently categorical, inherently relational.
And so you can't express simplicity through relation, through a relational medium. The only
mode of contact would have to be intuitive, which is why like the knowledge of this reality
can only ever come down to us rationalistic philosophers from those who through through
theology or yoga or whatever have made contact with that more unitive ineffable aspect of reality.
So does it make sense to say that? I mean, does it make sense to ask why the forms exist? Like
is there any level of contingency or are they just absolutely necessary? Because like take
like modern Christians, right? Like, I think William Land Craig argues that he believes in,
you know, abstract objects, that numbers exist. But he thinks that it's a itself kind of an
argument for the existence of God, but he also says that these wouldn't exist without God creating
them, without God creating the laws of logic and numbers and so on, because he says that it's like
it's a terrible limitation on God if you say that these, you know, numbers and abstract
objects and stuff are absolutely necessary. Because, you know, that's that's there themselves
kind of constraining God then. So like what's kind of a standard traditional like plateness
take on that? Like would Plato have said the, would you have ever speculated about like why
the forms exist? Or would a plateness say that that's kind of a meaningless question?
No, I don't think it'd be meaningless. I think they why they exist, you can easily justify on
epistemological grounds, like theoretically, we have to postulate these entities to make sense
of what we see. But like the bigger question of why they are there, you have to go to the higher
principles beyond the forms have to be prolific themselves, or they would be not as good as they
could otherwise be. So again, it's this kind of variety variation on the ontological argument
that people keep falling back on here, which I'm not totally happy with. But I think one way of
thinking of it is just that because creation from the one happens through similitude likenesses of
himself, the forms inevitably reflect the nature of that kind of divine reality in itself. So it's
not it's not a matter of God kind of with like libertarian free will selecting, you know, how
he's going to make the world. It's rather just the world and the forms are just an overflowing of
divine power and are an expression of his nature. And so they're not arbitrary. They are the necessary
ways that being must unfold. And that's like that raises kind of the ultimate metaphysical question
that you could ask, you know, is ultimate reality necessarily one way? And does some being or
super essential reality exert some kind of will over what the nature of that possible realm of
being would be? For me, like, if if that's what you do, then you're nominalist, and ultimately,
like, you're not going to be able to have rationalistic framework, you can always take that
step theoretically. But the worldview that comes out of that won't have the same advantages that
a worldview based on necessity has. And, you know, necessity just in Greek mythology, and in most
traditional mythological systems is placed above the gods. So the way that the forms are the way
all these subordinate levels are have to just be reflections of the nature of the divine ultimately.
All right, I'm going to get to some more to super chats. George Wright said,
when translated and played with Christianity, does the one correspond to the father and
Logos, the son? Logos, Jesus is Logos in the Christian interpretation, isn't he?
Yes. Yes. I don't know about the father as one of you.
No. I mean, if anything, the father in Judaic theology is more like the Demiurge, yes.
And Logos, I mean, the Logoi are principles within soul, like Eidos is the formal principle in the
realm of forms. Logos is, I think, peculiar to the level of soul, but I could be wrong on that.
It's kind of a technical point. Just actually seen as that came up, the Demiurge, the Old Testament.
So how influential was Platonism on Gnosticism? Did they get the idea of the Demiurge direct
from Plato? Yes, for sure. Of course, like the pessimism of the Gnostics, they did not take
from Plato. Plato was really, I think, more like Leibniz, where Leibniz thought that we have the
best of all possible worlds, very anti-Schopenhauer in that way, or not in line with Schopenhauer's
views. But yeah, the world denying isn't really there in Plato. I mean, he acknowledges that
there are better places to go, but he also acknowledges that the world is a beautiful place
and is created by it. Plotinus wrote a big screen against the Gnostics, didn't he? Yeah,
right, which I haven't read in a long time. But yes, so I do think they got that idea,
the Gnostics did. Also, it deserves mentioning it's this guy, Russell Gmerkin, has a very
interesting hypothesis about the origin actually of the Old Testament as we've received it.
Sorry, what's that name, Russell? Russell Gmerkin, G-M-I-R-K-E-N, I think.
So apparently, there isn't a shred of archaeological or textual or cultural evidence at all of the
Old Testament prior to 270 BC. And that's when the Septuagint Bible is translated. The translators
of the Septuagint Bible were Hellenized Jews living in Alexandria. They translated it in the
Library of Alexandria where there were obviously tons of Hellenistic texts, including Plato.
And Gmerkin just kind of traces all of these parallels between conventions in Greek literature,
Greek legal conventions, like the idea of a constitution is uniquely Greek. The ancient,
like the Code of Hammurabi is there as a set of laws, but Near Eastern societies didn't invent
the Constitution. And yet there are constitutional elements in the Old Testament and in Greek
law, and then also like particular prescriptions that Plato offers in the laws, especially in the
Republic. And it just looks like the people who translated the Sanhedrin Bible were actually
drawing from a set of their traditional scriptures and put it together in line with Hellenistic
philosophy and especially the advice of Plato, which if true would be hugely significant. I mean
obviously, I think Gmerkin has a couple interviews on YouTube and I've read some of his more recent,
he has two books on this, I read some of the more recent book. And it's definitely an interesting
hypothesis. Well, Nietzsche said Christianity was Platonism for the masses. So if Gmerkin is
correct, then that was doubly true. Yeah, that's interesting. And then when the Gnostics criticized
the Christians, or sorry, when the Neoplatonists criticized the Christians for being a historical,
well actually, it might be because the Jews themselves invented this fake history on the
advice of Plato, as he says in the Republic, you have to believe that your institutions are ancient,
etc. And that's what the Jews who followed Plato's advice did. And so that would be like the whole
Testament, like back to Moses and Abraham. Yeah, I mean, I'm sure there would be certain
scriptures that already existed, like the Book of Job, most people think is actually ancient
from like 11th century, or sorry, 11th, you know, 11th century BC, or thereabouts,
there are precedents in Near Eastern literature from the 800s, 700s, the lament literature that
like the genre looks similar to the Book of Job. But yeah, as far as the system goes that Pentateuch
the Mosaic Law, all of this stuff, and it fits with the higher criticism, like the author that's
called like the Deuteronomist, who's the latest author who really puts together like the Deutero
canonical formalization, and that system of law that would have been under Gomerkin's hypothesis
created during this translation of the Septuagint around 270 BC.
Right, that's very interesting. Yeah, I've bookmarked his Wikipedia, so I'll definitely check
that out. Hunter Stern said thoughts on the Straussian hermeneutic of Plato.
I don't know Strauss, so.
Yeah, Strauss has this interpretation that, you know, you have to have like an esoteric
interpretation of every philosopher, because they have to write in a way that doesn't,
that Plato came to this realization with Socrates that, you know, you have to present
version of your philosophy that won't upset the social order, and then one that can be
read esoterically. But I haven't read a lot of Strauss readers, so I can't really say it that
much. I mean, I agree with that. There's definitely the esoteric divide and Platonism.
Yeah, he thinks that's like, he also thinks there's an esoteric message in Plato, like specifically
about that, you know, as discussions of Socrates and stuff, like the role of the philosopher
as it pertains to the social order and trying to translate truth in that context. But yeah,
again, I haven't read a lot of Strauss, I can't really say anything too interesting on it.
Eton Vac said, Ervol speaks a lot about Platonic metaphysics, forms, etc. Okay, this is quite a
big question. One, how do you assess Plato's political philosophy strictly? Two, how much is
Plato's political philosophy grounded in his metaphysics? And, well, I guess you can answer
those first, and then I'll ask the other one, because it's kind of unrelated. Yeah, Plato's
political philosophy, it's kind of surprising we didn't cover that at all, actually, but
right. Yeah, there's a relationship known for, yeah. Right, yeah, yeah. So the relation to
his metaphysics, that's quite an interesting angle as it concerns his philosophy.
Right, I mean, they're obviously intimately connected. I am a Platonist politically as well,
and Plato was an authoritarian. Basically, it's one big endorsement of paternalism.
There is a hierarchy of souls, some souls know better. And if you don't know as well as someone
else, like you should follow the people who know. Everyone's, this is like a proceless idea,
everything's proper perfection is to be found by following, like in the train of its whatever
leads back to its proper cause. So the world is filled with these intermediary authorities that
we always have to be appealing to, to integrate ourselves into a broader hierarchy. And I think
that's basically the way and the model and the path. And I think in the 21st century,
especially it's going to become more obvious that you can't have libertarianism culturally.
You have to have some degree of paternalism. Now, there is a harmony that you can find between
libertarianism and this more authoritarian paternalistic way, which is like, you can have
independent kind of volunteerist societies that themselves internally operate on authoritarian
lines. And that's ultimately the way that I go. But yeah, I don't really disagree with Plato at all.
The Republic is meant to be like an absolute ideal. There's a couple of things we know about the way
he thought about this ideal state. One is that it corresponds to some kind of ideal form archetype
of political society that is there to be found by anyone. So Plato wouldn't have thought of himself
as inventing this system, but rather discovering like the true, most true dharma of a society
like his own. But then there's also a chart, sorry, just bear with me one moment here.
Yeah, there. So it's an ideal, it's also in the Timaeus, we learn exactly the constitution
and structure of ancient Athens. So in the Atlantis narrative, Athens defeats the
Atlantean Empire. And part of why it's able to do that is because it had this best of all
possible models of the state handed down directly by Athena. So it's given by the gods. It's also a
form, perfect mode of government. And, you know, some of the particulars you could argue were
having to do with the technology of this time and place. But by and large, the process is,
I think, what needs to be there in political society, which is you need to get talent very early on,
standardize certain aspects of education, especially like music, gymnastics, mathematics,
like what we've basically done. Like a lot of philosophy of education over the centuries
its origin to Plato's philosophy of education, and of Athens more broadly. You know, a lot of what
Plato recommends in the Republic is just like, do what Athens does and this and this additional
stuff. So yeah, I mean, I would consider myself a Platonist, basically, and it's tied to the
metaphysics because that's what the guardians have to do. They have to be able to make contact
once they've studied their mathematics, completed the rationalistic philosophy, learned all the
mundane principles of government. Then, you know, when they're 55 and up, and they're at the real
head of the hierarchy, they can like make make that intuitive contact with the forms, you know,
come to know the perfect state directly, and then come back down into the cave into the political
society and enforce that. And unless for Plato, you have this caste, spiritually enlightened caste
that can return to the higher realm in some form and, you know, make contact with that
guiding principle or formal principle of society, then it'll break down. So they're definitely
connected. All right, and the second part of that question was just, have you encountered
tropes nominalism?
No. Okay, yeah, I'm not very familiar with either. Just one other thing on that actually,
again, it's quite a big question. But I mean, in terms of the Plato's approach to political
philosophy versus Aristotle, I mean, what would you say is, is the main difference there? Is it
that Plato is more focused on, like, the perfect ability of people through the state in a way
that Aristotle isn't, you know, he's more taken the kind of family is a starting unit, would you
say that's a fair characterization? Plato certainly has more hope for the perfect ability of man,
but people mischaracterize that and take it in this kind of communist or like new socialist man
way in thinking that like everybody's going to be transformed. And Plato knows that's not
happening. Obviously, this is for the elite. It's for a small segment of the population to
actually overcome these kind of egoistic limitations of everyday life and and make a difference.
But anyway, Aristotle, I've read his politics, but I'm trying to kind of remember like where
where he really situates like the highest form of government. I know he ranks, I mean, his ranking
is similar to that of Plato from the Republic. But do you recall like does he put aristocracy on top
still? I don't know that he really like fundamentally disagrees. All that might mean he gets the idea
like man is a social animal, you need this larger community, but that also it follows
right in line with what Plato talks about in the Republic. You know, maybe there's
more emphasis on kinship, but also Plato, like if bare minimum, people need to believe that they all
spring from the same ground, you know, they do have this blood and soil connection. So that's
important mythologically for Plato, even if not like if it doesn't always have to be ethnographically
true, for example, like the Athenian tribes were legal fictions and people more or less knew that.
And yet Plato would endorse such tribal divisions, even if they don't come from an
organic source, they can still be useful for the state. Yeah, so I don't know, I would have to
reread the politics to really make a robust comparison. All right. Hunter Stern said,
is there any difference between Dugan and Urban Crystal both have their start in politics with
their own strand of Bolshevism, then through a schizo hermeneutic of Plato and onto influence
politics? Well, they're political views are obviously quite a bit different, I would say.
Sovereign Air said, you don't need to watch a video called the Athenian Revolt Against Babylonian
Finance. I linked it, I think it's by that channel that used to be around vertical politics.
Promise you won't be disappointed with the quality. He's one of the best creators,
not as official channel. All right, well, I'll check that out. But yeah, that's all the superchats.
Yeah, did you have any other topic regarding Plato you wanted to cover?
I mean, I think basically, like the challenge for people is if you don't want to accept the theory
of forms to explain how universals work, then you have a lot of other work to do in really making
a robust nominalist system. I know that a lot of other professional philosophers are nominalists.
I just don't think anyone can be a nominalist coherently. That's my case. That's what I defend.
So a lot of it does come down to the theory of the forms, the idea of universals,
what is the first principle of being? If it's not unity, if you don't go with Plato there,
and you don't take that kind of monism, then what's your first principle? The question is like,
here's this system. It is acted as the foundation of Western philosophy for more than 2000 years.
People have built off it in thousands of different ways in different ages.
And so if you're going to just say no to it, okay, man, now it's your turn. Now it's your turn to
build this system that's going to work for us as a foundation. And I don't see anybody coming up with
anything like that. If perennialism is essentially true, there is one true philosophy, then you
should expect the majority of the traditions out there will always be guided by a similar kind
of basic set of beliefs. You see that in Hinduism, in Platonism, you see that hints of it in what we
can gather of Indo-European philosophy. There are regional differences, of course, but I think
that the basic truth, metaphysically speaking, of the world is there, and it's one. There is one
truth of the world. If you say Plato got it wrong, then what do you put in its place? And like a
reference to its flux or its ineffable or unknowable, that can remain a bare assertion,
but it doesn't amount to a comprehensive worldview. And there are plenty of scientific
Platonists who have integrated modern theories, like there are Platonists working today,
integrating quantum mechanics, integrate information to people like Johanna Rottz,
who I respect. I know that you know about these people are out there doing the work to build
the new system that, you know, the equivalent of what Aquinas did in the Middle Ages, the equivalent
of what Plato and Aristotle did in antiquity. And yeah, there's just literally no alternative.
So we've just read through the Elcibiades, and I think the basic point that is made there is,
on the one hand, the nature of the soul. Where is our identity fundamentally situated? Do we
benefit ourselves by benefiting the body? Do we benefit ourselves by acquiring power? What's that
kind of first principle? What do you do first? Like even if we agree that political power is good.
Elcibiades, of course, is Athenian statesman. Bronze Age pervert mentioned him in his book,
Bronze Age mindset, as this Athenian statesman who like had influence in Athens, and then when
they were going to arrest him at a certain point in time, defected to Sparta. And then from Sparta,
well, he impregnated the wife of the king in Sparta. And so he had to leave and he defected to
the Persians. And then from the Persians, he redefected to the Athenians who wanted him back
because they thought like, wow, based, that's cool. And so he went back and then was kicked out again,
and then eventually died in Turkey somewhere. So but he was like, you know, very guided by
Thumos, very like martial spirit kind of character. And he wanted on his like 18th birthday, as soon
as he was given full legal privileges in the state of Athens, he wanted to go into the assembly and
like tell him what was what and what they ought to be doing with the state. And the whole dialogue
is Socrates basically just saying, whoa, calm down, like, first of all, what are you advising the
Athenians on? What do you know better than them that you can inform them on? And these are the
sorts of questions that I think many people who operate in political spheres don't actually
fundamentally ask themselves, you know, what do I know better about how the state should be run?
People presume that they know better, but often they leave these fundamental notions like justice,
like advantage, like what is the soul, like these sorts of things, they leave them completely unanswered.
And this approach of like starting in the middle with philosophy and starting with common notions
and indefinable, you know, je ne sais quoi that is your identity and movement. Like, that's not
been demonstrated to work. Historically, it's this Platonist approach, what Socrates advocates for
Alcibiades like, no, first, take care of your own virtue, get grounded yourself, and learn the nature
of reality. And then maybe you'll be in a position to to advise the Athenians and, you know, exert
your influence on their on the Empire. But step one is like, Okay, prepare yourself. And I think
Plato's solution ultimately is very clear. It clearly worked. It was building a school. And I
think we we are in a similar position. We should do similar things. So yeah, I'm doing my reading
group. We just finished Alcibiades. We're moving on to the Gorgias, starting April 16. We meet on
Saturdays. People can join through the Patreon by recognizing that not everybody you can
support it doesn't work for some people situation. So I have made quite a few exceptions for people.
So basically, whoever wants to get involved, you can contact me on Skype or just join the Patreon,
and I'll send you a link and explain how it works and stuff. But it's it's kind of just required
reading. Like if you want to be more than just a commenter on current events, like if you really
take the truth seriously, you want to have this holistic worldview. And I don't think our side,
generally speaking, can win unless we have this comprehensive worldview supporting us, like you
have to at least match the kind of thing the elites have produced. And by the way, the elites got
way where they are by relying on their knowledge of Plato, they read Plato, you probably should
do like it's kind of required reading if you want to have this comprehensive worldview, if you want
to get to the bottom of things, get to the bottom of our civilization, all of this, you're going to
have to do it one way or another. So you might as well deal with others. The dialogues can be a
little bit difficult to read. There's often many layers of meaning that get lost. You know, I'm often
kind of blown away by some of the Neoplatonic commentators when they like, excuse me, explicate
a metaphor that is there in like the setting of a dialogue, for example, and I just had no,
no cognizance of it the first time reading through. So there's a lot in these texts, you know,
they not only found provided the foundation of Judaism, Christianity, some of Islam,
also Hermeticism, ancient occult traditions, Renaissance magics, like all occult traditions
from Rosicrucianism to Masonry, like Mason still talk about Pythagoras and Plato, the all of these
people who have controlled the world have built what they've built off of the back of Plato. So
even if you want to reject it, fine, first read through it. So, you know, I encourage people
with dissenting opinions also to get in contact with me. If you think I'm totally wrong, then
let's have a conversation about it, you know, take our time and really analyze what's being said,
because kind of a motive just reacting against Plato, because like Heidegger doesn't like Plato
or whatever is just kind of childish, let's grow up and get our foundation set for putting ourselves
in the best path to victory, ideally. Yeah, your Ereval's channel link is in the description,
so if you want to get in contact with them, I think you post your Skype and other links and
stuff in the video so people can find you through there. Actually, one thing, the guy who asked
about the difference between Irving Crystal and Dugan, there is actually a debate that's been
done around again lately, where Dugan actually debated Bernard Henri Levy, who has a very similar
worldview to Irving Crystal, he's like a big apologist for neoliberalism and neo-conservatism,
so you could just watch that debate if you want to see the differences in worldview.
But yeah, just one other thing actually, I mean, I know you, as far as, you know, what you mentioned
about the school and you think that we need to do something similar today in terms of bringing the
best minds together, creating like a comprehensive, coherent worldview, certain metaphysics that has
like scientific insights. If I understand you right, you think that an advantage of this is
basically, you know, who kind of wins in the social space is kind of decided by technological,
scientific advances, you know, that's kind of how liberalism came to power. Like one question I have
is like, you know, as far as that goes, I mean, if you were to bring kind of the best scientific
minds together and get a, you know, an excellent sort of theory of everything, isn't there a problem
in the modern world that like to translate that into power now requires such a massive
sort of military industrial complex behind you. Like when, you know, the more things progress,
like, you know, one time you could make a great scientific discovery with a telescope, right,
or a math equation, but now the way things are progressing, you need like the large hadron
collider for like billions of dollars, whatever that costs, and like a huge team of hundreds of
scientists. So I don't know, that's a, that was a question actually in terms of like, you know,
does having the truth, or does having a scientific insight really translate into power today if you
don't have a huge state apparatus behind you to create a huge industrial apparatus to, you know,
carry out experiments and turn that actually into technology that could make any difference.
Right. Well, on the one hand, it depends on exactly what this new
philosophy worldview scientific paradigm looks like, because if it allows us to rediscover
the lost Atlantean acoustic limitation, you know, whatever they were using, then maybe it's something
that's practical for people. That's obviously a stretch. But I think the more like direct
path to victory by having an institution like this is using it as a framework for communities
to build new kinds of production chains. So rather than trying to like build the new
high tech thing, you have to be vertically integrated and you have to start from the ground up.
So you get this society together with the right worldview, and then you organize intelligently
in paternalistic ways, and build out the production chains gradually. So the direct
application of this worldview is as an operating system for a social structure. And then you scale
that social structure by better management, by affordability, by offering like tangible material
benefits to people who joined your paradigm. And then gradually you have more communities
involved, you have more people cooperating in your system. And then the end product of that
is some of this more high tech stuff that requires, you know, more capital investment.
But I think the worldview doesn't, it's not that the direct output has to be
the side beam cannon, right? That's like, there have to be several steps before you get to that,
that end artifact. So yeah, if you have the right worldview, you can align values,
you can get people cooperating, and then simply recruit, scale, and repeat until you have the
resources you need to do whatever else you want to do. All right. Yeah, well, we're coming up to
two hours, 40 minutes. Yeah, I really enjoyed this talk. It was great to get you on. Like I said,
I'm kind of immersed myself in Platonism again. And I feel like, kind of feel like I'm starting
from scratch, because yeah, if you really get into it, you can realize that there's there's a lot of
things you kind of took for granted, or you kind of gloss over some of the ancient philosophers,
I definitely did. You know, you kind of like, well, my experience anyway, no, I found the
just you feel like you there's like a sort of obligatory, like summary reading of them that
you have to do. And you just get the basics of them. And that's kind of it. So I found looking at
like secondary literature. And like I said, I really recommend that book by Eric Pearl.
You realize that it is actually a completely different way of approaching philosophy, a completely
different way of thinking about the world. And you actually have to like set aside all your sort of
modern prejudices in how you think about the world and how you approach questions about reality.
And it's actually, you know, it has its own kind of feeling and logic to it. But then once you
imbibe that, you realize that, you know, it's such a radically different way of doing things.
And it really does solve a lot of modern problems. So yeah, I think people should take an early
look at Platonism and Ereval's channel is very good. I also shared, I know you promote them,
you interview them. I shared this channel on my Telegram. I'm forgetting the name,
is it like E.C. Winsper? Yes, that's it. E.C. Winsper. Yeah, I recommend that channel as well.
And you can find Ereval's interview with them where they have another discussion about Plato.
But yeah, thanks for joining me, Ereval. I appreciate it. Thanks for everyone that tuned
in, sent super chats. And yeah, potentially, I'll be back next week. I'm going to have
Tyler Hamilton debating Adam Green on the historicity of Jesus in two weeks from now,
which I think will be an interesting debate. And yeah, that's all for now, everyone. So take care.
Thanks, Keith.
