The History of Crisis in U.S. Education is long and storied, and you might hear that
there's a new one almost every week, but there are some decision moments that usually
get highlighted in survey courses on education, so let me summarize a few.
One is the Sputnik Crisis of the 1950s.
On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched the Earth's first artificial satellite to
orbit the Earth.
The satellite was named the Sputnik 1.
The fact that the Soviets were beating us in the space race with a satellite about the
size of a beach ball was enough to push national attention and a lot of funding towards education.
Money went towards improving science and mathematics education, building foreign language education,
and shifting attention towards using education as a tool for national competition.
This was a defining moment in the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union,
and a defining moment for education as a national agenda item as well.
Ever since the Sputnik Crisis, education has been identified as a national priority.
But the rhetoric of the education crisis really took hold in our national conversation during
the early 1980s with a publication by President Ronald Reagan's administration called A Nation
at Risk.
A Nation at Risk presented a scathing assessment of American education and made it clear that
lackluster education would not only jeopardize the United States' economic advantage but
would also make the U.S. vulnerable to a foreign attack.
The language of crisis in A Nation at Risk is not subtle.
It states, and I quote, if an unfriendly foreign power had attempted to impose on America the
mediocre educational performance that exists today, we might well have viewed it as an
act of war.
The report then builds on this Cold War language, stating that, we have in effect been committing
an act of unthinking unilateral educational disarmament.
This is a big part of the story about how the nation's educational system has gotten
blamed for so-called underperformance in every presidential administration since.
President Reagan made education a focal point for political and economic crisis, and also
a platform for further political and economic agendas.
Problem is that this crisis was not so much of a product of education as it was a product
of other economic, political, or social policies.
So instead of education being a solution, education in many ways became a scapegoat.
Over time, a nation at risk has been better understood in terms of its political context.
But at the time it came out, many Americans saw education as the problem more than the
solution to what ailed the country.
Taking education as a problem isn't wrong, and accountability for lackluster education
in the United States is something we should be addressing.
So my critique of a nation at risk is not that it was completely mistaken, so much as
that it was part of a larger political agenda.
Now, others have had harsher criticism for a nation at risk.
For example, a Cato Institute scholar has written that a nation at risk was flawed in
that it wrongly concluded that student achievement was declining, and placed the blame on schools
for national economic problems over which schools have relatively little influence.
And according to this view, the report also ignored the responsibility of the nation's
other social and economic institutions for learning.
This critique echoes the view that comparisons of national educational systems on the basis
of international test scores alone misses the mark.
National economic problems, for instance, which obviously influence education both directly
and indirectly, are something over which educators have little, if any, control.
Still, the United States has enjoyed some successes in educational reforms in the years
since a nation at risk was published.
For example, President Bill Clinton's administration made hundreds of millions of dollars in Title
I funds available to schools in impoverished communities, and $1.2 billion more available
to repair crumbling classrooms during the late 1990s.
Now, on the other hand, the rhetoric of standards, accountability, and performance testing prescribed
by a nation at risk, has gotten even more shrill since President Reagan's time.
For example, one, we might argue flawed policy prescription to come out of a nation at risk,
was to increase the number of school days in a year.
This followed the recognition that countries like Japan, which outscored Americans on International
Assessments of Educational Achievement, had more school days per week and more days per
year.
So, ambitious schools and school districts in the U.S. started lengthening the academic
calendar by adding more days to the roughly 180 days that U.S. schools already convened
each year.
And yet, research shows that longer school days and extra days added to the academic
calendar don't really produce a significant or a sustainable effect on student achievement
or student learning or teacher teaching.
In the broader scheme, the idea is that education is a national problem, and that it is also
a panacea for the problems that aile the United States, and this persists.
Eventually, to address this continuing perception that education is a solution in search of
a fix, the country adopted a policy called No Child Left Behind.
Now, technically, No Child Left Behind is a 2001 reauthorization of the Great Society
Era Elementary and Secondary Education Act that I just mentioned.
Now, it's worth noting that the continuing emphasis on improvement through the decades,
both implied and overt from all of these national agenda examples.
It's not concentrated on the arts or humanities.
It's squarely placed on the shoulders of what we call STEM education.
STEM is a summary of different kinds of education, specifically science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics.
Usually when we think of primary and secondary school, or the grades one through twelve in
the United States, we're focusing on science and mathematics mostly, but it does involve
some technology and engineering.
And one of the reasons why we focus on STEM so much is because it has been shown to be
a significant contributor to technological development, economic productivity, military
prowess, and political power.
Those communities or those nations or those regions that are good at STEM tend to be powerful
and they tend to have money.
Now, that is a reason why it's focused on a lot.
Innovation, entrepreneurship are aligned with or are assumed to be aligned with STEM education.
So, the implication is and has been and remains that America's schools and teachers are failing
to prepare future generations to take up the reins and be great.
It's feared that America won't have enough well-prepared new leaders to propel U.S. science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics forward for the sake of the country and the economy.
Crisis tends to trump contentment, but if we're going to be truly excellent educators
in a country that aspires to greatness, then we do need to push forward and improve our
education, STEM and otherwise.
John Holdren, the science advisor to President Obama, once said that America needs a world-class
STEM workforce to address the grand challenges of the 21st century.
Whatever those challenges might be, Mr. Holdren is correct.
We do need an excellent education system in the United States.
The problem is in trying to decide what that looks like and how we'll know it when we
see it, but we also face a considerable barrier.
This is because the United States is among the most decentralized nations in the world.
Like many other countries, the U.S. Constitution provides no mandate for educational provision
or opportunity.
The silence of the U.S. Constitution on education is in stark contrast even to the
constitutions of some countries that U.S. representatives helped draft.
Take for example Japan.
Article 26 of the Japanese Constitution states that all people shall have the right to receive
an equal education correspondent to their ability as provided for by law, and all people
shall be obliged to have all boys and girls under their protection receive ordinary education
as provided for by law.
Such compulsory education shall be free.
An even more detailed statement of educational responsibility comes from the German Constitution.
Article 7 of the German Constitution states, the entire education system is under the supervision
of the state.
This means that while each individual state in Germany has responsibility for education,
there is also a national statement of supervisory authority.
Germany also does something highly unique.
Its Constitution injects a right to religious instruction directly into its statements on
education, and it states that parents have the right to decide whether their children
receive religious instruction, and that religious instruction forms part of the ordinary curriculum
in state and municipal schools, accepting secular schools.
Furthermore, it states that the right to establish private schools is guaranteed by
the German Constitution, although private schools as a substitute for state or municipal
schools require the approval of the state and are subject to the laws of the German
state, the individual states within Germany.
Now, this is an important recognition of the fact that school and non-school factors are
at work in the educational systems of Japan and Germany.
By school factors, I am referring again to the tools available to educators and administrators,
like books, curricula, school rooms, policies, whereas non-school factors are the cultural
practices and norms and other larger external influences.
School factors we can adjust and we can manipulate, non-school factors it's much more difficult
to do so through educational reform.
So we see that parental choice over instruction that children receive is heavily influenced
by factors that are beyond the control of the educational system, especially when we
discuss something as personal or as culturally embedded as religious instruction.
Yet when we think about the quality and provision of education in the United States, we often
ignore variations among individual states and concentrate instead on national averages
in student performance.
And we do it on a grand scale by looking at international comparisons of student achievement
based on large-scale cross-national achievement test data.
And in many cases, that leads to comparisons without any acknowledgement of the important
role that non-school factors play in education.
So now I'm going to speak about some of the ways we can and quite frankly we do compare
the American educational system with schools and students in other countries.
The best known and the most referenced international assessments of education worldwide are known
as PISA, that's P-I-S-A, which stands for the Program for International Student Assessment.
And the TIMS, that's T-I-M-S-S, which stands for the Trends in International Mathematics
and Science Study.
PISA and TIMS are not only the most recognized markers of internationally-comparative educational
information quite frankly across the educational research community, they are also often cited
in media reports discussing how well U.S. education is doing compared to schooling in
other countries.
For our purposes today, I will focus on TIMS, which tracks the academic achievements in
mathematics and science of students in about 70 countries around the world.
You might have seen or heard about how well the U.S. is doing on TIMS relative to the
scores in other countries, even though you might not have known it.
The evidence suggests that American students consistently score above the average in biology,
for example, and that those scores improved during the 2000s to score above the average
in earth science as well.
But U.S. performance in chemistry and physics consistently lags behind the overall average,
the overall science average, even though it's steadily improving over time.
And those who put a lot of stock in ranking achievement scores often analyze rankings
like this in detail.
The fact of the matter is that there are three broad groups of national performance based
on student achievement on tests like TIMS or PISA.
Those three groups are very simply those that are significantly above the international
average, those that are significantly below the international average, and then the rest
of us.
So let me explain those three groups in a little more detail.
One of the advantages of having this large-scale information, this test data from 70-plus countries,
is that you can see how students are performing on those assessments and compare them to one
another.
But it also means that statistically speaking, we can find an average for the world's population
that has participated.
And there is a statistical way to calculate whether or not a country's average score
is likely to really be different from the mean, the average, or it's likely to really
be lower than the average.
It's called statistical significance.
It's an important thing for people like me who do research on this, and it's important
actually for the general public to understand, because there's a very narrow band at the
top and a very narrow band at the bottom.
And most of the countries that participate in these assessments really aren't, statistically
speaking, performing very differently from one another.
At the high end, tend to be countries that are very good at test-taking, and it's often
because they are education systems that ask their students to participate in tests on
a regular basis, and it helps them move through the system.
At the low end, tend to be countries that are more newly developing.
They might be younger countries.
They might have only recently received independence from another country in a post-colonial sense.
Or they might be countries that are underdeveloped.
Maybe they don't have a fully functioning educational system.
But for most of us, we're in the middle.
And it's the same in both math and science.
Countries that appear at the top of the rankings then generally get the most attention from
policy makers and others.
And these are the so-called model systems.
For example, at the top of the TIMS science achievement rankings are Singapore, South
Korea and Finland.
The teacher preparation, the curriculum and classroom teaching methods in these countries
are examined in detail by researchers, usually in the hopes that their research and findings
will somehow influence educational policy and practice, that will find some tidbit of
information that we didn't know before.
Singapore, South Korea and Finland have each become relatively famous for particular characteristics
of their educational systems that policy makers or educational reformers or even the media
worldwide seem to admire.
Singaporean and Finnish teachers have gotten a lot of attention because of the rigorous
and standards-driven way that they are trained and certified.
The emphasis being on experts' content area and pedagogy.
And there are numerous studies and programs that have been developed using examples from
these countries to purportedly strengthen teachers as well.
And even after the Finnish started doing well on internationally comparative tests like
TIMS and PISA, the reforms they promoted were carefully examined and shown to promote equitable
educational access and opportunity rather than a tracking or an ability stream system
of internal competition.
So the Finnish culture of education has now come to be known as equity-based because of
that.
In Singapore and Korea by comparison, education and teachers are highlighted for the culture
of respect that they command.
The status of teachers is relatively higher in Singapore and Korea than it is in most
other countries.
And third, each of these model systems in Finland, Singapore and Korea have had their
curriculums scrutinized and it's been shown that their classrooms are subjected to more
focus and less repetition than in classrooms in other countries.
Now, Bill Schmidt, who is a professor and co-director of Michigan State's Education
Policy Center, has referred to the United States system as being a mile wide and an
inch deep, whereas the curriculum in Singapore, Korea and Finland is more focused and more
cumulative.
Now, let me explain what that means.
In countries where the curriculum is a mile wide, like in the United States, the curriculum
is rather shallow, meaning that if we were to go into an 8th grade classroom and to look
at what the science curriculum is, it might cover many different topics, but only to a
small degree.
In other words, there wouldn't be any one topic where it was delved into and followed
through maybe even beyond the intermediate level to the advanced level.
Instead, we would find a lot of different topics arranged.
There would be an expectation that U.S. students would know a lot, but only a little about
each of those.
Whereas in Singapore or Finland or Korea, the expectation is, and the evidence that
Bill Schmidt has gathered, is that they go much more deep into one particular topic and
they ignore the others.
Not that they wouldn't get it later, but they focus.
Now, if I were simply going to tell you how to fix education by summarizing what Singapore,
Korea and Finland do right in education, I would tell you that education can be fixed
with the four following steps.
One, we could prepare teachers who are experts in their content and pedagogical techniques
through highly selective, standards-driven, apprenticeship-oriented national teacher preparation
programs.
This is what we would take from the Singaporean and Finnish teacher education models.
They have high standards for their teachers.
They are highly selective and they have very accomplished apprenticeship systems where
teachers are matched with students and they are given a long time to work together.
Secondly, I would raise the status of teachers through standards-based preparation and I'd
shift salary and other professional status indicators up.
The third thing I would say to do if we were going to fix our problems is to focus students
on a few topics deeply rather than many topics superficially and repetitively.
That would be key because that's when student performance seems the highest.
It's called Aligning Curriculum and Classroom Practice and it is key because performance
seems highest when students focus on a few topics deeply rather than many topics superficially
and repetitively.
And then finally, I would say that solving equity issues by leveling the educational
playing field will improve education because it values both the context and the individual.
So all of these approaches have demonstrated evidence that they work in Singapore, in Korea,
and Finland based on TIMS, PISA, and other international education evidence.
But they aren't all good fits all of the time for education in other countries and
community contexts.
Because the key to learning from international comparisons is to understand which school
and non-school factors align to make good things happen in any particular context.
And unfortunately, the four fixes for education based on the examples in Singapore, Korea,
and Finland make a lot of assumptions that might not work in contexts outside of Singapore,
Korea, or Finland.
And if that's the case, are we finished?
Is it so context dependent that we can't take any lessons from those countries?
Do we just say that it was interesting to learn about, but now we'll go back and keep
repeating the same old reforms and methods we've been using for decades?
Well, I hope not.
I would say no, of course not.
Listen, external comparisons are helpful, but are they as helpful as internal comparisons?
Let me explain what that means for a second, and I'll use a personal example.
My daughter is about to turn 16.
That is when you get your driver's license in my state.
If she goes and takes her driver's exam, there is a criteria, a standard that she has to
meet.
That is very important.
And for her, that is a kind of external comparison.
That's true.
And she'll have to meet that standard in order to get her driver's license.
But a better way, perhaps, to see how well she's doing is to have her compare how she
does on that test one time versus how she does on a driver's exam the next time.
In other words, if she compares internally, she's going to get a better understanding
of what it is to compare herself with others.
And if she compares herself to, let's say, an expert driver, like a race car driver or
a bus driver or someone like that, it's going to be very different.
Well, the same thing is true when we're comparing educational systems.
We can compare as an educational system our own country and our own student performance
and our own teacher's teaching to what happens in other countries.
So if I'm in the United States, I can compare how we're doing to Canada or to one of those
excellent countries, Singapore or Korea or Finland.
But perhaps a better way of doing it would be to see, how are we doing around the United
States?
Let's start with some of the natural breaks.
How are the students in one state, like Pennsylvania, doing with students in another state, like
Oklahoma?
That would give us some interesting information that we might not have otherwise.
Now, the research that I've conducted suggests that taking policies and programs from other
high-performing countries is not a remedy for education in other systems.
But that, instead, those systems that focus on internal comparisons across content and
cognitive domains, the what and the how of learning, are the most effective reformers.
But another way of saying this is that it's important to examine what we learn in the context
of how we learn.
So if I were to take a second just to tell you briefly about content versus cognitive
domains, again, the content is what we learn.
In science, it could be biology or earth science or chemistry or physics.
The cognitive domains are how we learn.
This is very similar to Bloom's taxonomy, where we look at levels of learning.
The most basic would be knowing something.
I memorized it.
I can repeat it.
The next step would be reasoning.
I can take some information and use it.
Another step would be applying.
I can apply this to a unique situation, and I can take new information and come up with
a solution.
But the key is a balance across those content and those cognitive domains.
National educational systems, where there's the least variation across content and cognitive
domains, tend to have the highest performing or the most rapidly gaining systems.
Consider this example of eighth grade science cognitive domain scale scores from TIMS, that's
the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, from 2011.
If we compare the overall scores in science, we can see how national average student performance
in each of the cognitive domains compares to the country's own average overall score.
Focusing on strengths and weaknesses can be more targeted this way.
For example, in the United States, evidence shows that students perform at relatively
consistent levels in science.
American students tend to be stronger in knowing, relatively stable in reasoning, but slightly
weaker in applying science.
If we were to look at the data that suggests American students consistently score above
the mean in biology and earth sciences, but below in chemistry and physics, and try to
make policy and practice recommendations based on that, we could say reasonably for the United
States that improved teacher preparation and expertise in chemistry and physics could
improve student learning and performance in these areas.
The important thing is that if we target what teachers are learning, and we target on the
areas where we know there is demonstrated weakness in our students' performance, that
would improve overall learning.
Secondly, more focused curricula in chemistry and physics lessons could improve student
learning and performance.
Now remember, if we are diving more deeply into a concept, if we are going for the focus
curriculum rather than the shallow or superficial curriculum, then we're going to have more
understanding among students, and we're going to have them be able to put all of their energy
into that one area, bring interdisciplinary learning, they can bring math and science
and language and history all into learning that one topic as deeply as possible.
Three, if we're equalizing opportunities for advanced chemistry and physics learning,
then that would improve demonstrated student performance, because we want to make sure that
both boys and girls, or both wealthy and less wealthy, or whatever groups that you want
to compare, let's say take advanced chemistry and physics together rather than only one
group taking it.
We want to balance across our communities within our schools.
In other words, we can take evidence about what the highest performing educational systems
do.
We can match it to unique information about the needs, the context, and the characteristics
of education in any country or national education system.
We can use that to make useful policy and practice recommendations that align school
and non-school factors within each unique country context.
In the examples of potential reform ideas I just explained, the prospective reforms
each try to improve non-school factors within the school context by reducing inequality or
by adjusting for strengths and weaknesses in understanding that are solved by simply
raising standards or increasing the amount of information teachers teach and students
are asked to learn.
Raising standards and expanding the curriculum are typical crisis responses.
But as I pointed out at the beginning of this lecture, a culture of crisis puts us at something
of a disadvantage when it comes to using internationally comparative education information.
That is because crisis cultures panic, and panic leads to reform and change simply for
the sake of reform and change, not targeted and real reform that's aimed at improvement.
To achieve our educational aims, we spend a lot of time trying to manipulate school factors.
Those are the influence that have to do with curriculum and resources, teachers, and teaching
methods.
And we spend far less time thinking about how the non-school factors that contextualize
education within our own system and in what we can call comparison countries work to influence
teaching and learning.
In most countries, broadly speaking, not just our own, the education culture is driven by
crisis, but our responses don't have to be.
So the next time someone asks you how we can fix our failing education system, remind them
that while there is always room for improvement, aligning school and non-school factors within
a community or a country's unique context really is the key.
Listen, if Finland and South Korea can take different paths to educational prowess, so
too can the United States.
