Lecture 4 Evidence-Based Policy Making in Education
Two of the highest-scoring countries on international tests of educational achievement are Finland
and South Korea, yet they have two of the world's most different approaches to education.
Finland has an educational system that is low stakes, meaning that all of its students
have more or less equal access to the education system, and testing, especially standardized
testing, is infrequent.
South Korea, on the other hand, is a high-stakes system, where a student's placement on certain
early tests likely will have a large bearing on his or her life and on his or her career
path as well.
As a result, a private tutoring network has sprung up in South Korea as a shadow education
system, and it's not available to everyone.
The fact, though, that both Finland and Korea do very well on the standardized student tests
that so many nations use to compare their youth and our future leaders to other students
around the world, tells us that despite extremes in any one country's approach to education,
there is not a universal formula that will produce reliable outcomes in the global campaign
to produce high achievement.
I believe that student learning and performance are highly dependent on the culture and context
of each country's education system.
So this brings us to the central theme of this lecture, evidence-based decision-making.
The rise in the use of scientific evidence for educational policymaking rests on two
common beliefs.
One is the belief that school knowledge is abstract and universal, while the other is
the belief that empirical evidence is an efficient indicator of knowledge and learning.
And as a result, evidence presents serious educational policymaking consequences for individuals
and for schools alike.
In particular, the average scores on international assessments of math and science achievement
can be correlated with other indicators of national political and economic strength.
Sometimes we learn what we need to know by gathering data on the world's education system
and then applying the analysis that's required to interpret it.
But data can be misleading, particularly if we ask the wrong questions or misinterpret
the evidence.
As Ronald Reagan once said, facts are stupid things.
Now he was misquoting John Adams, but to Reagan's credit, he quickly corrected himself and
said facts are stubborn things.
And that is something I think we can all agree with.
They certainly are.
Either way, whether stupid or stubborn, data is a big concern to us in the world of education
because policy frameworks depend on it.
And not surprisingly, so does a lot of school funding.
But the policy and funding framework, beyond the policy and funding framework, there's
the issue of data being employed to validate or legitimize people, policies, and even entire
nations in the global education debate.
And beyond all of this, there's a closely related problem that usually is not even acknowledged
much less addressed in the education space.
And that is that we now produce so much data, usually in the form of quantitative or numbers-based
information, some of it completely irrelevant, some of it incorrect, that nobody has the
ability to sift through it all.
Quite frequently, all of that data, which offers both good and sometimes bad answers
to problems, sits around waiting to be analyzed and interpreted, or for insights that are
never realized.
Literally, sometimes this information just sits on a shelf somewhere.
But we care about education because we believe it is important for success, for development
and progress, both for the individual and for the broader society and nation.
After World War II, the education of children everywhere became a broadly shared objective
in nations around the world.
And this led to an unprecedented emphasis by parents and by policy makers on ensuring
primary and secondary education for all school-aged children.
And that was an objective that was formally limited to developed nations only.
Now part of the reason for this emphasis was an old-fashioned sense of paternalism.
Another less altruistic reason was the recognition that educated peoples tend to be more economically
and politically stable.
So national governments, education policy makers, and in particular development organizations
became more determined to deliver meaningful primary and secondary education.
And in the decades to follow, policy makers became particularly focused on quantitative
standards.
In this way, evidence-based educational policy making has become a global phenomenon.
Specifically, student achievement scores on standardized tests have become increasingly
relevant to educational decision and policy making, especially as international competition
in science, technology and politics increases.
To investigate the uses of evidence for educational policy making, I ask two fundamental questions.
Why use evidence in educational policy making?
And why is evidence-based educational policy making a worldwide phenomenon?
Now the answer to the first question, why use evidence in educational policy making, serves
as a foundation for exploring the motivations and agendas that drive our insatiable need
for data to inform educational policy and decision making.
The answer to the second question, why is evidence-based educational policy making a
worldwide phenomenon, offers a glimpse of the scope of evidence-based policy making
and some reasons why it has gained significance among policy makers around the world.
As a social scientist, I have to bring up some of the limitations and boundaries that
this course carries with it.
For instance, you may have noticed, I am a white American middle class male.
And although I do my best to be as objective and evidence-based as possible, my perspective
is always going to be shaped by my own identity and experiences as the person I am.
So if you were getting this same content from, for example, a black South African working
class female, you would probably notice significant differences in content emphasis and interpretation.
And I know that this may seem obvious, but it's important to recognize upfront so that
we are all clear on the limitations and perspective that my identity and experiences bring.
You should also think about your own identity and biases, because only half of the equation
is the content I bring to you.
The other half is what you do with it.
And that means that your own race, your own ethnicity, socioeconomic status, citizenship
and gender could play a significant role in what you hear me say and how you interpret
it.
A decidedly U.S. and American perspective flows through this course because I am American.
But a more purposeful reason for this U.S. American perspective is that while nearly
all the countries around the world are reforming their education systems, the United States
seems to be at the forefront of comparison and reform in just about every era.
And for that reason, approaching the topic of how the world learns from an American perspective
does actually give us an advantage, both in understanding what's going on in education
worldwide and also in critiquing and interpreting it.
Now I said a little earlier that evidence-based solutions to educational problems worldwide
have increased in scope and authority.
And as the stakes for education have risen, so has the call for more and improved use
of scientific evidence as a basis for educational policymaking.
The drive to quantify evidence indicators in education really began in earnest during
the new deal of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and then grew dramatically in scope two decades
later during the Great Society campaign of President Lyndon B. Johnson.
Now Johnson himself was a one-time school teacher who taught in an extremely poor, predominantly
Hispanic part of South Texas.
And for all of his excesses and expressions of power when he entered the White House,
Johnson had demonstrated such a belief in and fierce commitment to the impoverished Spanish-speaking
students he attended to immediately after the Great Depression that when he finally
achieved real power, he used it for education.
The biggest contribution President Johnson made to evidentiary-based decision-making
in education was this.
With little fanfare, his administration released a two-volume report on July 2, 1966.
It was titled Equality of Educational Opportunity and popularly known as the Coleman Report.
It's now widely regarded as one of the most important and really the first large-scale
evidence-based investigations of education in the 20th century.
Now this report is popularly called the Coleman Report because it's named for the American
sociologist James Coleman who led the study.
The Coleman Report suggested that family and peer influences, rather than school resources,
are what really determine student performance.
Now this evidence changed the course of educational policy-making in the United States and abroad.
Here's some of the backstory.
President Johnson commissioned the study and the resulting report as part of his strategy
to address civil rights in the United States.
But first, he had to identify evidence of inequality in schooling.
In particular, Johnson wanted to know which inequalities most affected student achievement.
So in 1964, during the height of the civil rights era, Congress asked the U.S. Commissioner
of Education to examine the lack of availability of equal education opportunities for individuals
by reason of race, color, religion, or national origin.
Johnson and his administration thought that fixing school inequality would be relatively
straightforward because the government could just pour more resources, in other words money,
into low socioeconomic status or poor performing schools.
This prediction did not develop as originally thought.
James Coleman, who was a professor of sociology at Johns Hopkins University, undertook an
unprecedented nationwide survey of education in the United States and collected national
data on approximately 600,000 students, 60,000 teachers, and 4,000 public schools.
It's absolutely amazing that this took place before the era of frequent and centrally coordinated
data collection like we have today.
Each state, district, and school, at that time anyway, had its own ways of keeping records,
which varied quite a bit from one place to another in terms of quality, scope, and type
of data.
So the importance of gathering and comparatively analyzing national education data became a
key lesson resulting from this study.
This team used this first-of-its-kind data set to relate family background characteristics
like race and ethnicity and socioeconomic status with school equity variables like whether
a school was racially integrated to student outcomes like test scores and attitudes about
higher education.
Perhaps not surprisingly, Coleman found that U.S. schools were deeply segregated and that
inequalities existed within schools as well as between them.
What was a surprise, though, was that Coleman found that student test outcomes were unrelated
to the usual school factors, for example, the quality of school facilities or programs
or teachers.
Instead, improvements in academic results among minority children were significantly
linked to the composition of the student body, which was measured by the proportion
of students with encyclopedias in their home and a proportion with high aspirations.
In other words, Coleman was one of the first people to find, using data, that non-school
factors were as good or better at predicting student success, especially among disadvantaged
and minority children, as were school factors.
That is an enormous finding and it supports, fortunately for me, my thesis that aligning
school and non-school factors is the most effective way to make improvements in education
policy and practice.
A second key outcome of this study is that Coleman was the first to bring large-scale
data to bear on educational policy.
Without the experience of the Coleman report and the effect that it had on civil rights
policies related to education, we might not have come to use evidence to make educational
decisions in the United States and around the world, as has since become customary.
But using this large-scale data for making educational decisions isn't simple.
In fact, it's quite complex.
For example, Coleman's team failed to find some things that their study was actually
designed to look for.
Instead of providing evidence that the quality of schools is the most important factor for
a student's academic success, as its sponsors expected, the report showed that a child's
family background and a school community's socioeconomic makeup were the best predictors
of student achievement.
In other words, the evidence was messy.
Resources alone were not the problem with educational inequality.
But we did learn that data could be used to address political agendas and make educational
policy and practical decisions and be collected and analyzed in a systematic way.
Despite its record of success, the Coleman report's remarkable accomplishment at introducing
data into the education debate in the United States is a principal reason why education
policy today is heavily dependent on evidence-based decision making.
So much so that educational policymaking around the world has become permeated with the tendency
to validate and legitimize educational processes and products by calling them evidence-based.
It's a magic term now.
In fact, it's almost taken for granted that policymakers were based their decisions on
evidence rather than on intuition or belief.
Now sometimes we might be better off applying a little more common sense based on grounded
beliefs along with analyses of the data.
So let's pause here for a moment to think about what we know from the Coleman report
about how to use evidence in making educational decisions.
First, we know that there is a complex blend of agenda and evidence that goes into making
educational decision making.
Our example of President Johnson's civil rights agenda and the Coleman report's findings
show us how that can work.
Second, we know that there is value in the systematic collection and coordinated analysis
of educational data for making decisions about educational policy and practice.
In the Coleman report example, we saw that although the Johnson administration's perspective
was that equalizing school factors could alleviate educational inequality, the evidence showed
that this was not necessarily the case.
And third, we know that a consideration of school and non-school factors is necessary
to make informed decisions about educational policy and practice.
Of course, if it were as simple as collecting data and then looking at what the data says
to make decisions, we wouldn't be having a discussion about how to use evidence in
educational decision making.
So let's take a few minutes to talk about how educational data are used and sometimes
misused to make education policy and to shape what teachers and students do in classrooms.
Evidence-based educational decision making and policy implementation often depend on
assessments of what works.
Now what works is also sometimes called best practices.
And it's a policy-making rationale that is a mix of individualized and agenda-driven
educational policy decisions and reforms.
These policy-making efforts are frequently based on exceptional cases that represent
what some people think success looks like in education, which quite frankly is usually
just measured as student achievement gains.
Best practices evidence is often quantitative, or in other words, numerical data, as a result
of its reliance on student achievement scores to document success.
And there are a few important problems with best practices evidence.
So let's talk about those.
One problem is that policy-making resulting from best practices evidence often focuses
only on what works in specific situations or with unique communities.
Sometimes this approach does not address the intervening variables that might prevent what
works in one context from having the same positive effect in other contexts.
The best practices approach in educational policy-making is far from the original evidence-based
research tradition that began, let's say, for example, in the field of medical research.
And the reason why is that education is a social phenomenon.
This means that the factors or variables affecting education are the result of a complex combination
of school and non-school factors.
In medical or natural science laboratories, it's possible to control for all of the mediating
variables.
That is not the case in a school or a classroom.
Every student, teacher or administrator that enters a school has a unique set of conditions
that influence her or his behavior and performance.
And these factors can change from day to day or, quite frankly, even from hour to hour.
In a medical or a laboratory situation, it is crucial to control for factors other than
the ones being tested so that the effect of a particular treatment can be isolated.
Now it's important to isolate the effects of particular treatments or programs or interventions
in schools and classrooms because the intervening or mediating variables can never be completely
controlled and they change in ways that are not always predictable.
Because of the nature of educational data, some have suggested that although basing
educational policy-making on scientific evidence might be a good idea in theory, its implementation
and rigor are, let's be honest, lacking.
And those holding this viewpoint call for a further examination of the rationale and
goals of evidence-based educational policy-making.
In my experience, best practices approaches are rarely the best for more than a handful
of schools or situations.
But using evidence to inform decision-making almost always leads to improved practice and
more relevant policies.
Perhaps others have had similar experiences because evidence-based educational policy-making
is the most frequently reported method used by politicians and policymakers.
In other words, those who really have the authority to make decisions about education
and educational policy-making.
Now the reasons often have to do as much with legitimacy seeking as with the actual evidence.
Policy seeking means that policymakers seek approval for what they're doing from their
individual and institutional peers and they often justify that with evidence.
Social expectations are pretty ingrained in most of us when it comes to education.
For example, we all have an expectation for what a teacher does or should do.
If a teacher doesn't do what we expect a teacher to do, then the teacher loses legitimacy.
Some of our expectations are based on what we've experienced before.
If you have children, you probably think about your child's teachers compared to your experiences
with teachers when you were a student.
If your experience with teachers was formal and strict, then you might be skeptical of
teachers who you think are too friendly or not strict enough with students.
Or if you think that intelligence tests are valid because teams of experts have developed
them after decades of research, you might be surprised to find that some of the smartest
people you know probably don't score as well as you thought on intelligence tests.
For example, a few years ago, the mayor of London at the time, Boris Johnson, became
something of a public joke because he failed a simple IQ test on live radio after making
some rather disparaging comments about people who score below the average IQ.
Although this is probably a good example of karma or the old saying that what goes around
comes around, the fact that he failed the simple IQ test was doubly surprising to many, especially
given his elite educational background and his reputation as an intelligent person.
In other words, the legitimacy of IQ tests and the relevance of a world-class education
were both thrown into question, and in this case, the legitimacy of the tests quite frankly
won out.
The point is that the legitimacy of quantitative evidence for making educational decisions
has become taken for granted by policymakers and the public alike, but this can be taken
to the extreme.
Some people might say that in spite of the recent emphasis on evidence-based scientific
research on education, policymakers demand data to back up their ideas.
Sometimes this is not so much for the scientific rigor and clarity that data can bring to a
situation, but instead for the legitimacy that it provides.
As a result, decision-making methods that garner legitimacy for the individual policymaker
and the educational system that are represented are commonly introduced by policymakers and
then implemented in schools.
In education, the measurability of student achievement scores usually seems clearer and
more understandable to the public and to policymakers than does learning potential
or the transferability of ideas, which can be measured with less quantitative instruments
for methods.
And there's little doubt that the most popular reason for using evidence as a basis for policymaking
is that evidence provides an indicator of how much someone has learned or how much impact
a certain educational technique has on students.
At the state and national levels, test results are increasingly tied to funding, and funding
has become a vital policymaking affirmation for school systems in every state.
Although only a small percentage of school budgets in the United States actually comes
from the federal government, at least compared to what comes from state and local taxes,
this small percentage is still a large and highly significant amount of money.
Without it, most schools would be unable to operate because they would fall short of their
budgetary requirements.
This has become especially true in the United States during the era of no child left behind
because of an accountability standard called adequate yearly progress.
Now adequate yearly progress, which is sometimes called simply AYP, is required by Congress's
No Child Left Behind Act and describes the amount of yearly improvement that each school
and district is expected to make.
Although states can decide how AYP will be measured, whatever measure they decide on
is reported to the U.S. Department of Education.
Usually it is measured as progress or improvement in student achievement on a state-administered
standardized test, and as a result, adequate yearly progress is tied to federal funding
and state and school reputations.
Furthermore, because the U.S. Department of Education has the responsibility for evaluating
the education performance of schools and states, the department can and does use test performance
as a means to control the curriculum schools adopt and the content the teachers teach and
other components of schooling.
While the No Child Left Behind Law of 2001 is simply the current version of legislation
originally adopted in 1965 as the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, the point of
the current version is to ensure that the students in all schools and districts, including
low-achieving children, meet high performance goals.
Few educators and parents would disagree with this objective, but standardized tests were
assumed to be the only way to measure student performance, and that caught several states'
school systems off guard.
Quite frankly, it continues to be highly contested.
For example, one state, Virginia, had many of its best schools declared as failing because
students in those schools did not show a significant rise in scores on the state test
during one year cycle.
And in some of these failing schools, the reason was because of flawed interpretation of the
evidence.
Many schools there were already performing very well, and it was difficult to improve
scores when students are already performing at high levels.
Another reason was because many schools in the state served large groups of special-needs
students who couldn't perform on the test as well as their mainstream peers.
Regardless of the reason, many of these schools lost significant federal funding because of
their inability to show adequate yearly progress.
Afterwards, many states wisened up and began to adjust their testing programs so that they
could show AYP every year.
This manipulation of the evidence for educational policymaking was unfortunately not the solution
that most reformers who backed No Child Left Behind had hoped for, and it undermined the
control that national-level educational policymakers had.
So I began this lecture by asking two fundamental questions.
Why use evidence in educational policymaking?
And why is evidence-based educational policymaking a global phenomenon?
The goals of using evidence for policymaking both in the United States and around the world
are to gauge quality, create equality, and establish control over schooling.
When the point of evidence for policymaking is quality, then students directly benefit
and the larger community benefits indirectly.
When the point of evidence for policymaking is to create equality, then students and communities
alike benefit directly because a more even distribution of knowledge empowered is then
likely to be shared throughout the society.
And when the point of evidence for policymaking is to control schooling, then the people,
organizations or groups who administer assessments and evaluate their results are the likely beneficiaries
because they're the ones who can then dictate what goes on in schools based on the evidence
and their own agenda.
