Lecture 8 Germany and Japan's Shattered Expectations
Indonesia is in the process of moving about 5 million secondary school-aged children into
vocational education programs.
They're doing this to help them prepare for the future and eventually move them into
jobs that government leaders hope will grow the country's economy.
The nationwide effort encompasses about 7% of the country's 67.5 million youth under
the age of 15.
It's based on the very real incentive, or stick, that without a better educated, better
qualified workforce, Indonesian companies will struggle to fill even half of their entry
level positions with qualified candidates by the end of the decade.
This dismal forecast is based on traditionally low school enrollment rates in this developing
southeastern Asian nation, as well as on the country's unfortunately substandard schools.
Meanwhile, a leading Washington think tank recently estimated that the United States
could see a $10 trillion cumulative increase in gross domestic product by 2050 if it were
to raise the math and science skills of its 15-year-olds to levels comparable with those
of Canadian youths.
Now, as promising as that forecast might appear, it's unlikely we will see incentives put
in place anytime soon to achieve such an ambitious objective.
So what explains such dramatically different responses by the United States and countries
like Indonesia to perceived educational and economic crises?
The incentives, or the carats, are essentially the same.
There's the belief that better education leads to higher economic productivity and increased
earnings power and reduced social ills.
The sticks are also the same.
Substandard scores on the same international tests of student achievement, signaling a lack
of competitiveness or potential inability to employ a generation of youth or even out-compete
neighboring countries.
One of the most important international benchmarks of student learning is the PISA, or Program
for International Student Assessment.
Once every three years, it assesses the reading, mathematics, and science skills of about 28
million 15-year-olds.
Students from randomly selected schools take a two-hour test that is based on a combination
of multiple choice and open-ended questions.
Now this sounds like a typical standardized test, but the exams are considered unique
and particularly effective because they're designed to assess what students know and can
apply in their own lives rather than being based on a specific school curriculum.
PISA was launched in 1997 by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
or the OECD, which is an international policy forum based in Paris.
The United States and many Western European countries form the core membership of this
organization, but Indonesia is not an OECD member state.
Still, it does work closely with the organization, and Indonesia is among very few countries
that made significant improvements in average student PISA performance last decade.
Now by no means are PISA assessments fail-safe or absolute proof of anything, but they are
taken quite seriously by most participating systems.
Now consider the following headlines from recent assessments.
The Australian News in Sydney, which is the country's number one news portal and reaches
about 3.7 million Australians, reported with alarm after recent PISA test results found
that the scores of Australian teenagers were the worst that they've seen in 10 years.
France's international news agency, the Asians France Press,
reported French falling behind in math.
And a headline in the United Kingdom's Guardian newspaper reported
UK students stuck in educational doldrums.
While Brazil's journal Brazil lamented,
despite advances in education, Brazil occupies the lowest position in PISA.
And in Toronto, the Globe and Mail reported,
Canada's fall in math education ranking sets off alarm bells.
So we can see that extreme and shocking news makes for a good story.
But the more substantive issue is,
what does this information contribute to discussions about education reform and improvement?
It used to be argued that education was important because it embodies culture
and is a way to ensure the survival of particular civilizations and cultures.
For example, in the late 1980s,
E.D. Hearst Jr. published a book called Cultural Literacy,
What Every American Needs to Know, where he argued that education taught
essential cultural information and without it, Americans wouldn't know what their culture was.
But nowadays, the debate is almost always about economics and competitive advantage.
What hasn't changed are national expectations that education is important
and that it is important for student populations to perform well on measures of educational prowess.
The United States, for instance, regularly scores somewhere below the middle of the pack
in international assessments of student achievement.
And as a result, U.S. education policy is caught up most of the time
in a constant cycle of shock and crisis related to education performance and opportunity.
Even so, the United States manages to top the economic and political power indicators
decade after decade, in spite of this malaise in which its educational system
and the policy levers around it appear to be stuck.
But not every country can afford to be complacent.
For example, Indonesia's Vocational Education Initiative is part of that country's orchestrated
response to the very low PISA scores it recorded early last decade.
More broadly, one of the most visible responses to international comparisons of education
is something that came to be known as the headlines reflect as PISA shock.
Of all the examples of PISA shock,
Germany is the best known for its response to student testing results on the PISA assessments
after its first participation in 2000.
Germany's middle of the pack performance wasn't too bad, considering the benefit of hindsight.
But the fact that it wasn't at the very top of the scale is what shocked German educators
and the German public more than the middling score itself.
Japan had its own version of PISA shock after its reading achievement test scores declined
between 2000 and 2003, and then again after it dropped in math achievement between 2003 and 2006.
This shows us that PISA assessments have become more than simple educational checkups.
They have come to signify all that is either right or wrong with national educational systems
and are sometimes revelatory of what we might perceive as more general national weaknesses.
In countries that perform below expectations, parents and policymakers tend to be the most
concerned because they feel they are most at risk, and their responses tend to be centralized.
Even if, as with Indonesian's vocational initiative, the resulting policy is pushed out
to the local schools and districts.
The second way that countries tend to respond to shortfalls on international tests of student
performance is through converging evidence approaches, such as Japan's push to conduct
research and make data-driven decisions about learning and performance.
Converging evidence refers to the principle that evidence from independent, unrelated sources
can converge to form strong conclusions.
And then, of course, there's a third response to substandard performance,
which is the relative non-response of countries such as the United States.
We tend to ignore PISA results, even when those results show high levels of poor performance.
Because PISA data are standard and quantifiable across countries, the assessment is considered
a legitimate evidence base for educational policy setting and reform.
And since policymaking is frequently a product of diplomacy, as much as or more so than coercion,
PISA results become an effective policy mechanism on the agendas of many national policy makers
and education systems.
These policy initiatives typically take one of three forms.
Specifically, they include implementing educational standards and accountability,
monitoring and evaluating educational equity, and improving teacher quality.
Now, this final example of improving teacher quality is a policy favorite.
Teaching, as the largest white-collar profession in most societies worldwide,
is, along with teacher quality, a perennial focus of educational reform and accountability.
So it's not shocking that education reform is one of the most important outcomes of PISA,
or really any large-scale international assessment, for that matter.
But let's examine how expectations get shattered in the first place.
The media, for one, play a big role in both creating the expectations,
as well as highlighting the gaps when expectations aren't met.
Initial reports describing international tests make mainstream media outlets such as newspapers,
television news, talk shows, and internet news and blogs.
The British media response to the country's PISA 2006 scores is representative.
The United Kingdom's PISA results were covered by the tabloid press,
as well as by mainstream newspapers, including extensive coverage of their results
by such highly respected international news sources as the Financial Times and others.
And such coverage means that the country's comparative educational performance
is broadly disseminated and can take a decidedly political turn.
Another newspaper, the British Evening Standard,
bluntly commented on the UK's PISA scores with this headline,
billion spent on education, but British schools slump in the World League.
Germany's belief that its education was superior, and the reality that it wasn't,
at least according to PISA, offers an even more startling study in contrast.
The shock that comes from shattered expectations for a nation's education system
often results simply from making the information public.
In Germany, two researchers by the names of Michelle Stack and Kirsten Martins
at the University of Bremen looked at the type and frequency of news coverage
related to international PISA results by focusing on one major daily newspaper
from each of several participating countries during the period between 2001 and 2008.
News coverage is generally a good way to gauge the degree to which the public
is aware of any phenomenon, but especially where the database results
might otherwise be too specialized for public interpretation.
The results of the University of Bremen study were quite interesting, actually.
Among all countries participating in PISA, Germany led the pack with about 250 PISA-related
news articles during that surveyed time period, while in the United States, by contrast,
virtually no news coverage was found that directly referenced PISA.
The researchers point out that Germans always tacitly assumed that they led the world in education,
only to discover that they fared somewhere in the middle of the pack instead.
So the attention that Germany's PISA results drew has become famous among international
assessment researchers and policymakers because it was an extreme
overreaction to what other countries would have considered a relatively good performance.
But reactions to PISA have increasingly become a phenomenon all by themselves.
For example, Finland, along with Poland, Japan and Indonesia, are each examples of PISA test
strong performers and successful reformers, at least according to the OECD or the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development. Among high performers, Finland sits at the top of the PISA
rankings. Finnish educators and policymakers expressed surprise at the ways in which the
international assessments launched them into the spotlight more than a decade ago.
That's been pointed out by many researchers, including Sotira Grek,
a research fellow at the Center for Educational Sociology at the University of Edinburgh.
Now she quotes some Finnish educational researchers as saying,
at a single stroke, PISA has transformed our conceptions of the quality of the work done
at our comprehensive school and of the foundations it has laid for Finland's future civilization
and development of knowledge. Yet the importance of Finland's teachers
to the country's school system has also become a model for other countries in terms of the
individual attention teachers provide students, the autonomy enjoyed by teachers in selecting
textbooks and evaluating students' performance, and the high status of teachers in Finnish society
in general. Pasi Solberg, who served as a high-ranking official in the Finnish Ministry
of Education and Culture, says there are seven things we need to know about teaching in Finland.
One, it is the most popular profession, five teaching applicants for every job.
Second, teachers have a strong social mission. Also, teaching in Finland requires a master's
level education. Finnish teachers have less classroom time and more time for reflection
and preparation. Finnish teachers have relative professional autonomy.
And principles are teachers. And then finally, parents trust schools.
Now, it's also worth noting that Finnish schools have no formal teacher evaluation process,
no merit pay, no census-based standardized tests, and no ranking of schools.
In short, Finland empowers high quality teaching by attracting the most capable individuals who
are committed to the profession. It then retains teachers in their jobs by maintaining respectful
and inspiring professional conditions for them. Pasi Solberg, the Ministry of Education official,
says that PISA results show that the strongest international performers
typically have the least variation between schools, but also relatively high levels
of student variation within schools. He says this reflects policies of inclusion
and attempts to ensure system-wide equity in education.
Poland, which first had to break with its decades of domination by the former Soviet Union
and communist government rule, is among 13 countries that have showed improvements in
its average performance on PISA tests since 2000. The main sources of these improvements
come from two sources in particular. One is the development of competencies
among the lowest-performing students, and the other is the development of competencies
among girls in particular. You see, the key that Poland discovered was that most of its students
fell within the upper distribution of student performance, but there was an important dichotomy
in that distribution. Some or most Polish students performed in the upper range of PISA,
yet the country also produced a significant group at the bottom of the performance distribution
that scored far below average. And because this lower group pulled down the country's average score,
Poland's educators and policymakers wisely discovered that if they focused on the lowest
performing students, they could then raise the country's overall average.
In a similar vein, Poland's decision to focus on the development of female students' competencies
was strategic. Poland's student female population is significant, often constituting
the majority of students who continue on to the highest levels of secondary school,
especially compared to boys who tend to leave school earlier on average.
So by focusing on girls and their education, Polish educators realized they had a greater
chance of lifting the overall scores of Polish students, and they were right.
Japan has typically scored high on PISA assessment results since the survey began in 2000.
Broadly speaking, Japanese students perform higher than the OECD average in all areas.
But more recently, Japan found itself in an unlikely position when its average student
achievement dropped for the first time compared to previous years, and in relation to the rest
of the top performers on PISA. While Japan's average was still far higher than many country's
highest scores, the dip served as a warning sign for the country's educators and led to several
key reforms. Japan's first response was to collect and interpret its own data about what worked the
best among different Japanese prefectures, or states or districts, and cities.
Researchers discovered several interesting school and non-school factors at play.
Regarding attitudes toward learning, they found that only a small percentage of students
claimed to have time to spend on reading for enjoyment. Only a small percentage of students
look forward to mathematics lessons, and only a small percentage of students were interested
in learning about science. In addition, a relatively small percentage of students said that teachers
helped them when they needed it. For example, 63.5% of Japanese students surveyed said they got that
kind of help when they wanted it, compared to the OECD average of about 78.2%.
Japanese researchers also put their finger on what were the identifying characteristics
of consistently high-performing prefectures. These characteristics included a high incidence
of three generations living under one roof, a low percentage of students who watched TV
for long periods of time, like four or more hours per day, and a high percentage of students
who reviewed their school lessons at home. The Japanese researchers found that high-performing
schools had a track record of implementing small classes, daily concerted reading activities,
such as morning reading times, supplementary instruction, and a team-oriented approach among
faculty. The Japanese found consistent problems among the low performers as well. For example,
low performers were poor at reading and interpreting materials and information,
and also substandard at connecting the materials to their own knowledge and their own experiences.
They were also deficient at writing clearly what they wanted to express, and had a poor ability to
connect and use knowledge in various situations. In addition, they were enrolled in schools that
did not provide sufficient guidance for students who needed that kind of support.
So based on the results of this research, Japanese policymakers decided on some educational reforms.
These included the cultivation of what they called a zest for life, based on the principles of
education clarified in the amendment of the Basic Act on Education, on an emphasis on balancing the
attainment of knowledge and skills, focusing on capacity, decisiveness, and expressiveness,
and cultivating what they referred to as a rich and wholesome heart and body through solid moral
and physical education. Now doing all of these things ended up being the challenge. So policy
responses came in two areas. One was the improvement of learning content, and the other was improvement
of the educational system. Improvement of learning content included revising courses
of study through national standards and systematic content revision, and even improving government
screening of textbooks. Then improvement of the educational system included reducing class sizes,
and increases in the number of new teachers, enhancing continuing education and professional
development for teachers, and revising the school management model to create more involvement and
empowerment of the community, and finally developing an accountability system from the national to the
local levels. What's important to remember about Japan is not exactly which reforms they implemented,
but how they decided which reforms to implement. It was a balance of evidence gathering,
school and non-school contextual considerations, and finally a set of decisions about which school
factors could be adjusted to make the most impact on teaching and learning.
And still, it's not always as easy to achieve effective reform as suggested by Finland's
or even Japan's examples. According to a presentation that the Indonesian Ministry of
National Education made at a PISA conference in Japan a few years ago, Indonesian student
performance on the test has increased, and variation among students has decreased.
This is due in part to improvements among low-achieving students, much like the example from Poland.
But unlike Poland, these improvements are not just a matter of improved focus on enhancing the
academic capacities of low-performing students. Instead, the response from the Indonesian perspective
was to assist the educated student population enter Indonesia's workforce and serve its developing
economy. This is an example of a research-driven national model development that seeks to understand
the links between student performance and learning.
Berhanuddin Tola, who has served as the Director of the Center for Educational Assessment in Indonesia's
Ministry of National Education, says Indonesia is approaching educational equity issues using
vocational and polytechnic education as the policy response, and the context for this
reform approach is clear. As I mentioned at the outset of this lecture,
Indonesian companies will struggle to fill half of their entry-level positions with fully
qualified candidates by the end of the decade due to low upper secondary and tertiary enrollment
rates and unfortunately substandard quality standards, at least according to a recent report
by the Boston Consulting Group. These consultants estimate that Indonesia's engineering field
is expected to experience some of the worst shortages with a projected deficit in engineering
graduates expected to increase to more than 70% by 2025. And while the report suggests that
shortages will not be as severe at senior levels, it says that many senior managers will continue
to lack the global exposure and leadership skills they need to succeed. While enrollment figures
in Indonesian schools through the first nine years of basic education have improved significantly
in recent years, only just over half or 51% of the population aged 15 to 18 years old
attended school at the upper secondary level in 2012, which is well below the Southeast Asian
average of 65%. This is despite the fact that the government is constitutionally obligated
to direct 20% of the national budget towards education, something observers say really doesn't
often happen in reality. But waste through corruption is considered a major issue within
the Indonesian education system and as a result quality standards at the secondary and tertiary
level are well below global standards as measured by a number of different indicators.
According to the 2012 PISA results, 15 year old Indonesians were rated 64th out of 65 countries
in mathematics, science and reading. And still the government set a target of 50%
upper secondary enrollment in vocational schools by 2015 and 70% by 2025.
Technical education is offered in six broad streams in technology and engineering,
information and communication technology, community welfare, arts crafts and tourism,
agribusiness and agro technology, and business and management. And all those students in technical
and vocational institutions can transfer to general secondary programs, it doesn't happen commonly.
In closing, let me say that if the OECD's purpose in creating PISA was to establish
data-based indicators and evidence to encourage and support the development of education policies
which are designed to improve student learning, then I'd say it's been a success.
But PISA and other internationally comparative data have had even greater impacts on national
education expectations. No longer are policy makers, educators and the public left alone
to guess how educated a nation's students are compared to their peers, nor to wonder
how their own assumptions stack up. The data exists. We don't have to guess,
but we do have to make peace with what the data tell us.
