Lecture 10 The Value in Linking School to Jobs
The song, Teach Your Children, by Crosby Still's Nash and Young, was one of 50 top
pop hits in 1970.
One of the lines to this song is, you of the tender years can't know the fears that your
elders grew by.
All through the ages, chief among these fears has been the question of whether our children
would grow up to enjoy better lives than we did.
The even more contemporary question is whether they will perform better than we did economically.
Earn more, be healthier, happier, live longer, and be better educated.
Each of these points is being promoted in every country around the world today.
In this lecture, I'm going to speak about what educators and business leaders, as well
as some government leaders, perceive as a growing disconnect between our schools and
the rapidly changing market, or between education and the economy.
But I intend to focus on renewed efforts around the world to test whether vocational
education and training, which was once a sort of closed, dingy hallway of education where
underperforming students went to learn how to fill the lower rungs of the workforce,
how this could become a new portal into skills-based education that prepares youth to participate
in an emerging, technology-driven knowledge economy.
Ghana is one country that is desperately trying to link education with jobs.
This isn't a new story, and we see examples like this around the world.
But in Ghana, the situation is desperate.
Not everyone is able to go to high school in Ghana, although the numbers continue to
rise.
The problem for those students who do persist in their schooling is that there's not always
the promise of employment.
And if there is employment after they graduate, it's often low status and low pay.
In other words, there's not a strong or a positive association between educational attainment
and employment or salaried work.
Ghana, like other countries, is faced with a dilemma.
On the one hand, the widespread expectation is that more education is one of the best
ways to develop both generations of young citizens and that education is also one of
the best ways to build and strengthen Ghana's economy, or any country's economy.
But neither of these expectations seems to be true, unfortunately.
Instead, Ghanaians have few obvious choices other than to remain unemployed.
They can find low status or low pay work when available.
They can keep trying for higher status and higher paying jobs, even if it means being
out of work for months or even years.
Or they can leave Ghana and try to find better opportunities elsewhere.
Really none of these options is beneficial to the development of young citizens or to
Ghana's economy.
The 1970s decade that began with that Crosby, Stills, Nash, and Young Song teacher children
also marked a U-turn away from what is now known as competency-based education.
Although most of you will probably know this better as vocational and technical education.
From the 1970s until the early 2000s, the emphasis became creating generations of youth
that would persist through college and university.
And as a result, educational systems in the United States, Ghana, and other nations around
the world geared their educational efforts that way towards college and university preparation.
But there's another swing in the pendulum going on now, and it's leading many educational
systems back around to more of a balance between college and university preparation and technical
and vocational preparation.
A key difference today, however, is that competency-based education isn't just for technical jobs or
vocational careers.
It's focused on what students can do when they leave school, as well as what they know.
And that, as we'll see later in this lecture, is an important aim not only for Ghana, but
it's becoming a shared objective around the world.
Until this latest shift in the pendulum, formal mass education and the labor market had over
the past century come to represent two distinct cultures that barely spoke to much less served
one another.
Unfortunately, the siloing of knowledge in school-based education into subjects like
math or science or language and history, and the separation of knowledge from skills, means
that students today may understand geometry, but rarely can they convert that knowledge
into practical workforce skills like carpentry or construction that would even enable them
to build a doghouse.
So in this lecture, I'm going to focus on some of the distinctions between those kinds
of knowledge and skills.
My point overall is that conventional formal education teaches information, but not skills.
Students become competent at remembering information and at test taking, but not at using information
in new situations or in combination with multiple sources of information.
And so one of the most important issues in education becomes whether school prepares
youth for transitioning to the job market and to career either before, after, or instead
of college.
Now the answer according to a lot of business and industry leaders is a big no.
They cite a lack of skills and qualifications among graduating students, and they argue
that not only are students unqualified for skilled positions, they also don't have the
soft skills necessary to work with others or to make decisions in unscripted situations
or to teach themselves new knowledge and skills when they need to in their workplace.
In other words, many business and industry leaders say that there's no connection between
what happens in formal school education and what's needed in the world of work.
There are a lot of questions about what knowledge and skills are needed to even be qualified
to work.
But even more importantly, this is a transition from one culture to another and from one life
stage into another.
And yet this transition from school to work or the school culture to the work culture
and across life stages reveals that formal mass education and the labor market have
become so disconnected that they really do comprise distinct cultures.
Now cultures exist because they build up shared norms, values, traditions, and material traits.
But let me offer just one anecdotal example to illustrate how any shared norm between
school and the labor market has broken down.
In a report titled, Out of Inventory, Skills Shortage Threatens Growth for U.S. Manufacturing,
a group called the Manufacturing Institute said that a severe shortage of manufacturing
skills in the United States has the potential to impede the trend of steady growth in U.S.
manufacturing.
In particular, the report states that manufacturers are having difficulty filling both skilled
and highly skilled manufacturing rules.
Now an example of a skilled job is welding and rightly so, a skilled welder is a critical
player in the manufacturing of many metal based products.
And in addition to mastering the craft of welding itself, an entry level welder must
master skills found in basic trigonometry, geometry, metallurgy, and blueprint reading.
Also, skilled welders can earn between $40,000 and $70,000 every year and are in high demand
across multiple industries that include manufacturing, oil and gas, and construction.
The problem, according to the Manufacturing Institute and other business and industry
leaders, is that formal education, like the kind we find in most schools, doesn't prepare
students to become welders, nor does it prepare them to value jobs like welding.
Now this is partly a product of a type of curriculum students are exposed to in schools.
But even more importantly, it's a product of the fact that transitioning to jobs like
welding are not aligned with the norms and values that formal education has come to represent.
Granted not every student wants or needs to go into welding, but the point isn't that
everyone has to do this.
The point is that this is one of many options that should and could be available to students
in school and as they leave or graduate from school.
If it weren't for the differences in cultures, remember the norms and values that exist between
school and work.
So how can we begin to better link educational and labor market cultures?
During the 1970s and 1980s, the large number of baby boomer youth who were still entering
the workforce at that time helped to explain why even a relatively low-skilled, entry-level
workforce still satisfied the needs of industry.
Because there were always more than enough applicants to choose from, the skill requirements
of employers could eventually be met after some searching.
But as the baby boomer generations' new entry into the labor market tapered off during the
1980s and 1990s, the skilled deficiencies, or at least perceived deficiencies of youth,
became much more apparent.
Industry representatives claimed that they could no longer sift through the pool of applicants
to find the qualified ones.
Now this led to attempts at vocational education in the United States that were, let's say
less than a perfect success, in part because vocational students were trained to fill the
lower rungs of the technical workforce, signifying relatively low prestige and attracting inadequate
funding resources and teaching talent.
As a result, the U.S. Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce suggested in 1990
that schools and employers alike were to blame for the economic dysfunction in American
society.
Of course, this may have come a little late, perhaps even years after urban downtowns had
emptied out for the suburbs, and Japanese car makers had taken the global lead in market
share from U.S. automakers in Detroit, and as steel was moving offshore to Brazil and
Korea, and the lion's share of commodities extraction and consumption, as well as industrial
assembly was moving to China, Asia, and its trading partners.
Even so, less than objective policy makers and industry representatives assigned blame
for labor market transition and economic problems to educators.
This is why policy makers solutions to the growing disconnect between schools and the
workplace, and between education and the economy as a result, increasingly came to be based
on competency frameworks in education.
Apprenticeships also have been introduced, and now reintroduced, as a way to infuse education
with technical and vocational training without necessarily sacrificing the way that school
prepares students for college or university.
Apprenticeship programs enable employers to develop and apply industry standards to training
programs for school-based apprentices who are also enrolled in regular school coursework,
often during the morning.
The expectation is that apprenticeship programs can increase productivity and improve the
quality of the workforce.
In some U.S. states, like Florida, apprentices who complete registered apprenticeship programs
are accepted by the industry as journeymen.
The rationale for apprenticeship programs connected to schooling is that by providing
on-the-job training, related classroom instruction, and guaranteed wage structures, that employers
who sponsor apprentices provide incentives to attract and retain more highly qualified
employees and improve productivity.
Many countries have successful apprenticeship programs as well.
Austria, for example, is one country where apprenticeships have become quite attractive
to students because they have a good reputation for helping students move from school into
the labor market with minimal obstacles.
According to recent data, approximately 40 percent of youth go on a work-based apprenticeship
after they finish school.
Apprenticeships were very important during the economic crisis of the early 2000s because
they offered young people an easier entrance into the labor market and because companies
could use apprenticeships to make sure they were hiring staff with the right set of skills
and qualifications.
Now, a competency-based framework is defined differently depending on which educational
system you're in.
In the United States, competency-based education is more about flexibility and reducing the
time that students spend in their seats than it is about preparing students for transitioning
to work and career.
Competency-based education in America includes strategies like online and blended learning,
dual enrollment, and early college high schools, project-based and community-based learning,
and many other kinds.
The rationale is that this type of learning leads to better student engagement because
the content is supposedly relevant to each student and tailored to their unique needs.
Now this is a unique approach to education, which does provide a lot more flexibility
than traditional formal school arrangement, but does it have work or career-based competencies
in mind?
The answer is probably not necessarily, but in other countries like Germany, the United
Kingdom, or Australia, competency-based frameworks, which are also sometimes called
national qualifications frameworks, look a lot different.
In these countries, competency-based education is a new approach to vocational education
and training in which skills, knowledge, and attitudes are carefully specified as part
of educational curricula or policy in order to help or really more realistically require
students to achieve competence in those standards, mostly within a national qualifications framework.
So competence, which is the term in the British context, or competency, which we talk about
in the Australian context, can be understood as the specification of knowledge and skill
and the application of that knowledge and skill to the standard of performance expected
in the workplace.
In other words, the focus of competency-based education is based on industry or labor market
standards rather than on subject-based curricula or school courses where individual achievements
are normally valued against what someone knows rather than what someone can do with what she
or he knows.
The Japanese school-to-work transition model provides an interesting example of how linking
school and work is mediated through cultural context and culturally established norms or
relationships.
For example, Japanese high schools have been traditionally more active and involved in
helping workforce-bound students directly enter the workforce upon high school graduation.
This contrasts sharply with the more severe cut in ties or cut in relationship between
school and work that happens in the United States and, quite frankly, other countries
like Ghana.
In fact, non-college-bound Japanese students will often continue through high school because
their schools will share or even assume the responsibility of finding them suitable employment
after they graduate.
This of course assumes that they have been appropriately educated, so Japanese public
schools follow a general curriculum through the end of secondary school.
There are also more specific vocational training schools in Japan, but the majority of students
follow the general curriculum.
The general curriculum in Japan not only prepares students for college, but also for
lifelong learning.
In other words, Japan's educational system caters to employers with a preference for
employees who can retrain themselves and who know how to learn.
Now this is important because of the tradition of many Japanese employees to remain with
one company throughout their lifetimes.
Also Japanese employers often maintain tightly coupled relationships with individual schools
and teaching faculty through semi-formal contracts.
And when they do this, employers can supposedly cull the best and the brightest of the non-college-bound
youth, which helps them improve the quality and production of their services and products.
Although Japanese families may not need to become involved in the school-to-work transition
of students due to the tight institutional coupling between education and employment.
A student's family background and involvement can encourage or even accelerate students'
achievement during school, which may lead to teacher recommendations or other positive
consequences for their future employment.
So Japanese families become instruments for incorporating culture into the link between
school and work.
The Japanese approach to school-to-work transition stands in stark contrast to the approaches
in other countries.
For example, Saudi Arabian culture imposes a very definite stigma on certain occupations,
especially non-professional or blue collar ones, although this culture I have to say
is slowly shifting.
And as a result, Saudi students have been resistant to vocational and technical education even
though the government has provided vocational courses and has an official vocational education
department.
But in Saudi Arabia, the patriarchal family hierarchy is a lifelong and life-permeating
relationship.
So Saudi parents end up being the ones to often facilitate their children's employment.
And Saudi youth follow their parents' directions in getting jobs after school.
Now this is also an effective model for transition and it's uniquely contextualized by Saudi
culture, but it does not often provide the best fit between a student's knowledge and
skills and the job they end up getting.
All kinds of education, general as well as vocational, can prepare students to participate
actively and productively in the labor market and society.
But regardless of whether we call it vocational or competency-based education, educators and
government administrators around the world are increasingly looking to vocational education
as part of the solution to two related problems.
The preparedness and suitability of new workers entering the workforce.
And second, the transformative effects of technology on the labor force and the economy.
While educators should look closely at adapting existing curricula to the industries and professions
their young students will one day fill, they also feel compelled to develop much more ambitious
and effective vocational programs.
And this speaks to a larger practicality which is that education can no longer end at high
school or college, but must remain a lifelong pursuit in order to maintain a person's marketable
skills.
In fact, a large body of academic research supports the notion that educational systems
that don't integrate academic knowledge and skills with vocational knowledge and skills
are less effective at facilitating students' transition from school to work, because they
prevent vocationally trained students from achieving the highest salaries and qualifying
for the best available jobs.
However, an even bigger and largely unfulfilled challenge for education is to share responsibility
for applicable education and training with employers in such a way that youth enter the
workforce or they enter higher education equally prepared.
Employers in the United States and around the world have claimed for the past century
that they look for multi-skilled youth when hiring.
In other words, they say they seek basic competency skills coupled with advanced technical skills.
Now these basic competency skills usually include social, personal and capacity skills
and are said to be fundamental characteristics for new employees because without them it's
unlikely that employers can or will invest in their employees' technical or occupational
training.
Employers add that the pace of technological change makes their former methods of work
structure and hiring obsolete.
And because of the rapidly shifting nature of applied technology and the permanent nature
of critical thinking, youth with strong critical thinking skills and knowledge of how to apply
their knowledge and skills to specific work situations are obviously preferred by employers.
Employer opinion surveys tend to conclude that students who learn vocational skills
and how to stay abreast of current trends and discoveries are the most employable because
they are the most maintenance-free and productive employees.
Over the last several decades, about two-thirds of company training dollars in the United
States went to college-educated youth while only about half of the youth population had
education or training beyond secondary school.
So often, at least in the United States, receiving job-specific training is something
that happens most frequently for the college-educated and less frequently for those moving directly
to work after they graduate from high school.
Now this supports the proposition that schools act as training grounds for employment.
If for no other reason than by virtue of the chronological sequence of events, first compulsory
math education and later career employment.
This proposition assumes a high degree of coordination between content knowledge that's delivered
in schools and work-ready skills which does not often exist in school curricula or classroom
practice anywhere around the world.
There are encouraging signs across all major national economies that a convergence between
vocational education and general education is finally beginning to be realized.
And as globalization advances, the policy push for a standardized and qualified labor
force gains voice.
And although many developed and some developing countries still emphasize vocational training
in schools, the clear connection between vocational education and work has been replaced by competency-based
frameworks that emphasize high-level skills which are ideally transferable across a broad
range of occupational situations.
In Ghana, the demand for education continues to be strong.
So educational reformers, recognizing that university-educated Ghanaians were not necessarily
gainfully employed after graduation, have decided to expand the country's technical
and vocational education offerings.
The idea is that these more career-focused educational experiences will serve the social
function of creating generations of Ghanaian citizens while also providing more opportunities
to employment and economic development.
Part of this shift is an emphasis on something called competency-based training.
And this means that education for career-oriented students is demand-driven or built upon the
competencies that employers confirm are needed from new employees.
In this way, the transition between school and work is supported by both the educational
system and local business and industry that employ graduates.
It also means that the knowledge and skills that students leave school with are the knowledge
and skills that employers need.
And the goal is to both reduce the out-of-school and out-of-work transition time and increase
the status and salary of new youth employees after they leave school.
The success of the Ghanaian effort to shift towards more of a balance between university
and career preparation and education has been mixed, admittedly.
The educational system in every country is a large bureaucracy and that's often hard
to change, so there are challenges to institutionalizing career education in Ghana.
But there are also clear signs of success.
More and more students are entering career education streams in school and graduating
with the technical knowledge and vocational skills that cooperating employers and industries
say they need.
That's a move in the right direction for educating generations of youth as well as serving the
dual purposes of creating young citizens and building the economy.
