Lecture 14 – Who is Accountable for Education
When I was a high school teacher in New Mexico, I was hired to teach English and coach basketball,
and I did both.
But like most teachers in the United States, I was also expected to perform certain duties
around the school to ensure the safety and order of the school environment.
Some teachers presided over the cafeteria, some made sure that students got on and off
the school buses safely, but my duty was a little different.
Mine was to stand in front of the school and look across a small stream that separated
the school property from the rest of the city.
Specifically, my job was to look for any students who might be smoking off-school property,
and then my principal wanted me to stop them when they came on to school property, and
I would ask them to empty their pockets for me.
If they had any tobacco or lighters, I took them, and I sent them on their way to class.
I was basically a friendly school narc.
Like me, my principal was new to the high school.
He came from a successful principal position somewhere else, and he was extremely zealous
about improving the culture of education at our high school, and about promoting success,
and he loved the word synergy.
He planned and hosted professional development sessions for teachers to promote these ideas,
but he was very active around schools, walking the halls, visiting classrooms unannounced,
and questioning teachers about how they were teaching and why.
Teachers at the school became frustrated with him fairly quickly, though.
If a teacher wanted to talk to the principal, instead of visiting him in his office, they
had to walk and talk with him as he patrolled the hallways.
Some complained about him in the teacher's lounge, saying that they felt he didn't care
about what they had to say, because he never sat down to talk with them.
He would only walk and talk.
This principal also considered himself a member of the local community.
It was a rural, low-income area, predominantly Navajo and Hispanic, and he was sympathetic
to the issues and concerns of these groups, which was great, by the way.
The problem came during a chilly morning one November.
As usual, I was standing in front of the high school before the first bell rang, looking
across the stream to see who might be smoking, and who to stop and ask to empty their pockets
when they came onto school property.
And I did see a group of boys clearly smoking about a block from campus, so when they came
across the stream, I asked them to empty their pockets.
I found the typical cigarettes and lighters, but when one boy emptied his pocket, out came
a short hunting knife.
It was about four inches long, which isn't big for a hunting knife, but it was considered
a weapon, and our school had a strict no-tolerance policy for weapons on school property.
So I asked him to come with me, and we went directly to the principal's office, where
I fully expected an immediate expulsion for bringing a weapon to campus.
But later in the day, I came across this young man again in the hallway, and I was shocked.
Why hadn't he been expelled?
Now by now, the news about the knife had spread, and several teachers came forward who'd previously
had this student in class.
It turns out he'd made threats against some of them, and they, like me, were surprised
that he hadn't been expelled for bringing a weapon to campus.
So several teachers went to talk to the principal about their concerns.
The principal said that it was a hunting community, and that carrying a small hunting knife wasn't
a big deal in that environment.
The teachers said they had a responsibility to keep their students and themselves safe,
especially when the student with the knife had made documented threats against some of
them.
Well, at the next school board meeting, the issue of the knife and the decision to suspend
rather than expel the student came up.
And to make a long story short, that principal was fired for contradicting the school's zero-tolerance
policy on weapons.
Now there are several issues of accountability going on here.
The principal was accountable to his teachers, to his students, to the parents and community,
and to the school board.
He was responsible for each group, and although he made a decision that he thought was appropriate
and accountable to each, it ended up very badly for him.
This is an example of a clash between local community and school accountability cultures,
and it's not unique.
Many communities around the United States and around the world experience similar conflicts,
although some cultures have been better accommodated in schools than others.
Take for example the ways that schools, teachers, and students in Japan manage themselves.
In Japan, the accountability culture is as much a part of society as it is a part of
school.
Japan is a consensus culture, meaning that there is more emphasis on working and living
within a group or on behalf of the group than on developing and asserting one's own individuality.
Now this is a broad generalization, so I trust you know that this is not absolute across
Japan, but in general, this is the case.
In schools as well, this consensus culture manifests itself.
As students move into secondary school, or really junior high school, they are organized
for much of the school day into small groups within classrooms called Han.
Now these small groups work together on some of their academic assignments, but more than
that, they're there to serve as a way to distribute responsibility or accountability
among the students for the functions of the classroom, like cleaning the classroom, or
eating lunch, or monitoring student behavior and other functions.
Hans, these groups, even are used to arrange desks during their group time in a way that
shows how they're connected and who's responsible or accountable for each small group.
For example, if there are five students in one of these groups, four of the desks would
be arranged face to face directly in front of each other, and then the fifth desk would
be placed at the end, looking down across the other four.
This desk at the end would be where the Han leader would sit, and she or he would be responsible
for that small group.
Now this way of arranging people into cooperative groups extends to the teacher's room as well
in Japanese schools.
Remember that in Japanese schools, the students stay in one classroom from most of their school
day, and it's the teachers who move from class to class.
This means that the teachers have their own desks in a separate teacher's office room.
Now this is different than the typical teacher's lounge that we see in the United States or
the United Kingdom and other places, which is more for eating and sitting than anything
else.
The Japanese teacher's room is also arranged into groups with desks facing each other in
a row, and then the group leader's desk at the end of the row looking across all of the
others.
Consensus culture has embedded itself in the Japanese schooling model, and therefore the
accountability of Japanese students and teachers is to their group, and to their group leader
first and then to other stakeholders after that.
It's a much clearer accountability system in many ways because it's obvious to whom
individuals are accountable within school and beyond.
So accountability culture varies from country to country and from region to region.
But some connected elements of accountability culture do appear in most educational systems,
and these connected elements are access, achievement, and the combination of standards
and assessment.
Let's start with access.
Education, particularly formal mass education, has become a staple of societies worldwide
over the last 100 years.
This means that the formal version of schooling that you and I are familiar with is similar
to the forms of schooling that generations of people all over the world have also experienced.
Now maybe the classroom in Oklahoma City doesn't look exactly like the classroom in
Parle, South Africa, but it's going to be close, and the roles and expectations for
students and teachers are probably going to be similar as well.
In other words, most people around the world have had access to formal education, and it's
become something more than a privilege.
Access to education is considered a human right.
Article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights says that everyone has the right
to education, and that education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental
stages.
What this means for accountability, though, is that since everyone has access to it and
it is considered a human right, then everyone is also a stakeholder, and the general public
deeply penetrates the school system in most places around the world.
So accountability to the public is one element of accountability culture for education that
we consistently see worldwide.
We see this in the expectation that parents become involved in their children's education,
and in the expectation that teachers sometimes assume responsibilities that are traditionally
given to parents.
We see this in the fact that teachers and classrooms are people and places that families
and others in the community have access to, often simply by asking.
Now, contrast this with the degree to which you can just walk into a doctor's examination
room, and you'll understand how much more public penetration there is into schools.
We even see this in the development of individualized education programs for students who might
have different needs due to physical or cognitive or social or emotional circumstances.
In other words, access and public penetration into education are a key factor in education's
accountability culture.
Access is the importance of achievement, and the assumed linear relationship between
education and student achievement in particular.
There's an assumption that if a teacher or a school is providing a good education, then
students will score well on tests and have good grades overall.
Likewise, there's an expectation that if students are not scoring at the top of the performance
range, or at least higher than their peers, then there must be something wrong with the
education they're receiving.
We've talked about reasons why this is not such a straightforward relationship before,
but we can emphasize the reasons again here.
In short, the assumption is that school factors cause student achievement.
For school factors are anything that we can manipulate or change about school, so the
curriculum, or the textbooks, or the teachers, or the buildings.
So if schools are better, then achievement is better.
But the fact that school and non-school factors, which are the things that we cannot change
about school, or things that happen outside of school, like socio-economic context, or
culture, or things like that, those interact to influence student learning and achievement.
So the relationship between schools and the education students receive there is not a
linear one.
The third element of accountability culture is a combination of standards and assessment.
This means that in order to be held accountable, there needs to be a standard to be held accountable
too, and a means to assess whether each student, teacher, principal, and school meets that
standard.
This is why in countries where education is deemed to be slipping or failing, standards
are often the first things developed as part of educational reform.
The use of standards and assessment is usually the most directly observable indicator of
an accountability culture in national education systems, around the world even, because standards
and assessment are usually embodied by a nation's educational curriculum.
But the ways that each country's educational system implements this accountability culture
through standards and curricula and assessment differs.
For example, if we think about Finland's accountability culture and how the Finnish
educational system implements educational standards, then we get a much different picture than
when we look at the U.S. system.
Cassie Solberg, a scholar of Finnish education who served as a high-ranking official in the
Finnish Ministry of Education and Culture, points out three distinct elements of the
Finnish curriculum.
First, Solberg says that every district in Finland develops its own curriculum, usually
under the direction or responsibility of schools.
There are some national laws and educational directives that have to be fulfilled, and
it's the responsibility of each district to make sure that they are.
These curricula requirements include foreign language, special education, student welfare,
and sometimes schooling for immigrant children depending on the district.
When schools are often given the responsibility for developing curriculum by the districts,
Solberg points out that across Finland, it's really the schools that develop their own
curriculum as long as it meets the general national requirements.
Second, Finland has national curriculum frameworks that help align the school curriculum.
This is a bottom-up approach to curriculum development rather than the U.S. version of
top-down.
National curriculum frameworks in Finland simply serve to describe general objectives
and core content, with the one addition that there are subjects and general time allocations
for each that each district has to follow.
The goal is that education will be provided equally to students across Finland as long
as these subjects are allocated generally equal time in the classroom.
So then schools have the responsibility for developing the standards and the teaching
used to meet those standards for each grade level and subject.
What's interesting is there aren't any standardized tests in Finland to assess whether individual
standards are being met because there aren't common standards across all of Finland, only
general curriculum frameworks.
Third, Finnish teachers are empowered to design the national curriculum frameworks as well
as the district or school level standards.
In fact, working groups of teachers are brought together to update the curriculum when it's
needed.
And then teachers field test and evaluate new curricula to make sure that these are workable
curricular solutions for teachers and students alike.
Teachers also enjoy their freedom from standardized tests because they can then focus on what they
think is important to teach rather than what a test that someone else designed covers.
We can contrast this with a recent development in U.S. education, the common core standards.
The goal of common core standards was to raise student achievement across the United States
by standardizing the curriculum taught in schools in every state.
One of the key ways that the developers of the common core standards did this was to benchmark
the standards against those found in other high performing countries.
In particular, the common core attempts to reverse that mile wide and inch deep criticism
that some educational researchers attached to the U.S. curriculum in the 1990s and early
2000s.
Instead, the goal was to focus the common core standards so that U.S. students were going
more deeply into particular content or subjects than they did before.
And several teams of educational researchers have found that the common core standards
are not necessarily worse and in some instances might even be better than the standards that
each state currently has.
But there are also criticisms of the common core standards, which highlights some key
differences between U.S. guidelines and those in high performing nations like Finland.
For one thing, the common core standards were not developed at the school level or by teachers
at the schools themselves.
Instead, the standards were the product of a collaborative effort of state governors
and state education departments or commissions, which included representation of teachers
by national teacher unions and representative working groups of teachers.
So teachers weren't empowered to develop these new standards for their own unique teaching
and learning situations in their own schools and classrooms as much as they were asked
to contribute to a state led initiative.
Next there's the issue of assessment that follows the common core standards.
Much resistance to the common core in the United States is a result of a backlash against
what many perceive as the increasing institutionalization of standardized testing in American education.
In other words, the resistance is not always to the standards themselves so much as it
is to the fact that assessment always follows standards and in this case standardized testing
follows the common core.
Now this is in stark contrast to the Finnish system where standardized testing wasn't even
possible because the educational standards themselves are so specific to individual schools
and districts that it would not be possible with the standardized test to adequately assess
students across schools and districts in Finland.
Of course there's a similar motivation in both the Finnish and U.S. examples, which
is educational equity.
Educational equity is an interesting issue because it's different than equality.
Equality is when you have the same of something, so the same activities or the same curriculum
or the same textbooks or the same teachers.
But equity means fairness or justice.
So the idea is not in Finland that every student receives exactly the same education.
The idea is instead that every student receives the education that they need and that is fair
or just for them to receive.
It means that some students may have more advantages in school than others because they
have more advantages outside of school than others.
It's an interesting way of thinking about how we provide fair education to individuals
and students in schools.
And in Finland the accountability expectation is not only for teaching and learning but
also for equity.
But in Finland the idea of equity is providing the same subjects for about the same amount
of time for all students in each grade.
Even though it might not be exactly equal and even though the exact standards and methods
for teaching and learning the content of these subjects will vary from school to school.
In contrast the U.S. also attempts to achieve equity in teaching and learning.
But the fundamental idea is that to achieve equity the standards, curriculum and in many
cases the assessment of students must all be the same.
In other words it's more like equality.
And as a result the subjects as well as what teaching and learning achieves has to be the
same regardless of significant differences in context in different schools, districts
and states across the U.S.
So there are significant differences in the way that Finland and the United States address
issues of equity.
But that brings me back to a central argument that I make.
Which is that the alignment of school and non-school factors in each educational system
is what allows good things to happen.
Now by alignment of school and non-school factors we're not talking about a specific
formula where you put in five school factors and four non-school factors and you get product
X.
It has much more to do with how do we create a situation that is equitable in the Finnish
sense of equity, that provides a fair and just education for all students.
The basic things about schooling that we can manipulate, that we can change, those can
be changed to address the non-school factors.
Think of the Japanese example that I gave earlier.
The Japanese schools run in this consensus culture and so the ways that school classrooms
are organized brings that culture into it.
We would never be able to get away with that in the same way in the United States where
too much based on an individual culture.
It wouldn't work the same way, although I know people have tried.
We have to know what the context is, what those non-school factors are, in order to
be able to change the school factors.
So it's not an easy formula and it does take some effort to decide which are the important
non-school factors in each particular community.
But if we do that first and then we adjust the school factors afterwards, that's where
the alignment of school and non-school factors takes place.
So clearly the idea of how that alignment should occur differs between the US and Finland.
In Finland the idea is that non-school factors in context take precedence over school factors
like standards and curriculum.
Whereas in the United States it's usually the opposite and school factors are assumed
to take precedence over non-school factors in context.
Now perhaps these differences are due to the fact that non-school factors in Finland are
much less variable and they represent more equity than inequity than they do in the United
States.
Or perhaps it's because the teachers in Finland are better equipped to adapt their curriculum
and standards to their local context due to enhanced training and preparation.
But regardless of the reason, we can see that there are the core elements of access to education,
achievement in education and standards and assessment of education that make up the core
elements of an accountability culture in both the United States and Finland.
It's just the combination and the unique combination of these elements that leads to different systems
in each country.
Perhaps the key to understanding what makes the American approach to accountability unique
compared to other countries is in the words of former President George W. Bush when he
signed the No Child Left Behind Reauthorization in 2002.
He said, accountability is an exercise in hope.
When we raise academic standards, children raise their academic sites.
When children are regularly tested, teachers know where and how to improve.
When scores are known to parents, parents are empowered to push for change.
And when accountability for our schools is real, the results for our children are real.
Regardless of which country's educational system we examine, accountability seems to
come back to individual student and teacher performance.
Yes, there are exceptions, like the consensus culture in Japan, which arranges much of the
responsibility for what happens in a classroom and school around small groups of students
and teachers.
But when educational quality is assessed, student achievement scores still seem to take precedence.
Even in Finland, the country that has a standards and curriculum system that does not emphasize
the importance of standardized assessment for accountability, even in Finland, there's
still somewhat of a focus on standardized testing.
They still participate in standardized international assessments of reading, mathematics, and science,
and they do well.
My example of the principle at the High School in New Mexico shows that balancing the educational
concerns for students as children and as humans against the expectations for youth in a particular
cultural context is not an easy task.
We can also see that knowing who the stakeholders are and to whom students and educators are
accountable makes all the difference.
