Let's start today with a thought experiment.
This way, we can imagine what school might be like in the future, or maybe the not too
distant future.
We can begin by imagining a world where school isn't a place you go to anymore.
It's not a building or a classroom that you can walk around and sit in.
Instead, imagine that the things that you do in school, especially the teaching and
learning things you do in school, are always with you.
Imagine a world where the traditional role of a teacher has been eliminated because there
are other ways to disseminate and structure education, largely through the use of new
technologies.
Now imagine a world where creating and managing knowledge is more important than learning
and using old information.
Can you imagine this kind of world?
If there are no schools and teachers, then how do we know where or what school is?
If there is no schedule or structure to education, then how do we teach and learn?
These are important questions to ask about this imaginary future, but the interesting
part is that these are not hypothetical questions anymore.
Advances in technology allow most of us to have access to a seemingly infinite amount
of information all day, every day.
Computers and internet technology have become embedded in the fabric of life in the developed
countries of North America, Europe, and much of the world.
And even in countries where the economy is still developing and the technological infrastructure
lags behind, there are access points where technology is available and that make access
possible to information from around the world.
Now consider this real-world example.
Back in 1999, a man named Dr. Sugata Mitra did something crazy.
He was the chief scientist at a technology company in New Delhi, India.
And he wondered if children could learn to use computers on their own without any instruction.
You might say this is no big deal since many of us have children or grandchildren who know
much more about how to use technology than we do.
But Dr. Mitra was thinking about a different kind of population.
In my own experience, for example, my children have had access to technology and gadgets all
of their lives.
They've grown up around them.
But Dr. Mitra wanted to know what happened if you made technology available to children
who had never had those kinds of opportunities before.
So in 1999, he literally put a hole in the wall that ran between his company building
and the slum in Kalkaji, New Delhi.
Into the hole, he stationed a computer that was available for anyone to use.
He also recorded the children and other slum dwellers as they figured out how to use it.
And it was an immediate success, especially among the children.
Without any outside support, the children learned how to use the computer.
And they wanted to learn how to use it without any prompting from others.
This is an example of how technology can change what and how we teach and learn.
And it's a tool that is not limited by culture, context, or social expectations.
Technology, especially computer and electronic technology, has already changed the face of
education and can be used to great advantage to provide access to visual and recorded information
that otherwise wouldn't be available.
It can also be used as a way to avoid teaching and learning if it's done only to remediate
or to entertain students who otherwise might not be easy to teach.
In this lecture, we're going to cover a lot of ground.
We're going to discuss issues of accessibility and opportunity to teach and learn worldwide
by using education.
And specifically, we will talk about how certain types of technologies are used to convey
information through more traditional teaching and learning methods, as well as through some
less conventional and much more self-directed methods.
With the widespread availability of technology in the 21st century, there is a global expectation
that information of just about every kind is always available.
Even if this expectation is not always personally accessible to each individual around the world.
Even if universal access did exist, not everyone has the preparation, the tools, or the understanding
to use the technology.
Although, as we saw from Dr. Mitra's example, a little bit of access is all that is needed
to begin building an understanding of technology.
Still, the promise of access to information and communication technologies, which I will
sometimes refer to as ICT, lives somewhere between the worlds of what is real and what
is ideal.
In other words, there's a lot of talk about how important information and communication
technologies are for education around the world.
But there's less evidence of it making a difference in teaching and learning consistently
across different communities, classrooms, and cultures.
At the same time, there's plenty of evidence that what's called a digital divide still
exists.
The term digital divide refers to a gap between peoples, regions, or groups in terms of their
access to information and communication technologies.
Some have full access and control over how they access and use technology, while others
don't have any access at all, or they have their access restricted or limited by other
groups or by the technology infrastructure available to them.
Usually the technology we're talking about in reference to the digital divide includes
telephones, television, personal computers, and the internet with special emphasis in
recent years on mobile technology like cell phones and tablets.
Modern Asia, from the years 1965 to 1990, grew faster economically than any other part
of the world.
This growth was enormously beneficial to what were then known as the Asian Tigers, Hong
Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, and South Korea.
And their access to new technologies grew along with their economies.
But other nations, such as Malaysia, Thailand, and Indonesia, thrived economically as well.
Perhaps not to the degree that Hong Kong and the others did, but enough to have access
to many of the same technologies.
Availability and access to technology did not filter as quickly or as completely to
less affluent East Asian nations, such as Laos and Bhutan.
These countries still experienced the digital divide, particularly in rural areas.
There is, however, the shared expectation that at some point in time, these areas will
become more connected to information and communication technologies to further their economic and
educational growth.
Again, we have a situation where even though the rhetoric may not match the reality, there
is still intent and relative opportunity for technology use, even though it may be restricted
or limited.
It's only through time and a more equitable distribution of ICT infrastructure, equipment,
access, and use that communities in both more and less well-resourced countries will
be able to more tightly couple their information and communication technologies rhetoric and
expectations to ICT availability and use.
As information and communication technologies become institutionalized and more prevalent,
this will create shared digital communications experiences among students in more and more
countries.
Now this happens as students learn the basics of operating a computer, the parts of a computer,
basic programs, as well as how to communicate through email or instant messaging and texting,
often as part of their formal curricula or learning resources in schools.
An intriguing example of this is the One Laptop Per Child initiative that began in Boston,
Massachusetts in 2005 and that seeks to put information and communication technologies
in the hands of children in developing nations around the world.
Education figures prominently in the One Laptop Per Child program, which states that across
the developing world, education systems need to change dramatically to prepare children
for the modern world.
Children and adults learn best when they are actively involved in learning and involved
teachers, relevant content, and appropriate technology can facilitate both educational
change and learning motivation.
The One Laptop Per Child organization reports that it has provided low-cost, low-energy,
rugged laptops to two million students and teachers in Latin America alone and that half
a million students and teachers in Africa and other parts of the world participate as well.
The largest national partners for One Laptop Per Child are Argentina, Mexico, Rwanda, and
Uruguay. Uruguay is the first major country in the world to provide every elementary schoolchild
with a laptop. And then there's also Peru. The One Laptop Per Child campaign has other
projects as well, in Gaza, Afghanistan, Haiti, Ethiopia, and Mongolia.
And while these efforts are to be lauded, the technology might not always be used even
when it exists. I've seen this phenomenon on more than one occasion.
One of the most interesting of these is at a school in a disadvantaged community in
South Africa.
For several years, I was involved in something called the South Africa Educational Development
Initiative. We worked with disadvantaged schools and communities in the western Cape
of South Africa, and it was a tremendous experience.
We had a chance to provide some much-needed support to one school and community in particular,
and that stayed with me ever since.
Interestingly, this school provides two examples of the digital divide, not because of a lack
of technology resources, so much as because of a lack of capacity or knowledge and skills
among students and teachers about that technology, and also a lack of sustainability for the
technology that was available to them.
The primary school where we did most of our work was unique in that it had both a photography
darkroom and a computer lab.
The darkroom was filled with expensive photo development machines, equipment, and chemicals,
and it was professionally outfitted.
It had been donated by a wealthy Westerner who traveled through the region, happened
to have met the school principal, and wanted to contribute something to the school.
This South African school, which abutted a large squatter camp, also had a computer lab
with about 30 desktop computers in it.
The computers were all in working condition, and there even was an internet connection,
although school internet service was not very strong or consistent.
If we think about the digital divide in terms of resources alone, then this disadvantaged
school was not so disadvantaged.
They had both a photography darkroom, and all of the technology needed to develop film
along with a full computer lab.
The problem wasn't with technology resources, but it was a problem of capacity and sustainability.
The capacity problem was that none of the teachers or students knew how to use the photo
development equipment.
They were initially briefly shown what all of the machines were when they were installed
and what they did, but none of them remembered how, and they didn't have any support to teach
that process after that initial training period during the installation of the machines.
Several teachers commented that it was old technology anyway, and they all used their
phones or digital cameras to take photos instead.
Likewise, although the teachers and students knew how to use computers to check email and
social media and to play games, they didn't know how to use the computers in their computer
lab to facilitate instruction or to creatively and interactively teach the school curriculum
to their students.
In short, the knowledge and skills necessary to use the available technology just didn't
exist at this school, and because of this fact, neither technology was sustainable.
Now this could be contrasted with a school in a more affluent, white community in the
same small South African city.
In this school, students also had a computer lab, with much the same equipment as in the
disadvantaged school. But the teachers knew how to apply the technology for instruction
related to the curriculum, and not just to play games and check social media.
They also had students who used the computers to supplement their regular learning by finding
new information or by communicating with people about things they needed help and understanding.
Technology was both a topic and a tool for the affluent white South African students
and teachers, whereas it was hardly either with the disadvantaged mixed race South African
students and teachers. And although this South African case is a textbook example of the
digital divide, there are newer ways that technology is successfully shaping how the
world learns.
With the advent of mobile technology, education is becoming more and more on demand. This
means that people no longer have to go to school or take a formal class in order to learn
something new. Mobile technology means that you can be checking on something, looking
up information, and communicating with experts at any moment and from anywhere, so long as
you have a mobile device with you.
And while mobile technology use has increased dramatically around the world, this is nowhere
more so the case than in the Arabian Peninsula countries of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. It is
a significant development, which has the potential to boost Gulf Nationals participation in
the knowledge economy driven private sector of the labor market. But it represents under
investigative potential.
No research evidence is available to guide Kuwaiti national policy or innovation related
to the development and use of mobile technology so that it might encourage or support participation
in this new knowledge economy or private sector engagement.
There is little or no research at all investigating how young Gulf Nationals currently use mobile
technology, much less which uses of mobile technology enhance educational access or opportunity
or entrepreneurship, or how mobile technology use is learned or taught, especially comparing
Gulf national youth to expatriate youth.
As a result, and in order to eventually foster active and entrepreneurial involvement of
children and young people in the knowledge based private sector, one regular topic for
discussion within the Gulf, and quite frankly around the world, is an evidence base for
strategic planning, development, and application of mobile technology and education.
Some of this discussion is spurred by youth who are already using mobile technology in
innovative ways. For example, the on demand culture means that there are many young digital
entrepreneurs accessing information wherever they are and whenever they want to. This kind
of flexibility is primarily possible through the use of mobile technologies.
Nick Delosio for one is a British Australian entrepreneur and the creator of a news summary
reading application called Summly. By the age of 18, he had succeeded in selling this
application to Yahoo for an estimated $30 million.
And in an interview in Britain's The Guardian newspaper, the teen millionaire said that
the whole world of knowledge is literally in your pocket, and that wasn't there years
ago. He said, it means as a young person, if you're ever curious about something, you
can literally type it into Google and learn about it because everything is there for free.
The potential educational applications are therefore tremendous because mobile technologies
provide broad opportunities for innovative thinking and entrepreneurship. It enhances
the potential of young adults to use their digital skills for more than just social media
or playing games. Examples like this one are why education reformers and educators are
paying more and more attention to mobile technology in the classroom and for educational purposes.
Abdul Rahman Alzanki, a Kuwaiti adolescent, might temporarily have been the youngest Arab
and Muslim entrepreneur in the world. He succeeded in developing a free iPhone app
named Doodle Destroy, which was downloaded over 800,000 times and remained among the top
five most downloaded apps around the world for a while.
Although he was only in the 10th grade at the time, Alzanki was one of the savviest Kuwaitis
when it came to using mobile technology. Like Alzanki, there are many other young Kuwaitis
and students around the world who are familiar with and capable of using mobile technology
for applications beyond simple communications and entertainment.
Mobile platforms present a unique way of learning compared to more traditional desktop
technology. For example, education through mobile technology tends to be needs focused.
This is the on-demand character of mobile technology, which means that as you need information,
you seek it and use it. It is a much different form of learning than traditional methods,
because you don't need to memorize or even remember a lot of the data that used to be
required. And you don't need to remember it because it is stored on the internet or
in the cloud or in whatever memory space your technology provides you access to.
Learning through mobile technology is also different because it is more focused on managing
and organizing data than on acquiring and storing it. In other words, the problems of
learning and remembering information are comparatively insignificant to the challenges of sorting
through all of the massive databases of information available online or in a computer's memory.
The challenge is to find what you need and what is more relevant rather than to find
simply something. So data management becomes a key skill that
has to be taught and learned in order to take full advantage of mobile technology for education.
Finally, mobile technology is typically less linear and more networked than traditional
systems. In other words, there is a different sequence to learning through on-demand mobile
access to information than there is through more traditional methods.
Sometimes the nature of what someone is learning requires a specific sequence. For example,
you have to know how to add and subtract before you can move on to algebra. But once the basic
information is there, there is no longer a need to move sequentially from one level of
information to the next. Instead, information is mapped relationally across different topics,
ideas, approaches, perspectives, and content. Mobile technology provides the chance to insert
expertly validated information into everyday conversations rather than relying on speculation
or interpretation or simple memory. Mobile technology provides control over
how information is sought and applied by the students or whomever has the technology rather
than relying on teachers or others who are identified as experts to share the information
with students at a deliberate pace.
Mobile technology is becoming more ubiquitous worldwide, even in poorer countries and communities.
Mobile phones are common in slums, townships, and rural communities now, and smartphones
that allow ever-expanding access to the internet and handheld computing are growing exponentially.
Today, programs that use mobile technology for purposes ranging from mobile payment systems
like Apple Pay in the U.S. to microcredit loan programs that push credit to loan recipients
mobile phones in developing countries so that they can make purchases in their own communities
using the credit they carry with them on their phones.
There are also programs where mobile phone technology is being used to share and transfer
health data between remote medical stations in sub-Saharan Africa and hospitals in larger
cities so that patient records and treatments can be more effective and more closely monitored.
Education also plays a key role, but the ways that mobile technology can be used to facilitate
teaching and learning haven't been institutionalized yet.
Yes, there are mobile games and apps that incorporate learning into them, just like there are desktop
games that teach history, like the Oregon Trail which many people have used, or teach
math and science to students. But what's different about the shift towards mobile technology
is that the learning has to be increasingly need-based, non-linear, and networked.
That isn't a shift that has happened on a large scale or in a consistent pattern yet.
Instead, inequality in access to and capacity to use technology persists, which means that
the digital divide is still a concern around the world.
Those with more access to technology as part of their formal education or in life more
generally seem to be afforded more opportunities to access information and then use that information
for learning.
What should be clear, though, is that it is easier than we might have originally thought
to imagine a world where there are no schools and no teachers.
Everyone continues to be a student, and the direction that a person's education takes
depends on what their needs are and how they manage and critically assess the information
they have access to, rather than where they go to school or which teacher they have.
In short, how the world learns through technology is more a question of access to technology
and data management than it is the quality of a school, teacher, or curriculum.
And that's a fairly radical concept.
