In this lecture, we're going to go back to the earliest recorded mathematics, going back
almost 4,000 years to both ancient Mesopotamia and ancient Egypt.
In both of these civilizations, at about the same time, we get the development of quite
sophisticated mathematical texts.
And we're going to be looking at these texts for the origins of the ideas of algebra, and
also the origins of the idea of approximating values.
For Mesopotamia, we're looking at what's known as the Old Babylonian Period, roughly
about 2,000 B.C. to around 1,600 B.C.
In Egypt, we're looking at the early Middle Kingdom, also over approximately the same
period.
What was happening in both of these civilizations, both Mesopotamia in what today is modern Iraq,
and also in Egypt along the Nile River Valley, is that both of these were getting very sophisticated
civilizations that had highly developed systems of commerce, they were doing a lot of construction.
They needed to train a large core of civil servants, of bureaucrats, of people who could
oversee taxation, who could oversee the building projects that were coming about at that time.
And these were people who needed to be trained in basic mathematical techniques.
And the mathematics that we have from this period are the textbooks that would have been
used in order to train these people.
So it's not mathematics the way we might like to see it, which is where did they get these
ideas, how did they develop these ideas.
What we get are problem books, sets of problems, together with worked out solutions.
These are problems that students would have worked on and tried to emulate.
Now the problem books that we have that come to us from Egypt are really quite limited.
There really are only two of these books, but they're both quite complete, and especially
one of them.
We've got the Rhined Papyrus that was probably written around the 17th century BC, the name
of the scribe who wrote it was Ames, and we do know that in fact that this was developed
from or copied from a slightly earlier manuscript believed to have been written about 200 years
earlier.
It's quite complete.
The actual papyrus roll that exists is about 13 inches high and about 18 feet long.
There is one other important source for Egyptian mathematics from this period, and that's the
Moscow Mathematical Papyrus that was probably written in the 19th to the 18th century BC.
That exists today in the Pushkin State Museum, but unfortunately we only have a small piece
of that papyrus, only the top edge still exists.
It's about the top three inches of it, but the whole papyrus is about 15 feet long.
So we've basically got these two problem books that lay out the kinds of problems that civil
servants in ancient Egypt were expected to be able to do.
And what is very interesting is the way that the ancient Egyptians represented number.
The way we represent number today is really quite sophisticated.
What we do with number is we have 10 symbols, the 10 digits, 0 through 9.
And if we want to represent a number that is larger than 9, we start reusing these digits,
but we put them in places that carry this extra value.
So for example, the two digits 1 and 3 can be combined to 13, or we can also combine
the two digits 1 and 3 into 31.
And the 3 has a very different meaning depending on whether it's 1, 3, or whether it's 3, 1.
In the latter case, 3, 1, that digit 3 represents 30, it's 3 tens.
And so we take these 10 digits and we put them in different positions in order to indicate
how many tens we have, or how many hundreds we have, or how many thousands we have.
The system that was used in ancient Egypt is a much simpler system.
And it's based on the idea, first of all, starting out by representing a number by strokes,
which is certainly the very oldest way of representing a number.
So one is a single stroke, and two would be two strokes, and three would be three strokes,
and four would be four strokes.
We still see some echoes of this in our modern way of representing numbers, because the digit
2, for example, is really based on two horizontal strokes with a curve connecting them.
And the number 3 is really based on three horizontal strokes with curves connecting them.
Now it becomes very cumbersome if you want to represent every number by strokes.
And so what the Egyptians devised was a system by which once they got up to 10 of these strokes,
they would replace 10 strokes with a single symbol, what we call a yoke.
So a yoke was a single symbol that would represent 10.
Once you got up to 10 of these symbols for 10, then you would replace them by a single
symbol referred to as a rope, and so it's simply a spiraling symbol.
That meant you've got 100.
So if you wanted to represent 317, for example, you would have three of the rope symbols,
one of the yoke symbols, and seven of the stroke symbols.
And if you wanted 10 of the ropes, then that was represented by a lotus symbol that represented
a thousand, and so on.
This was continued up into 10,000 and 100,000.
In addition to that, the Egyptians were able to work with simple fractions.
What they did was to think of the reciprocals of the integers.
And so if you wanted to represent one-half, you would simply take two strokes and draw
an oval over the top of them.
And so that represented the reciprocal of two or one-half.
One-third would be three strokes with an oval over the top of it.
Now, you've got a problem here in that how do you represent a number like three-quarters?
Well, what the Egyptians would do is represent three-quarters as a half, so two with an oval
over it, plus a quarter, so that would be four with another oval over that.
And that really was sufficient for the kinds of uses of fractions that you get in ancient
Egypt.
The kinds of problems that they would work with, one of the examples from the Rhine Papyrus
is that you've got a scoop, and you've got a certain volume of wheat, a heckot, and the
problem that was posed was it takes three and a third scoops in order to equal one heckot.
What is the size of a single scoop?
And so this is one of the problems that these people who were training to be civil servants
would practice.
The ancient Egyptians were quite good in their work with geometry.
They were able to find a lot of formulas for areas, for volumes.
They knew the Pythagorean theorem.
In the next lecture, I'm going to talk about Pythagoras.
He lived in the 6th century BC.
So the Pythagorean theorem is definitely much, much older than Pythagoras himself.
In fact, it's clear that even by the year 2000 BC in Mesopotamia and in Egypt, people
were very conversant with the Pythagorean theorem.
They were using it in many different contexts, and so it must be much, much older than 2000
BC.
And the Pythagorean theorem, the way to think about it is the way that really has been thought
about throughout most of the history of mathematics.
The Pythagorean theorem is really a theorem about areas.
You take a right-angle triangle, and you construct a square on each of the three sides.
So you take the bottom side and construct a square on that.
You take one of the other sides and construct a square on that, and you take the third side
and you construct a square on that.
And what the Pythagorean theorem says is that the areas of the two smaller squares, when
added together, give you precisely the area of the large square.
Now today we know the Pythagorean theorem as the square of the length of one of the
legs plus the square of the length of another leg is equal to the square of the length of
the hypotenuse, but what's really going on there when we use the word square, it should
be taken literally, and that's the way people have thought about this theorem right up until
very recent centuries, is a theorem about areas.
Another of the problems that the Egyptians solved was that of finding the area of a circle.
And the problem of finding areas of things that are not square regions or rectangular
regions was always simplified into the problem of finding the side of a square whose area
is equal to the given area.
So this is a problem that would be stated not just by the Egyptians and the Babylonians,
but also by Greeks and also by medieval and Renaissance mathematicians.
The problem of squaring a circle.
You've got a circle of a certain diameter and you want to find the side of a square that
has the same area as that circle.
And one of the amazing results that the ancient Egyptians actually were able to come up with
is the way to find the side of that square is to take the diameter of the circle and
take eight ninths of that diameter.
So you construct a square whose side is eight ninths of the original diameter and that actually
gives you an extremely close approximation to the actual area of the circle.
An approximation that is off by less than one part in a hundred, certainly accurate enough
for the kind of work that these Egyptian scribes needed to be able to do.
Now the situation in old, the ancient Babylonian kingdom in Mesopotamia was quite different
from what was going on in Egypt at that time.
As I said, from Egypt we've basically got two sources.
From Mesopotamia we've got literally thousands of sources, but they are not complete texts.
They are tiny fragments of texts.
Because in Mesopotamia rather than writing on papyrus scrolls, what the scribes did was
to record information on clay tablets.
So they would take a clay tablet and they would take a reed stylus and they would stamp
marks in the clay tablet.
And the clay tablets generally were fairly small and so very often a clay tablet would
just contain a single problem with its solution or perhaps it would be a table of values but
you would not be able to get a complete math text.
But we have thousands of these clay tablets that have survived and so we've got a very
good idea of what was happening in Babylonian mathematics at this time.
I want to focus on two of those tablets because they give a good indication of the kinds of
mathematics that the Babylonians were able to do.
The first of these is known as Plimpton 322.
Today it resides at Columbia University and it's about three and a half inches high, about
five inches long and it's believed to have been created about 1800 BC.
And this is a tablet that deals with the Pythagorean theorem and in particular it is looking
at cases of the Pythagorean theorem where you can take the three sides of the triangle
to all be integers.
These are called Pythagorean triples.
So this is three integers such as 3, 4, 5 where 3 squared which is 9 plus 4 squared which
is 16, 9 and 16 is 25 and 25 is a perfect square.
Another example of a Pythagorean triple is 5, 12 and 13.
Another example is 8, 15 and 17 and sometime back in ancient prehistory people began after
studying the Pythagorean theorem and realizing what was going on there to look for triples
of integers that had this property.
Now what's amazing about Plimpton 322 is that it does not just find triples like 3, 4, 5
and 5, 12, 13 but among the triples that are contained on Plimpton 322 are 119, 120 and
169.
If you take 119 squared plus 120 squared that is equal to 169 squared.
And it's very unlikely that anybody could find this just by chance and if you've got
any question about what's going on here some of the other triples that occur on Plimpton
322 are 33, 67 and 34, 56 and 48, 25.
Another triple is 4,601 if I square that, 4,800 square that and add it to the first square.
I'm going to get a perfect square exactly 6,649 squared.
So there must be something going on behind this unfortunately for Plimpton 322 all we
have is this table of values.
We have no idea how it was created and there's some fascinating mathematical detective work
trying to figure out what else we can pick up from what other things we see on Babylonian
mathematics to figure out how they might have come up with these triples but clearly
they must have had a general procedure for coming up with them.
Now this is a good opportunity to also talk about the way in which the Babylonians represented
numbers.
They started out in the same way that the Egyptians had so they had a particular symbol
of vertical wedge that represented one and two of these would represent two and three
of them would represent three until they got up to ten and then they had a new symbol
for ten and that was simply a wedge put on its side.
So a sideways wedge, a horizontal wedge represented ten and then you built up from there but rather
than going all the way to a hundred the Babylonian stopped at sixty.
We're not exactly sure why sixty but my guess is it has something to do with the fact both
that there are approximately 360 days to a year and also the fact that sixty is a number
that is divisible by many nice small integers but they worked with sixty and then instead
of coming up with a new symbol for sixty what they did was to reuse the symbol for one.
In the same way that when I'm writing thirty one I reuse that three symbol but in the tens
place.
So the Babylonians instead of having a base ten system based on powers of ten as our modern
numbers are they had a base sixty system based on powers of sixty.
So if they would put a one in the sixties place and that would then indicate that they
had sixty and they could build up sixties and once they got up to sixty sixties they
would start over again again with their symbol for one that would go into the place of sixty
sixties and sixty sixties is three thousand six hundred.
So they would have a unit's place, they would have a sixties place and they would have a
thirty six hundred's place and they could continue that.
So for example the number four thousand six hundred and one there is one three thousand
six hundred inside of that you take out three thousand six hundred you're left with one
thousand and one there are sixteen sixties in that you take out the sixteen sixties which
is nine hundred and sixty and you're left with forty one.
So they would represent this number four thousand six hundred and one by thirty six hundred
sixteen sixties and forty one ones.
The next piece of Babylonian pottery the next mathematics that I want to talk about is called
YBC 7289 it's a rather unromantic name but that happens to be its designation from the
archaeological dig that it was discovered in.
It exists today at Yale University it probably dates from between eighteen hundred and sixteen
hundred and what's going on on this particular piece of mathematics is that the Babylonians
are representing the square root of two.
We consider a square and we look at the diagonal of the square and the problem that they're
really wrestling with is if I take the length of that square as my unit how many times can
I measure off the length of that square against the diagonal.
Well you try to measure off the length of the square against the diagonal and you realize
that it goes in once and it's not going to go in twice so there's a piece left over.
How big is that piece?
And what they did then was to take their unit and break it down into sixty subunits so sixtieths
of their basic unit.
This idea of taking their units and breaking it down into sixtieths incidentally is something
that we still have with us today.
The fact that we break an hour down into sixty minutes and a minute down into sixty seconds
comes directly to us out of the Babylonian way of dealing with fractions.
So the Babylonians would deal with sixtieths and if you take the piece on the diagonal
that's left over it's about twenty four sixtieths but not exactly you can get twenty four sixtieths
and then there's a little piece left over.
And on this clay tablet what the Babylonians did was take their sixtieths of a unit and
break it down into sixtieths of sixtieths.
And they saw that there were about fifty one of these sixtieths of sixtieths but there was
a little piece left over and they then analyzed the little piece that was left over and they
found that there were about ten sixtieths of sixtieths of sixtieths.
Now you're not going to be able to do that by actually measuring, in fact you really
can't get much beyond just sixtieths of a unit.
So there had to be some very sophisticated algebra that was sitting behind what the Babylonians
were able to do in order to get this approximation to the square root of two so very accurately.
The approximation that they came up with was that the square root of two is approximately
one plus twenty four sixtieths plus fifty one over sixty times sixty plus ten over sixty
times sixty times sixty which in our modern decimal representation is approximately one
point four one four two one three.
This is incredible accuracy, the Babylonians were able to get the square root of two down
to an accuracy of less than one part in a million.
Now not only did they deal with this question of how to find approximations, there also
is a lot of algebra that is contained in the old Babylonian clay tablets.
It's not algebra the way we think about algebra today and in fact one of the big themes
that we'll be following through this series of lectures is how algebra actually did develop.
But it's very instructive to look at the way that the Babylonians viewed algebraic
problems because that's the way the Greeks would look at it, it's the way that the Indians
would look at it, it's the way that the Chinese would look at it.
It really is not up until about the year 1000 AD that we begin to get algebraic notation
that and algebraic ideas that really are connected to our modern way of thinking about algebra.
But the kinds of problems that the Babylonians looked at were very algebraic and one of the
problems that is contained on one of the Babylonian tablets is the following, you've got a square
of unknown side and we want to add to that the length of that square and the value is
three quarters, what is the length of the square?
Now today the way we would set that up is with an algebraic equation, we would say x
squared plus x equals three quarters and we would solve it algebraically.
But the algebraic notation did not exist at this time.
What the Babylonians did was to think about this problem geometrically, you've got a square,
you've got a certain length that is equal to that square, let's create a second area
to add to the square, we'll create a rectangle whose height is equal to the length of the
square and whose width is one unit so that the area of this rectangle is exactly equal
to the length of the original square.
So in our modern algebraic notation if we think of the side of the square as being x
by x then our rectangle is x high and it's one unit wide.
And the method of proof is exactly equivalent to the way we would solve this problem algebraically
today, what the scribe is told to do is to take that rectangle and break it in half so
you get two rectangles each of height this unknown quantity and each of width exactly
one half.
We take one of those rectangles and we slide it underneath our square.
So now I've got my square, I've got a rectangle over here of width one half and height equal
to the height of the square, I've got another rectangle underneath the square whose width
is equal to the length of the square and whose height is equal to one half.
And now we complete the square and completing the square for the ancient Babylonians for
the Greeks again right up until relatively recently is filling in the missing area on
an actual geometric square.
So we want to fill in that little missing piece that's down in the corner and we know
exactly how big that little piece is, it's exactly a quarter, it's exactly half a unit
high and half a unit wide and so its area is equal to one half times one half which
is equal to a quarter.
That tells us that if I add an area equal to a quarter to my existing area I'm going
to get an exact square.
An exact square, well I knew that the area originally was three quarters, if I add an
area of one quarter that now gives me an area of one and so my entire square has area one
well it's easy to determine what the side of that square is, it must be a square of
side one but I know that the side is also equal to the unknown side of the original
square plus one half and that tells me that the original square must have been half a
unit by half a unit.
So that's exactly what we do algebraically today and this is one of the reasons in the
first lecture why I talked about the power of looking at the history of mathematics because
teaching students how to solve a quadratic equation by completing the square suddenly
makes a lot more sense if you're actually able to think about it geometrically and not
think about completing the square as some abstract operation but actually as taking
a geometric square and filling in the missing piece and once you understand what's going
on geometrically here you can then take that idea and see how to encode it in the algebraic
notation but it would take 3,000 years before these problems of solving quadratic equations
got encoded in the kind of algebraic notation that we are familiar with today.
I've been looking at Babylonian mathematics and Egyptian mathematics basically in the
period 2000 to 1600, I've been looking at the kinds of texts that were being used to
train the scribes to train the civil administrators, you do not get a lot of mathematics you get
some mathematics after 1600 BC but the sources are not really nearly as rich as they had
been before and to some extent much of the mathematics goes underground at this point.
Much of the mathematics in Babylon in Egypt is taken over by the priestly castes who are
using mathematics for astronomical observations.
I'm going to wait until lecture 5 before I really begin to look at astronomy and its
effect on mathematics in any detail but one of the things that's important to remember
is that the mathematical tradition continues both in Mesopotamia and Egypt.
We have every reason to believe that it becomes much deeper and richer largely because we
know that it has direct influence on what would come into being in the Greek world starting
in about the year 600 BC but it does become secret knowledge.
This ability to understand what was going on in the heavens was understood as a way
of predicting what was likely to happen on earth after all the position of the sun in
the heavens certainly has great influence on what's going on on the earth and so very
likely the position of the planets, the position of the moon should also have an influence
on what's going on and this then would become secret knowledge.
In Mesopotamia these mathematicians, astronomers, astrologers would come to be called magi
and the magi who visit the infant Jesus in the Christmas story are mathematicians, Persian
mathematicians from Mesopotamia who have seen a star and have realized the astrological
implications of the star that they saw and follow it and so we get mathematicians appearing
in the New Testament.
In the next lecture we're going to jump ahead 1200 years to about 600 BC and we're going
to see how the Greek mathematicians of that time picked up the ideas that they inherited
from Mesopotamia and from Egypt and then developed that mathematics in very new and
very important directions.
