In the last lecture, we finished our study of Greek mathematics, and in this lecture,
we move on to Indian mathematics.
The origins of Indian mathematics are rather uncertain.
The earliest records that we have actually come to us from the Vedas, the great epic
poems that were written in the mid to late 2nd millennium BC.
The mathematics that's contained in the Vedas is very sketchy and often what is found there
is more of a mnemonic device, and so it's open to a great deal of interpretation what
exactly is being described in the Vedas.
But there is a collection of works that really are appendices to the Vedas, what are known
as the Sulbasutras, written in the period roughly 800 BC to 200 BC.
And these describe how rituals were to be performed, and they lay out the way in which
altars were to be constructed, things such as this.
And so there's a fair amount of mathematics that's contained in the Sulbasutras.
And so one of the problems that the Indian priests would face is one of, say, doubling
the area of an altar, and in order to double the area, what you need to do is take the
length and the width and multiply each of those by the square root of 2.
So the Sulbasutras explain how to find a good approximation to the square root of 2.
They also explain how to compute volumes.
If you want to double the volume of a given altar, you need to multiply each of the three
dimensions by the cube root of 2.
And so these also explain how to find good approximations to the cube root of 2.
We do find references to the Pythagorean theorem here.
We also find references to interesting counting problems, because one of the ways in which
the Vedas and the Sulbasutras and these other poetic forms was memorized was to recombine
the syllables.
And people were often interested in the number of ways that these could be recombined.
And some of our earliest work on what we call combinatorics actually comes from these kinds
of investigations.
The earliest recorded writing that we have of Indian mathematics also makes it clear
that they were using a very different system for recording numbers, a system that's much
closer to the system that we use today.
They had nine symbols for the digits 1 through 9, and then they would combine these with
special symbols for the powers of 10.
So you had a symbol for 10, a symbol for 100, a symbol for 1,000, and so on, and you put
these together.
So if you wanted to represent a number like 327, you'd write the digit 3, the 100 symbol,
the digit 2, the 10 symbol, and then the digit 7.
It was not yet a full place value system in our modern sense, and one of the problems
was that at this point, the Indian mathematicians did not have the digit 0.
They did not have this placeholder, which enables us to tell the difference between
307 and 37, and so they used symbols for the power of 10 that was being recorded.
This system, as we'll see in the next lecture, was also used by Chinese mathematicians.
And one of the interesting questions out there is whether this system was originally created
in India and then imported into China, or originally created in China and then imported
into India, or perhaps created someplace else, such as Central Asia, and then imported
into both of those countries, or maybe it just happened to come up independently.
It was an idea that made good sense in both India and China.
But at roughly the same time, we see a very similar system of writing the numbers.
Now itself would be invented sometime, well, nobody's really sure, sometime between 300
and about 6700 AD.
The earliest actual recording that we have of 0 being used as a placeholder in a number
is actually in a Hindu temple in Cambodia that was constructed in the year 683 AD, and
the year as recorded in the Hindu system was a number that actually used the digit 0.
Zero had been used a bit earlier, not as a placeholder, but as a number that could be
manipulated by the 7th century astronomer Brahma Gupta.
And this really is the first time that we have record of somebody working with a symbol
that represents nothing, a symbol for zero.
Zero now enters the numerical system, and Brahma Gupta did explain how to, what happens
when you add a zero to a number, or subtract zero from a number, or what happens if you
multiply a number by zero, you still get zero, and he wrestled a bit with this whole
issue of what happens when you divide a number by zero, and essentially sort of left that
up in the air, what happens when you try to divide by zero.
In today's lecture, I'm going to focus on three great Indian astronomers.
Again, these were men who were best known for their contributions to astronomy, but they
also did a great deal of work in mathematics generally, in algebra, in number theory, and
other areas of mathematics.
These are Aryabhata, born about 476, died sometime in the middle of the 6th century
AD.
Brahma Gupta, that I have already mentioned, who lived in the 6th century.
And then Bhaskara Acharya, Acharya is an honorific title, it means scholar, so this is really
Bhaskara the scholar, who lived in the middle of the 12th century.
As I said in the last lecture, the astronomical works that were developed in Alexandria and
elsewhere in the eastern Mediterranean would be taken up by the Indian astronomers, and
this appears to have happened in the first several centuries AD under the Kushan Empire.
Now, the Kushan Empire was an empire that had come down out of Central Asia to take
over northern India, and it had strong connections with an older Hellenistic Empire, the Seleucids,
who were based in Persia and also in Central Asia.
And largely because of this, the Kushan Empire maintained strong connections with the eastern
Mediterranean, and we do know that they brought astronomical texts from Alexandria and elsewhere.
Strangely, it seems that they never actually imported Ptolemy's Almagest, that appears
to be one of the books that was not translated into Sanskrit, but many of the other astronomical
works of that same period were brought into India and were translated into the Sanskrit.
And fairly soon after receiving the Greek texts, the Indian astronomers began to build
on those and further develop their idea of trigonometry.
The first of the great Indian astronomical texts is the Suryasiddhanta.
We don't know exactly when it was written, probably in the fourth or fifth century AD.
It's possible it was written even earlier than that.
But already here in this first Indian astronomical work that uses trigonometry, we see that the
Greek cord has been replaced by the half cord, what would come in the west eventually to
be called the sign.
And there actually is an interesting story behind how we got this word sign.
The Indian astronomers quite naturally called it a half cord.
The word for cord is jia, and half is arda, so this was an arda jia, a half cord, although
eventually they dropped the adjective half, they just referred to it as a jia or jiva.
And this meant, though, the half cord.
And from jiva, the word was taken up by the Islamic astronomers, and they pronounced it
as jiba, and they wrote it in Arabic, which only uses consonants as jb.
And when the first western astronomers were trying to figure out what this function was
that was being described, they looked at these Arabic letters jb, which of course did not
represent any word in Arabic.
Jiba is not an Arabic word, it's simply a transliteration of the Sanskrit word for this
half cord.
They looked at those letters jb, and the one Arabic word that they knew that used the
letters jb was jayib, which means breast.
And so they assumed that this was to be called a breast.
Now it's not quite clear how this happened, but perhaps out of excessive modesty, rather
than calling it a breast, they decided to refer to the fold of a cloth that might cover
a breast, and the fold of a cloth could be referred to as a sinus.
And so this became a sinus in Latin, which in English eventually would become our sign,
so we get sign out of a mistranslation of a transliteration of a Sanskrit word.
The Indian astronomers also studied the cosine, which was the cotigia, and if you think about
the bow and arrow, so we've got the arc of the bow, we've got the cord, and we've got
the arrow, the shaft of the arrow, so that's the distance from the center of the circle
to the cord, that is the cosine or the cotigia.
And the Indian astronomers also made great use of the ukramaja, and that's the tip of
the arrow, that's the little part of the arrow between the cord and the arc of the bow.
This would come to be called in English the versed sign.
We no longer work with the versed sign, the versed sign after all is just the radius minus
the cosine, so there's no real need to come up with a separate term for this.
But if you look in the 17th century, something like Newton's Principia, his mathematical principles
of natural philosophy, he does a lot with the versed sign, and this is where it's coming
from.
Indian invention, and it comes out of describing that arc, that tip of the arrow.
I'd like to spend some time now looking at the trigonometric tables that people came
up with, and particularly the work of Aryabhata.
Aryabhata, as I said, was born 476, he was in the Gupta Empire, the Gupta Empire had
begun around 320, would last until about 600 AD.
Aryabhata lived in Kusumapura, which was the center for astronomical work, very near the
capital of Pataliputra, which today is modern Putna in India.
He also was working with a circle of radius 3438, and he almost certainly was not aware
of Ptolemy's Almagest, because as I said, Ptolemy's Almagest was actually able to look
at chord lengths for arcs all the way down to half a degree.
And Aryabhata was working with chord lengths of 3 degrees 45 minutes.
In other words, what he was doing was starting with a chord length for 60 degrees, and then
from that you can get the chord length for 30, 15, 7 and a half, and then 3 and 3 quarters
just by taking half angles.
So he had a much rougher table, but he did something that was extremely important.
He was looking at the problem of interpolation.
If you've got a table of values, and you want to find some intermediate value, how do you
go about doing that?
Well, a natural way of doing this interpolation is that if you've got a value, say that's
halfway between the two given values, you just take the output that's halfway between
the two outputs.
And rather than looking at the actual trigonometric table that Aryabhata was looking at, I'm going
to show you a somewhat simplified table that illustrates the point of what Aryabhata and
the later Indian astronomers were able to do.
So what I'm going to do on one side, I've got inputs that are the digits 1, 2, 3 and
4, and then I've got outputs that are the digits 1, 3, 7 and 13.
And the question then is, if I've got an input of 2 and a half, what should be my output?
Well, 2 and a half is halfway between 2 and 3, so that suggests that my output should be
halfway between 3 and 7.
And so we might take 5 as the logical output, and that's what's called a linear interpolation.
We're just assuming that things work as if they're on a straight line.
But in fact, if you look at these output values, 1, 3, 7, 13, you see that the output values
are increasing.
1 to 3 is a difference of 2, 3 to 7 is a difference of 4, 7 to 13 is a difference of 6.
These differences are themselves increasing.
Aryabhata did not just look at the differences, he actually took a table of the second differences.
And he used that to refine the way in which he was going to do this interpolation.
What is happening in this table is that as we move further down the table, the increase
gets bigger.
And so the increase in the output going from 2 to 2 and a half should not be as big as
the increase in output as we go from 2 and a half down to 3.
We need a bigger increase in output.
Now the total increase in output from 2 to 3 has got to be 4, so the output increases
from an output of 3 to an output of 7.
But how do we then arrange this output in order to take into account the fact that the outputs
are increasing at an increasing rate?
And one of the things that you can do is to decide that from 1 to 1 and a half we've got
to have a certain increase in the output.
From 1 and a half to 2 we've got to have a greater increase in the output, and the increase
in the output has to increase by the same amount each time.
And so we can do this if from 1 to 1 and a half we have an increase of three quarters,
from 1 and a half to 2 we have an increase of five quarters, from 2 to 2 and a half we
have an increase of seven quarters, and then from 2 and a half to 3 we have an increase
of nine quarters.
Now our increases are going up by the same amount each time.
Seven quarters plus nine quarters gives us our 16 quarters, our total increase of four
as we go from 2 to 3, and so that says that a better output for an input of 2 and a half
is 3 plus an increase of seven quarters.
So that gives us four and three quarters as the desired output.
And what is happening here is that you are beginning to get the idea of taking this table
of values and doing what today is called a quadratic interpolation.
So you're no longer using just a straight line to figure out what numbers should come
out.
You're using a much more sophisticated kind of technique for interpolation.
And this idea of using a quadratic interpolation would be more fully developed by Brahmagupta.
And Brahmagupta would actually show how to do an arbitrary quadratic interpolation for
any kind of function that you might put in.
So if you know the value of first differences and you know the values of the second differences,
you can then use those in order to get a better idea of what the intermediate values in your
table should be.
Brahmagupta is an extremely important mathematician and astronomer.
He taught at the great astronomical center of Ujjain, which is located on the western
edge of Madhya Pradesh, near modern Rajasthan.
Ujjain was founded around the fourth century B.C. and it would exist until the 12th century
AD would be an important mathematical center and it would be so important as an astronomical
center that it would mark zero longitude or what was the first meridian for Indian astronomers.
Now the first meridian in our modern world is the line of Greenwich and that's chosen
because of the Royal Astronomical Observatory in Greenwich.
It's decided that that is zero longitude and you measure the longitudes east and west
from Greenwich.
In ancient Indian astronomy, that zero mark of longitude was located going right through
the center of Ujjain, the great astronomical center.
As I mentioned before, Brahmagupta is the first person known to have used zero.
He also is one of the first people known to have used negative numbers.
Now we will see in China that negative numbers came in much earlier but only as intermediate
steps and Brahmagupta realized that you needed to be able to actually work with negative numbers
and accept negative numbers as possible solutions.
And so far as we know, he's the first person actually to accept negative numbers as solutions
to mathematical problems.
This interpolation formula, this quadratic interpolation is often attributed to Newton
who would then go on and extend this to interpolation by polynomials of higher degree, cubic polynomials,
fourth degree polynomials and so on.
Eventually the Indian astronomers would realize how to do this, how to not just take first
differences and second differences but to work with third differences, fourth differences,
as many as you needed in order to get a very accurate interpolation of the values.
Brahmagupta also did work on D'Ephantine equations.
So these are equations that were studied by D'Ephantis and one of the examples of these
that I gave earlier is the problem of Pythagorean triples, so 3, 4, 5, 3 squared plus 4 squared
equals 5 squared.
The kind of D'Ephantine equations that Brahmagupta studied, equations where we're only interested
in integer solutions, are things like x squared minus 8y squared equals 1.
If you find two integers that solve this, then the ratio of those integers gives you
a very good approximation to the square root of 8, a good rational approximation.
And he found a number of solutions to this.
We don't know exactly the method that he used, all we know are the answers that he
found, but for example he showed that 3 squared minus 8 times 1 squared is equal to 1.
And 17 squared minus 8 times 6 squared is equal to 1.
And 3,363 squared minus 8 times 1,189 squared is equal to 1.
Another one of the examples of the D'Ephantine equations that Brahmagupta studied are something
squared minus 61 times something else squared is equal to 1.
And here the answer gets much more complicated.
One of the answers that Brahmagupta actually came up with to this is you take 1,766,349,
you square it, you subtract 61 times 226,153,980, this quantity gets squared, and then that
difference is actually equal to 1.
This idea would further be developed by the last of the great Indian astronomers that
I want to talk about, Bhaskara Acharya, born in 1114, died in 1185.
He also was interested in this problem of finding polynomials that interpolate values
in these tables of sines and cosines and versed sines.
And he came up with something that would really anticipate developments in Western Europe
that would come many, many hundreds of years later.
And that is, in order to find a good polynomial to approximate the sign, he considered the
rate at which the sign function is changing.
What Bhaskara actually was looking at is the derivative of the sign function.
And what he realized is that the rate at which the sign function changes is given by the
cosine function.
And the rate at which the cosine function changes is given by the negative of the sign
function.
And he saw how to use this fact in order to find what today we would call a Taylor polynomial,
a quadratic polynomial that does a very good approximation to the sign function very close
to any value that you happen to know the exact value of the sign function for.
So if you know the exact value of the sign, you know the exact value of the cosine, you
can work out this quadratic approximation.
And this really marks a new episode in the understanding of polynomials.
Because up until now, polynomials had been thought of simply as things that are useful
for solving problems that involve areas, then you use a quadratic polynomial, or problems
involving volumes, then you're going to use a cubic polynomial.
But now, suddenly, polynomials were being used for interpolation.
They're being used to approximate the missing values in a table.
And once you start doing that, there's no reason to stop at polynomials of degree three.
There's no reason to stop with volumes.
The Greeks stopped with polynomials of degree three because it made no sense to talk about
a four-dimensional region.
But if you're simply looking at the interpolation, suddenly it makes sense to go beyond degree
three and consider a polynomial of degree four, a polynomial of degree five, a polynomial
of degree six.
And we're not entirely sure where these different polynomials came from, but it seems that this
was one of the important sources of the development of the idea of a polynomial of general degree.
Also, the Diophantine equation that was studied by Brahmagupta, this general problem, you've
got a perfect square, and you subtract some integer times another perfect square.
I gave the examples where it's a perfect square minus eight times another perfect square equals
one, where a perfect square minus 61 times another perfect square is equal to one.
That is known today as Pehl's equation, and this is an equation that was not just studied
by Baskara.
Baskara actually was able to find a way of coming up with a solution to Pehl's equation
no matter what multiplier you were using.
So you could use an eight, you could use a 61, you could use any number as long as it's
not a perfect square.
So you could take x squared minus 57y squared equals one, or x squared minus 327y squared
equals one, and Baskara laid out a procedure that would enable you to find a pair of integers
that would then satisfy that equation.
Indian mathematics would continue after the fall of Ujjain.
Ujjain disappears in 1235.
This is when the Delhi Caliphate conquers Ujjain.
The astronomical center is destroyed at that time, at the time of the conquest.
The astronomers in Ujjain are dispersed.
Northern India ceases to be a center of important mathematical work, but the mathematical work
of that time does move down into southern India, specifically southwestern India in
Kerala.
And we do have a series of important Indian astronomers doing work in mathematics down
in Kerala, beginning with Madhava in the 14th into the early 15th century, Parameshwara,
the 8th, 14th century into the 15th century, Nilakanta, 15th into the early 16th century.
And what these astronomer mathematicians were able to do is to take the general idea that
Baskara had done of taking a trigonometric function, looking at its rate of change and
using the rate of change and the rate of change of the rate of change and the rate of change
of the rate of change, of the rate of change, to come up first as Baskara did with a quadratic
polynomial that's a good approximation to the sine function, and then a cubic polynomial
and then a fourth degree polynomial.
And eventually they saw how to get a polynomial of arbitrary degree.
So you can get a polynomial of as high degree as you want, the higher you take the degree,
the closer the approximation is going to be.
And it's not clear which of these astronomers actually was responsible for it, it's generally
believed that this goes back all the way to Madhava.
But at this time what they did was not just figure out how to get polynomials of arbitrarily
large degree, they then made the jump to a polynomial of infinite degree, what today
we would call a power series.
So this is an infinite collection of powers of your unknown which can be brought as close
as you wish to the actual value of the function.
So it's a representation of the function as a sum of powers of the unknown, the powers
go out toward infinity, you can get as close to the value as you want just by going far
enough out.
This is work that was probably done in the 14th century.
This is work that would not be redone in Europe until the very end of the 17th century.
Unfortunately the work that was done in India was lost to the rest of the world.
The astronomers who were working on power series in South India were not able to communicate
their results to anyone else.
And the fact is that their way of approximating the sign was almost too accurate.
The problem was that you can only measure the difference between two lights in the sky
to within maybe a couple minutes of arc.
So being able to calculate values of the sign or the cosine or the tangent to this kind
of accuracy was far more than what was needed.
And at this point nobody could figure out any other uses for the sign or the cosine.
The only uses for these trigonometric functions at this time was in astronomy.
And since no one could figure out these uses, eventually knowledge of these power series
would be lost.
And it was only in the 19th century actually when British archaeologists managed to come
across some of these old documents from several hundred years earlier, mathematicians then
looking at them realized what actually had been accomplished.
But it points out the importance of not just pulling ideas from the world around you, the
ideas that you pull out of the world around you have got to be applicable to worthwhile
problems in understanding the world.
And once the mathematics becomes divorced from what is really needed, there is the danger
that it's going to degenerate.
In the next lecture I'm going to move north from India into China and we will see what
was happening at this same time, the first millennium AD, roughly up to about 1300 AD
in China.
