In this lecture we're going to look at Pierre de Fermat and also Rene Descartes. Fermat
really is instrumental in the development of analytic geometry and the origins of calculus
and this will be the first time that I talk a little bit about Fermat's last theorem.
Fermat was by profession a lawyer. His mathematics was simply an avocation. Fermat had been born
in 1601. He would die in 1665. Born near Toulouse, he first went to Bordeaux and there
he actually studied mathematics, studied with some of the disciples of Viet, a French algebraist
from the 1500s who was no longer alive at that time but people who had studied with Viet
were around and Fermat learned a lot of his mathematics at that time. From Bordeaux he
then went on to Orléans where he got a law degree and then returned to Toulouse. He initially
got a job as counselor to parliament and it was as in this capacity as a counselor that
he was able to add the DE to his name and so he became Pierre de Fermat. He fairly quickly
rose through the ranks as a lawyer in service to the parliament and to the government in
Toulouse. By 1638 he was counselor for the upper house of parliament and by 1652 he was
working for the criminal court and would eventually attain one of the highest positions there.
In fact his rise through the law profession was so meteoric that a number of people have
postulated that it may have been his good luck that the plague came through Toulouse
so frequently, that his superiors probably were dying off, which is why he was able
to rise through the ranks. He himself at one time did actually contract the plague and
the rumor went out for a while that he had actually died of the plague although fortunately
for us he did survive. As I said Fermat looked at mathematics as an avocation. He actually
published very little in his lifetime and we might not even know about Pierre de Fermat
if it had not been for his son. It was his son who would collect his manuscripts after
his father's death and then see that they got published and that his name was more widely
known. The first mathematics that Pierre de Fermat did came out of work that he had begun
in the 1620s while he was in Bordeaux. He had come across a description of a lost book
from Apollonius. So this is Apollonius of Perga, the author of The Connex and one of
the books that he wrote was called Plain Loci or it's Two Dimensional Curves. That book
is lost to us but a later Greek mathematician by the name of Papas had written about this
particular book of Apollonius and described many of the results that had happened to him
and described many of the results that Apollonius had proven in his book. And so Fermat took
a translation into Latin of this description of the lost book of Apollonius and he sought
to try to prove these results on geometry and they were extremely difficult to prove
but in order to find a proof what Fermat did was to invent an entirely new way of approaching
geometric problems, what today we call analytic geometry. What he did was to take a geometric
figure and reinterpret it algebraically. Usually the way we think of that today is
to take an algebraic expression and look at it geometrically when we graph an algebraic
expression and so we put a horizontal axis and we put a vertical axis, we've got our
two variables the x and the y and for each pair of values, a value for x and a value
for y that correspond to a point that satisfies an algebraic equation, we take a look at the
x value and the y value and we plot that point and as you plot all of the points on what
today is called the Cartesian coordinate axis, you get a curve traced out. Now you can actually
look at this both ways, you can start with an algebraic expression and turn it into a
geometric curve, you can also start with a geometric curve and turn it into an algebraic
expression and this is exactly what Fermat did, he took the geometric statements that
Apollonius had made, he translated them into algebraic statements and then he used this
very advanced work on algebra that had been done in the preceding centuries in order to
find simple solutions and simple proofs to these geometric problems.
Now when Fermat did his coordinate axes, he didn't do them quite the way we would do
them today, he did not actually have a vertical axis, he had the horizontal axis on which
one of the variables would be represented and then he simply marked off the distance
to the other variable, very much along the lines of what Galileo did, but remember that
Galileo actually drew little vertical lines, one of Fermat's inventions was not to draw
those little vertical lines but simply to mark the point above the horizontal axis, but
he didn't actually put in the vertical axis and actually as he found the distance from
the horizontal axis he didn't always move vertically, sometimes he moved off at an angle,
the important thing is that you're always moving off at exactly the same angle, but
it provides a method for translating this algebraic expression into geometric or geometric
back into algebraic. It's an idea that Fermat came up with, Descartes would also come up
with the same idea at the same time. Fermat had started on this work in the 1620s, it
would be 1637 before he was ready to publish it and he published it in that year as the
book Introduction to Plain and Solid Loci and exactly that same year by one of the great
coincidences that often happens in mathematics, René Descartes independently came up with
exactly the same idea for translating between geometric objects and algebraic expressions.
René Descartes published his great work, Geometry, contained in a more comprehensive
work called Discourse on the Method for Rightly Directing One's Reason and Searching for Truth
in the Sciences and one of the things that you cannot accuse Descartes of is being overly
humble. He believed that he had found the right way for answering any scientific question.
That would be out there. Now in fact Descartes' explanation of how to pass back and forth
between geometric and algebraic expressions would become much more popular than Fermat's
for a couple of reasons. One, Descartes was just much better known. Also Descartes was
very good at coming up with efficient algebraic notation. And the notation that we use today
is really Descartes' algebraic notation. Fermat was using an algebraic notation that
he had learned from Viet's disciples. It's not as efficient. It's not as easy to work
with. A lot of people looked at Fermat's work and they couldn't understand what he was
really doing or they had trouble reading it. And that is why today when we talk about a
coordinate plane we talk about it as a Cartesian plane named after Descartes rather than a
Fermatian plane named after Pierre de Fermat. Although in reality both of them discovered
the same idea and published this idea in exactly the same year. Now there is an important difference
between how Descartes and Fermat looked at this problem of moving between geometry and
algebra. Descartes, like Fermat, started with this idea of taking a geometric object, interpreting
it algebraically and then being able to come to geometric conclusions by studying the algebra.
That is how Fermat began this, but Fermat fairly quickly realized that he could move in the
other direction and that would be very powerful. He could take an algebraic expression, say
the equation that describes a quadratic polynomial, a polynomial of degree 2, and he could then
graph that algebraic expression and work with a parabola instead of the algebraic expression.
And when you take an algebraic expression and you look at it geometrically, very often
you can see things in the geometry that are not immediately apparent when you're looking
at the algebra. And two examples of this are you can think about the area underneath the
geometric object. So I've got a parabola, perhaps a parabola, that is opening downward
and one can ask what is the area between the horizontal axis and this particular parabola.
The other thing that you can look at is where does this algebraic expression hit its largest
value? Where does it reach its smallest value, say within some range of values? If you look
at it geometrically, the highest value is simply going to be where that curve peaks.
And the lowest value is going to be where that curve has its lowest value. And that ability
to take an algebraic expression and translate it into something geometric would very directly
lead into the development of much of calculus. This is something, unfortunately, that Descartes
missed. I want to say just a little bit more about Descartes. I mentioned before that he
is the person who invented the term imaginary number for the square root of a negative number.
Again, a very, very unfortunate term because these are numbers that truly exist even though
Descartes called them imaginary. This is also a time in the 17th century when people were
still not sure about whether to accept negative numbers as legitimate numbers. Now I've talked
about the introduction of negative numbers. The Chinese were the first to work with them.
They didn't accept them as legitimate solutions, but they realized that they were important
as intermediate steps. And the Indian mathematicians eventually would adopt them not just as intermediate
steps, but actually as legitimate answers. The Islamic mathematicians were very much divided
on whether or not to allow negative numbers. They were certainly very useful. On the other
hand, they were very much embedded in the Greek tradition and the Babylonian tradition
that looked at numbers as describing something, and ideally numbers were describing lengths
in some way. You can't talk about a negative length, and so it never really seemed to make
sense to talk about negative numbers. And when we get into Western Europe in the 15th,
16th, and 17th centuries, there was a very real ongoing debate about whether or not to
accept negative numbers as legitimate answers. Descartes was one of the last to really speak
out against accepting negative numbers. He would talk about a negative root of a polynomial,
a negative solution to a polynomial equation as a false root, and a positive solution as
a true root. Fortunately, that's a terminology that we have long since lost, and certainly
by the middle of the 17th century and well into the late 17th century, people were now
accepting negative numbers as legitimate numbers that really could be answers to problems that
were out there. One of the other things that Descartes did that really set science back
quite a bit was his Principles of Philosophy, published in 1644. His idea was to put out
principles on which you could base all of your knowledge of the universe. So he was
looking at this problem that Aristotle had laid out foundations for understanding the
world around us, and the Aristotelian foundations were crumbling. Descartes decided to replace
those with modern foundations that would hold up. And so this is where we get such phrases
as cogito ergo sum, I think therefore I am. And his work consists of four major volumes,
the Principles of Human Knowledge, the Principles of Material Things, of the Visible World,
and the Earth. And one of the things that Descartes stated quite forcefully in this particular
collection was that there can be no action without an actor, no action at a distance.
If something is moving, it's because something else is moving it. And so he explained the
motion of the planets by postulating an ether that pervaded all of the universe, and it
was actually the swirling ether that was moving the planets in their courses. And he explained
the fact that we don't sense motion because we are embedded in this ether, we are moving
with the ether, and since we're moving with this ether, we don't sense this motion.
Now I said that would be one of the great disasters of the mid 17th century, and that's
because when Newton published his Principia, he was looking at gravity. Gravity is something
that acts at a distance, and Newton was unable to explain how it was possible for gravity
to act at a distance without any intermediary. And a lot of people criticize Newton in fact
refused to accept his great work on celestial mechanics precisely because he could not come
up with a Cartesian type mechanism in order to explain how gravity was able to act.
I said that Fermat published very little, even though he published very little, he was
an active correspondent in mathematics. And most of his correspondence was undertaken
with a Catholic priest in Paris by the name of Father Mecha Mersen, a very important figure
during the 1600s. This is a time before scientific journals, and so if you wanted to find out
what something else was doing, you had to learn it by letter. And there were a few key
people, and Father Mersen was one of the most important of these, who would correspond with
the scientists of that time. He would hear what different people were doing, what they
had discovered, and then he would send out letters to all of his acquaintances describing
this. He was a great friend of Descartes, he was a good friend of Christian Huygens, who
I will talk about in the next lecture, and he also corresponded regularly with Fermat.
Mersen incidentally was also a great supporter of Galileo, despite the fact that he was a
Catholic priest. In secret, he managed to smuggle out a copy of Galileo's dialogue,
this work that had been banned by the Inquisition. It was Mersen who managed to get a copy of
this to the Netherlands and to see that it got published. Mersen is known to have had
over 78 correspondents during his life, including not just Descartes and Huygens and Fermat,
but also Gassendi, Roberwald, Pelt, Torricelli, Hobbes, and both Etienne and Blaise Pascal,
all of the great scientists of his time. In 1636, Fermat tackles the problem of finding
the area underneath the curve that is described by an algebraic expression. So this is, in
essence, what would come to be understood as the integral calculus. Given an algebraic
expression, consider its curve, the curve that represents that expression, and look at the
area underneath it. And it would be Fermat who would be the first person who would actually
discover how to find the area underneath this curve for an arbitrary algebraic expression.
Coming up with what today we think of as the means of integrating polynomials. He used
precisely the method of exhaustion that goes back to Eudoxus of Canetus and that had been
used then by Euclid and Archimedes and Ebenal Hytham and many mathematicians since then.
And Fermat showed how to use this idea in order to find areas under curves. He was not
the only person, one of the other correspondence of Mercen in the very same year of 1636.
G. de Roberwald also found exactly the same formula for the area under a curve that corresponds
to an arbitrary polynomial. Fermat then went on and considered the problem of, given an
algebraic expression, how do we find where it reaches its maximum, its greatest value,
or its minimum, its least value. And in 1639 he would discover how to do this. And the idea
was to take the algebraic expression, represent it as a curve, and then look at the line that
is tangent to the curve at each point. If we consider the line that touches the curve
at just a single point, if I've got an expression that is increasing, that slope is going to
be positive. If I've got an expression that is decreasing, that slope is going to be negative.
If I've got an expression that is at its highest value or at its very lowest value, then that
tangent line is going to be horizontal, its slope is going to be zero. Fermat did not
stop there. He then looked at how to determine the slope of the tangent line at a single point.
And what he did then was to consider two points that are very close to the point in question
on the curve that we're looking at. And it's possible to actually construct the equation
of the straight line that goes through those two points. And the slope of the line that
goes through those two points is going to be the rise over the run. It's the change in
the y value divided by the change in the x value. And Fermat's brilliant insight was
that you could take this change in the x value to be smaller and smaller and smaller as the
change in the x value gets smaller, the change in the y value gets smaller. And what happens
is that this ratio of two numbers, both the numerator and denominator, are getting closer
to zero. But this ratio is going to approach some number that is the slope of the line
that is precisely tangent at that particular point. When we want to find the maximum value
or the minimum value, we do precisely this procedure. But we're looking for those points
where the slope of the tangent line is exactly equal to zero. Now the fact that the slope
of the tangent line is zero does not guarantee that we have either a maximum value or a minimum
value. The function might increase, level off at a kind of step, and then start increasing
again. But in general, for most algebraic expressions, you're going to have very few
places where the function actually has a horizontal tangent line. And so that greatly limits the
number of places where you have to look for the greatest value or the least value. In
fact, restricts it so that you can then simply look at the value of the function at the different
candidates and pick that value of the function at which you get the largest value or the
smallest value. Fermat extended this idea to actually find ways of determining this slope
of the tangent line, what today we call the derivative of the function. Fermat found rules
for doing this for any polynomial, for arbitrary, not only integer powers of an unknown, but
also for arbitrary rational powers of an unknown. So if I've got something that is representing,
a curve that's representing the square root of x, or the cube root of x, or x to the five
thirds power, Fermat showed how to find the slope of the tangent line for an expression
such as that. I want to spend the rest of this lecture looking at Fermat's work in
number theory, because that would be extremely important. Fermat read Diophantus's Arithmetica,
and one of the things that he discovered there was the Pythagorean triples. Something else
that he discovered in the work of Diophantus was perfect numbers. A perfect number is one
which, if you take the sum of its proper divisors, gets you back to that number. So in the case
of six, the sum of its proper divisors, one, two, and three, is six again. If I take the
proper divisors of 28, they are one, two, four, seven, and fourteen. If I add those numbers
up, I get back to 28. Perfect numbers were important to the Greeks. They continued to
be important, and in fact, one of my favorite quotes comes from St. Augustine of Hippo.
In the city of God, he muses on why it took God exactly six days to complete the creation,
and he says in that it is recorded that all God's works were completed in six days, because
six is a perfect number. Well, there were four perfect numbers that were known to the
ancient Greeks, six, twenty-eight, four hundred ninety-six, and eight thousand one hundred
and twenty-eight, and Fermat was interested in this problem of going beyond that. And
one of the keys to finding a perfect number, as Fermat realized, was to find a prime that
is one less than a power of two. So if I look at six, that's two times three, three is
one less than a power of two. If I look at twenty-eight, that is four times seven, seven
is one less than a power of two. And the even perfect numbers, we actually don't know if
there are any odd perfect numbers or not, but the even perfect numbers all have to be
of this form. It's going to be a power of two times a prime that is one less than a power
of two. And Fermat did very important work in understanding when a number that is one
less than a power of two can be a prime. First of all, the exponent has to be a prime.
Two to the eighth minus one cannot possibly be prime. Two to the ninth minus one cannot
possibly be prime. Two to the eleventh minus one might be a prime. In fact, it's not. Two
to the eleventh minus one is equal to twenty-three times eighty-nine, but something's interesting,
something interesting is happening there. If I look at twenty-three and eighty-nine, I was
using the exponent eleven, and both twenty-three and eighty-nine are one more than a multiple
of eleven. There's something very deep going on here that Fermat realized that if I take
a prime, take two to that prime power and subtract one, the only numbers that can divide
into that are numbers that are one more than a multiple of that prime exponent. This would come to be
known as Fermat's little theorem, and it would come to play a very important role in number
theory, and in fact the RSA public key crypto system that I'll talk about in the very last
lecture has its foundation in this observation of Fermat. This problem of when is one less
than a power of two equal to a prime, is one that would continue to interest mathematicians,
and in fact the very largest known prime today is of this form. It is called a Mersenne prime
in honor of Fr. Mecha Mersenne, and the largest prime known at the moment that I am speaking,
and this changes about once a year, but currently the largest known prime is the forty-fourth
prime that is one less than a power of two. It is two to the thirty-two million five hundred
and eighty-two thousand six hundred and fifty-seven minus one. It's an enormous number, it's got
almost ten million digits in it, so I'm not going to be able to show you that number, but
in general the largest known prime has usually been one of these Mersenne primes, a number
that is one less than a power of two. Fermat also was interested in the problem of Pythagorean
triples, so integers like three, four, five, where three squared plus four squared equals
five squared, or five, twelve, thirteen, five squared plus twelve squared equals thirteen
squared, and that led him to think about what about using higher powers. Can I find three
positive integers so that the cube of the first plus the cube of the second is equal
to the cube of the third, or use fourth powers, the fourth power of the first plus the fourth
power of the second is equal to the fourth power of the third? Well, he was reading Diathontis,
his Arithmetic at this time, and he was writing his notes in the margin, and this copy of Diathontis
with the marginal notes is something that Fermat's son would publish with all of these marginal
notes, and this is how we come to know of what today is called Fermat's Last Theorem, and
Fermat wrote in the margin, thinking about doing Pythagorean triples but for higher powers,
it is impossible for a cube to be written as a sum of two cubes, or a fourth power to be
written as a sum of two fourth powers, or in general for any number which is a power greater
than the second to be written as a sum of two light powers. I have a truly marvelous demonstration
which this margin is too narrow to contain. Well, almost certainly he did not have a proof
of this result, which came to be known as Fermat's Last Theorem, called Fermat's Last Theorem
because over the years people would prove all of the other results that Fermat had stated
without proof or show that they were wrong. This was the last of his assertions that needed
to be settled, and it would not be finally settled until the very end of the twentieth
century, but that's a topic for a later lecture. For the next lecture, we're going to turn to
Isaac Newton and the full development of calculus.
