In this lecture, we're going to look at a new element in the development of mathematics.
We're going to see how art has really influenced geometry and all of mathematics within the
past few centuries.
I've been standing in front of a picture of the lion court at Alhambra in Granada because
it's an excellent example of symmetry in art.
There is all kinds of symmetry throughout Alhambra and symmetry is really fundamental
to much of what artists do.
To be symmetric means to be left unchanged under some kind of a transformation.
And as we look at the lion court at Alhambra, we see that if we do a mirror reflection of
the building, this is a kind of transformation shifting the left for right in a mirror image.
Under this transformation, the picture is left unchanged.
Quite intentionally, of course, it was built so that it would have that symmetry.
The lion basin at the center also has a symmetry, a different kind of symmetry.
It does have this mirror symmetry so that if you look at the reflection of that basin,
you get back exactly the same basin.
But if you were to look down on the basin from above, you would see that it is surrounded
by 12 lions equally spaced around the circumference of the basin.
And so this means that if I take this configuration, the circular basin, with its 12 lions and
I rotate it by 30 degrees, I'm not going to change the configuration that I've got.
And so we say that this basin has 12 fold rotational symmetry.
I can rotate it 12 times by 30 degrees each time.
And each time I rotate it, I get back to exactly the figure that I had before.
There's another kind of transformational symmetry that occurs in Alhambra and that is present
throughout the palace.
And that is translational symmetry, the idea that you've got a pattern and that pattern
repeats as you move horizontally or it repeats as you move vertically.
Such a pattern is often referred to as a wallpaper pattern.
And the first of the illustrations of the kinds of tiling patterns that are at Alhambra
is shown in this particular picture that shows this translational symmetry.
And the thing about a pattern that has translational symmetry is that you can tile a surface of
arbitrarily large size.
The pattern is going to continue off forever in all directions, which has a fundamental
religious truth hidden within it for the Islamic creators of this particular piece
of art, the idea of the infinitude of creation.
But it also is very appealing to create a pattern that has this kind of translational
symmetry.
Now this particular pattern at Alhambra has more than translational symmetry.
It also has rotational symmetry.
We've got figures here where if we rotate them by 120 degrees, we get back exactly the
same figures.
Now there are colors within this tiling pattern that disrupts some of the symmetry.
And I think there was an intentional effort on the part of the artist to have the symmetry
and yet have something that seems to break it.
But if we just look at the geometric patterns, we see that not only do we have translational
symmetry, we also have a three-fold rotational symmetry.
There is another type of translational symmetry or wallpaper symmetry that is shown in the
next picture that shows a six-fold rotational symmetry.
Now if I take this pattern, which is going to repeat arbitrarily in both horizontal and
vertical directions, and I rotate it by only 60 degrees instead of 120 degrees, I'm going
to get back to exactly the same wallpaper pattern that I had before.
Here is yet another example of a wallpaper pattern that is present in Alhambra.
This particular pattern has four-fold symmetry, so I can rotate it by 90 degrees and get back
to the original pattern.
It almost has mirror symmetry, but if you'll notice some of those bands that outline the
figure actually overlap in ways that it doesn't quite have perfect mirror symmetry.
And there's something very interesting going on here.
You've got translational symmetry.
You have, at first glance, mirror symmetry, and yet the artist has been quite clever in
breaking that mirror symmetry, so it's not really quite there.
It invites the observer to look at the pattern more closely and think about what's going
on.
Another example of a wallpaper pattern is given in Alkazar, the castle in Seville.
This is actually taken from a metal door in the castle, and it shows another wallpaper
pattern that has both four-fold rotational and mirror symmetries, but they're quite
different from the other four-fold or mirror symmetry that we saw in the previous picture,
in that in this particular case, the rotational symmetry has its center in the center of those
circles, whereas the mirror symmetry is located at a different point.
The mirror symmetry is located at the center of these lozenges, so one can have a wallpaper
pattern that has both four-fold rotational and mirror symmetry, either with the centers
of both of these symmetries at the same point, or you can have a pattern that has these symmetries
at different points.
So we've been looking at different kinds of symmetries, different kinds of transformations
that leave a picture unchanged.
We've looked at the mirror symmetries, we've looked at rotational symmetries, we've looked
at translational symmetries, we've looked at various combinations of these.
Another important kind of symmetry is what is called a dilation, and we see this quite
clearly in the kinds of images that are often used, where you have a picture, and inside
that picture there is a smaller picture, which is an exact copy of the large picture.
And inside that small copy of the large picture, there is an even smaller copy of the large
picture, and this continues off to infinity.
We call this dilation symmetry, because if I take that small picture that's inside the
large picture, and I expand it out to the size of the original large picture, I get
back the original large picture.
So this is a transformation, this idea of dilating that small picture, expanding it out, or a
dilation can be a contraction.
So the dilation is either expansion or contraction, and to have a pattern that is left unchanged
once I accomplish that particular expansion or contraction.
The graphic artist Moritz Escher, born in 1898, died in 1972, traveled to Alhambra in
1922.
He was quite taken by the art of Alhambra, and he returned there in 1936, and began to
do an extensive study of the kinds of symmetry patterns that he saw in the Alhambra, in the
tiling of the walls, and the various kinds of transformations that were used, and he
became fascinated by this idea of patterns that are left unchanged under various kinds
of transformations.
And he actually went back to the Netherlands, where he was from, after spending several
months at Alhambra in 1936.
He went back and he began to explore the mathematics behind it.
There was a very important paper on these wallpaper patterns that was published by George
Polia, one of the great Hungarian mathematicians of the 20th century, a paper that Polia had
published in 1924, looking at all of the different ways you can take a wallpaper pattern and
combine it with other kinds of symmetries, rotational symmetries, mirror symmetries,
and so on.
And one of the things that Polia shows in this paper is that there are exactly 17 different
types of wallpaper patterns.
If you've got a pattern that's going to repeat indefinitely in the horizontal and vertical
direction, what kind of rotational symmetries can it have?
What kind of mirror symmetries can it have?
In fact, there are 17 of them.
That result was not original to Polia.
It had first been done in 1885 by Fedorov.
And there are interesting questions that that raises.
What if instead of a translational pattern in two dimensions, you think of a crystal
pattern, a translational pattern in three dimensions, which is going to be unchanged
as you translate horizontally or vertically or translate in the third dimension of depth.
How many ways can you combine such an invariance with various rotational and mirror symmetries?
It turns out that in three dimensions, there are lots of ways of doing it.
There are 320 different ways of combining three dimensional translation invariance together
with other symmetries.
Escher began to create drawings, graphic art that used all of the wallpaper patterns.
And fairly quickly, he began to move beyond that and look at other transformations that
mathematicians had been studying and looking for creating art that was unchanged under
these particular transformations.
And one of the most important groups of transformations that mathematicians would use, it's a group
that would come into importance in the 19th century.
And as you will see, would actually come to play a role in the ultimate proof of Fermat's
last theorem.
This is a group of transformations that are known as the modular transformations.
And they're one of the reasons why I talked about complex numbers and the complex plane
so much in the last lecture, because understanding the plane as being made up of complex numbers
is critical to understanding these modular transformations.
So there are two basic modular transformations.
The first of these is to take the object and translate it by one unit to the right or to
the left.
So one of the things about any of these transformations that they're studying is that they can always
be reversed.
And you can always then build on them.
So if I can take my picture and move everything one unit to the right and it doesn't change,
then if I move it another unit to the right, it again won't change.
And so we get a translational symmetry but only in the horizontal direction, not a vertical
translational symmetry.
The second symmetry that comes to play a role in the modular transformations is a kind of
inversion.
What you do is to take a point in the complex plane, let's denote it by the letter z, and
that gets translated into the point which is the negative of the reciprocal of z.
To understand what happens, if I take a point in the plane, I want to think of this point
in the plane as being represented by an exponential with a complex exponent.
And in the last lecture, I explained how this can be done.
If I've got a point in the plane, I need to figure out how far that point is from the
origin.
If it's e squared away from the origin, then that's going to be that distance and that
will go into my representation of this number.
That will be the real part of the exponent, the number 2.
And then if the angle of elevation is pi over 4 radians, or in other words 45 degrees,
that goes into the complex part of the exponent.
And so this complex number that is e squared away from the origin and at an elevation of
45 degrees, or pi over 4, is represented by e to the 2 plus pi over 4 times i.
Now I want to take the reciprocal of that number.
If I take the reciprocal of that number, that means taking the negative of the exponent.
So instead of looking at e to the 2 plus pi over 4 i, I'm going to look at e to the minus
2 minus pi over 4 i.
Now the distance from the origin has changed from e squared to e to the minus 2.
And when I take the reciprocal of any complex number, what's going to happen is that the
distance from the origin turns into the reciprocal of that distance from the origin.
If I've got a complex number that is five units from the origin, its reciprocal will
be a fifth of a unit from the origin.
Something different is happening with the angle, though.
The angle had been pi over 4 radians, an arc of pi over 4.
That turns into minus pi over 4.
So instead of traveling in a positive direction from the positive real axis, in other words,
instead of traveling counterclockwise, we travel pi over 4 radians in a clockwise direction.
Instead of moving above the real axis, we now move below the real axis.
And so to take the reciprocal of a number is, first of all, to replace its distance by
the reciprocal of that distance, and then to reflect that number over the real axis.
So take the reflection across the real axis.
Now in the case of a modular transformation, we're taking z and replacing it not with one
over z, but the negative of one over z.
So there's one more action that has to take place.
We take the distance, replace it by the reciprocal of the distance.
We take that remaining point and reflect it over the real axis.
And now we take the negative of that number.
And to take the negative of a complex number, you simply draw the line from that number
through the origin and go out the opposite side of the origin exactly the same distance.
Now one of the things that this does, if I start with a complex number that is in what
we call the upper half plane, so I start with a complex number where the imaginary part
is positive.
It lies above the real axis.
And I take the negative reciprocal of that number.
It's going to change the distance from the origin.
It's going to flip that number across the real axis so I'm now below the real axis.
And then when I take the negative, I wind up back above the real axis.
So this transformation is one that takes a number that is above the real axis and turns
it into another number that is above the real axis.
And we can now start to combine these transformations to get all of the modular transformations.
So for example, if I take the region that is shown in this particular picture, the gray
region that is in here, it's what is called the fundamental region.
And all of the other spaces that you see above the real axis can be reached by some combination
of these modular transformations.
So I can start with some point in this gray region in my fundamental domain.
And I can move it by one unit to the right.
And I'm now in this second region.
And I can now take the negative reciprocal of that, which moves me into this small region
which is down near the axis, down near the real axis.
I can now move it one unit to the left and then take the negative reciprocal again.
And I get into one of these even smaller regions that is even closer to the real axis.
And so any of the regions that you see can be reached from my original fundamental domain
by some combination of these transformations that are called the modular transformations.
Well to get back to Escher, he was fascinated by this idea of these kinds of modular transformations.
And in particular what he realized is that you can take this upper half plane and you
can wrap it up into a circle.
And what you get is a figure that is shown in this piece of graphic art which is called
Circle Limit 3 that really illustrates what is going on and all of the kinds of symmetries
that are inherent in the modular transformations.
As I said, will be very important to the mathematics we'll be looking at after this.
And so we'll be coming back to Escher's Circle Limit 3 very often in the succeeding lectures.
Another type of transformation I want to talk about is one that is credited to Auguste
Mubius from Leipzig.
He was a student of Gauss, he was actually an astronomer.
And his name is generally associated with the Mubius band.
If I take a strip of paper, this is colored differently on the two sides, and I put it
together, something like this, we have a clear inside to the band, and we've got a clear
outside to the band.
But if I put a half twist into it, something like this, you can see that now we have a
band with only one side.
As we come around to the brown side, it turns into the orange side, and the orange side goes
around and it turns into the brown side.
There is only one side to a Mubius band.
Actually, Mubius was not the first person to come up with this idea of a one-sided band.
Johann Listing was the first person to do it about a decade earlier, but Mubius made
it famous.
Now the group of transformations that Mubius looked at were made up of translations, rotations,
dilations, and simple reciprocals.
And there's a very useful way of taking a look at this particular combination of transformations.
And I want to show you a short video clip now that was put together by two friends of
mine at the University of Minnesota, Doug Arnold and Jonathan Rogness.
So we're going to look at the Mubius transformations.
These are fundamental to many, many different areas of mathematics.
And as I said, the basic transformations are translation, and here we see a region that
is being translated, dilations, expansions, and contractions, rotations.
And then we also have this process of taking the reciprocal, and this shows what happens
as we take the reciprocal or the inverse of the points in the complex plane.
We can combine the Mubius transformations, and we see here some of those combinations.
This was an inversion combined with a translation.
We're going to see how to combine the Mubius transformations in a slightly different way
that really illustrates very nicely what's really going on using something called a projection.
Rather than just working with the plane, we're going to consider a sphere that sits above
that plane, and we look at a region of the sphere that is projected down onto the plane.
We get our translations by moving the sphere around the plane, our dilations by moving
the sphere up and down, our rotations simply by rotating the sphere, and the inversion
then becomes a very simple operation on the sphere.
It is simply rotating the sphere across a horizontal axis.
And we can now combine these Mubius transformations just by combining motions of the sphere.
So I get a rotation of the sphere about a horizontal axis, followed by a rotation of
the sphere around a vertical axis, followed by moving the sphere.
We get our translation, and that gives us one of the Mubius transformations.
What we've seen in this video clip is actually another type of transformation that will play
a very important role, and that's the idea of a projection.
Being a region or a collection of points that lies on one surface, and projecting it
onto another surface.
That was what was done.
We took a region on the sphere, and we projected it onto the plane.
And projections will come to play a very important role in mathematics, and they trace their
ancestry right back to the understanding of perspective.
A lot of the artists of the Renaissance were very interested in developing this idea of
perspective, and they tended to be very mathematical.
Many of the great artists of the Renaissance, people like Piero della Francesca and Leonardo
da Vinci, were artists, but they were also interested in the mathematics of the art,
and they saw how to combine these two.
One of them that I want to talk a little bit about is Albrecht Durer from Germany, born
in 1471, he would die in 1528.
He was born in Nürnberg, he went to Italy to study, that after all, was the place to
study both art and also mathematics at this time.
He went to the University of Bologna, and he studied mathematics with Pacioli.
He came back to Germany, and he actually wrote the first book of mathematics in German.
He wrote actually a number of books on mathematics, one of which was on compass and straight edge
constructions, and I want to show you one of the pictures that Albrecht Durer created
using compass and straight edge constructions.
It does not look like your standard compass and straight edge construction.
This is his Adam and Eve, created in 1504.
Obviously, there are more lines in there than just what was created with a straight edge
and compass, but the importance is that the outline of the figures and the basic proportions
were all worked out very geometrically.
Durer's Saint Jerome, that was created in 1514, is an excellent example of the use
of perspective.
There are very clear lines of perspective, and one of the interesting things that comes
through this perspective is that you see how shapes change.
If you look at the pot that is hanging from the ceiling, the bottom of that pot certainly
is a circle, but looking at it from the side, looking at it in perspective, it no longer
looks like a circle.
It looks like an ellipse, and that's one of the important aspects of perspective or projection
is how an object looks one way initially, and then as you project it, it changes its
appearance.
And this property is something that would be studied extensively in the 19th century.
We know projections from a number of sources, and especially the Mercator projection, which
is the way we have of representing the surface of the earth.
This was developed by Gerardus Mercator, lived 1512 to 1594.
And the idea here is that you've got a spherical earth, and we want to represent that surface
on something that is flat, so we wrap a cylinder around the earth, and we take a vertical line
that runs through the earth, a line that runs from the north pole to the south pole, and
we simply project out from that line through the surface to the earth onto our cylinder.
And that is the standard representation of the earth that you see in most maps, known
as the Mercator projection, and it is a projection from the surface of a sphere onto this cylinder.
And once we've got the surface of the earth represented on the cylinder, we can simply
slice the cylinder and unroll it in order to get a rectangular map.
Someone who did important work on projections was Jean-Victor Pencelet.
He was born in 1788, died in 1867.
He was a student of Mange, one of the great geometers of the 18th century.
Mange was somebody who joined Lagrange at the École Polytechnique, teaching at that
illustrious school.
Pencelet did go to the École Polytechnique and learned from Mange there, and Pencelet
was particularly interested in the properties that are left unchanged when you do a projection.
So as we saw in perspective, a circle becomes an ellipse, but you can't find a perspective
that changes a circle into a square.
What kinds of figures can you get under what kinds of projections?
This is the problem that Pencelet studied.
And as he studied this, he realized that there was a basic duality between points and lines.
If I've got two points in the plane, there is a unique line that goes through them.
If I've got two lines in the plane, they are going to cross at a unique point.
Well, almost.
The two lines in the plane might be parallel lines, but Pencelet decided that he wanted
these parallel lines to meet, and so the natural place for them to meet is out at infinity.
And so you get what is known as the projective plane, where you include this point at infinity
as one of the possible points, so that every pair of lines gives you a point, every pair
of points gives you a line.
The basic idea behind the projective plane is to take all of the lines that radiate from
the origin in three-dimensional space and replace each one of those lines by a single point.
Now, it becomes very difficult to actually work this out, because in order to do this
to see the resulting surface that you get, you actually need to think in four-dimensional
space.
But geometers have been very ingenious in trying to visualize what the projective plane
looks like, and I want to close this particular lecture by looking at one of those representations.
Again, the projective plane really can only be seen in four-dimensional space, but the
boy surface, named for Werner Boy, who came up with this representation in 1901, is one
of those who found a way of showing it.
It really exists in four dimensions, but we get some idea of the complexity of this projective
plane.
In the next lecture, we're going to continue, look at Gauss and his contributions to the
development of geometry.
