In this lecture, we're going to look at the ways in which algebra underwent a fundamental
change in the 19th century.
Instead of being the kind of algebra that we learn in high school, working with these
x's and these equations, algebra really becomes a tool for studying transformations.
And the origins of this lie in the algebraic problem of finding the exact value of the
root of a polynomial, the exact value of the place where a polynomial is equal to zero.
And as I mentioned in an earlier lecture, once you know one of the roots of a polynomial,
you can always use that in order to reduce the degree of the polynomial so that you
now have a simpler problem to work with if you want to continue finding additional roots.
We have the quadratic equation, which tells us how to find the root of a quadratic polynomial.
And I've talked about how that particular solution to the root of a polynomial goes
all the way back to the Babylonians.
In the case of cubic polynomials, polynomials of degree three, the method for finding the
exact value of a root was found by Delfero and Tartaglia, and then for a fourth degree
or a quartic polynomial that was found by Ferrari, Cardano's student.
The natural next question is, what about a polynomial of degree five?
Is there way of finding and expressing the exact value of the root of a polynomial of
degree five?
And here we need to be a little careful of exactly what we mean by the exact value.
In the case of a quadratic polynomial, a cubic or a quartic polynomial, what we can find
is an expression for the root that simply involves rational numbers together with addition,
traction, multiplication, division, and the taking of radicals.
So you might need to use square roots with a quadratic equation, cube roots with a cubic
equation.
We'll go ahead and allow ourselves fifth roots or sixth roots or seventh roots or whatever
kind of radical we need.
But what we'd like to be able to do is to take a polynomial and express its root precisely,
exactly, not just an approximation, but the exact value in terms of the four-hourth
arithmetic operations together with the radicals.
And a lot of people studied this problem of trying to find the root of a fifth degree
polynomial, and in 1771, Lagrange did an intensive study of what was known up to that point.
He looked at these formulas for the root of a quadratic polynomial, a cubic, or a fourth
degree, and he tried to understand exactly what was going on there, and he published
a very important paper in which he explained what was happening, why it was possible to
find an exact value for those roots.
He was hoping that in doing that, he would get the insight that he needed in order to
find the formula for the root of a fifth degree polynomial.
But in fact, what this paper did was open the mathematical community to the suspicion
that maybe there wouldn't be a way of finding the exact value for any fifth degree polynomial.
Now there are fifth degree polynomials for which you can find the exact value of the
root.
If I take the polynomial x to the fifth minus two, there is an exact value for a root of
that polynomial, namely the fifth root of two works.
But if I've got an arbitrary fifth degree polynomial, is it always possible to find
a nice closed expression for the root of that polynomial?
Some of the important work done on polynomials and their roots was done by Gauss.
In 1798, while he was still a student, he showed how to construct a regular 17-gon using
compass and straightedge.
So this is a regular polygon with 17 sides that can be constructed just with compass
and straightedge.
And the key to this actually is finding the exact value of a certain polynomial of degree
eight.
The polynomial is more complicated than I want to say verbally, but I'll put it up on
screen for you.
And he actually found an explicit formula for a root of this polynomial.
And again, it's an explicit formula using the four-hour arithmetic operations together
with square roots.
In particular, the square root of 17 plays an important role.
And once again, I'm not going to say that root verbally, but I'll put it up on screen
and you can see the complexity of it.
This is the kind of thing that people were looking for in general for polynomials, exact
values of what a root would be.
Gauss had another important breakthrough in this problem of finding roots.
He proved in his doctoral thesis of 1799 that in fact every polynomial always has a root.
Now you might have to look in the complex values.
There is not necessarily a real number that's going to make that polynomial zero, but there
always will be a complex number that makes that polynomial zero.
This is known as the fundamental theorem of algebra.
And in fact, Gauss's thesis did have some gaps, there were some problems with his proof.
Gauss would return to this problem later on in life, and I suspect maybe this might be
behind Gauss's reluctance to publish things until he was absolutely certain that they
were correct.
The fact that one of the first things he had published wasn't quite correct as he put
it out there.
But Gauss would go back and publish other complete and correct proofs of the fundamental
theorem of algebra in 1815, in 1816, and again in 1848.
But Gauss never really made any progress on this fundamental question of the fifth degree
polynomial.
Is it always possible to find a nice expression for the root?
And the first person to actually prove that it cannot always be done was a Norwegian mathematician
by the name of Niels Henrik Abel.
And Abel will be the first of several mathematicians I'll be talking about in this lecture who
died tragically young.
Abel was born in 1802.
He would die in 1829.
He was born of a family of modest means, but his father died while he was still a teenager.
And Abel, as the second oldest of the sons in this family, suddenly took on much of the
responsibility of providing the money to keep the family going.
And so he continued to study mathematics, but he really didn't have much in the way
of financial support.
His teacher in Norway realized the tremendous talent that this young man had.
And when Abel came up with a proof that in fact there isn't a nice closed solution to
every fifth degree polynomial, his teacher went to the Norwegian government and managed
to get them to agree to fund Abel's studies on the continent.
Abel would go first to Berlin and then eventually to Paris.
At this time, this now was the 1820s, Paris really was the center of mathematical work
in Europe.
But the amount of money that the Norwegian government could give him was not very much.
Abel himself was sending much of that money back to his family to support the family.
And so we know that he was living in very mean conditions.
And while he was in Paris, he developed tuberculosis.
He eventually would return to Norway, but he would never be cured of it.
And in 1829, he died of the tuberculosis.
The other mathematician I want to talk about is Everiste Galois.
Galois was born in 1811.
He would die in 1832.
He died before his 21st birthday.
And Galois was interested in the same problem that Abel was interested in, namely trying
to see if there is a solution in closed form to polynomials of degree 5 or degree 6 or
degree 7 or higher degree polynomials.
And even more importantly, the broader question, as we've seen sometimes these polynomials
do have exact roots.
Sometimes they don't.
How do you decide when there is an exact root and when you don't have an exact root?
And this is the question that Galois set himself to studying.
Galois had a very tragic life.
He tried to enter the École Polytechnique in 1828.
He was only 16 years old at the time.
He took the entrance examination.
He failed it.
The following year, at the age of 17, he again tried to enter the École Polytechnique.
He again took the entrance examination.
And once again, he failed it.
That same year of 1829, he got the fundamental insight into why it is that some polynomials
have exact values for the roots and some polynomials don't.
As we saw with Galois, he was looking at a polynomial of degree 8 that did have an exact
value for the root.
But most polynomials of degree 8 do not have an exact value for the root.
Well, Galois wrote up what he had done.
It's a method of analyzing polynomials that later would come to be known as Galois theory.
And he sent his first draft to Augustin-Louis Cauchy.
Cauchy is a French mathematician.
I'll be talking much more about him in the next lecture.
But in the 1820s, he was the greatest of the French mathematicians, and certainly one
of the greatest of the mathematicians at the time, not of the stature of Gauss, who was
in Germany at this time, but certainly comparable to Gauss.
But Galois sent his work to Cauchy.
And Cauchy was not particularly interested in this question at the time.
Cauchy lost the manuscript, never made any commentary about it.
And so nothing happened with this first draft of Galois.
1830, Galois still was unable to get into the École Polytechnique, but he did succeed in
being admitted to the École Normale.
This was probably the second most prestigious university in all of France at that time.
It also had been established by the First French Republic in order to train teachers.
And again, it was an institution that was really concentrating on science and mathematics.
It was a very good place for him to be, but he was only there for a few months before he
was expelled from university.
1830 was a tumultuous year in France.
That's the year that Charles X was forced from the throne.
And there was a lot of uncertainty about what kind of government would succeed him.
Now eventually, Louis Philippe would come in as a constitutional monarch.
But there were a lot of people during the year of 1830 who were trying to re-establish
the French Republic.
And Galois was among those at the forefront of arguing for and demonstrating for a republic
to be re-established in France.
And because of his writings, because of his activism, he was expelled from the university.
Galois went out and joined a National Guard unit, a particular unit that was very well
known for its republican sympathies.
And this is republican in the French sense of being a supporter of the French Republic.
And at the same time, he wrote up another draft of his understanding of the roots of
polynomials.
And he sent this second draft to Joseph-Louis Fourier.
Fourier, announced to Galois, was on his deathbed at this time.
Fourier was totally incapable of reading any kind of mathematical manuscript.
And we don't know what happened to this second draft that was sent to Fourier, but it disappeared.
Sophie Germain, who I mentioned just briefly in the last lecture, became aware of Galois
and the fact that he was doing this important work in algebra.
And she became one of his supporters.
She took an interest in Galois.
She encouraged him to rewrite his manuscript and send it out to several other mathematicians.
And among the two mathematicians that he sent it to were Poisson and Lacroix.
We don't know what happened to the copy that went to Lacroix.
That also seems to have been lost.
We don't know what Lacroix's response was, if any.
The copy that went to Poisson, we do know that Poisson looked at it, couldn't make any sense
of it whatsoever, and filed it away.
Fortunately, he didn't lose it.
Later on, that would be discovered.
And it was the copy of the manuscript that went to Poisson that would be the basis for
the fame that Galois eventually would achieve, but not until long after he died.
The National Guard unit that Galois had joined was disbanded at the time that the monarchy
was turned over to Louis Philippe, but that did not stop Galois from arguing and demonstrating
for a republic in France.
He was in the summer of 1831 at a gathering of former members of the National Guard unit
in which he proposed a toast to the king, holding up in his hand not just the glass
of wine, but also a knife.
And that was seen as a threat against the life of the king.
There was some controversy over exactly what Galois had said as he made this toast, whether
he was verbally threatening the king at the same time or not.
But he was arrested at this point when it came up for trial because of the uncertainty
of exactly what he said he was released.
But this did not stop his republican sympathies, and later on that summer he was seen walking
through the streets of Paris, completely armed, and also wearing his National Guard uniform,
which had been banned because again of the republican ties that it had, and he was re-arrested.
He remained in prison until March of 1832 when he contracted cholera.
He was sent to the prison hospital and there while he was convalescing he fell in love
with the daughter of the doctor who was taking care of him.
Unfortunately she did not return that affection.
In April Galois was released from prison and very shortly after that he found himself challenged
to a duel.
And unfortunately we don't know the circumstances of the duel.
It might have been connected with this daughter of the doctor.
It might have been that her boyfriend had challenged him to the duel or somehow he had
done something that somebody was going to her defense.
It might very well have been connected with his political activism that he was challenged
to this particular duel.
But he was challenged to the duel and the night before the duel he realized that he probably
would not survive it.
Galois was only 20 years old at this time.
There is a story often told that it was the night before the duel that he wrote up his
work on finding roots of polynomials.
In fact we do know that that night he did write a letter to a friend of his in which
he did talk about this work.
But in fact it was the manuscript that had been sent to Poisson almost a year earlier
that really was the basis for what we know about Galois's work on finding roots of polynomials.
But in fact Galois did die in that duel.
In the 1840s there was a resurgence of interest in this question of finding the exact value
of roots of polynomials.
And in fact 1842 Charlemate had published a proof of the impossibility of finding the
root of a general quintic polynomial.
And it would then be shortly after that Joseph Louville would discover Poisson's manuscript
and in 1846 published the work that Galois had done and also do an exposition of that
work.
Galois being a very young man being a very inexperienced mathematician had a lot of
trouble expressing his ideas in ways that other mathematicians could appreciate and understand.
And so it was Joseph Louville who had been born in 1809 who took Galois's ideas not only
published the manuscript but also began to expound on it and show the rest of the mathematical
community the depth of understanding that really lay behind this.
Other mathematicians would begin to work on this theory of Galois, this understanding
of when a polynomial has a root.
You would get many more papers published during the 1840s and the 1850s.
And finally in the 1860s, actually in 1866, Serret in the third edition of his fundamental
work in algebra, his core algebra, in the third edition he has a section on Galois theory
in which he explains this.
And at this point 1866 Galois theory has found its way into the most popular textbook of
the time and it is now part of the standard mathematics curriculum.
Now the idea behind Galois theory is really something closely related to transformations.
If we think about a polynomial of degree two, it has two roots.
A polynomial of degree three is going to have three roots.
These are roots that exist in the complex plane.
So they might be real numbers but you might have to use complex numbers.
And when I say a polynomial of degree three has three roots, some of the roots might be
at the same point in the plane.
So you might have a double root or a triple root, but as long as you count the roots with
according to their multiplicity, you're going to get the same number of roots as you have
the degree of the polynomial.
And these roots are distributed around the plane.
And the key to finding an exact expression for any one of these roots is based on the
symmetry of the roots.
If you take a polynomial such as x to the fifth minus two, I said that there is a nice
expression for a root of that polynomial, namely a fifth root of two.
But in fact, all five of those roots can be found very easily just by looking in the
complex plane at the circle of radius fifth root of two.
And the five roots of x to the fifth minus two are simply going to be equally spaced in
the complex plane around that circle of radius fifth root of two.
In this particular case for this particular polynomial, the roots have a lot of symmetry.
If I rotate this by 72 degrees, rotate my entire plane by 72 degrees, that's a transformation
that maps each of the roots to another one of the roots.
And what Galois realized was that the trick to finding a nice expression for the roots
of a polynomial is that the location of the roots fall into some kind of nice symmetric
pattern where there are nice transformations that take the roots into each other.
If you've got these kinds of transformations operating on the roots, then there will be
nice closed formulas for the roots.
And if you don't have this kind of symmetry, you're not going to be able to find such a
formula.
Now if we only have a few roots, we have to have this kind of symmetry.
If I'm looking at a polynomial with real coefficients and I look at a quadratic polynomial,
either both of the roots are real or if they are complex, one of them lies above the real
axis and the other one is the mirror image of that point across the real axis.
So with a polynomial of degree two, I always get this symmetry.
And the same thing happens with polynomials of degree three and four.
There is always enough symmetry in these polynomials in order to guarantee that you're going to
be able to find exact values for the roots.
But as soon as you get to a polynomial of degree five, you no longer have a guarantee
that there is sufficient symmetry in order to be able to find exact values of the roots.
And this would turn out to be the key, the symmetry of the roots.
And largely because of this, in the 19th century, algebra changes from looking at algebraic
expressions as we think of them in high school algebra and really becoming the study of these
transformations, looking at the kinds of transformations not just in two-dimensional space, but transformations
in three-dimensional space or four-dimensional space or even infinite-dimensional space.
And this is in all kinds of strange spaces, such as the projective space that I talked
about at the very end of lecture 16.
So algebra becomes the study of transformations because it is the understanding of transformations
that really lies behind being able to solve algebraic problems.
And so we get what becomes really an entirely new field that today is called modern algebra
or abstract algebra that is really the study of transformations.
I want to close this lecture by talking about another mathematician who died not as tragically
young as Abel or Galois.
He was in his 40s when he died, but I now consider somebody who dies in their 40s to
have died tragically young.
This is Jacob Jacobi.
Jacobi was a German mathematician.
He also was Jewish.
And in the early 19th century, it was still very hard to be a Jewish mathematician.
At many universities in Europe, you had to be Christian.
Often you had to belong to a particular church in order to go to that university.
In fact, at Cambridge and Oxford, you had to belong to the Church of England in order
to be able to matriculate, let alone teach at Cambridge or Oxford.
Jacobi was a little bit luckier.
He was able to go to the University of Berlin even though he was Jewish and study there
and obtain his doctorate there.
But there was no question of being able to get an academic position at any of the major
German universities being Jewish.
And so he converted to Catholicism in order to be able to get an academic position.
He would get his first position at the University of Königsberg, and then eventually he would
move on in 1844 and get a position in a chair of mathematics at the University of Berlin.
He actually died in 1851 of smallpox.
I want to say a little bit about his important work of 1829, essential work that he did on
elliptic functions that I talked about at the end of my lecture on Gauss, these doubly
periodic functions.
In 1829, Jacobi published a groundbreaking work called the New Fundamental Theory of
Elliptic Functions.
And he was interested in this fundamental domain that we have for elliptic functions.
Now, the fundamental domain that I described in the last lecture was a rectangular region.
There actually is no reason why it has to be rectangular.
It might be that the fundamental region is actually a parallelogram.
Now you can always do a rotation of the variables so that one of the periods is moving in the
real direction.
And we might as well scale things so that that real period is equal to one.
So we can always take our elliptic function, rotate it, rescale it so that one of the periods
is obtained just by moving one unit to the right or one unit to the left.
But then the second period actually can be any complex number.
And we might as well assume that it's a complex number with a positive imaginary part.
So I've got one period that is real and a second period that is a complex imaginary
number and that gives me a period parallelogram once you know the values of this elliptic
function inside this parallelogram.
You can just translate the parallelogram horizontally or vertically in order to find
the values of the elliptic function anywhere.
Now the question that Jacobi faced was the following.
If we're given an elliptic function, it is possible to figure out what the period is,
what the shape of the parallelogram is.
Jacobi asked, what if I know the shape of the parallelogram I want to get?
Is it possible to construct an elliptic function that has that particular shape?
So he went from the shape of the parallelogram which is equivalent to finding the complex
period.
If I know the value of the complex period, can I use that to construct an elliptic function
with this particular period?
And the key to finding an elliptic function with this particular period is something that
Jacobi called a theta function and the theta function which has as its input the complex
period that you want and as its output it produces various parameters that are needed
to construct your elliptic function.
This particular theta function has an interesting symmetry.
It doesn't change if you replace the variable by one more than that variable and it also
essentially does not change if you replace the variable by the negative reciprocal of
that variable.
This is the modular transformation that I talked about in lecture 16.
These theta functions of Jacobi that tell you how to construct an elliptic function
with a given period, these theta functions are invariant under the transformations of
the modular group under these modular transformations.
And this takes us back to that piece of the upper half plane, so this piece of the complex
plane that lies above the real axis where we have these large, the large fundamental
domain that lies above zero and then smaller and smaller copies that go off get smaller
and smaller as they get closer to the real axis.
This is exactly the picture that's represented in Escher's print circle limit three.
What Escher is really looking at is the region that is invariant, the kind of transformation
invariance of Jacobi's theta functions.
These functions that are unchanged under the modular transformations are today known as
modular functions.
Theta functions are just one example of these modular functions and the modular functions
will come to play an important role as so much else, I've promised well, in the story
of the proof of Fermat's last theorem.
In our next lecture, we're going to look at some fundamental changes that happen to calculus
in the early 19th century.
