Hi everyone.
I come from a country where there was communism before I was born, and actually when I was
born.
And my parents didn't have the same options as I do.
They didn't have the same options to go out and start a business.
They didn't have the same options of having a transparent government, of being able to
go to the government and ask for something.
In fact, my parents didn't join the Communist Party, even though they were college educated,
and they didn't have the same benefits, even though, you know, kind of now everybody does.
And I feel lucky about that.
I feel lucky that we have a chance to have equal opportunity.
And I think, you know, how I think of social media, the business I'm in, is that it gives
us more equal opportunity in what we do, and that it enhances the way we think about things.
So if I define social media first for you, so for me, social media isn't about Facebook,
isn't about Twitter, isn't about all these platforms together.
Social media for me is the people on those platforms.
It's you, you, everyone.
So to think about social media, you can think about it as the platforms, but it's the people.
When we're thinking about working with governments, when we're thinking about working with companies,
the way we often feel is that we're the little guys, and there are big companies, big institutions,
that you have to be working with.
But what we don't realize as people is that we have a lot more power.
And the last few years have shown us the examples of that power, not the full extent of it,
but the first examples of that power.
So we see this from Egypt, from Tahrir Square, a couple of years ago in the Arab Spring.
That was just the beginning.
We see this in Turkey.
Turkey banned Twitter.
Then they banned YouTube.
The U.S. called it the modern-day book burning.
And I believe that's exactly what it was.
It was a political move.
It got quickly ousted by the Supreme Court, who says this is not constitutional.
This is against freedom of speech, which is great, and that's what they did just two days ago.
Thank God.
But during the ban, people totally defied it.
In the first day of the ban, Twitter and Turkey sent more tweets than ever before historically.
And they kept finding new and new ways after the government kept blocking them and blocking them and blocking them.
They kept finding new ways to get on Twitter, even though they didn't really have to.
They could have talked to each other on Facebook.
It was for the sake of doing it, of being able to tweet when it's banned by the government,
because it was the wrong thing to do.
And then there are right examples, like the White House.
The White House puts up a petition where everybody that gets over 100,000 votes now, it was actually lower,
but can come in and get a response from the White House.
Now, of course, there are silly things like deport Justin Bieber and revoke his green card.
There are more serious matters, like, you know, we would like to build a death star.
And they respond to that, that it's not in their budget, unfortunately.
But they would love to, and they've got a lot of more exciting projects.
But there's no budget for the death star.
No, but really, there are amazing projects, actually.
There were, through this platform, there was Stop SOPA through this platform,
was that had every time it had over 100,000 petition votes.
And that's great. That's something that really helps open up the government, open up the businesses.
And have you understand that, okay, I'm living in a world where the government listens.
Now, I don't have 100,000 votes yet, but there are easier ways through social media to get them today.
So I consider this platform a social platform.
And one thing to visualize, I mean, politicians today, they really feel like they're in power,
but it's a democracy that we vote these guys into their roles.
And unless they really listen to what we're saying, and unless they do what we kind of want,
we won't vote them there again.
And the better off, I mean, we have a chance to be social about it, discuss opinions,
change facts, exchange information.
And that information, I mean, I've heard so many times,
like what this politician did, what this politician did.
Very soon, you'll be able to monitor each politician by what he said on social media,
in the media, what he did, what he voted for, for so perfectly,
that they will not be able to hide against their votes anymore.
And this is, of course, applies to governments, this applies to politicians,
this applies to institution, as well as companies in the market.
So there was a tweet that, it was a Twitter hack of the Associated Press,
and the Associated Press sent out this tweet to explosions in the White House,
and Barack Obama is injured.
The market immediately responded, this tweet costs over $100 billion.
That's about a billion per character, just if you're counting it.
And the market quickly recovered, but it could have been 10 billion higher during that day,
if you look at the numbers.
You kind of see that the market could have been $510 billion higher that day.
So it only cost the market $510 billion, still a pretty good hack.
But that only shows you how powerful social media is.
And maybe eventually, without social media, we'd come to the same conclusion.
But social media works as an amplifier.
We get there faster, we get there easier, and it works perfectly for that.
Another great example is Starbucks.
Starbucks in the UK doesn't pay corporate tax in the UK.
They funnel their money through different procedures that I don't understand, but they do that.
And the UK was very, very upset with them.
They're a bunch of protests, social media updates, kind of people talking about social,
the damage was done to them, to their identity, to their brand.
And that kind of drives ROI down for that brand.
I mean, PR-wise, it's a disaster.
Another case is British Airways.
They have quite bad customer service online and through social media.
I mean, try writing them.
There was even this guy that wrote them, says, guys, I really need your help.
I lost my luggage.
I'm gonna be in Portugal for the next two days.
They responded in three.
So this guy obviously didn't need any more help.
Another one and an example of that escalating is somebody said,
don't fly British Airways.
This customer was in no way motivated.
It wasn't any motivation in particular.
Their customer service is horrendous.
That would be a normal, regular tweet.
Every company gets a million of them.
The difference between this and
all the other tweets that they've been getting is that this person paid for
promoting it.
He paid a couple thousand dollars to promote this tweet to a lot of people.
They now call that complain-vertising.
Power of the individual.
Amplify, this guy had 100 followers or something like that, right?
I mean, 100 followers amplified through paid media.
They're retweets.
Then the media attention and then every piece of media in the world was
reporting from BBC to Financial Times, promoted tweet to British Airways,
complaining about customer service.
PR campaign worth hundreds of millions of dollars.
That is the power of one individual, of one tweet.
And that's quite powerful.
Now, if we remember the world without social media,
I mean, we imagine it today, we feel like, okay, what was it like?
But really, if you think about it, world without having a phone being connected
to a network being able to take a picture, that's what really makes a difference.
In Tunisia, there was a revolution during the Arab Spring, and
they successfully took down the government.
But before that, two years before the burning of this guy that burned himself.
I mean, there was another kind of spark, and it was much stronger.
But at the time, it didn't stick.
The people didn't go out to the streets.
And it was for a couple of reasons.
But primarily, Facebook penetration at the time was at 50,000.
There was no way to spread the word for the people.
They didn't have enough phones connected with data so
they could spread the word between each other.
So there was a problem.
But two years later, with Facebook being at the millions of users,
with social media being connected, with people being connected on their phones,
they suddenly shed it out to the world and the problem was gone.
Because people with their phones, they're connected.
Ten years ago, this was not the case.
And in 2005, we all spoke about citizen journalism.
It's gonna be about citizen journalism, mobile citizen journalism.
People taking pictures, reporting crime, reporting it to the media.
Citizen journalism is social media today.
It just got renamed.
And we don't call it citizen journalism anymore.
And coming back to the power of the individual.
The individuals today have more power than they ever, ever had before.
They have power to talk and change companies, to change governments,
to change institutions.
And I encourage every one of you to think about how you can influence
the world around you.
Because you can influence it more than you ever could for
the last several generations.
You have the power of social media, the power of amplifying those thoughts,
amplifying those actions.
So today, you're standing against one big company and
they did something very wrong, you're not alone.
You have a lot of company that helps you, and that's a good thing.
And when I look at companies, and when I look at companies and
the way they do things, these are the values that they should be having.
They don't all have those values.
I mean, I myself, I have a company of running it for seven years now.
And before that, I've had it for six years.
I had a company that I ran for seven years, and it was a mobile games company.
And that didn't go so well.
It bankrupted for me, and that was a very difficult moment.
And the way I chose to deal with that ending was I chose to keep it to myself,
work it through, and try to find a solution on my own.
I didn't communicate it to anyone, must just to my closest.
And I kept it in, all internal, completely internalized.
At the other hand, there's another startup now that had gone bankrupt.
And they're tweeting about it.
They're blogging about it.
They're publishing their PNL.
And they're saying, this is what we still think is valuable about our business.
This is why we did it, and this is why we think it's valuable.
And they're actually managing through the process very well.
Investors are very happy with the process.
But I didn't do it that way.
And of course, I didn't have the options of social media,
of being able to put it on a platform.
I'd have to program that blog, figure it out.
By the time I'd be done, I'd already be finished.
So, we didn't really have those options long time ago.
So I believe in the next 10 years of social and in social media,
is that individuals' voice will be heard so much more.
U.S. people, you have new powers that you never thought you could have before.
My parents, they look at this, they're like, whoa, what's going on?
They don't understand this.
But at the end of the day, they will be users of this one way or the other.
They will go and vaguely comment on your Facebook updates, at least, if nothing else.
And social media, it's about people being connected.
Social media in the next 10 years will help solve bigger problems.
Today, we share things in social media that are perhaps not the most important.
Of course, it's important for us to share how we feel.
This is a great picture.
I felt nervous about that.
But I think social media will be used for bigger and bigger causes
to help create a united mind of people to change something,
to help finally change the world and create a better place.
And institutions and companies, as a result of that,
institutions and companies will have to be a lot more flexible than we are today.
We have the power of choice.
And this is the most beautiful thing in social media.
What I'll conclude with is that when I look at the most retweeted tweet of all times,
is an Oscars selfie with a bunch of celebrities.
Now, don't get me wrong, they're gorgeous celebrities.
But at the same time, it lacks vision.
It has over 3 million retweets.
Yet at the same time, why don't we retweet something stronger?
Something that will help change the world.
We need it, and not a selfie, hopefully.
We need a picture, a message, an action that will help us change the world,
whether it's a problem of health, of hunger, of specific issues that we want to solve and address.
We want to raise money on Kickstarter.
We want to raise a lot of money through charity.
That's exactly what social media is for, and that's what it's great.
And that's what everybody should be able to use it for.
Thank you very much.
