Where ever you are, you're always using your senses to give you information about the world
around you.
And when you came into the auditorium today, you probably looked around, saw the stage setting,
you might have heard the chatter of people excitedly taking their seats, the quietening
hush, and then the voice of the speaker.
But I wonder how many of you paid attention to the smell of the auditorium.
And actually, we give smell very little attention of all the senses that are giving us information
about the world.
It's the one we neglect and we sometimes devalue.
Now that's probably because we think that we only smell when we're sniffing.
It's only when we're sniffing that we actually get some smell.
But that's not true.
As J.J. Gibson, the psychologist, said, we smell because we breathe.
We're actually always being bombarded with lots of volatile molecules.
And off-action is always on.
The processing is always going on.
So the question is, why are we not more aware of it?
Well, lots of people devalue the sense of smell, including rather famous philosophers.
And it's a famous party game that people play.
If I had to lose one of my senses, which would I willingly give up first?
And it's often smell.
So here's Immanuel Kant saying just that.
Which organic sense is the most ungrateful and also seems the most dispensable, the
sense of smell?
It does not pay to cultivate it or to refine it at all in order to enjoy, for there are
more disgusting objects than pleasant ones, especially in crowded places, like this.
He says, even when we come across something fragrant, the pleasure coming from the sense
of smell is fleeting and transient.
Now that's why I think a lot of people believe that smell could be easily dispensed with.
And a recent survey showed that many teenagers would rather lose their sense of smell than
give up one of their social media accounts.
That's how little we care about our sense of smell.
But that's a mistake.
It's a sense that we only recognize the value of when we lose it.
And when people lose their sense of smell, often because of head injury, a virus, taking
medication, respiratory infections, the sudden loss of a sense of smell comes with a change
in their emotional world.
People feel this less savor to life.
They often develop depression.
And in fact, people who lose their sense of smell are often depressed longer than those
who lose their sight.
It means that we no longer take for granted the familiar people in places around us.
And it's often smell that's giving us that sense of familiarity.
This is wonderful work done by these two sensory scientists in Dresden, Thomas Hummel and Ilona
Croy, who've studied the effects on our quality of life and there's a huge reduction in quality
of life when we lose our sense of smell.
And as we get older, we'll all start to lose our sense of smell.
Just like eyesight and hearing, it will diminish.
The good news is that right now you can improve your sense of smell and I'll tell you a little
bit about that later.
But that way in which smell is part of the environment and makes us feel that we're somewhere
familiar.
Again, we don't notice it until it's maybe going to be lost.
And the problem here is that smell is very emotionally loaded.
It's very emotionally loaded.
Smell memories, odor memories, key into some of our oldest and our most emotional memories.
The smell of your grandmother's kitchen, the smell of a place where you were on holiday.
And some of those things come back when you just get the briefest whiff of the odor again.
And the olfactory cortex here projects directly to centers of emotion and memory, the amygdala
and the entorhinal cortex.
Unlike the other senses, it's not gated by the thalamus.
It doesn't go round the brain before it gets to those emotional centers.
It's very direct.
And that's why we get a big charge, emotional charge.
And when people lose their sense of smell, their emotions are depressed.
Their emotions are not getting fed with those regular signals.
Here's a gallery I know very well.
And I want to invite you to think about museums and galleries that you like to visit.
They will have a characteristic smell.
You probably, if you think about it, know how they smell.
This is a Kelvin Grove art gallery and museum in Glasgow, my hometown.
And it recently went through a major multi-million pound refit.
And when it was going to be closed for four years to be refitted, the Glaswegians said,
almost as one, don't change the smell.
Don't change the smell.
Why?
Because they had been there as children, taken there by schools.
They had gone back as adults and recognized it and perhaps taken their own children in
turn.
And it always had that familiar smell that they knew so well, something between stone
and furniture polish, but was very distinctive and characteristic of this place.
And people didn't want to lose it.
And people often think that their sense of smell is probably not so important because,
unlike other animals, maybe we're not good at smelling.
Dogs are very good at smelling.
Rats are good at smelling.
But maybe we humans are not.
But it's not that we are poor at smelling.
In fact, we've got a superb sense of smell.
We just don't trust our nose.
And we don't use it because we're not on all fours.
The fact that we're standing on two legs and we're looking and hearing, we use those to
detect the environment.
But nothing stops us from being able to be like a dog.
And this is wonderful work by Noam Sobel and colleagues when he was in Berkeley, where
he got his undergraduates to put on blindfolds and to follow an odor trail that was chocolate
odor.
And the chocolate odor was laid out on the grass.
And it turns out that humans can get to the source of the chocolate.
They're a little slower than dogs.
They're not as direct.
But they can do it.
So we're underutilizing our sense of smell.
It's there and it can be used.
Then our sense of smell is important for signals that are social signals we give off to one
another.
Our body odors actually convey information.
And we give chemo signals that can affect our own emotions.
Again lovely work by the Sobel group from the Weissmann Institute shows that there are
chemical signals in emotional tears that reduce men's testosterone and affect their
libido.
Who knew?
Similarly, we can smell fear from other people.
Lovely work by Bettina Pauls and Denise Chen showing that we can smell and be affected
by the body odor of someone who's undergone fear.
And how they do that is they take t-shirts of people who've been skydiving and then t-shirts
of people who've been doing vigorous exercise and it's the skydiving t-shirts, the smell
of fear that we can recognize as the fearful ones and also can affect us.
So we're probably chemo signaling to one another.
Right now your near neighbors are giving off scent and of course scent occupies the space
between us.
It's there for the taking but we often don't pay attention to it.
We use it to recognize our nearest and dearest.
Just by their clothes, by t-shirts you can recognize whether this is a relative of yours
or not and I know you may have some relatives in mind and think I'd know him or her anywhere
but in general we can do this.
In general we can tell is this person related to me.
And not only that, smell is also involved in sexual selection.
So it turns out that you're more attracted to people whose body odor indicates that their
immune system is further away from yours and that if they're sent and their body odor signals
that they're too close to you, you wouldn't find them so attractive.
Somebody's major histocompatibility complex in humans called the human leukocyte antigens
are actually partly responsible for how they smell.
So your smell is due to three things, is due to your immune system, what you eat and the
bacteria on you.
So when we smell people we can, as it were, be sensitive to their attractiveness because
of the distance their immune system is from ours and that's going to help the chance of
successful reproduction.
So it's very interesting that somebody may be very attractive, very nice, you might have
known them for a long time and think oh, they'll be a lovely companion but if they don't smell
right there's nothing you can do.
And equally, equally, you can sometimes find a stranger and you just suddenly think wow,
they're really attractive and I was just so attracted to that person that it might be
love it for smell, not love it for sight.
So don't neglect it but are all the things I'm talking to you about things that go on
unconsciously?
Are these ways in which olfactory processing happens but it's not in consciousness?
And might it be that it's only every now and then and occasionally things break through
into consciousness that smells reach us?
And that might happen because smells are a little overpowering, it might be that they're
a little disgusting but it's not just disgusting odours that capture our attention, it can
also be intoxicating odours, wow, that smells incredible, this smells delicious and of course
we can direct our attention to bring smell into consciousness when we pay this sort of
attention to people.
And we all, we all go in for sniffing at times whether it's just to find out whether the
milk in the fridge is fresh and whether we should continue putting it in our tea or coffee.
Now of course, as I said earlier, smell can be trained unlike your eyesight and hearing,
you can actually improve your sense of smell and that's what leads to perfumers and wine
tasters and coffee tasters being better than the rest of us and in fact there are changes
in the brain, perfumers have more grey matter in the entorhinal cortex and sommeliers have
more dense grey matter in their orbital frontal cortex so there is really development you
can do that will make a difference, a real difference to the kind of information you
can extract and what you know.
But of course we might wonder how good is our sense of smell, other individual differences
that matter?
Well yes there are and on average women are better in their sense of smell than men on
average which doesn't mean there won't be men with a very good sense of smell and women
with a poor sense of smell.
But how do we know what people's sense of smell is, well we can test it.
We can use these sniffing sticks, a really good test devised by Thomas Hummel's group
in Dresden where these are pens that you smell and some of them are not as good as
other pens we might enjoy on occasion as teachers but these allow us to detect, these
allow us to detect somebody's threshold, when is there a difference between no odor
and an odor being noticeable, discrimination are two odors the same or different and finally
identification is that rose or mint or leather or tar when you smell one of these pens and
the funny thing is that lots of people who take this test will say to you oh I'm no good
at smelling I really can't do this and in fact they're very very accurate they've got
very high score and in the contrary sense there are people who continuously complain
about their awareness of odors oh I'm very bothered by smells I can smell smells and
I'm perturbed by them I've got very good sense of smell but when we test them they don't
have a good sense of smell they're either average or poor so our awareness of how good
our sense of smell is doesn't correlate with how accurate we are that might be a reason
why we neglect smell but a place where we don't neglect it and where odor really makes a
difference to our experience consciously is in eating but here smell doesn't get the
recognition it's due most of what we call tasting is due to smell so when you think
of what the tongue can provide it can provide salt sweet sour bitter umami savory that's
about it and yet you can taste strawberry mango melon peach you don't have peach receptors
on your tongue that's all coming from smell so people who lose their sense of smell will
often go to a doctor and say I can't taste anything and a good medic will put some salt
on their tongue or lemon juice or sugar and say can you taste that and they'll say yes
but that's all I can taste and now they realize how much of tasting was due to smell but we
confuse taste and smell a lot if I gave you vanilla pods to smell you would say smell
sweet the sweet's a taste not a smell and if I clipped a little bit of the vanilla pod
off and got you to chew it there's no sweetness in there at all it's quite bitter so what's
happening what's happening is the brain is going from its usual association of combining
vanilla aroma with things that have sucrose or sugar chocolate ice cream custard biscuits
and it's saying whenever I get that aroma it's usually accompanied by something sweet
and you transfer that quality of sweetness onto a smell even though it's not really there
so we have confusions but smell is playing a huge part in food and not getting a look
in but it's not smell as we usually think of it it's not inhaling molecules from the
outside it's the second source of smell which is going from the mouth to the nose up the
back of the nasopharynx and it's when you swallow or chew food that you pulse odors
up to the nose and that's when you get a big flavor hit so smell along with touch and taste
and temperature are all integrated into a single experience of flavor that we often call taste
and our mistake is not crediting smell for playing the largest part in that experience
but smell doesn't just combine with taste and touch it combines with other senses too
did you know there are odors in shampoo that make your hair feel softer this is strange
so smell interacts with touch interacts with taste now our sense of smell so keen when we're
younger we'll start to diminish as we get older by the age of 70 about quarter of the
population are functionally nosmic that means they don't have a sense of smell and their
quality of life will suffer they'll be more subject to depression they won't take pleasure
in their food they won't recognize the familiarity of people in places around them but we can
do something about that because we know from recent research that smell training or factory
training sniffing odors if you get four essential oils and you smell them first thing in the
morning and last thing at night that will preserve your sense of smell longer as you
age and it will also make you cognitively more alert so it turns out that smelling odors
smell training is better for you than Sudoku do that and you'll have a much more active
life now people who've never had a sense of smell often wonder what they're missing and
they often say well if I go into they've they were born without a sense of smell what what
is it I'm missing what's this invisible thing you talk about and a Spanish philosopher Marta
Tafaya said maybe it's when I'm in a garden and I can see the beauty of the physical arrangement
but I don't get the odors and aromas so I don't feel as immersed so maybe you feel immersed
in a space when you're getting smells and notice that we don't notice smell because
we stop paying attention to it when it's familiar we no longer notice the smell of our own home
everybody else's home's got a smell isn't that odd but yours now well it's that you've
stopped paying attention to it but of course it's good enough that if you go home you'll
say something's changed did I leave the garbage out somebody been smoking so you would notice
so I think all faction is not absent it doesn't get switched off in the gaps instead all faction
is a constant background to our experience because it's always there we pay less attention
to it but it modulates our moods it affects our attention and awareness and it's consolidating
our memory of familiar things so many people named here have helped me in understanding
the importance of all faction and all of them would want me to tell all of you that if you
think you can live just as well without your sense of smell you need to think again thank you
