Blackstone Audio presents Quantum, Einstein, Bohr, and The Great Debate About The Nature
of Reality by Manjit Kumar.
For Lamberam and Gurmit Kaur, Pandora, Ravinder and Jasvinder.
Prologue The Meeting of Minds
Aaron Fest was in tears. He had made his decision. Soon he would attend the week-long gathering
where many of those responsible for the quantum revolution would try to understand the meaning
of what they had wrought. There, he would have to tell his old friend Albert Einstein
that he had chosen to side with Niels Bohr.
Aaron Fest, the 34-year-old Austrian professor of theoretical physics at Leiden University
in Holland, was convinced that the atomic realm was as strange and ethereal as Bohr argued.
In a note to Einstein as they sat around the conference table, Aaron Fest scribbled,
Don't laugh. There is a special section in purgatory for professors of quantum theory
where they will be obliged to listen to lectures on classical physics ten hours every day.
I laugh only at their naivete, Einstein replied. Who knows who would have the last laugh in a few years?
For him it was no laughing matter, for at stake was the very nature of reality and the soul of physics.
The photograph of those gathered at the Fifth Solvay Conference on
Electrons and Photons, held in Brussels from 24 to 29 October 1927,
encapsulates the story of the most dramatic period in the history of physics.
With seventeen of the twenty-nine invited eventually earning a Nobel Prize,
the conference was one of the most spectacular meetings of minds ever held.
It marked the end of a golden age of physics, an era of scientific creativity unparalleled
since the scientific revolution in the 17th century, led by Galileo and Newton.
Paul Aaron Fest is standing, slightly hunched forward in the back row, third from the left.
There are nine seated in the front row, eight men and one woman. Six have Nobel Prizes in either
physics or chemistry. The woman has two, one for physics awarded in 1903 and another for chemistry
in 1911. Her name? Marie Curie. In the center, the place of honor, sits another Nobel laureate,
the most celebrated scientist since the age of Newton, Albert Einstein.
Looking straight ahead, gripping the chair with his right hand, he seems
ill at ease. Is it the winged collar and tie that are causing him discomfort?
Or what he has heard during the preceding week?
At the end of the second row on the right, is Niels Bohr, looking relaxed with a half-windzical
smile. It had been a good conference for him. Nevertheless Bohr would be returning to Denmark
disappointed that he had failed to convince Einstein to adopt his Copenhagen interpretation
of what quantum mechanics revealed about the nature of reality.
Instead of yielding, Einstein had spent the week attempting to show that quantum mechanics was
inconsistent, that Bohr's Copenhagen interpretation was flawed. Einstein said years later that
this theory reminds me a little of the system of delusions of an exceedingly intelligent paranoic
concocted of incoherent elements of thoughts. It was Mox Plunk, sitting on Marie Curie's right,
holding his hat and cigar who discovered the quantum. In 1900 he was forced to accept that the
energy of light and all other forms of electromagnetic radiation could only be emitted or absorbed by
matter in bits, bundled up in various sizes. Quantum was the name Plunk gave to an individual
packet of energy with quanta being the plural. The quantum of energy was a radical break with the
long-established idea that energy was emitted or absorbed continuously, like water flowing from a tap.
In the everyday world of the macroscopic where the physics of Newton ruled supreme, water could
drip from a tap, but energy was not exchanged in droplets of varying size. However, the atomic and
subatomic level of reality was the domain of the quantum. In time it was discovered that the
energy of an electron inside an atom was quantized. It could possess only certain amounts of energy,
and not others. The same was true of other physical properties, as the microscopic realm was found to
be lumpy and discontinuous and not some shrunken version of the large-scale world that humans
inhabit, where physical properties vary smoothly and continuously, where going from A to C means
passing through B. Quantum physics however revealed that an electron in an atom can be in one place
and then, as if by magic, reappear in another, without ever being anywhere in between,
by emitting or absorbing a quantum of energy. This was a phenomenon beyond the can of classical
non-quantum physics. It was as bizarre as an object mysteriously disappearing in London and
an instant later suddenly reappearing in Paris, New York or Moscow. By the early 1920s it had long
been apparent that the advance of quantum physics on an ad hoc piecemeal basis had left it without
solid foundations or a logical structure. Out of this state of confusion and crisis emerged a bold
new theory known as quantum mechanics. The picture of the atom as a tiny solar system with electrons
orbiting a nucleus, still taught in schools today, was abandoned and replaced with an atom that was
impossible to visualize. Then, in 1927, Werner Heisenberg made a discovery that was so at odds
with common sense that even he, the German Wunderkind of quantum mechanics, initially struggled to
grasp its significance. The uncertainty principle said that if you want to know the exact velocity
of a particle, then you cannot know its exact location and vice versa. No one knew how to
interpret the equations of quantum mechanics, what the theory was saying about the nature of
reality at the quantum level. Questions about cause and effect or whether the moon exists when
no one is looking at it had been the preserve of philosophers since the time of Plato and Aristotle.
But after the emergence of quantum mechanics, they were being discussed by the 20th century's
greatest physicists. With all the basic components of quantum physics in place,
the fifth Solvay Conference opened a new chapter in the story of the quantum.
For the debate that the conference sparked between Einstein and Bohr raised issues that
continue to preoccupy many eminent physicists and philosophers to this day. What is the nature
of reality, and what kind of description of reality should be regarded as meaningful?
No more profound intellectual debate has ever been conducted,
claimed the scientist and novelist C.P. Snow. It is a pity that the debate
because of its nature can't be common currency. Of the two main protagonists,
Einstein is a 20th century icon. He was once asked to stage his own three-week show at the
London Palladium. Women fainted in his presence, young girls mobbed him in Geneva. Today this
sort of adulation is reserved for pop singers and movie stars. But in the aftermath of the
First World War, Einstein became the first superstar of science, when in 1919 the bending
of light predicted by his theory of general relativity was confirmed. Little had changed
when in January 1931, during a lecture tour of America, Einstein attended the premiere of
Charlie Chaplin's movie City Limits in Los Angeles. A large crowd cheered wildly when they
saw Chaplin and Einstein. They cheer me because they all understand me, Chaplin told Einstein,
and they cheer you because no one understands you. Whereas the name Einstein is a byword for
scientific genius, Meals Bohr was, and remains, less well known. Yet to his contemporaries he was
every inch the scientific giant. In 1923, Max Bohr, who played a pivotal part in the development
of quantum mechanics, wrote that Bohr's influence on theoretical and experimental research of our
time is greater than that of any other physicist. Forty years later, in 1963, Werner Heisenberg
maintained that Bohr's influence on the physics and the physicists of our century was stronger
than that of anyone else, even than that of Albert Einstein. When Einstein and Bohr first met in
Berlin in 1920, each found an intellectual sparring partner who would, without bitterness or ranker,
push and prod the other into refining and sharpening his thinking about the quantum.
It is through them and some of those gathered at Solvay in 1927 that we capture the pioneering
years of quantum physics. It was a heroic time, recalled the American physicist Robert Oppenheimer,
who was a student in the 1920s. It was a period of patient work in the laboratory,
of crucial experiments and daring action, of many false starts and many untenable conjectures.
It was a time of earnest correspondence and hurried conferences, of debate, criticism,
and brilliant mathematical improvisation. For those who participated, it was a time of creation.
But for Oppenheimer, the father of the atom bomb, there was terror, as well as exaltation
in their new insight. Without the quantum, the world we live in would be very different.
Yet for most of the twentieth century, physicists accepted that quantum mechanics
denied the existence of a reality beyond what was measured in their experiments.
It was a state of affairs that led the American Nobel Prize-winning physicist
Murray Gell-Mann to describe quantum mechanics as
that mysterious, confusing discipline which none of us really understands but which we know how to
use and use it we have. Quantum mechanics drives and shapes the modern world by making possible
everything from computers to washing machines, from mobile phones to nuclear weapons.
The story of the quantum begins at the end of the nineteenth century when, despite the recent
discoveries of the electron, x-rays and radioactivity, and the ongoing dispute about whether or not
atoms existed, many physicists were confident that nothing major was left to uncover.
The more important fundamental laws and facts of physical science have all been discovered,
and these are now so firmly established that the possibility of their ever being supplanted
in consequence of new discoveries is exceedingly remote, said the American physicist Albert
Michelson in 1899. Our future discoveries, he argued, must be looked for in the sixth place of
decimals. Many shared Michelson's view of a physics of decimal places, believing that any
unsolved problems represented little challenge to established physics and would sooner or later yield
to time-honored theories and principles. James Clerk Maxwell, the nineteenth century's greatest
theoretical physicist, had warned as early as 1871 against such complacency. This characteristic
of modern experiments, that they consist principally of measurements, is so prominent
that the opinion seems to have got abroad that in a few years all the great physical constants
will have been approximately estimated, and that the only occupation which will be left to men of
science will be to carry on these measurements to another place of decimals. Maxwell pointed out
that the real reward for the labor of careful measurement was not greater accuracy but the
discovery of new fields of research and the development of new scientific ideas.
The discovery of the quantum was the result of just such a labor of careful measurement.
In the 1890s, some of Germany's leading physicists were obsessively pursuing a problem
that had long vexed them. What was the relationship between the temperature, the range of colors,
and the intensity of light emitted by a hot iron poker? It seemed a trivial problem compared to the
mystery of x-rays and radioactivity that had physicists rushing to their laboratories and
reaching for their notebooks. But for a nation forged only in 1871, the quest for the solution
to the hot iron poker, or what became known as the black body problem, was intimately bound up with
the need to give the German lighting industry a competitive edge against its British and American
competitors. But try as they might. Germany's finest physicists could not solve it. In 1896
they thought they had, only to find within a few short years that new experimental data
proved that they had not. It was Max Planck, who solved the black body problem at a cost.
The price was the quantum.
Part 1. The Quantum
Briefly summarized what I did can be described as simply an act of desperation.
Max Planck. It was as if the ground had been pulled out from under one, with no firm foundation
to be seen anywhere, upon which one could have built. Albert Einstein.
For those who are not shocked when they first come across quantum theory cannot, possibly,
have understood it. Niels Bohr.
Chapter 1. The Reluctant Revolutionary
A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the
light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar
with it, wrote Max Planck toward the end of his long life. Bordering on cliché, it could easily
have served as his own scientific obituary, had he not as an act of desperation abandoned ideas
that he had long held dear. Wearing his dark suit, starched white shirt and black bow tie,
Planck looked the archetypal late 19th century Prussian civil servant, but for the penetrating
eyes under the huge dome of his bald head. In characteristic Mandarin fashion he exercised
extreme caution before committing himself on matters of science or anything else.
My maxim is always this, he once told a student. Consider every step carefully in advance, but
then, if you believe you can take responsibility for it, let nothing stop you.
Planck was not a man to change his mind easily.
His manner and appearance had hardly changed when two students in the 1920s,
as one recalled later, it seemed inconceivable that this was the man who had ushered in the
revolution. The Reluctant Revolutionary could scarcely believe it himself. By his own admission
he was peacefully inclined and avoided all doubtful adventures. He confessed that he lacked the
capacity to react quickly to intellectual stimulation. It often took him years to reconcile
new ideas with his deep-rooted conservatism. Yet at the age of 42, it was Planck who unwittingly
started the Quantum Revolution in December 1900 when he discovered the equation for the
distribution of radiation emitted by a black body. All objects, if hot enough,
radiate a mixture of heat and light with the intensity and color changing with the temperature.
The tip of an iron poker left in a fire will start to glow a faint dull red. As its temperature
rises it becomes a cherry red, then a bright yellowish orange, and finally a bluish white.
Once taken out of the fire the poker cools down, running through this spectrum of colors
backwards until it is no longer hot enough to emit any visible light. Even then it still gives off an
invisible glow of heat radiation. After a time this too stops as the poker continues to cool
and finally becomes cold enough to touch. It was the 23-year-old Isaac Newton who in 1666
showed that a beam of white light was woven from different threads of colored light
and that passing it through a prism simply unpicked the seven separate strands,
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet. Whether red and violet represented the
limits of the light spectrum or just those of the human eye was answered in 1800. It was only then
with the advent of sufficiently sensitive and accurate mercury thermometers that the astronomer
William Herschel placed one in front of a spectrum of light and found that as he moved it across
the bands of different colors from violet to red the temperature rose. To his surprise it continued
to rise when he accidentally left the thermometer up to an inch past the region of red light.
Herschel had detected what was later called infrared radiation, light that was invisible
to human eyes from the heat that it generated. In 1801, using the fact that silver nitrate
darkens when exposed to light, Johann Ritter discovered invisible light at the other end
of the spectrum beyond the violet, ultraviolet radiation. The fact that all heated objects
emit light of the same color at the same temperature was well known to potters long before 1859,
the year that Gustav Kirchhoff, a 34-year-old German physicist at Heidelberg University,
started his theoretical investigations into the nature of this correlation.
To help simplify his analysis, Kirchhoff developed the concept of a perfect absorber and emitter
of radiation called a black body. His choice of name was apt. A body that was a perfect absorber
would reflect no radiation and therefore appear black. However, as a perfect emitter its appearance
would be anything but black if its temperature was high enough for it to radiate at wavelengths
from the visible part of the spectrum. Kirchhoff envisaged his imaginary black body as a simple
hollow container with a tiny hole in one of its walls. Since any radiation, visible or invisible
light entering the container, does so through the hole, it is actually the hole that mimics a
perfect absorber and acts like a black body. Once inside the radiation is reflected back
and forth between the walls of the cavity until it is completely absorbed. Imagining the outside
of his black body to be insulated, Kirchhoff knew that if heated, only the interior surface of the
walls would emit radiation that filled the cavity. At first, the walls, just like a hot iron poker,
glow a deep cherry red, even though they still radiate predominantly in the infrared. Then,
as the temperature climbs ever higher, the walls glow a bluish white as they radiate at wavelengths
from across the spectrum from the far infrared to the ultraviolet. The hole acts as a perfect
emitter, since any radiation that escapes through it will be a sample of all the wavelengths present
inside the cavity at that temperature. Kirchhoff proved mathematically what Potters had long
observed in their kilns. Kirchhoff's law said that the range and intensity of the radiation
inside the cavity did not depend on the material that a real black body could be made of, or on
its shape and size, but only on its temperature. Kirchhoff had ingeniously reduced the problem
of the hot iron poker. What was the exact relationship between the range and intensity
of the colors it emitted at a certain temperature to how much energy is radiated by a black body
at that temperature? The task that Kirchhoff set himself and his colleagues became known
as the black body problem. Measure the spectral energy distribution of black body radiation,
the amount of energy at each wavelength from the infrared to the ultraviolet at a given temperature
and derive a formula to reproduce the distribution at any temperature.
Unable to go further theoretically without experiments with a real black body to guide him,
Kirchhoff nevertheless pointed physicists in the right direction. He told them that the distribution
being independent of the material from which a black body was made meant that the formula
should contain only two variables, the temperature of the black body and the wavelength of the emitted
radiation. Since light was thought to be a wave, any particular color and hue was distinguished
from every other by its defining characteristic, its wavelength, the distance between two successive
peaks or troughs of the wave. Inversely proportional to the wavelength is the frequency
of the wave, the number of peaks or troughs that pass a fixed point in one second,
the longer the wavelength the lower the frequency and vice versa. But there was also a different
but equivalent way of measuring the frequency of a wave, the number of times it jiggled up and down,
waved, per second. The technical obstacles in constructing a real black body and the
precision instruments needed to detect and measure the radiation ensured that no significant
progress was made for almost 40 years. It was in the 1880s when German companies tried to develop
more efficient light bulbs and lamps than their American and British rivals that measuring the
black body spectrum and finding Kirchhoff's fabled equation became a priority. The incandescent light
bulb was the latest in a series of inventions including the arc lamp, dynamo, electric motor,
and telegraphy, fueling the rapid expansion of the electrical industry. With each innovation the
need for a globally agreed set of units and standards of electrical measurement became
increasingly urgent. 250 delegates from 22 countries gathered in Paris in 1881 for the
first international conference for the determination of electrical units. Although the volt, amp,
and other units were defined and named, no agreement was reached on a standard for
luminosity and it began to hamper the development of the most energy efficient means of producing
artificial light. As a perfect emitter at any given temperature a black body emits the maximum
amount of heat in for red radiation. The black body spectrum would serve as a benchmark in
calibrating and producing a bulb that emitted as much light as possible while keeping the heat
it generated to a minimum. In the competition between nations presently waged so actively,
the country that first sets foot on new paths and first develops them into established branches of
industry has a decisive upper hand, wrote the industrialist and inventor of the electrical
dynamo, Wernher von Siemens. Determined to be first, in 1887 the German government founded the
Physikalische Technische Reichsinstalt, PTR, the Imperial Institute of Physics and Technology.
Located on the outskirts of Berlin in Charlottenburg on land donated by Siemens,
the PTR was conceived as an institute fit for an empire determined to challenge Britain and America.
The construction of the entire complex lasted more than a decade as the PTR became the best
equipped and most expensive research facility in the world. Its mission was to give Germany the
edge in the appliance of science by developing standards and testing new products. Among its
list of priorities was to devise an internationally recognized unit of luminosity. The need to make
a better light bulb was the driving force behind the PTR Blackbody Research Program in the 1890s.
It would lead to the accidental discovery of the quantum, as Planck turned out to be the right man,
in the right place, at the right time.
Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck was born in Kiel, then a part of Danish Holstein,
on 23rd April, 1858 into a family devoted to the service of church and state.
Excellence in scholarship was almost his birthright.
Both his paternal great-grandfather and grandfather had been distinguished theologians,
while his father became professor of constitutional law at Munich University.
Venerating the laws of God and man, these duty-bound men of probity were also steadfast and
patriotic. Max was to be no exception.
Planck attended the most renowned secondary school in Munich, the Maximilian Gymnasium.
Always near the top of his class but never first, he excelled through hard work and self-discipline.
These were just the qualities demanded by an educational system with a curriculum founded
on the retention of enormous quantities of factual knowledge through rote learning.
A school report noted that, despite all his childishness, Planck at 10 already possessed
a very clear logical mind and promised to be something right.
By the time he was 16 it was not Munich's famous taverns but its opera houses and concert halls
that attracted the young Planck. A talented pianist he toyed with the idea of pursuing a
career as a professional musician. Unsure he sought advice and was bluntly told,
if you have to ask, you'd better study something else.
In October, 1874, aged 16, Planck enrolled at Munich University and opted to study physics
because of a burgeoning desire to understand the workings of nature.
In contrast to the near militaristic regime of the Gymnasiums,
German universities allowed their students almost total freedom. With hardly any academic
supervision and no fixed requirements, it was a system that enabled students to move
from one university to another, taking courses as they pleased.
Sooner or later those wishing to pursue an academic career took the courses by the
preeminent professors at the most prestigious universities.
After three years at Munich where he was told,
it is hardly worth entering physics anymore because there was nothing important left to
discover, Planck moved to the leading university in the German-speaking world, Berlin.
With the creation of a unified Germany in the wake of the Prussian-led victory over France
in the War of 1870 to 1871, Berlin became the capital of a mighty new European nation.
Situated at the confluence of the Havel and the Spree rivers, French war reparations allowed its
rapid redevelopment as it sought to make itself the equal of London and Paris.
A population of 865,000 in 1871 swelled to nearly 2 million by 1900,
making Berlin the third largest city in Europe.
Among the new arrivals were Jews fleeing persecution in Eastern Europe,
especially the pogroms in Tsarist Russia.
Inevitably the cost of housing and living soared, leaving many homeless and destitute.
Manufacturers of cardboard boxes advertised,
good and cheap boxes for habitation, a shanty town sprung up in parts of the city.
Despite the bleak reality that many found on arriving in Berlin,
Germany was entering a period of unprecedented industrial growth, technological progress and
economic prosperity. Driven largely by the abolition of internal tariffs after unification
and French war compensation by the outbreak of the First World War, Germany's industrial output
and economic power would be second only to the United States. By then it was producing over two
thirds of continental Europe's steel, half its coal, and was generating more electricity than
Britain, France and Italy combined. Even the recession and anxiety that affected Europe after
the stock market crash of 1873 only slowed the pace of German development for a few years.
With unification came the desire to ensure that Berlin, the epitome of the new Reich,
had a university second to none. Germany's most renowned physicist,
Hermann von Helmholtz, was enticed from Heidelberg. A trained surgeon, Helmholtz was also a
celebrated physiologist who had made fundamental contributions to understanding the workings of
the human eye after his invention of the ophthalmoscope. The 50-year-old polymath knew his worth.
Apart from a salary several times the norm, Helmholtz demanded a magnificent new physics
institute. It was still being built in 1877 when Planck arrived in Berlin and began attending
lectures in the university's main building, a former palace on Unter den Linden, opposite the
Opera House. As a teacher, Helmholtz was a severe disappointment. It was obvious, Planck said later,
that Helmholtz never prepared his lectures properly. Gustav Kirchhoff, who had also transferred from
Heidelberg to become the professor of theoretical physics, was so well prepared that he delivered
his lectures like a memorized text, dry and monotonous. Expecting to be inspired, Planck admitted
that the lectures of these men netted me no perceptible gain. Seeking to quench his thirst
for advanced scientific knowledge, he stumbled across the work of Rudolf Klausius, a 56-year-old
German physicist at Bonn University. In stark contrast to the lackluster teaching of his two
esteemed professors, Planck was immediately enthralled by Klausius's lucid style and
enlightening clarity of reasoning. His enthusiasm for physics returned as he read Klausius's papers
on thermodynamics. Dealing with heat and its relationship to different forms of energy,
the fundamentals of thermodynamics were at the time encapsulated in just two laws.
The first was a rigorous formulation of the fact that energy, in whatever guise, possessed the
special property of being conserved. Energy could neither be created nor destroyed but
only converted from one form to another. An apple hanging from a tree possesses potential energy
by virtue of its position in the earth's gravitational field, its height above the ground.
When it falls, the apple's potential energy is converted into kinetic energy, the energy of motion.
Planck was a schoolboy when he first encountered the law of the conservation of energy.
It struck him like a revelation, he said later, because it possessed absolute universal validity
independently from all human agency. It was the moment he caught a glimpse of the eternal,
and from then on he considered the search for absolute or fundamental laws of nature as
the most sublime scientific pursuit in life. Now Planck was just a spellbound reading Klausius's
formulation of the second law of thermodynamics. Heat will not pass spontaneously from a colder
to a hotter body. The later invention of the refrigerator illustrated what Klausius meant
by, spontaneously, a refrigerator needed to be plugged into an external supply of energy,
in this case electrical, so that heat could be made to flow from a colder to a hotter body.
Planck understood that Klausius was not simply stating the obvious but something of deep
significance. Heat, the transfer of energy from A to B due to a temperature difference,
explains such everyday occurrences as a hot cup of coffee getting cold and an ice cube in a glass
of water melting. But left undisturbed, the reverse never happened. Why not? The law of
conservation of energy did not forbid a cup of coffee from getting hotter and the surrounding
air colder or the glass of water becoming warmer and the ice cooler. It did not outlaw heat flowing
from a cold to a hot body spontaneously, yet something was preventing this from happening.
Klausius discovered that something and called it entropy. It lay at the heart of why some
processes occur in nature and others do not. When a hot cup of coffee cools down the surrounding
air gets warmer as energy is dissipated and irretrievably lost, ensuring that the reverse
cannot happen. If the conservation of energy was nature's way of balancing the books in any
possible physical transaction, then nature also demanded a price for every transaction that
actually occurred. According to Klausius entropy was the price for whether something happened
or not. In any isolated system only those processes, transactions in which entropy either
stayed the same or increased, were allowed. Any that led to a decrease of entropy were strictly
forbidden. Klausius defined entropy as the amount of heat in or out of a body or a system
divided by the temperature at which it takes place. If a hot body at 500 degrees loses 1000
units of energy to a colder body at 250 degrees, then its entropy has decreased by negative 1000
divided by 500 equals negative 2. The colder body at 250 degrees has gained 1000 units of energy,
plus 1000 divided by 250 and its entropy has increased by 4. The overall entropy of the system,
the hot and cold bodies combined, has increased by two units of energy per degree.
All real, actual processes are irreversible because they result in an increase in entropy.
It is nature's way of stopping heat from passing spontaneously of its own accord from something
cold to something hot. Only ideal processes in which entropy remains unchanged can be reversed.
They however never occur in practice, only in the mind of the physicist. The entropy of
the universe tends toward a maximum. Alongside energy, Planck believed that entropy was the
most important property of physical systems. Returning to Munich University after his year-long
sojourn in Berlin, he devoted his doctoral thesis to an exploration of the concept of irreversibility.
It would be his calling card. To his dismay he found no interest to let alone approval,
even among the very physicists who were closely concerned with the topic.
Helmholtz did not read it. Kirchhoff did but disagreed with it.
Clausius, who had such a profound influence on him, did not even answer his letter.
The effect of my dissertation on the physicists of those days was nil,
Planck recalled with some bitterness, even 70 years later. But driven by an inner compulsion,
he was undeterred. Thermodynamics, particularly the second law,
became the focus of Planck's research as he began his academic career.
German universities were state institutions. Extraordinary, assistant, and ordinary,
full professors were civil servants appointed and employed by the Ministry of Education.
In 1880, Planck became a Privat Dotsund, an unpaid lecturer at Munich University.
Employed neither by the state nor the university, he had simply gained the right to teach in exchange
for fees paid by students attending his courses. Five years passed as he waited in vain for an
appointment as an extraordinary professor. As a theorist uninterested in conducting experiments,
Planck's chances for promotion were slim, as theoretical physics was not yet a firmly established,
distinct discipline. Even in 1900 there were only 16 professors of theoretical physics in Germany.
If his career was to progress, Planck knew that he had to win somehow, a reputation in the field
of science. His chance came when Goettingen University announced that the subject for its
prestigious essay competition was the nature of energy. As he worked on his paper, in May 1885,
a message of deliverance arrived. Planck, aged 27, was offered an extraordinary professorship
at the University of Kiel. He suspected it was his father's friendship with Kiel's head of physics
that had led to the offer. Planck knew there were others more established than he who would have
expected advancement. Nevertheless, he accepted and finished his entry for the Goettingen competition
shortly after arriving in the city of his birth. Even though only three papers were submitted
in search of the prize, an astonishing two years passed before it was announced that there would be
no winner. Planck was awarded second place and denied the prize by the judges because of his
support for Helmholtz in a scientific dispute with a member of the Goettingen faculty.
The behavior of the judges drew the attention of Helmholtz to Planck and his work. After a little
more than three years at Kiel in November 1888, Planck received an unexpected honor. He had not
been first or even second choice, but after others had turned it down, Planck, with Helmholtz's backing,
was asked to succeed Gustav Kirchhoff at Berlin University as professor of theoretical physics.
In the spring of 1889 the capital was not the city Planck had left 11 years earlier.
The stench that always shocked visitors had disappeared as a new sewer system replaced
the old open drains, and at night the main streets were lit by modern electric lamps.
Helmholtz was no longer head of the university's physics institute, but running the PTR,
the majestic new research facility three miles away. August Kunt, his successor, had played no
part in Planck's appointment, but welcomed him as an excellent acquisition and a splendid man.
In 1894 Helmholtz, aged 73, and Kunt, only 55, both died within months of each other.
Planck, only two years after finally being promoted to the rank of ordinary professor,
found himself as the senior physicist at Germany's foremost university at just 36.
He had no choice but to bear the weight of added responsibilities,
including that of advisor on theoretical physics for Annalinde physics.
It was a position of immense influence that gave him the right of veto on all theoretical papers
submitted to the premier German physics journal. Feeling the pressure of his newly elevated position
and a deep sense of loss at the deaths of his two colleagues, Planck sought solace in his work.
As a leading member of Berlin's close-knit community of physicists, he was well aware of the
ongoing, industry-driven black-body research program of the PTR. Although thermodynamics was
central to a theoretical analysis of the light and heat radiated by a black body,
the lack of reliable experimental data had stopped Planck from trying to derive the
exact form of Kirchhoff's unknown equation. Then, a breakthrough by an old friend at PTR
meant that he could no longer avoid the black-body problem.
In February 1893, 29-year-old Wilhelm Wien discovered a simple mathematical relationship
that described the effect of a change in temperature on the distribution of black-body
radiation. Wien found that as the temperature of a black-body increases, the wavelength at which
it emits radiation with the greatest intensity becomes ever shorter. It was already known that
the rise in temperature would result in an increase in the total amount of energy radiated,
but Wien's displacement law revealed something very precise. The wavelength at which the maximum
amount of radiation is emitted multiplied by the temperature of a black body is always a constant.
If the temperature is doubled, then the peak wavelength will be half the previous length.
Wien's discovery meant that once the numerical constant was calculated by measuring the peak
wavelength, the wavelength that radiates most strongly at a certain temperature,
then the peak wavelength could be calculated for any temperature. It also explained the changing
colors of a hot iron poker. Starting at low temperatures, the poker emits predominantly
long wavelength radiation from the infrared part of the spectrum. As the temperature increases,
more energy is radiated in each region, and the peak wavelength decreases. It is displaced
toward the shorter wavelengths. Consequently, the color of the emitted light changes from red
to orange, then yellow and finally a bluish-white, as the quantity of radiation from the ultraviolet
end of the spectrum increases. Wien had quickly established himself as a member of that endangered
breed of physicist, one who was both an accomplished theorist and a skilled experimenter. He found
the displacement law in his spare time and was forced to publish it as a private communication
without the imprimatur of the PTR. At the time he was working as an assistant in the PTR's
optics laboratory under the leadership of Otto Lummer. Wien's day job was the practical work
that was a prerequisite for an experimental investigation of black body radiation. Their
first task was to construct a better photometer, an instrument capable of comparing the intensity of
light, the amount of energy in a given wavelength range, from different sources such as gas lamps
and electric bulbs. It was the autumn of 1895 before Lummer and Wien devised a new and improved
hollow black body capable of being heated to a uniform temperature. While he and Lummer developed
their new black body during the day, Wien continued to spend his evenings searching for Kirchhoff's
equation for distribution of black body radiation. In 1896 Wien found a formula that Friedrich
Passchen at the University of Hanover quickly confirmed agreed with the data he had collected
on the allocation of energy among the short wavelengths of black body radiation. In June
that year, the very month the distribution law appeared in print, Wien left the PTR for an
extraordinary professorship at the Technische Hochschule in Aachen. He would win the Nobel Prize
for physics in 1911 for his work on black body radiation but left Lummer to put his distribution
law through a rigorous test. Tudusa required measurements over a greater range and at higher
temperatures than ever before. Working with Ferdinand Curlbaum and then Ernst Pringschein,
it took Lummer two long years of refinements and modifications but in 1898 he had a state of the
electrically heated black body. Capable of reaching temperatures as high as 1500 degrees Celsius,
it was the culmination of more than a decade of painstaking work at the PTR.
Plotting the intensity of radiation along the vertical axis of a graph against the wavelength
of the radiation along the horizontal axis, Lummer and Pringschein found that the intensity
rose as the wavelength of radiation increased until it peaked and then began to drop.
The spectral energy distribution of black body radiation was almost a bell-shaped curve,
resembling a shark's dorsal fin. The higher the temperature, the more pronounced the shape as
the intensity of radiation emitted increased. Taking readings and plotting curves with the
black body heated to different temperatures showed that the peak wavelength that radiated
with maximum intensity was displaced towards the ultraviolet end of the spectrum with increasing
temperature. Lummer and Pringschein reported their results at a meeting of the German Physical
Society held in Berlin on 3 February 1899. Lummer told the assembled physicists,
among them Planck, that their findings confirmed Wien's displacement law. However,
the situation regarding the distribution law was unclear. Although the data was in broad
agreement with Wien's theoretical predictions, there were some discrepancies in the infrared
region of the spectrum. In all likelihood these were due to experimental errors, but it was an
issue they argued that could be settled only once other experiments spread over a greater
range of wavelengths and over a greater interval of temperature can be arranged.
Within three months Friedrich Paschen announced that his measurements, though conducted at a
lower temperature than those of Lummer and Pringschein, were in complete harmony with the
predictions of Wien's distribution law. Planck breathed a sigh of relief and read out Paschen's
paper at a session of the Prussian Academy of Sciences. Such a law appealed deeply to him.
For Planck the theoretical quest for the spectral energy distribution of black
body radiation was nothing less than the search for the absolute, and, since I always regarded
the search for the absolute as the loftiest goal of all scientific activity, I eagerly set to work.
Soon after Wien published his distribution law, in 1896, Planck set about trying to place the law
on rock solid foundations by deriving it from first principles. Three years later, in May, 1899,
he thought he had succeeded by using the power and authority of the second law of thermodynamics.
Others agreed and started calling Wien's law by a new name, Wien Planck, despite the claims and
counterclaims of the experimentalists. Planck remained confident enough to assert that,
the limits of validity of this law, in case there are any at all, coincide with those of the
second fundamental law of the theory of heat. He advocated further testing of the distribution
law as a matter of urgency, since for him it would be a simultaneous examination of the second law.
He got his wish. At the beginning of November 1899, after spending nine months extending the
range of their measurements as they eliminated possible sources of experimental error,
Lummer and Pringsheim reported that they had found discrepancies of a systematic nature between
theory and experiment. Although in perfect agreement for short wavelengths, they discovered
that Wien's law consistently overestimated the intensity of radiation at long wavelengths.
However, within weeks Pauschen contradicted Lummer and Pringsheim. He presented another set of new
data and claimed that the distribution law appears to be a rigorously valid law of nature.
With most of the leading experts living and working in Berlin, the meetings of the German
Physical Society held in the capital became the main forum for discussions concerning
black body radiation and the status of Wien's law. It was the subject that again dominated the
proceedings of the society at its fortnightly meeting on 2 February 1900, when Lummer and
Pringsheim disclosed their latest measurements. They had found systematic discrepancies between
their measurements and the predictions of Wien's law in the infrared region that could not be the
result of experimental error. This breakdown of Wien's law led to a scramble to find a replacement,
but these makeshift alternatives proved unsatisfactory, prompting calls for further testing at even
longer wavelengths to unequivocally establish the extent of any failure of Wien's law.
It did after all agree with the available data covering the shorter wavelengths
and all other experiments bar those of Lummer Pringsheim had found in its favor.
As Planck was only too well aware, any theory is at the mercy of hard experimental facts,
but he strongly believed that a conflict between observation and theory can only be
confirmed as valid beyond all doubt if the figures of various observers substantially agree with each
other. Nevertheless, the disagreement between the experimentalists forced him to reconsider the
soundness of his ideas. In late September 1900, as he continued to review his derivation,
the failure of Wien's law in the deep infrared was confirmed.
The question was finally settled by Heinrich Rubens, a close friend of Planck's, and Ferdinand
Kurlbaum. Based at the Technische Hochschule on Berliner Straße, where at the age of 35 he had
recently been promoted to ordinary professor, Rubens spent most of his time as a guest worker
at the nearby PTR. It was there, with Kurlbaum, that he built a black body that allowed measurements
of the uncharted territory deep within the infrared region of the spectrum. During the summer
they tested Wien's law between wavelengths of 0.03 mm and 0.06 mm at temperatures ranging from 200
to 1500 degrees Celsius. At these longer wavelengths, they found the difference between
theory and observation was so marked that it could be evidence of only one thing,
the breakdown of Wien's law. Rubens and Kurlbaum wanted to announce
their results in a paper to the German Physical Society. The next meeting was on Friday,
5th of October. With little time to write a paper they decided to wait until the following
meeting two weeks later. In the meantime, Rubens knew that Planck would be eager to hear the latest
results. It was among the elegant villas of bankers, lawyers and other professors in the
affluent suburb of Grunewald in West Berlin that Planck lived for 50 years in a large house with
an enormous garden. On Sunday, 7th October, Rubens and his wife came for lunch.
Inevitably the talk between the two friends soon turned to physics and the black body problem.
Rubens explained that his latest measurements left no room for doubt. Wien's law failed at
long wavelengths and high temperatures. Those measurements Planck learned revealed that at
such wavelengths the intensity of black body radiation was proportional to the temperature.
That evening Planck decided to have a go at constructing the formula that would
reproduce the energy spectrum of black body radiation. He now had three crucial pieces
of information to help him. First, Wien's law accounted for the intensity of radiation
at short wavelengths. Second, it failed in the infrared, where Rubens and Curlbaum had found
that intensity was proportional to the temperature. Third, Wien's displacement law was correct.
Planck had to find a way to assemble these three pieces of the black body jigsaw together
to build the formula. His years of hard-won experience were quickly put into practice
as he set about manipulating the various mathematical symbols of the equations at his disposal.
After a few unsuccessful attempts, through a combination of inspired scientific guesswork
and intuition, Planck had a formula. It looked promising. But was it Kirchhoff's long sought-after
equation? Was it valid at any given temperature for the entire spectrum? Planck hurriedly penned
a note to Rubens and went out in the middle of the night to post it. After a couple of days Rubens
arrived at Planck's home with the answer. He had checked Planck's formula against the data
and found an almost perfect match. On Friday 19 October at the meeting of the German physical
society, with Rubens and Planck sitting among the audience, it was Ferdinand Curlbaum who made
the formal announcement that Wien's law was valid only at short wavelengths and failed at the longer
wavelengths of the infrared. After Curlbaum sat down, Planck rose to deliver a short comment
billed as an improvement of Wien's equation for the spectrum. He began by admitting that he had
believed Wien's law must necessarily be true and had said so at a previous meeting. As he continued
it quickly became clear that Planck was not simply proposing an improvement, some minor tinkering with
Wien's law, but a completely new law of his own. After speaking for less than 10 minutes Planck
wrote his equation for the blackbody spectrum on the blackboard. Turning around to look at the
familiar faces of his colleagues, he told them that this equation, as far as I can see at the
moment, fits the observational data published up to now. As he sat down, Planck received
polite nods of approval. The muted response was understandable. After all what Planck had just
proposed was another ad hoc formula manufactured to explain the experimental results. There were
others who had already put forward equations of their own in the hope of filling the void,
should the suspected failure of Wien's law at long wavelengths be confirmed.
The next day Rubens visited Planck to reassure him. He came to tell me that after the conclusion
of the meeting he had that very night checked my formula against the results of his measurements,
Planck remembered, and found satisfactory concordance at every point. Less than a week later,
Rubens and Curlbaum announced that they had compared their measurements with the predictions
of five different formulae and found Planck's to be much more accurate than any of the others.
Passion 2 confirmed that Planck's equation matched his data. Yet despite this rapid
corroboration by the experimentalists of the superiority of his formula, Planck was troubled.
He had his formula. But what did it mean? What was the underlying physics? Without an answer,
Planck knew that it would at best be just an improvement on Wien's law and have merely the
standing of a law disclosed by a lucky intuition that possessed no more than a formal significance.
For this reason on the very first day when I formulated this law, Planck said later,
I began to devote myself to the task of investing it with true physical meaning.
He could achieve this only by deriving his equations step by step,
using the principles of physics. Planck knew his destination, but he had to find a way of
getting there. He possessed a priceless guide, the equation itself. But what price was he prepared
to pay for such a journey? The next six weeks were, Planck recalled,
the most strenuous work of my life. After which, the darkness lifted and an unexpected vista began
to appear. On 13 November he wrote to Wien. My new formula is well satisfied. I now have also obtained
a theory for it which I shall present in four weeks at the physical society here, in Berlin.
Planck said nothing to Wien either of the intense intellectual struggle that had led to his theory
or the theory itself. He had strived long and hard during those weeks to reconcile his equation
with the two grand theories of 19th century physics, thermodynamics, and electromagnetism.
He failed. A theoretical interpretation therefore had to be found at any cost,
he accepted, no matter how high. He was ready to sacrifice every one of my previous convictions
about physical laws. Planck no longer cared what it cost him as long as he could bring about a
positive result. For such an emotionally restrained man, who only truly expressed himself freely at
the piano, this was highly charged language. Pushed to the limit in the struggle to understand
his new formula, Planck was forced into an act of desperation that led to the discovery of the
quantum. As the walls of a black body are heated they emit infrared visible and ultraviolet radiation
into the heart of the cavity. In his search for a theoretically consistent derivation of his law,
Planck had to come up with a physical model that reproduced the spectral energy distribution
of black body radiation. He had already been toying with an idea. It did not matter if the
model failed to capture what was really going on, all Planck needed was a way of getting the right
mix of frequencies, and therefore wavelengths, of the radiation present inside the cavity.
He used the fact that this distribution depends only on the temperature of the black body and not
on the material from which it is made to conjure up the simplest model he could.
Despite the great success that the atomic theory has so far enjoyed, Planck wrote in 1882,
ultimately it will have to be abandoned in favor of the assumption of continuous matter.
Eighteen years later, in the absence of indisputable proof of their existence,
he still did not believe in atoms. Planck knew from the theory of electromagnetism
that an electric charge oscillating at a certain frequency emits and absorbs radiation only of
that frequency. He therefore chose to represent the walls of the black body as an enormous array
of oscillators. Although each oscillator emits only a single frequency, collectively they emit
the entire range of frequencies found within the black body. A pendulum is an oscillator,
and its frequency is the number of swings per second, a single oscillation being one complete
two and froze swing that returns the pendulum to its starting point. Another oscillator is a weight
hanging from a spring, its frequency is the number of times per second the weight bounces
up and down after being pulled from its stationary position and released. The physics of such
oscillations had long been understood and given the name simple harmonic motion by the time Planck
used oscillators as he called them in his theoretical model. Planck envisaged his collection of
oscillators as massless springs of varying stiffness so as to reproduce the different
frequencies each with an electric charge attached. Heating the walls of the black body provided
the energy needed to set the oscillators in motion. Whether an oscillator was active or not would
depend only upon the temperature. If it were then it would emit radiation into and absorb radiation
from the cavity. In time if the temperature is held constant this dynamic give and take of
radiation energy between the oscillators and the radiation in the cavity comes into balance
and a state of thermal equilibrium is achieved. Since the spectral energy distribution of black
body radiation represents how the total energy is shared among the different frequencies,
Planck assumed that it was the number of oscillators at each given frequency that
determined the allocation. After setting up his hypothetical model he had to devise a way to
share out the available energy among the oscillators. In the weeks following its announcement
Planck discovered the hard way that he could not derive his formula using physics that he
had long accepted as dogma. In desperation he turned to the ideas of an Austrian physicist
Ludwig Boltzmann who was the foremost advocate of the atom. On the road to his black body formula
Planck became a convert as he accepted that atoms were more than just a convenient fiction
after years of being openly hostile to the atomic theory.
The son of a tax collector Ludwig Boltzmann was short and stout with an impressive
late 19th century beard. Born in Vienna on 20 February 1844 he was for a while
taught the piano by the composer Anton Bruckner. A better physicist than a pianist,
Boltzmann obtained his doctorate from the University of Vienna in 1866. He quickly made
his reputation with fundamental contributions to the kinetic theory of gases so called because
its proponents believed that gases were made up of atoms or molecules in a state of continual motion.
Later, in 1884, Boltzmann provided the theoretical justification for the discovery
by Josef Stefan, his former mentor, that the total energy radiated by a black body is proportional
to the temperature raised to the fourth power, t to the fourth power or t times t times t times t.
It meant that doubling the temperature of a black body increase the energy it radiated
by a factor of 16. Boltzmann was a renowned teacher and, although a theorist, a very capable
experimentalist, despite being severely short-sighted. Whenever a vacancy arose at one of Europe's
leading universities his name was usually on the list of potential candidates. It was only after
he turned down the professorship at Berlin University, left vacant by the death of Gustav
Kirchhoff, that a downgraded version was offered to Planck. By 1900, the much-traveled Boltzmann
was at Leipzig University and universally acknowledged as one of the great theoreticians.
Yet there were many, like Planck, who found his approach to thermodynamics unacceptable.
Boltzmann believed that properties of gases, such as pressure, were the macroscopic manifestations
of microscopic phenomena regulated by the laws of mechanics and probability.
For those who believed in atoms, the classical physics of Newton governed the movement of each
gas molecule. But using Newtonian laws of motion to determine that of each of the countless molecules
of a gas was, for all practical purposes, impossible. It was the 28-year-old Scottish
physicist James Clerk Maxwell who, in 1860, captured the motion of gas molecules without
measuring the velocity of a single one. Using statistics and probability Maxwell worked out
the most likely distribution of velocities as the gas molecules underwent incessant collisions
with each other and the walls of a container. The introduction of statistics and probability was
bold and innovative. It allowed Maxwell to explain many of the observed properties of gases.
Thirteen years younger Boltzmann followed in Maxwell's footsteps to help shore up the kinetic
theory of gases. In the 1870s he went one step further and developed a statistical interpretation
of the second law of thermodynamics by linking entropy with disorder.
According to what became known as Boltzmann's principle, entropy is a measure of the probability
of finding a system in a particular state. A well-shuffled pack of playing cards, for example,
is a disordered system with high entropy. However, a brand-new deck with cards arranged
according to suit and from ace to king is a highly ordered system with low entropy.
For Boltzmann the second law of thermodynamics concerns the evolution of a system with a low
probability and therefore low entropy into a state of higher probability and high entropy.
The second law is not an absolute law. It is possible for a system to go from a disordered
state to a more ordered one, just as a shuffled pack of cards may, if shuffled again, become
ordered. However, the odds against that happening are so astronomical that it would require many
times the age of the universe to pass for it to occur. Plunk believed that the second law of
thermodynamics was absolute. Entropy always increases. In Boltzmann's statistical interpretation,
entropy nearly always increases. There was a world of difference between these two views as far as
Planck was concerned. For him to turn to Boltzmann was a renunciation of everything that he held dear
as a physicist, but he had no choice in his quest to derive his black-body formula.
Until then I had paid no attention to the relationship between entropy and probability,
in which I had little interest since every probability law permits exceptions,
and at that time I assumed that the second law of thermodynamics was valid without exceptions.
A state of maximum entropy, maximum disorder, is the most probable state for a system.
For a black-body that state is thermal equilibrium, just the situation that Planck faced as he tried
to find the most probable distribution of energy among his oscillators. If there are 1,000 oscillators
in total and 10 have a frequency v, it is these oscillators that determine the intensity of radiation
emitted at that frequency. While the frequency of any one of Planck's electric oscillators is fixed,
the amount of energy it emits and absorbs depends solely upon its amplitude, the size of its
oscillation. A pendulum completing 5 swings in 5 seconds has a frequency of 1 oscillation per
second. However, if it swings through a wide arc, the pendulum has more energy than if it traces
out a smaller one. The frequency remains unchanged because the length of the pendulum fixes it,
but the extra energy allows it to travel faster through a wide arc. The pendulum therefore
completes the same number of oscillations in the same time as an identical pendulum swinging
through a narrower arc. Applying Boltzmann's techniques, Planck discovered that he could
derive his formula for the distribution of black-body radiation only if the oscillators absorbed
and emitted packets of energy that were proportional to their frequency of oscillation.
It was the most essential point of the whole calculation, said Planck, to consider the energy
at each frequency as being composed of a number of equal, indivisible energy elements that he
later called quanta. Guided by his formula Planck had been forced into slicing up energy, e, into
hv-sized chunks, where v is the frequency of the oscillator, and h is a constant.
E equals hv would become one of the most famous equations in the whole of science.
If, for example, the frequency was 20 and h was 2, then each quantum of energy would have a magnitude
of 20 times 2 equals 40. If the total energy available at this frequency were 3600, then there
would be 36 divided by 40 equals 90 quanta to be distributed among the 10 oscillators of that
frequency. Planck learned from Boltzmann how to determine the most probable distribution of these
quanta among the oscillators. He found that his oscillators could only have energies 0,
hv, 2, hv, 3, hv, 4, hv, all the way up to n, hv, where n is a whole number.
This corresponded to either absorbing or emitting a whole number of energy elements or quanta
of size, hv. It was like a bank cashier able to receive and dispense money only in denominations
of 1 pound, 2 pounds, 5 pounds, 10 pounds, 20 pounds and 50 pounds.
Since Planck's oscillators cannot have any other energy, the amplitude of their oscillations
is constrained. The strange implications of this are manifest if scaled up to the everyday world
of a spring with a weight attached. If the weight oscillates with an amplitude of 1 centimeter,
then it has an energy of 1, ignoring the units of measuring energy. If the weight is pulled down to
2 centimeters and allowed to oscillate, its frequency remains the same as before. However,
its energy, which is proportional to the square of the amplitude, is now 4. If the restriction
on Planck's oscillators applied to the weight, then between 1 centimeter and 2 centimeters,
it can oscillate only with amplitudes of 1.42 centimeters and 1.73 centimeters because they
have energies of 2 and 3. It cannot, for example, oscillate with an amplitude of 1.5 centimeters
because the associated energy would be 2.25. A quantum of energy is indivisible.
An oscillator cannot receive a fraction of a quantum of energy. It must be all or nothing.
This ran counter to the physics of the day. It placed no restrictions on the size of oscillation
and therefore on how much energy an oscillator can emit or absorb in a single transaction.
It could have any amount. In his desperation, Planck had discovered something so remarkable
and unexpected that he failed to grasp its significance. It is not possible for his
oscillators to absorb or emit energy continuously like water from a tap. Instead,
they can only gain and lose energy discontinuously in small, indivisible units of E equals Hv,
where V is the frequency with which the oscillator vibrates that exactly matches
the frequency of the radiation it can absorb or emit.
The reason why large-scale oscillators are not seen to behave like Planck's atomic-sized ones
is because H is equal to 0.00000000000000000000000000000000060026 erg seconds
or 6.626 divided by 1000 trillion trillion. According to Planck's formula, there could be
no smaller step than H in the increase or decrease of energy, but the infinitesimal size of H makes
quantum effects invisible in the world of the everyday when it comes to pendulums,
children's swings and vibrating weights. Planck's oscillators forced him to slice
and dice radiation energy so as to feed them the correct bite-sized chunks of Hv.
He did not believe that the energy of radiation was really chopped up into quanta.
It was just the way his oscillators could receive and emit energy. The problem for Planck was that
Boltzmann's procedure for slicing energy required that at the end the slices be made ever thinner
until mathematically their thickness was zero, and they vanished, with the whole being restored.
To reunite a sliced-up quantity in such a fashion
was a mathematical technique at the very heart of calculus. Unfortunately for Planck,
if he did the same, his formula vanished too. He was stuck with quanta, but was unconcerned.
He had his formula. The rest could be sorted out later.
Gentlemen, said Planck as he faced the members of the German Physical Society,
seated in the room at Berlin University's Physics Institute. He could see Rubens,
Lumer and Pringsheim among them as he began his lecture.
Sir Theorie des Gesetzes der Energie vertilern im normal Spektrum. On the theory of the energy
distribution law of the normal spectrum. It was just after 5 p.m. on Friday, 14th of December 1900.
Several weeks ago I had the honor of directing your attention to a new equation that seemed
suitable to me for expressing the law of the distribution of radiating energy over all areas
of the normal spectrum. Planck now presented the physics behind that new equation as he derived it.
At the end of the meeting his colleagues roundly congratulated him.
Just as Planck regarded the introduction of the quantum, a packet of energy as a
purely formal assumption to which he really did not give much thought, so did everyone else that day.
What was important to them was that Planck had succeeded in providing a physical justification
for the formula he had presented in October. To be sure his idea of chopping up energy into
quanta for the oscillators was rather strange, but it would be ironed out in time.
All believed that it was nothing more than the usual theorists' sleight of hand,
a neat mathematical trick on the path to getting the right answer. It had no true physical
significance. What continued to impress his colleagues was the accuracy of his new radiation
law. Nobody really took much notice of the quantum of energy, including Planck himself.
Early one morning Planck left home with his seven-year-old son, Irwin.
Father and son were headed to nearby Grunewald Forest.
Walking there was a favorite pastime of Planck's and he enjoyed taking his son along. Irwin later
recalled that as the pair walked and talked his father told him, today I have made a discovery
as important as that of Newton. When he recounted the tale years later, Irwin could not remember
exactly when the walk took place. It was probably some time before the December lecture.
Was it possible that Planck understood the full implications of the quantum after all?
Or was he just trying to convey to his young son something of the importance of his new
radiation law? Neither. He was simply expressing his joy at discovering not one but two new
fundamental constants, k which he called Boltzmann's constant and h which he called
the quantum of action, but which physicists would call Planck's constant. They were fixed and eternal.
Two of nature's absolutes. Planck acknowledged his debt to Boltzmann, having named k after the
Austrian, a constant that he had discovered in his research leading up to the black body formula.
Planck also nominated Boltzmann for the Nobel Prize in 1905 and 1906.
By then it was too late. Boltzmann had long been plagued by ill health, asthma, migraines,
poor eyesight and angina. Yet none of these were as debilitating as the bouts of severe
manic depression he suffered. In September 1906 while on holiday in Duino near Trieste,
he hanged himself. He was 62. And though some of his friends had long feared the worst,
news of his death came as a terrible shock. Boltzmann had felt increasingly isolated
and unappreciated. It was untrue. He was among the most widely honored and admired physicists
of the age. But continuing disputes over the existence of atoms had left him vulnerable
during periods of despair to believing that his life's work was being undermined.
Boltzmann had returned to Vienna University for the third and last time in 1902.
Planck was asked to succeed him. Describing Boltzmann's work as
one of the most beautiful triumphs of theoretical research,
Planck was tempted by the Viennese offer but declined.
H was the ax that chopped up energy into quanta, and Planck had been the first to wield it.
But what he quantized was the way his imaginary oscillators could receive and emit energy.
Planck did not quantize, chop into HV-sized chunks, energy itself.
There is a difference between making a discovery and fully understanding it,
especially in a time of transition. There was much that Planck did that was only implicit
in his derivation and not even clear to him. He never explicitly quantized individual oscillators
as he should have done, but only groups of them. Part of the problem was that Planck thought he
could get rid of the quantum. He only realized the far-reaching consequences of what he had done,
much later. His deep conservative instincts compelled him to try for the best part of a decade
to incorporate the quantum into the existing framework of physics.
He knew that some of his colleagues saw this as bordering on a tragedy.
But I feel differently about it, Planck wrote. I now know for a fact that the elementary quantum
of action, H, played a far more significant part in physics that I had originally been inclined to
suspect. Years after Planck's death in 1947, at the age of 89, his former student and colleague
James Franck recalled watching his hopeless struggle to avoid quantum theory, to see whether he
could not at least make the influence of quantum theory as little as it could possibly be.
It was clear to Franck that Planck was a revolutionary against his own will, who finally
came to the conclusion, it doesn't help, we have to live with quantum theory, and believe me it will
expand. It was a fitting epitaph for a reluctant revolutionary.
Physicists did have to learn to live with the quantum. The first to do so was not one of Planck's
distinguished peers, but a young man living in Bern, Switzerland. He alone realized the radical
nature of the quantum. He was not a professional physicist, but a junior civil servant whom Planck
credited with the discovery that energy itself is quantized. His name was Albert Einstein.
Chapter 2 The Patent Slave
Bern, Switzerland, Friday 17 March 1905
It was nearly eight o'clock in the morning as the young man dressed in the unusual plaid suit
hurried to work clutching an envelope. To a passerby, Albert Einstein appeared to have forgotten
that he was wearing a pair of worn out green slippers with embroidered flowers. At the same time,
six days a week, he left his wife and baby son Hans Albert behind in their small two-room apartment
in the middle of Bern's picturesque old town quarter, and walked to the rather grand sandstone
building ten minutes away. With its famous clock tower, the Zeitloga Term, and arcades lining
both sides of the cobbled street, Kramgasso was one of the most beautiful streets in the Swiss
capital. Lost in thought, Einstein hardly noticed his surroundings as he made his way to the
administrative headquarters of the Federal Post and Telephone Service. Once inside, he headed
straight for the stairs on the third floor that housed the Federal Office of Intellectual Property,
better known as the Swiss Patent Office. Here, he and the dozen other technical experts,
men in more sober dark suits, labored at their desks for eight hours a day sorting out the
barely viable from the fatally flawed. Three days earlier, Einstein had celebrated
his 26th birthday. He had been a patent slave as he called it for nearly three years.
For him the job brought to an end the annoying business of starving. The work itself he enjoyed
for its variety, the many-sided thinking it encouraged, and the relaxed atmosphere of the
office. It was an environment Einstein later referred to as his worldly monastery.
Although the post of technical expert, third class was a humble one, it was well paid and allowed
him time enough to pursue his own research. Despite the watchful eye of his boss the formidable
Herr Hauler, Einstein spent so much time between examining patents secretly doing his own calculations
that his desk had become his office for theoretical physics. It was as if the ground had been pulled
out from under one, with no firm foundation to be seen anywhere upon which one could have built,
was how Einstein recalled feeling after reading Plunk's solution of the blackbody problem
soon after it was published. What he sent in the envelope to the editor of Annalinde Physics,
the world's leading physics journal on 17 March 1905, was even more radical than Plunk's original
introduction of the quantum. Einstein knew that his proposal of a quantum theory of light
was nothing short of heresy. Two months later, in the middle of May, Einstein wrote to his friend
Konrad Habicht, promising to send four papers he hoped to see published before the year's end.
The first was the quantum paper. The second was his PhD dissertation, in which he set out a new
way to determine the sizes of atoms. The third offered an explanation of Brownian motion, the
erratic dance of tiny particles like grains of pollen suspended in liquid. The fourth paper,
Einstein admitted, is only a rough draft at this point and is an electrodynamics of moving
bodies which employs a modification of the theory of space and time. It is an extraordinary list.
In the annals of science only one other scientist and one other year bears comparison
with Einstein and his achievements in 1905. Isaac Newton, in 1666, when the 23-year-old
Englishman laid the foundations of calculus and the theory of gravity and outlined his theory of light.
Einstein would become synonymous with the theory first sketched out
in his fourth paper, Relativity. Although it would change humanity's very understanding of the nature
of space and time, it was the extension of Plunk's quantum concept to light and radiation
that he described as very revolutionary, not relativity. Einstein regarded relativity as
simply a modification of ideas already developed and established by Newton and others, whereas his
concept of light quanta was something totally new, entirely his own, and represented the greatest
break with the physics of the past. Even for an amateur physicist, it was sacrilegious.
For more than half a century it had been universally accepted that light was a wave phenomenon.
In, on a heuristic point of view concerning the production and transformation of light,
Einstein put forward the idea that light was not made up of waves, but particle like quanta.
In his resolution of the black body problem, Plunk had reluctantly introduced the idea that
energy was absorbed or emitted as quanta in discrete lumps. However, he, like everyone else,
believed that electromagnetic radiation itself was a continuous wave phenomenon,
whatever the mechanism of how it exchanged energy when it interacted with matter.
Einstein's revolutionary point of view was that light, indeed all electromagnetic radiation,
was not wave-like at all, but chopped up into little bits. Light, quanta.
For the next twenty years virtually no one but he believed in his quantum of light.
From the beginning Einstein knew it would be an uphill struggle. He signaled as much by including,
on a heuristic point of view in the title of his paper. Heuristic, as defined by the
shorter Oxford English Dictionary means, serving to find out. What he was offering physicists
was a way to explain the unexplained when it came to light, not a fully worked out
theory derived from first principles. His paper was a signpost towards such a theory but even
that proved too much for those unprepared to travel to a destination in the opposite direction
to the long-established wave theory of light. Received by the Analynder
Physic between 18th of March and 30th of June, Einstein's four papers would transform physics
in the years ahead. Remarkably, he also found the time and energy to write twenty-one book reviews
for the journal during the course of the year. Almost as an afterthought since he did not tell
Habicht about it he wrote a fifth paper. It contained the one equation that almost everyone
would come to know. E equals mc squared. A storm broke loose in my mind was how he described the
surge of creativity that consumed him as he produced his breathtaking succession of papers
during that glorious burns spring and summer of 1905. Max Planck, the advisor on theoretical physics
for the Analynder Physic, was among the first to read on the electrodynamics of moving bodies.
Planck was immediately won over by what he and not Einstein later called the theory of relativity.
As for the quantum of light, though he profoundly disagreed with it,
Planck allowed Einstein's paper to be published. As he did so he must have wondered about the
identity of this physicist capable of the sublime and the ridiculous.
The people of Ulm, our mathematicians, was the unusual medieval motto of the city on the banks
of the Danube in the southwestern corner of Germany where Albert Einstein was born.
It was an apt birthplace on 14 March 1879 for the man who would become the epitome
of scientific genius. The back of his head was so large and distorted his mother feared her newborn
son was deformed. Later, he took so long to speak that his parents worried he never would.
Not long after the birth of his sister and only sibling, Maya, in November 1881,
Einstein adopted the rather strange ritual of softly repeating every sentence he wanted to
say until satisfied it was word perfect before uttering it aloud. At seven, to the relief of
his parents Hermann and Pauline, he began to speak normally. By then the family had lived in Munich
for six years, having moved so Hermann could open an electrical business in partnership with his
younger brother Jakob. In October 1885, with the last of the private Jewish schools in Munich closed
for more than a decade, the six-year-old Einstein was sent to the nearest school.
Not surprisingly in the heartland of German Catholicism, religious education formed an
integral part of the curriculum. But the teachers, he recalled many years later,
were liberal and did not make any denominational distinctions.
However liberal and accommodating his teachers may have been,
the antisemitism that permeated German society was never buried too far beneath the surface,
even in the schoolroom. Einstein never forgot the lesson in which his religious studies teacher
told the class how the Jews had nailed Christ to the cross. Among the children,
Einstein recalled years later, antisemitism was alive especially in elementary school.
Not surprisingly he had few, if any, school friends.
I am truly a lone traveler and have never belonged to my country, my home, my friends,
or even my immediate family, with my whole heart, he wrote in 1930. He called himself an
Einspenner, a one-horse cart. As a schoolboy he preferred solitary pursuits and enjoyed nothing
more than constructing ever taller houses of cards. He had the patience and tenacity even as a
ten-year-old to build them as high as fourteen stories. These traits, already such a fundamental
part of his makeup would allow him to pursue his own scientific ideas when others might have given up.
God gave me the stubbornness of a mule, he said later, and a fairly keen scent.
Though others disagreed, Einstein maintained he possessed no special talents, only a passionate
curiosity. This quality that others had, however, coupled with his stubbornness, meant that he
continued to seek the answer to almost childlike questions, long after his peers were taught
to stop even asking them. What would it be like to ride on a beam of light?
It was trying to answer this question that set him on his decade-long path to the theory of relativity.
In 1888, aged nine, Einstein started at the Leutpold Gymnasium, and he later spoke bitterly
of his days there. Whereas young moxplunk enjoyed and thrived under a strict militaristic discipline
focused on rote learning, Einstein did not. Despite resenting his teachers and their autocratic
methods, he excelled academically, even though the curriculum was orientated towards the humanities.
He scored top marks in Latin and did well in Greek, even after being told by his teacher
that nothing would ever become of him. The stifling emphasis on mechanical learning at
school and during music lessons with tutors at home was in stark contrast to the nurturing
influence of a penniless, Polish medical student. Mox Talmud was 21 and Albert 10,
when every Thursday he began dining with the Einsteins as they adopted their own version
of an old Jewish tradition of inviting a poor religious scholar to lunch on the Sabbath.
Talmud quickly recognized the inquisitive young boy as a kindred spirit.
Before long the two would spend hours discussing the books that Talmud had given him to read or
had recommended. They began with books on popular science that brought to an end what Einstein
called his religious paradise of youth. The years at a Catholic school and instruction
at home by a relative on Judaism had left their mark. Einstein, to the surprise of his
secular parents had developed what he described as a deep religiosity. He stopped eating pork,
sang religious songs on the way to school, and accepted the biblical story of creation as an
established fact. Then, as he devoured one book after another on science, came the realization
that much of the Bible could not be true. It unleashed what he called a fanatic free thinking
coupled with the impression that youth is intentionally being deceived by the state through
lies. It was a crushing impression. It sowed the seeds of a lifelong suspicion of every kind of
authority. He came to view the loss of his religious paradise as the first attempt to free himself
from the chains of the merely personal, from an existence which is dominated by wishes, hopes,
and primitive feelings. As he lost faith in the teachings of one sacred book, he began to experience
the wonder of his sacred little geometry book. He was still at primary school when his uncle
Jacob introduced him to the rudiments of algebra and began posing problems for him to solve.
By the time Talmud gave him a book on Euclid's geometry, Einstein was already well versed
in mathematics not normally expected of a boy of twelve. Talmud was surprised at the speed
with which Einstein worked through the book, proving the theorems and completing the exercises.
Such was his zeal that during the summer vacation he mastered the mathematics to be taught the
following year at school. With a father and an uncle in the electrical industry, Einstein not only
learned about science through reading, but was surrounded by the technology that its application
could produce. It was his father who unwittingly introduced Einstein to the wonder and mystery of
science. One day, as his son lay ill in bed with a fever, Hermann showed him a compass.
The movement of the needle appeared so miraculous that the five-year-old trembled
and grew cold at the thought that something deeply hidden had to be behind things.
The Einstein brothers' electrical business initially prospered. They went from manufacturing
electric devices to installing power and lighting networks. The future seemed bright as the
Einsteins notched up one success after another, including the contract to provide the first
electric lighting for Munich's famous Oktoberfest. But in the end the brothers were simply outgunned
by the likes of Siemens and AEG. There were many small electrical firms that prospered and survived
in the shadow of these giants, but Jacob was over-ambitious and Hermann too indecisive for
their company to be one of them. Beaten, but not bowed, the brothers decided that Italy,
where electrification was just beginning was the place to start afresh. So, in June 1894 the
Einsteins relocated to Milan. All except fifteen-year-old Albert, who was left behind in the care of
distant relatives to complete the three remaining years to graduation from the school he detested.
For the sake of his parents he pretended that everything was fine in Munich,
however he was increasingly troubled by the thought of compulsory military service. Under German law,
if he remained in the country until his seventeenth birthday,
Einstein would have no choice but to report for duty when the time came or be declared a deserter.
Alone and depressed, he had to think of a way out, when suddenly the perfect opportunity arose.
Dr. Degenhardt, the teacher of Greek who thought Einstein would never amount to anything,
was now also his form tutor. During a heated argument, Degenhardt told Einstein he should
leave the school. Requiring no further encouragement he did just that after obtaining a medical
certificate stating that he was suffering from exhaustion and required complete rest to recover.
At the same time, Einstein secured a testimonial from his mathematics teacher that he had mastered
the subject to a level required to graduate. It had taken him just six months to follow in
the footsteps of his family and cross the Alps into Italy. His parents tried to reason with him,
but Einstein refused to go back to Munich. He had an alternative plan. He would stay in Milan
and prepare for the entrance exams the following October of the Federal Polytechnicum in Zurich.
Established in 1854 and renamed Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule,
ETH in 1911, the poly was not as prestigious as Germany's leading universities.
However, it did not require graduation from a gymnasium as a precondition for entry.
To be accepted, he explained to his parents, he just needed to pass its entrance exams.
They soon discovered the second part of their son's plan. He wanted to renounce his German
nationality and thereby remove the possibility of ever being called up for military service by the
Reich. Too young to do it himself, Einstein needed his father's consent. Hermann Dooley gave it and
formally applied to the authorities for his son's release. It was January 1896 before they
received official notification that Albert, at the cost of three marks, was no longer a German
citizen. For the next five years, he was legally stateless until he became a Swiss citizen.
A renowned pacifist later in life, once he was granted his new nationality,
Einstein turned up for his Swiss army medical on 13 March 1901, the day before his 22nd birthday.
Fortunately, he was found unfit for military service because of sweaty flat feet and varicose veins.
As a teenager back in Munich, it was not the thought of serving in the army that bothered him,
but the prospect of dawning a gray uniform on behalf of the militarism of the German Reich,
which he hated. The happy months of my sojourn in Italy are my most beautiful memories,
was how Einstein even after 50 years, recalled his new carefree existence. He helped his father and
uncle with their electrical business and traveled here and there visiting friends and family.
In the spring of 1895 the family moved to Pavia, just south of Milan, where the brothers opened a
new factory that lasted little more than a year before it too closed. Although amid the upheaval
he had worked hard to prepare, Einstein failed the polyentrance exams. Yet his mathematics and
physics results were so impressive that the professor of physics invited him to attend his
lectures. It was a tantalizing offer, but for once Einstein took some sound advice.
He had done so badly in languages, literature and history that the director of the poly urged him
to go back to school for another year and recommended one in Switzerland.
By the end of October Einstein was in Arau, a town 30 miles west of Zürich. With its liberal
ethos, the Argao-Kanton School provided a stimulating environment that enabled Einstein to
thrive. The experience of boarding with the classics teacher and his family was to leave
an indelible mark. Jost Vintler and his wife Pauline encouraged free thinking among their
three daughters and four sons, and dinner each evening was always a lively and noisy affair.
Before long the Vintlers became surrogate parents, and he even referred to them as
Papa Vintler and Mama Vintler. Whatever the old Einstein said later about being a lone
traveler, the young Einstein needed people who cared about him and he for them.
Soon it was September 1896 and exam time. Einstein passed easily and headed to Zürich
and the Federal Polytechnicum. A happy man is too satisfied with the present to dwell too much
upon the future. Einstein had written at the start of a short essay called My Future Plans
during his two-hour French exam. But an inclination for abstract thinking and the lack of
practical sense had led him to decide on a future as a teacher of mathematics and physics.
So it was that Einstein found himself, in October 1896, the youngest of 11 new students
entering the Poly's school for specialized teachers in the mathematical and science subjects.
He was one of the five seeking to qualify to teach maths and physics.
The only woman among them was to be his future wife.
None of Albert's friends could understand why he was attracted to Mileva Maric.
A Hungarian Serb she was four years older and a bout of childhood tuberculosis had left her
with a slight limp. During the first year they sat through the five compulsory math courses and
mechanics the single physics course offered. Although he had devoured his little sacred
book of geometry in Munich, Einstein was no longer interested in mathematics for its own sake.
Hermann Minkowski, his maths professor at the Poly recalled that Einstein had been
a lazy dog. It was not apathy but a failure to grasp as Einstein later confessed that the approach
to a more profound knowledge of the basic principles of physics is tied up with the most
intricate mathematical methods. It was something he learned the hard way in the years of research
that followed. He regretted not having tried harder to get a sound mathematical education.
Fortunately, Marcel Grossmann, one of the other three besides Einstein and Mileva enrolled in
the course, was a better mathematician and more studious than either of them. It would be to
Grossmann that Einstein later turned for help as he struggled with the mathematics needed to
formulate the general theory of relativity. The two quickly became friends as they talked about
anything that might interest young people whose eyes were open. Only a year older Grossmann
must have been an astute judge of character for he was so impressed by his classmate that he took
him home to meet his parents. This, Einstein, he told them, will one day be a very great man.
It was only by using Grossmann's excellent set of notes that he passed the intermediate exams
in October 1898. In old age Einstein could barely bring himself to contemplate what might have
happened without Grossmann's help after he began skipping lectures. It had all been so different
at the beginning of Heinrich Weber's physics course when Einstein looked forward from one of
his lectures to the next. Weber, who was in his mid-fifties, could make physics come alive
for his students, and Einstein conceded that he lectured on thermodynamics with great mastery.
But he became disenchanted because Weber did not teach Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism
or any of the latest developments. Soon Einstein's independent streak and contemptuous manner began
to alienate his professors. You're a smart boy, Weber told him, but you have one great fault.
You do not let yourself be told anything. When the final exams took place in July 1900 he came
fourth out of five. Einstein felt coerced by the exams and they had such a deterring effect upon
him that afterwards he found, the consideration of any scientific problems distasteful to me for
an entire year. Milleva was last, and the only one to fail. It was a bitter blow for the couple
who were now affectionately calling each other Johannzel, Johnny, and Dokzerl, Dolly. Another,
soon followed. A future as a school teacher no longer appealed to Einstein. Four years in Zurich
had given rise to a new ambition. He wanted to be a physicist. The chances of getting a full-time
job at a university were slim even for the best students. The first step was an assistant's
position with one of the professors at the poly. None wanted him and Einstein began searching
further afield. Soon I will have honored all physicists from the North Sea to the Southern
tip of Italy with my offer, he wrote to Milleva in April 1901 while visiting his parents.
One of those honored was Wilhelm Ostwald, a chemist at the Leipzig University.
Einstein wrote to him twice. Both letters went unanswered. It must have been distressing for
his father to watch his sons growing despair. Hermann, unknown to Albert then or later took
it upon himself to intervene. Please forgive a father who is so bold as to turn to you esteemed
hair professor in the interest of his son, he wrote to Ostwald. All those in position to give
a judgment in the matter praise his talents. In any case I can assure you that he is extraordinarily
studious and diligent and clings with great love to his science. The heartfelt plea went unanswered.
Later Ostwald would be the first to nominate Einstein for the Nobel Prize.
Although anti-Semitism may have played a part, Einstein was convinced that it was Weber's poor
references that were behind his failure to secure an assistantship. As he grew increasingly despondent,
a letter from Grossmann held out the possibility of a decent, well-paying job.
Grossmann Sr. had learned of Einstein's desperate situation and wanted to help the
young man whom his son held in such high regard. He strongly recommended Einstein for the next
vacancy that now arose to his friend Friedrich Haller, the director of the Swiss Patent Office in
Bern. When I found your letter yesterday, Einstein wrote to Marcel, I was deeply moved by your devotion
and compassion which did not let you forget your old luckless friend. After five years of being
stateless, Einstein had recently acquired Swiss citizenship and was certain it would help when
applying for the job. Maybe his luck had changed at last. He was offered and accepted a temporary
teaching job at the school in Winterthur, a small town less than 20 miles from Zurich.
The five or six classes Einstein taught each morning left him free to pursue physics in the
afternoon. I cannot tell you how happy I would feel in such a job, he wrote to Papa Vintler,
shortly before his time in Winterthur ended. I have completely given up my ambition to get
a position at a university, since I see that even as it is, I have enough strength and desire left
for scientific endeavor. Soon that strength was put to the test when Mileva announced,
she was pregnant. After failing the poly exams a second time, Mileva returned to her parents in
Hungary to await the arrival of the baby. Einstein took the news of the pregnancy in his stride.
He had already entertained thoughts of becoming an insurance clerk and now vowed to find any job,
no matter how humble, so that they could marry. When their daughter was born, Einstein was in
burn. He never saw Lee Searle. What happened to her, whether she was given up for adoption
or died in infancy, remains a mystery. In December 1901, Friedrich Holler wrote to
Einstein asking him to apply for a vacancy at the patent office that was about to be advertised.
The long search for a permanent job seemed at an end as Einstein set off his application before
Christmas. All the time I rejoice in the fine prospects which are in store for us in the near
future, he wrote to Mileva. Have I already told you how rich we will be in burn? Convinced that
everything would be settled quickly, Einstein quit a year-long tutoring job at a private
boarding school in Schaffhausen, after only a few months. Burn was home to some 60,000 people
when Einstein arrived during the first week of February 1902. The medieval elegance of the
old town quarter had changed little in the 500 years since it had been rebuilt, following a fire
that destroyed half the city. It was here that Einstein found a room on Gerechtigkeitgasse,
not far from the city's famous bear pit. Costing 23 francs a month, it was anything but the large
beautiful room he described to Mileva. Not long after he unpacked his bags, Einstein went down
to the local newspaper to place an advert offering his services as a private tutor of mathematics
and physics. It appeared on Wednesday 5th of February and offered a free trial lesson.
Within days it paid off. One of the students described his new tutor as about five foot ten,
broad-shouldered, slightly stooped, a pale brown skin, a sensuous mouth, black mustache,
nose, slightly aquiline, radiant brown eyes, a pleasant voice, speaking French correctly,
but with a slight accent. A young Romanian Jew, Maurice Sullivan, also came across the
advert as he read his newspaper Walking Down the Street. A philosophy student at Burn University,
Sullivan was also interested in physics. Frustrated that a lack of mathematics was preventing him
from gaining a deeper understanding of physics, he immediately made his way to the address given
in the newspaper. When Sullivan rang the bell, Einstein had found a kindred spirit.
The student and tutor talked for two hours. They shared many of the same interests and
after spending another half hour chatting in the street, they agreed to meet the following day.
When they did, all thoughts of a structured lesson were forgotten amid a shared enthusiasm
for exploring ideas. As a matter of fact you don't have to be tutored in physics,
Einstein told him on the third day. What Sullivan liked about Einstein, as the two quickly became
friends, was the care with which he outlined a topic or problem as lucidly as possible.
Before long, Sullivan suggested that they read a particular book and then discuss it.
Having done the same with Max Talmud in Munich as a schoolboy, Einstein thought it an excellent idea.
Soon Conrad Habicht joined them. A friend from Einstein's aborted stint teaching
at the boarding school in Schaffhausen, Habicht had moved to Burn to complete a
mathematics thesis at the university. United by their enthusiasm for studying and clarifying
the problems of physics and philosophy for their own satisfaction, the three men started calling
themselves the Academy Olympia. Even though Einstein came highly recommended by a friend,
Holler had to make sure he was capable of doing the job. The ever-growing number of patent applications
for all manner of electrical devices had made the hiring of a competent physicist to work alongside
his engineers a necessity rather than a favor for a friend. Einstein impressed Holler sufficiently
to be provisionally appointed a technical expert third class with a salary of 3,500 Swiss francs.
At eight o'clock in the morning on 23rd June 1902, Einstein reported for his first day as
a respectable federal ink pisser. As a physicist, Holler told Einstein,
you haven't a clue about blueprints. Until he could read and assess technical drawings,
there would be no permanent contract. Holler took it upon himself to teach Einstein what he needed to
know, including the art of expressing himself clearly, concisely, and correctly. Although he
had never taken kindly to being instructed as a schoolboy or student, he knew that he needed to
learn all he could from Holler. A splendid character and a clever mind. One soon gets used to his
rough manner, Einstein wrote. I hold him in very high regard. As he proved his worth,
Holler likewise came to respect his young protege as a prized member of staff.
In October 1902, aged only 55, his father fell seriously ill. Einstein traveled to Italy to
see him one last time. It was then, as he lay dying, that Hermann gave Albert his permission to
marry Milleva, a prospect that he and Pauline had long opposed. With only Solovine and Habicht
as witnesses, Einstein and Milleva married the following January in a civil ceremony at the
Bern registrar's office. Marriage is, Einstein said later, the unsuccessful attempt to make
something lasting out of an incident. But in 1903 he was just happy to have a wife that cooked,
cleaned and simply looked after him. Milleva had hoped for more.
The patent office took up 48 hours a week. From Monday to Saturday Einstein started at
eight o'clock and worked until noon. Then it was lunch either at home or with a friend at a nearby
café. He was back in the office from two until six. It left eight hours for fooling around each day
and then there's also Sunday, he told Habicht. It was September 1904 before Einstein's provisional
position was made permanent with a pay rise of 400 francs. By the spring of 1906,
Haller was so impressed with Einstein's ability to tackle technically very difficult patent
applications that he rated him as one of the valued experts at the office. He was promoted to
technical expert second class. I will be grateful to Haller for as long as I live. Einstein had
written to Milleva soon after moving to Bern in the expectation that a job at the patent office
would sooner or later be his and he was. But it was only much later that he recognized the extent
of the influence that Haller and the patent office exerted on him. I might not have died,
but I would have been intellectually stunted. Haller demanded that every patent application
be evaluated rigorously enough to withstand any legal challenge. When you pick up an application,
think that anything the inventor says is wrong, he advised Einstein, or else you will follow the
inventor's way of thinking and that will prejudice you. You have to remain critically vigilant.
Accidentally, Einstein had found a job that suited his temperament and honed his abilities.
The critical vigilance he exercised in assessing an inventor's hopes and dreams,
often on the basis of unreliable drawings and inadequate technical specifications,
Einstein brought to bear on the physics that occupied him. The many-sided thinking his job
entailed he described as a veritable blessing. He had the gift of seeing a meaning behind
inconspicuous well-known facts which had escaped everyone else, recalled Einstein's friend and
fellow theoretical physicist, Max Born. It was this uncanny insight into the working of nature
which distinguished him from all of us, not his mathematical skill. Einstein knew that his
mathematical intuition was not strong enough to differentiate what was really basic from the
rest of the more or less dispensable erudition. But when it came to physics, his nose was second
to none. Einstein said he learned to sent out that which was able to lead to fundamentals
and to turn aside from everything else, from the multitude of things which clutter up the mind
and divert it from the essential. His years at the patent office only heightened his sense of smell.
As with the patents that inventors submitted, Einstein looked for subtle flaws and inconsistencies
in the blueprints of the workings of nature put forward by physicists. When he found such a
contradiction in a theory, Einstein probed it ceaselessly until it yielded a new insight
resulting in its elimination or an alternative where none had existed before. His heuristic
principle that light behaved in certain instances as if it was made up of a stream of particles,
like quanta, was Einstein's solution to a contradiction at the very heart of physics.
Einstein had long accepted that everything was composed of atoms and that these discrete,
discontinuous bits of matter possessed energy. The energy of a gas for example was the sum total
of the energies of the individual atoms of which it was made up. The situation was entirely different
when it came to light. According to Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism, or any wave theory,
the energy of a light ray continuously spreads out over an ever-increasing volume like the waves
radiating outwards from the point where a stone hits the surface of a pond. Einstein called it
a profound formal difference and it made him uneasy while stimulating his many-sided thinking.
He realized that the dichotomy between the discontinuity of matter and the continuity of
electromagnetic waves would dissolve if light was also discontinuous, made up of quanta.
The quantum of light emerged out of Einstein's review of Planck's derivation of the Blackbody
Radiation Law. He accepted that Planck's formula was correct, but his analysis revealed what
Einstein had always suspected. Planck should have arrived at an entirely different formula.
However, since he knew the equation he was looking for, Planck fashioned his derivation to get it.
Einstein worked out exactly where Planck had gone astray. In his desperation to justify his equation
that he knew to be in perfect agreement with experiments, Planck had failed to consistently
apply the ideas and techniques he used or that were available to him. If he had done so, Einstein
realized that Planck would have obtained an equation that did not agree with the data.
Lord Rayleigh had originally proposed this other formula in June 1900, but Planck had taken little,
if any, notice of it. At the time he did not believe in the existence of atoms and therefore
disapproved of Rayleigh's use of the Equipartition theorem. Adams are free to move in only three
ways, up and down, back and forth and side to side, called a degree of freedom to the
called a degree of freedom. Each is an independent way in which an atom can receive and store energy.
In addition to these three kinds of translational motion, a molecule made up of two or more atoms
has three types of rotational motion about the imaginary axes joining the atoms, giving a total
of six degrees of freedom. According to the Equipartition theorem, the energy of a gas
should be distributed equally among its molecules and then divided equally among the
different ways in which a molecule can move. Rayleigh employed the Equipartition theorem
to divide up the energy of black body radiation among the different wavelengths of radiation
present inside a cavity. It had been a flawless application of the physics of Newton, Maxwell
and Boltzmann. Aside from a numerical error that was later corrected by James Jeans,
there was a problem with what became known as the Rayleigh Jean's Law.
It predicted a buildup of an infinite amount of energy in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum.
It was a breakdown of classical physics that many years later in 1911 was dubbed the ultraviolet
catastrophe. Thankfully, it did not actually happen, for a universe bathed in a sea of ultraviolet
radiation would have made human life impossible. Einstein had derived the Rayleigh Jean's Law on
his own and knew that the distribution of black body radiation that it forecast contradicted the
experimental data and led to the absurdity of an infinite energy in the ultraviolet.
Given that the Rayleigh Jean's Law tallied with the behavior of black body radiation only
at long wavelengths, very low frequencies, Einstein's point of departure was Wilhelm
Wien's earlier black body radiation law. It was the only safe choice, even though Wien's
law managed to replicate the behavior of black body radiation only at short wavelengths,
high frequencies and failed at longer wavelengths, lower frequencies of the infrared.
Yet it had certain advantages that appealed to Einstein. He had no doubts about the sound
ness of its derivation, and it perfectly described at least a portion of the black
body spectrum to which he would restrict his argument. Einstein devised a simple but ingenious
plan. A gas is just a collection of particles, and in thermodynamic equilibrium it is the
properties of these particles that determine, for example, the pressure exerted by the gas
at a given temperature. If there were similarities between the properties of
black body radiation and the properties of a gas, then he could argue that electromagnetic
radiation is itself particle-like. Einstein began his analysis with an imaginary black
body that was empty, but unlike Planck, he filled it with gas particles and electrons.
The atoms in the walls of the black body however contained other electrons.
As the black body is heated they oscillate with a broad range of frequencies resulting
in the emission and absorption of radiation. Soon the interior of the black body is teeming
with speeding gas particles and electrons, and the radiation emitted by the oscillating electrons.
After a while, thermal equilibrium is reached when the cavity, and everything inside it,
is at the same temperature, T. The first law of thermodynamics, that energy is conserved,
can be translated to connect the entropy of a system to its energy, temperature and volume.
It was now that Einstein used this law, Wien's law and Boltzmann's ideas, to analyze how the
entropy of black body radiation depended on the volume it occupied, without establishing any model
for the emission or propagation of radiation. What he found was a formula that looked,
exactly like one describing, how the entropy of a gas made up of atoms, is dependent on the
volume it occupies. Black body radiation behaved as if it was made up of individual particle-like
bits of energy. Einstein had discovered the quantum of light without having to use either
Planck's black body radiation law, or his method. In keeping Planck at arm's length,
Einstein wrote the formula slightly differently, but it meant and encoded the same information as
E equals Hv, that energy is quantized, that it comes only in units of Hv. Whereas Planck had only
quantized the emission and absorption of electromagnetic radiation, so that his imaginary
oscillators would produce the correct spectral distribution of black body radiation,
Einstein had quantized electromagnetic radiation and therefore light itself.
The energy of a quantum of yellow light was just Planck's constant, multiplied by the frequency
of yellow light. By showing that electromagnetic radiation sometimes behaves like the particles
of a gas, Einstein knew that he had smuggled his light quanta in through the back door,
by analogy. To convince others of the heuristic value of his new point of view concerning the
nature of light, he used it to explain a little understood phenomenon. The German physicist
Heinrich Hertz first observed the photoelectric effect in 1887 while in the middle of performing
a series of experiments that demonstrated the existence of electromagnetic waves. By chance he
noticed that the spark between two metal spheres became brighter when one of them was illuminated
by ultraviolet light. After months of investigating the completely new and very puzzling phenomenon,
he could offer no explanation, but believed incorrectly that it was confined to the use
of ultraviolet light. Naturally it would be nice if it were less puzzling, Hertz admitted,
however there is some hope that when this puzzle is solved more new facts will be clarified than
if it were easy to solve. It was a prophetic statement, but one that he never lived to see
fulfilled. He died tragically young at the age of 36 in 1894. It was Hertz's former assistant,
Philippe Linnard, who in 1902 deepened the mystery surrounding the photoelectric effect when he
discovered that it also occurred in a vacuum when he placed two metal plates in a glass tube and
removed the air. Connecting the wires from each plate to a battery, Linnard found that a current
flowed when one of the plates was irradiated with ultraviolet light. The photoelectric effect was
explained as the emission of electrons from the illuminated metal surface. Shining ultraviolet
light onto the plate gave some electrons enough energy to escape from the metal and cross the gap
to the other plate, thereby completing the circuit to produce a photoelectric current.
However, Linnard also found facts that contradicted established physics. Enter Einstein and his
quantum of light. It was expected that increasing the intensity of a light beam by making it
brighter would yield the same number of electrons from the metal surface but with each having more
energy. Linnard, however, found the exact opposite. A greater number of electrons were emitted with
no change in their individual energy. Einstein's quantum solution was simple and elegant. If light
is made up of quanta, then increasing the intensity of the beam means that it is now made up of a
greater number of quanta. When a more intense beam strikes the metal plate, the increase in the
number of light quanta leads to a corresponding increase in the number of electrons being emitted.
Linnard's second curious discovery was that the energy of the emitted electrons was not governed
by the intensity of the light beam, but by its frequency. Einstein had a ready answer.
Since the energy of a light quantum is proportional to the frequency of the light,
a quantum of red light, low frequency, has less energy than one of blue light, high frequency.
Changing the color, frequency of light, does not alter the number of quanta in beams of the same
intensity. So, no matter what the color of light, the same number of electrons will be emitted since
the same numbers of quanta strike the metal plate. However, since different frequencies of light are
made up of quanta of different energies, the electrons that are emitted will have more or less
energy depending on the light used. Ultraviolet light will yield electrons with a greater maximum
kinetic energy than those emitted by quanta of red light. There was another intriguing feature.
For any particular metal, there was a minimum or threshold frequency below which no electrons
were emitted at all, no matter how long or intensively the metal was illuminated. However,
once this threshold was crossed, electrons were emitted no matter how dim the beam of light.
Einstein's quantum of light supplied the answer once again as he introduced a new concept, the work
function. Einstein envisaged the photoelectric effect as the result of an electron acquiring
enough energy from a quantum of light to overcome the forces holding it within the metal surface
and to escape. The work function, as Einstein labeled it, was the minimum energy an electron
needed to escape from the surface, and it varied from metal to metal. If the frequency of light is
too low, then the light quanta will not possess enough energy to allow an electron to break the
bonds that keep it bound within the metal. Einstein encoded all this in a simple equation.
The maximum kinetic energy of an electron emitted from a metal surface was equal to the energy of
the light quanta it absorbed, minus the work function. Using this equation, Einstein predicted
that a graph of the maximum kinetic energy of the electrons versus the frequency of light used
would be a straight line beginning at the threshold frequency of the metal. The gradient
of the line, irrespective of the metal used, would always be exactly equal to Planck's constant, H.
I spent ten years of my life testing that 1905 equation of Einstein's, and contrary to all my
expectations, complained the American experimental physicist Robert Millican, I was compelled to
assert its unambiguous verification in spite of its unreasonableness, since it seemed to
violate everything we knew about the interference of light. Although Millican won the 1923 Nobel
prize partly in recognition of this work, even in the face of his own data he balked at the
underlying quantum hypothesis, the physical theory upon which the equation is based is
totally untenable. From the very beginning, physicists at large had greeted Einstein's
light quanta with similar disbelief and cynicism. A handful wondered if light quanta existed at
all or whether they were simply a useful fictional contrivance of practical value in calculations.
At best some thought that light and therefore all electromagnetic radiation did not consist of
quanta, but only behaved as such when exchanging energy with matter. For most among them was Planck.
When in 1913 he and three others nominated Einstein for membership of the Prussian Academy
of Sciences, they concluded their testimonial by trying to excuse his light quanta proposal.
In some it can be said that among the important problems which are so abundant in modern physics,
there is hardly one in which Einstein did not take a position in a remarkable manner,
that he might sometimes have overshot the target in his speculations, as for example in
his light quantum hypothesis, should not be counted against him too much. Because without
taking a risk from time to time it is impossible even in the most exact natural science to introduce
real innovations. Two years later Millikan's painstaking experiments made it difficult to
ignore the validity of Einstein's photoelectric equation. By 1922 it was becoming almost impossible,
as Einstein was belatedly awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize for Physics explicitly for his photoelectric
effect law described by his formula and not for his underlying explanation using light quanta.
No longer the unknown patent clerk in Bern, he was by then world famous for his theories of
relativity and widely acknowledged as the greatest scientist since Newton. Yet his quantum theory
of light was just too radical for physicists to accept. The stubborn opposition to Einstein's idea
of light quanta rested on the overwhelming evidence in support of a wave theory of light. However,
whether light was a particle or a wave had been hotly disputed before. During the 18th century
and in the early years of the 19th, it was Isaac Newton's particle theory that had triumphed.
My design in this book is not to explain the properties of light by hypothesis,
Newton wrote at the beginning of Optics, published in 1704, but to propose and prove them by reason
and experiments. Those first experiments were conducted in 1666 when he split light into the
colors of the rainbow with a prism and wove them back together into white light using a second prism.
Newton believed that rays of light were composed of particles or as he called them,
corpuscles, the very small bodies emitted from shining substances. With the particles of light
traveling in straight lines, such a theory would, according to Newton, explain the everyday fact
that while a person can be heard talking around a corner, they cannot be seen, since light cannot
bend around corners. Newton was able to give a detailed mathematical account for a host of
optical observations, including reflection and refraction, the bending of light as it passes
from a less to a more dense medium. However, there were other properties of light that Newton
could not explain. For example, when a beam of light hit a glass surface, part of it passed through,
and the rest was reflected. The question Newton had to address was why some particles of light were
reflected and others not. To answer it, he was forced to adapt his theory. Light particles
caused wave-like disturbances in the ether. These fits of easy reflection and easy transmission,
as he called them, were the mechanism by which some of the beam of light was transmitted through
the glass and the remainder reflected. He linked the bigness of these disturbances to color.
The biggest disturbances, those having the longest wavelength in the terminology that came later,
were responsible for producing red. The smallest, those having the shortest wavelength, produced
violet. The Dutch physicist Christian Huygens argued that there was no Newtonian particle of light.
Thirteen years older than Newton by 1678, Huygens had developed a wave theory of light
that explained reflection and refraction. However, his book on the subject,
Cité de la Lumière, was not published until 1690. Huygens also believed that light was a
wave traveling through the ether. It was akin to the ripples that fanned out across the still
surface of a pond from a dropped stone. If light was really made up of particles, Huygens asked,
then where was the evidence of collisions that should occur when two beams of light crossed
each other? There was none, argued Huygens. Sound waves do not collide, air go light,
must also be wave-like. Although the theories of Newton and Huygens were able to explain
reflection and refraction, each predicted different outcomes when it came to certain other,
optical phenomena. None could be tested with any degree of precision for decades. However,
there was one prediction that could be observed. A beam of light made up of Newton's particles
traveling in straight lines should cast sharp shadows when striking objects, whereas Huygens
waves, like water waves bending around an object they encounter, should result in shadows whose
outline is slightly blurred. The Italian Jesuit and mathematician Father Francesco Grimaldi
christened this bending of light around the edge of an object, or around the edges of an extremely
narrow slit, diffraction. In a book published in 1665, two years after his death, he described how an
opaque object placed in a narrow shaft of sunlight, allowed to enter an otherwise darkened room through
a very small hole in a window shutter, cast a shadow larger than expected if light consisted
of particles traveling in straight lines. He also found that around the shadow were fringes of colored
light and fuzziness, where there should have been a sharp, well-defined separation between light and
dark. Newton was well aware of Grimaldi's discovery and later conducted his own experiments to
investigate diffraction, which seemed more readily explicable in terms of Huygens' wave theory. However,
Newton argued that diffraction was the result of forces exerted on light particles and indicative
of the nature of light itself. Given his preeminence Newton's particle theory of light, though in
truth a strange hybrid of particle and wave, was accepted as the orthodoxy. It helped that
Newton outlived Huygens who died in 1695, by 32 years. Nature and nature's laws lay hid in night,
God said let Newton be, and all was light. Alexander Pope's famous epitaph bears witness
to the awe in which Newton was held in his own day. In the years after his death in 1727,
Newton's authority was undiminished and his view on the nature of light, barely questioned.
At the dawn of the 19th century the English polymath Thomas Young did challenge it,
and in time his work led to a revival of the wave theory of light.
Born in 1773, Young was the eldest of ten children. He was reading fluently by the age of two and had
read the entire Bible, twice by six. A master of more than a dozen languages, Young went on to
make important contributions toward the deciphering of Egyptian hieroglyphics. A trained physician
he could indulge his myriad intellectual pursuits, after a bequest from an uncle left him financially
secure. His interest in the nature of light led Young to examine the similarities and differences
between light and sound, and ultimately to one or two difficulties in the Newtonian system.
Convinced that light was a wave he devised an experiment that was to prove the beginning of
the end, for Newton's particle theory. Young shone monochromatic light onto a screen with a
single slit. From this slit a beam of light spread out to strike a second screen, with two very
narrow and parallel slits close together. Like a car's headlights these two slits acted as
new sources of light, or as Young wrote, as centers of divergence, from whence the light
diffracted in every direction. What Young found on another screen placed some distance behind the
two slits, was a central bright band surrounded on each side by a pattern of alternating dark and
bright bands. To explain the appearance of these bright and dark fringes, Young used an analogy.
Two stones are dropped simultaneously and close together into a still lake.
Each stone produces waves that spread out across the lake. As they do so the ripples originating
from one stone encounter those from the other. At each point where two wave troughs or two wave
crests meet, they coalesce to produce a new single trough or crest. This was constructive
interference. But where a trough meets a crest or vice versa, they cancel each other out,
leaving the water undisturbed at that point. Destructive interference.
In Young's experiment light waves originating from the two slits similarly interfere with each
other before striking the screen. The bright fringes indicate constructive interference while
the dark fringes are a product of destructive interference. Young recognized that only if
light is a wave phenomenon could these results be explained. Newton's particles would simply
produce two bright images of the slits with nothing but darkness in between. An interference
pattern of bright and dark fringes was simply impossible. When he first put forward the idea
of interference and reported his early results in 1801, Young was viciously attacked in print
for challenging Newton. He tried to defend himself by writing a pamphlet in which he let
everyone know his feelings about Newton. But, much as I venerate the name of Newton I am not
therefore obliged to believe that he was infallible. I see, not with exultation but with regret,
that he was liable to err, and that his authority has perhaps, sometimes even retarded the progress
of science. Only a single copy was sold. It was a French civil engineer who followed Young
in stepping out of Newton's shadow. Augustin Fresnel, 15 years his junior independently rediscovered
interference and much else of what Young, unknown to him, had already done. However, compared to
the Englishman, Fresnel's elegantly designed experiments were more extensive, with the presentation
of results and accompanying mathematical analysis so impeccably thorough that the wave theory started
to gain distinguished converts by the 1820s. Fresnel convinced them that the wave theory
could better explain an array of optical phenomena, the Newton's particle theory. He also answered the
long-standing objection to the wave theory, light cannot travel around corners.
It does, he said. However, since light waves are millions of times smaller than sound waves,
the bending of a beam of light from a straight path is very, very small and therefore extremely
difficult to detect. A wave bends only around an obstacle not much longer than itself.
Sound waves are very long and can easily move around most barriers they encounter.
One way to get opponents and skeptics to finally decide between the two rival theories
was to find observations for which they predicted different results.
Experiments conducted in France in 1850 revealed that the speed of light
was slower in a dense medium such as glass or water than in the air.
This was exactly what the wave of light predicted, while Newton's core puzzles
failed to travel as fast as expected. But the question remained, if light was a wave,
what were its properties? Enter James Clerk Maxwell and his theory of electromagnetism.
Born in 1831 in Edinburgh, Maxwell the son of a Scottish landowner was destined to become the
greatest theoretical physicist of the 19th century. At the age of 15 he wrote his first
published paper on a geometrical method for tracing ovals. In 1855 he won Cambridge University's
Adams Prize for showing that Saturn's rings could not be solid but had to be made of small,
broken bits of matter. In 1860 he instigated the final phase of the development of the
kinetic theory of gases, the properties of gases explained by maintaining that they consisted
of particles in motion. But his greatest achievement was the theory of electromagnetism.
In 1819 the Danish physicist Hans Christian Orsted discovered that an electric current flowing
through a wire deflected a compass needle. A year later the Frenchman Francois Aragault found that
a wire carrying an electric current acted as a magnet and could attract iron filings.
Soon his compatriot André Marie Ampere demonstrated that two parallel wires were
attracted towards one another if each had a current flowing through it in the same direction,
however they repelled each other if the currents flowed in the opposite directions.
Intrigued by the fact that a flow of electricity could create magnetism,
the great British experimentalist Michael Faraday decided to see if he could generate electricity
using magnetism. He pushed a bar magnet in and out of a helix coil of wire and found
an electric current being generated. The current ceased whenever the magnet was motionless within
the coil. Just as ice, water and steam are different manifestations of H2O, Maxwell showed in 1864
that electricity and magnetism were likewise different manifestations of the same underlying
phenomenon, electromagnetism. He managed to encapsulate the disparate behavior of electricity
and magnetism into a set of four elegant mathematical equations. On seeing them,
Ludwig Boltzmann immediately recognized the magnitude of Maxwell's achievement
and could only quote Goethe in admiration. Was it a god that wrote these signs?
Using these equations Maxwell was able to make the startling prediction that electromagnetic
waves traveled at the speed of light through the ether. If he was right, then light was a form
of electromagnetic radiation. But did electromagnetic waves actually exist? If so,
did they really travel at the speed of light? Maxwell did not live long enough to see his
prediction confirmed by experiment. Aged just 48 he died from cancer in November 1879. The year
Einstein was born. Less than a decade later in 1887, Heinrich Hertz provided the experimental
corroboration that ensured Maxwell's unification of electricity, magnetism and light was the
crowning achievement of 19th century physics. Hertz proclaimed in his paper outlining his
investigations. The experiments described appear to me at any rate, eminently adapted to remove
any doubt as to the identity of light, radiant heat and electromagnetic wave motion. I believe
that from now on we shall have greater confidence in making use of the advantages which this identity
enables us to derive both in the study of optics and electricity. Ironically, it was during these
very experiments that Hertz discovered the photoelectric effect that provided Einstein with
evidence for a case of mistaken identity. His light quanta challenged the wave theory of light
that Hertz and everyone else thought was well and truly established. Light, as a form of electromagnetic
radiation, had proved so successful that for physicists to even contemplate discarding it
in favor of Einstein's light quanta was unthinkable. Many found light quanta absurd. After all, the
energy of a particular quantum of light was determined by the frequency of that light,
but surely frequency was something associated with waves, not particle-like bits of energy
traveling through space. Einstein readily accepted that the wave theory of light had proved itself
superbly in explaining diffraction, interference, reflection and refraction, and that it would
probably never be replaced by another theory. However, the success he pointed out rested on
the vital fact that all these optical phenomena involved the behavior of light over a period
of time, and any particle-like properties would not be manifest. The situation was starkly different
when it came to the virtually instantaneous emission and absorption of light. This was the
reason, Einstein suggested, why the wave theory faced especially great difficulties explaining
the photoelectric effect. A future Nobel laureate, but in 1906 a Privat Dotzand at Berlin University,
Max Lau wrote to Einstein that he was willing to accept that quanta may be involved during the
emission and absorption of light. However, that was all. Light itself was not made up of quanta,
warned Lau, but it is when it is exchanging energy with matter that it behaves as if it
consisted of them. Few even conceded that much. Part of the problem lay with Einstein himself.
In his original paper he did say that light behaves as though it consisted of quanta.
This was hardly a categorical endorsement of the quantum of light. This was because Einstein
wanted something more than just a heuristic point of view. He craved a fully-fledged theory.
The photoelectric effect had proved to be a battlefield for the clash between the supposed
continuity of light waves and the discontinuity of matter. Atoms. But in 1905 there were still
those who doubted the reality of atoms. On 11th May, less than two months after he had finished
his quantum paper, the Analynder Physik received Einstein's second paper of the year. It was his
explanation of Brownian motion and it became a key piece of evidence in support of the existence of
atoms. When in 1827 the Scottish botanist Robert Brown peered through a microscope at some pollen
grains suspended in water, he saw that they were in a constant state of haphazard motion,
as if buffeted by some unseen force. It had already been noted by others that this erratic
wiggling increased as the temperature of the water rose and it was assumed that some sort of
biological explanation lay behind the phenomenon. However, Brown discovered that when he used pollen
grains that were up to twenty years old, they moved in exactly the same way. Intrigued, he produced
fine powders of all manner of inorganic substances from glass to a piece of the Sphinx and suspended
each of them in water. He found the same zigzagging motion in each case and realized that it could
not be animated by some vital force. Brown published his research in Panflit entitled,
A Brief Account of Microscopical Observations Made in the Months of June, July and August 1827
on the particles contained in the pollen of plants and on the general existence of active
molecules in organic and inorganic bodies. Others offered plausible explanations of Brownian motion,
but all were sooner or later found wanting. By the end of the 19th century, those who believed
in the existence of atoms and molecules accepted that Brownian motion was the result of collisions
with water molecules. What Einstein recognized was that the Brownian motion of a pollen grain was
not caused by a single collision with a water molecule, but was the product of a large number
of such collisions. At each moment the collective effect of these collisions was the random zigzagging
of the pollen grain or suspended particle. Einstein suspected that the key to understanding this
unpredictable motion lay in deviations, statistical fluctuations from the expected
average behavior of water molecules. Given their relative sizes on average, many water molecules
would strike an individual pollen grain simultaneously from different directions.
Even on this scale, each collision would result in an infinitesimal push in one direction,
but the overall effect of all of them would leave the pollen unmoved as they cancelled each other
out. Einstein realized that Brownian motion was due to water molecules regularly deviating from
their normal behavior as some of them got bunched up and struck the pollen together,
sending it in a particular direction. Using this insight, Einstein succeeded in calculating the
average horizontal distance a particle would travel as it zigzagged along in a given time.
He predicted that in water at 17 degrees Celsius, suspended particles with a diameter of one
thousandth of a millimeter would move on average just six thousandths of a millimeter in one minute.
Einstein had come up with a formula that offered the possibility of working out the size of atoms
armed only with a thermometer, microscope, and stopwatch.
Three years later, in 1908, Einstein's predictions were confirmed in a delicate series of experiments
conducted at the Sorbonne by Jean Perrin, for which he received the Nobel Prize in 1926.
With Planck championing the theory of relativity and the analysis of Brownian motion recognized as
a decisive breakthrough in favor of the atom, Einstein's reputation grew, despite the rejection
of his quantum theory of light. He received letters often addressed to him at Berne University
as few knew he was a patent clerk.
I must tell you quite frankly that I was surprised to read that you must sit in an office for eight
hours a day, wrote Jacob Laub from Würzburg. History is full of bad jokes.
It was March 1908, and Einstein agreed. After almost six years, he no longer wanted to be a
patent slave. He applied for a job as a mathematics teacher at a school in Zurich, stating that he
would be ready and willing to teach physics as well. With his application he enclosed a copy
of his thesis that had earned him, at the third attempt, a doctorate from Zurich University in
1905 and laid the groundwork for the paper on Brownian motion. Hoping it would bolster his
chances, he also sent all of his published papers. Despite his impressive scientific achievements
of the 21 applicants, Einstein did not even make the short list of three.
It was at the behest of Alfred Kleiner, the professor of experimental physics at Zurich
University, that Einstein tried for a third time to become a Privat Dotsund, an unpaid lecturer
at the University of Berne. The first application was rejected because at the time he did not have
a Ph.D. In June 1907 he failed, a second time, because he did not submit a habilitation schrift,
a piece of unpublished research. Kleiner wanted Einstein to fill a soon-to-be-created
extraordinary professorship in theoretical physics, and being a Privat Dotsund was a necessary
stepping stone to such an appointment. So, he produced a habilitation schrift, as demanded,
and was duly appointed a Privat Dotsund in the spring of 1908.
Only three students attended his first lecture course on the theory of heat.
All three were friends. They had to be, since Einstein had been allocated Tuesdays and Saturdays
between 7 and 8 in the morning. University students had the choice of whether or not
to attend courses offered by a Privat Dotsund, and none were willing to get up that early. As a
lecturer, then and later, Einstein was often under-prepared and made frequent mistakes.
And when he did he simply turned to the students and asked,
who can tell me where I went wrong or where have I made a mistake? If a student pointed
out an error in his mathematics, Einstein would say, I have often told you my mathematics have
never been up to much. The ability to teach was a vital consideration for the job earmarked for
Einstein. To ensure that he was up to the task, Kleiner organized to attend one of his lectures.
Annoyed it, having to be investigated, he performed poorly. However, Kleiner gave him
a second chance to impress and he did. I was lucky, Einstein wrote to his friend Jakob Laub.
Contrary to my habit, I lectured well on that occasion. And so it came to pass.
It was May 1909, and Einstein could finally boast that he was an official member of the
Guild of Horses, as he accepted the Zürich Post. Before moving to Switzerland with Milleva and
five-year-old Hans Albert, Einstein traveled to Salzburg in September to give the keynote lecture
to the cream of German physics at a conference of the Gesellschaft Deutsche Natureforsche und Arze.
He went well prepared. It was a singular honor to be asked to deliver such a lecture.
It was one usually reserved for a distinguished elder statesman of physics,
not someone who had just turned 30 and was about to take up his first extraordinary professorship.
So all eyes were on Einstein. But he seemed oblivious as he paced the podium and delivered
what would turn out to be a celebrated lecture. On the development of our views concerning the
nature and constitution of radiation, he told the audience that the next stage in the development
of theoretical physics will bring us a theory of light that may be conceived of as a sort of fusion
of the wave and of the emission theory of light. It was not a hunch, but based on the result of
an inspired thought experiment involving a mirror suspended inside a black body. He managed to derive
an equation for the fluctuations of the energy and momentum of radiation that contained two very
distinct parts. One corresponded to the wave theory of light while the other had all the hallmarks
of the radiation being composed of quanta. Both parts appeared to be indispensable,
as did the two theories of light. It was the first prediction of what would later be called
wave particle duality. That light was both a particle and a wave. Plunk, who was chairing,
was the first to speak after Einstein sat down. He thanked him for the lecture and then told
everyone he disagreed. He reiterated his firmly held belief that quanta were necessary only in
the exchange between matter and radiation. To believe as Einstein did that light was actually
made up of quanta, Plunk said, was not yet necessary. Only Johannes Stark stood up to support
Einstein. Sadly, he, like Leonard, would later become a Nazi, and the two of them would attack
Einstein and his work as Jewish physics. Einstein left the patent office to devote
more of his time to research. He was in for a rude awakening when he arrived in Zurich.
The time he needed to prepare for the seven hours of lectures that he gave each week
left him complaining that his actual free time is less than in Bern. The students were struck by
the shabby appearance of their new professor, but Einstein quickly gained their respect and
affection by his informal style as he encouraged them to interrupt if anything was unclear.
Outside formal lectures, at least once a week he took his students along to the cafe Terrasse
to chat and gossip until closing time. Before long, he got used to his workload and turned
his attention to using the quantum to solve a long-standing problem.
In 1819, two French scientists, Pierre Doulomb and Alexis Petit, measured the specific heat capacity,
the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of a kilogram of a substance,
by one degree, for various metals from copper to gold. For the next fifty years, no one who
believed in atoms doubted their conclusion that the atoms of all simple bodies have exactly the
same heat capacity. It therefore came as a great surprise when in the 1870s exceptions were discovered.
Imagining that the atoms of a substance oscillated when heated,
Einstein adapted Planck's approach as he tackled the specific heat anomalies.
Atoms could not oscillate with just any frequency but were quantized, able to oscillate only with
those frequencies that were multiples of a certain fundamental frequency.
Einstein came up with a new theory of how solids absorb heat. Atoms are permitted to absorb energy
only in discrete amounts. Quanta. However, as the temperature drops, the amount of energy the
substance has decreases until there is not enough available to provide each atom with the correct
sized quantum of energy. This results in less energy being taken up by the solid and leads
to a decrease in specific heat. For three years there was hardly a murmur of interest in what
Einstein had done, despite the fact that he had shown how the quantization of energy,
how at the atomic level energy comes wrapped up in bite-sized chunks, resolved a problem
in a completely new area of physics. It was Walter Nernst, an eminent physicist from Berlin,
who made others sit up and take note as they discovered that he had been to see Einstein in
Zurich. Soon it was clear why. Nernst had succeeded in accurately measuring the specific
heats of solids at low temperatures and found the results to be in total agreement with
Einstein's predictions based on his quantum solution. With each passing success his reputation
soared ever higher, and Einstein was offered an ordinary professorship at the German University
in Prague. It was an opportunity he could not refuse, even if it meant leaving Switzerland
after 15 years. Einstein, Milleva and their sons Hans Albert and Edward, who was not yet one, moved
to Prague in April 1911. I no longer ask whether these quanta really exist, Einstein wrote to his
friend Michel Besso, soon after taking up his new post. Nor do I try to construct them any longer,
for I now know that my brain cannot get through in this way. Instead, he told Besso he would limit
himself to trying to understand the consequences of the quantum. There were others who also wanted
to try. Less than a month later, on 9th of June, Einstein received a letter and an invitation from
an unlikely correspondent. Ernst Solve, a Belgian industrialist who had made a substantial fortune
by revolutionizing the manufacture of sodium carbonate, offered to pay 1,000 francs to cover
his travel expenses if he agreed to attend a week-long scientific congress to be held in Brussels
later that year from 29 October to 4 November. He would be one of a select group of 22 physicists
from across Europe, brought together to discuss current questions concerning the molecular and
kinetic theories. Planck, Rubens, Wien and Ernst would be attending. It was a summit meeting
on the quantum. Planck and Einstein were among the eight, asked to prepare reports on a particular
topic. To be written in French, German or English, they were to be sent out to the participants
before the meeting and serve as the starting point for discussion during the planned sessions.
Planck would discuss black-body radiation theory, while Einstein had been assigned his
quantum theory of specific heat. Although Einstein was accorded the honor of giving the final talk,
a discussion of his quantum theory of light was not on the agenda.
I find the whole undertaking extremely attractive, Einstein wrote to Walter Ernst.
And there is little doubt in my mind that you are its hardened soul.
By 1910, Ernst believed that the time was ripe to get to grips with the quantum that he regarded as
nothing more than a rule with most curious indeed, grotesque, properties. He convinced Solve to
finance the conference, and the Belgians spared no expense booking the plush, hotel metropole
as the venue. In its luxurious surroundings with all their needs catered for, Einstein and his
colleagues spent five days talking about the quantum. Whatever slim hopes he harbored for
progress at what he called the witches Sabbath, Einstein returned to Prague disappointed and
complained of learning nothing that he did not know before. Nevertheless, he had enjoyed getting
to know some of the other witches. Marie Curie, whom he found to be unpretentious,
appreciated the clearness of his mind, the shrewdness with which he marshaled his facts,
and the depth of his knowledge. During the Congress it was announced that she had been
awarded the Nobel Prize for chemistry. She had become the first scientist to win, too,
having already won the physics prize in 1903. It was a tremendous achievement that was overshadowed
by the scandal that broke around her during the Congress. The French press had learned that she
was having an affair with a married French physicist. Paul Langevin, a slender man with
an elegant mustache, was a delegate at the conference and the papers were full of stories
that the pair had eloped. Einstein, who had seen no signs of a special relationship between the two,
dismissed the reports as rubbish. Despite her sparkling intelligence he thought Curie was
not attractive enough to represent a danger to anyone. Even though at times he appeared to
waver under the strain, Einstein had been the first to learn to live with the quantum,
and by doing so revealed a hidden element of the true nature of light.
Another young theorist also learned to live with the quantum after he used it to resurrect a flawed
and neglected model of the atom. Chapter 3 The Golden Dane
Manchester, England, Wednesday, 19 June, 1912.
Dear Harold, perhaps I have found out a little about the structure of atoms,
Niels Bohr wrote to his younger brother. Don't talk about it to anybody, he warned,
for otherwise I couldn't write to you so soon. Silence was essential for Bohr,
as he hoped to do what every scientist dreams of, unveiling a little bit of reality.
There was still work to be done and he was eager to finish it in a hurry,
and to do that I have taken off a couple of days from the laboratory. This is also a secret.
It would take the 26-year-old Dane much longer than he thought
to turn his fledgling ideas into a trilogy of papers, all entitled On the Constitution of
Atoms and Molecules. The first, published in July 1913, was truly revolutionary.
As Bohr introduced the quantum, directly into the atom.
It was his mother Ellen's 25th birthday when Niels Henrik David Bohr was born on 7 October,
1885 in Copenhagen. She had returned to the comfort of her parents' home for the birth of her
second child. Across the wide cobbled street from Christianborg Castle, the seat of the Danish
parliament, Vedstranden 14 was one of the most magnificent residences in the city.
A banker and politician, her father was one of the wealthiest men in Denmark.
Although the Bohrs did not stay there long, it was to be the first of the grand and elegant homes
in which Niels lived throughout his life. Christian Bohr was the distinguished professor
of physiology at Copenhagen University. He had discovered the role of carbon dioxide in the
release of oxygen by hemoglobin, and together with his research on respiration it led to nominations
for the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine. From 1886 until his untimely death in 1911,
at just 56, the family lived in a spacious apartment in the university's Academy of
Surgery. Situated in the city's most fashionable street and a 10-minute walk from the local school,
it was ideal for the Bohr children. Jenny, two years older than Niels and Harold, 18 months younger.
With three maids and a nanny to look after them, they enjoyed a comfortable and privileged childhood,
far removed from the squalid and overcrowded conditions in which most of Copenhagen's ever
increasing inhabitants lived. His father's academic position and his mother's social standing
ensured that many of Denmark's leading scientists and scholars, writers and artists, were regular
visitors to the Bohr home. Three such guests were, like Bohr Sr., members of the Royal Danish Academy
of Sciences and Letters, the physicist Christian Christensen, the philosopher Harold Hoefding,
and the linguist Wilhelm Thompson. After the Academy's weekly meeting, the discussion would
continue at the home of one of the quartet. In their teens, whenever their father played host
to his fellow academicians, Niels and Harold were allowed to eavesdrop on the animated debates that
took place. It was a rare opportunity to listen to the intellectual concerns of a group of such men
as the mood of fantasyical, gripped Europe. They left on the boys, as Niels said later,
some of our earliest and deepest impressions. Bohr the schoolboy excelled at mathematics and
sciences but had little aptitude for languages. In those days, recalled a friend, he was definitely
not afraid to use his strength when it came to blows during the break between classes.
By the time he enrolled at Copenhagen University, then Denmark's only university,
to study physics in 1903, Einstein had spent more than a year at the patent office in Bern.
When he received his master's degree in 1909, Einstein was extraordinary professor of theoretical
physics at the University of Zurich and had received his first nomination for the Nobel Prize.
Bohr had also distinguished himself, albeit on a far smaller stage. In 1907, aged 21,
he won the gold medal of the Royal Danish Academy with a paper on the surface tension of water.
It was the reason why his father who had won the silver medal in 1885 often proudly proclaimed,
I'm silver, but Niels is gold. Bohr struck gold after his father persuaded him to abandon the
laboratory for a place in the countryside to finish writing his award-winning paper.
Although he submitted it just hours before the deadline, Bohr still found something to add and
handed in a post script two days later. The need to rework any piece of writing until he was satisfied
that it conveyed exactly what he wanted, verged on an obsession. A year before he finished his
doctoral thesis, Bohr admitted that he had already written 14 more or less divergent rough drafts.
Even the simple act of penning a letter became a protracted affair. One day,
Harold seeing a letter lying on Niels's desk offered to post it only to be told,
oh no, that is just one of the first drafts for a rough copy.
All their lives, the brothers remained the closest of friends. Apart from mathematics and
physics they shared a passion for sport, particularly football. Harold, the better player,
won a silver medal at the 1908 Olympics as a member of the Danish football team that lost
to England in the final. Also regarded by many to be intellectually more gifted,
he gained a doctorate in mathematics a year before Niels received his in physics in May 1911.
Their father, however, always maintained that his eldest son was the special one in the family.
Dressed in white tie and tails as custom demanded, Bohr began the public defense of his doctoral
thesis. It lasted just 90 minutes, the shortest on record. One of the two examiners was his
father's friend Christian Christensen. He regretted that no Danish physicist was well enough informed
about the theory of metals to be able to judge a dissertation on the subject. Nevertheless,
Bohr was awarded his doctorate and sent copies of the thesis to men like Max Plant and Hendrik
Lawrence. When no one replied, he knew it had been a mistake to send it without first having it
translated. Instead of German or French, which many leading physicists spoke fluently, Bohr decided
on an English translation and managed to convince a friend to produce one. Whereas his father had
chosen Leipzig and his brother Goettingen, German universities being the traditional place for
high flying Danes to complete their education, Bohr chose Cambridge University. The intellectual
home of Newton and Maxwell was for him the center of physics. The translated thesis would be his
calling card. He hoped that it would lead to a dialogue with Sir Joseph John Thompson, the man
he described later as the genius who showed the way for everybody.
After a lazy summer of sailing and hiking, Bohr arrived in England at the end of September 1911
on a one year scholarship funded by Denmark's famous Carlsberg Brewery. I found myself rejoicing
this morning when I stood outside a shop and by chance happened to read the address Cambridge
over the door. He wrote to his fiancee Margrethe Neurland. The letters of introduction and the
Bohr name led to a warm welcome from the university's physiologists who remembered his late father.
They helped him find a small two room flat on the edge of town and he was kept very busy with
arrangements, visits and dinner parties. But for Bohr it was his meeting with Thompson,
JJ to his friends and students alike, which soon prayed on his mind.
A bookseller's son from Manchester, Thompson had been elected the third head of the Cavendish
laboratory in 1884 within a week of his 28th birthday. He was an unlikely choice after James
Clerk Maxwell and Lord Rayleigh to lead the prestigious experimental research facility
and not just because of his youth. JJ was very awkward with his fingers, one of his assistants
later admitted, and I found it necessary not to encourage him to handle the instruments.
Yet if the man who won the Nobel Prize for discovering the electron lacked a delicate touch,
others testified to Thompson's intuitive ability to comprehend the inner working of intricate
apparatus without the trouble of handling it. The polite manner of the slightly dishevelled
Thompson, the epitome of the absent minded professor in his round-rinned glasses tweed
jacket and winged collar helped calm Bohr's nerves when they first met. Eager to impress he had
walked into the professor's office clutching his thesis and a book written by Thompson.
Opening the book Bohr pointed to an equation and said,
this is wrong. Though not used to having his past mistakes paraded before him in such a
forthright manner, JJ promised to read Bohr's thesis. Placing it on top of a stack of papers
on his overcrowded desk, he invited the young Dane to dinner the following Sunday.
Initially delighted as the weeks passed and the thesis remained unread, Bohr became increasingly
anxious. Thompson, he wrote to Harold, has so far not been easy to deal with as I thought the first
day. Yet his admiration for the 55-year-old was undiminished. He is an excellent man,
incredibly clever and full of imagination. You should hear one of his elementary lectures
and extremely friendly. But he is so immensely busy with so many things and he is so absorbed in
his work that it is very difficult to get to talk to him. Bohr knew that his poor English did not
help, so with the aid of a dictionary he began reading the Pickwick papers as he fought to
overcome the language barrier. Early in November, Bohr went to see a former student of his fathers
who was now the professor of physiology at Manchester University. During the visit,
Lorraine Smith introduced him to Ernest Rutherford, who had just returned from a physics conference
in Brussels. The charismatic New Zealander, he recalled years later, spoke with characteristic
enthusiasm about the many new prospects in physical science. After being regaled with a vivid account
of the discussions at the Solvay meeting, Bohr left Manchester charmed and impressed by Rutherford,
both the man and the physicist. On his first day in May 1907, the new head of physics at
Manchester University caused a stir, as he searched for his new office. Rutherford went
up three stairs at a time which was horrible to us, to see a professor going up the stairs like that,
remembered a laboratory assistant. But within a few weeks the boundless energy and earthy
no-nonsense approach of the 36-year-old had captivated his new colleagues. Rutherford was
on his way to creating an exceptional research team, whose success over the next decade or so would
be unmatched. It was a group shaped as much by Rutherford's personality as his inspired
scientific judgment and ingenuity. He was not only its head, but also its heart.
Born on 30 August 1871 in a small single-story wooden house in Spring Grove, on New Zealand's
South Island, Rutherford was the fourth of twelve children. His mother was a school teacher and
his father ended up working in a flax mill. Given the harshness of life in the scattered rural
community, James and Martha Rutherford did what they could to ensure that their children had a
chance to go as far as talent and luck would carry them. For earnest it meant a series of
scholarships that took him to the other side of the world and Cambridge University.
When he arrived at the Cavendish to study under Thompson in October 1895, Rutherford was far
from the exuberant and self-confident man he would become within a few years. The transformation
began as he continued work started in New Zealand on the detection of wireless waves,
later called radio waves. In only a matter of months Rutherford developed a much improved
detector and toyed with the idea of making money from it. Just in time he realized that exploiting
research for financial gain in a scientific culture where patents were rare would harm the
chances of a young man yet to make his reputation. As the Italian Guglielmo Marconi amassed a fortune
that could have been his, Rutherford never regretted abandoning his detector to explore a
discovery that had been front page news around the world. On 8 November 1895, Vilhelm Rentgen
found that every time he passed a high voltage electric current through an evacuated glass tube,
some unknown radiation was causing a small paper screen coated with barium platino cyanide to glow.
When Rentgen, the 50-year-old professor of physics at the University of Würzburg,
was later asked what he had thought on discovering his mysterious new rays,
he replied, I did not think, I investigated. For nearly six weeks he did the same experiment
over and over again to make absolutely certain that the rays actually existed.
He confirmed that the tube was the source of the strange emanation causing the fluorescence.
Rentgen asked his wife Bertha to place her hand on a photographic plate while he exposed it to
X-rays as he called the unknown radiation. After 15 minutes Rentgen developed the plate.
Bertha was frightened when she saw the outlines of her bones, her two rings,
and the dark shadows of her flesh. On 1 January 1896, Rentgen mailed copies of his paper,
a new kind of rays, together with photographs of weights in a box and the bones in Bertha's hand,
to leading physicists in Germany and abroad. Within days news of Rentgen's discovery and his
amazing photographs spread like wildfire. The world's press latched on to the ghostly photograph
revealing the bones in his wife's hand. Within a year 49 books and over a thousand scientific and
semi-popular articles on X-rays would be published. Thompson had begun studying the sinister sounding
X-rays even before an English translation of Rentgen's paper appeared in the Weekly Science
Journal Nature on 23 January. Engaged in investigating the conduction of electricity
through gases, Thompson turned his attention to X-rays when he read that they turned a gas
into a conductor. Quickly confirming the claim he asked Rutherford to help measure the effects of
passing X-rays through a gas. For Rutherford the work led to four published papers in the next
two years that brought him international recognition. Thompson provided a brief note to the first
suggesting, correctly as it later proved, that X-rays, like light, were a form of electromagnetic
radiation. While Rutherford was busy conducting his experiments, in Paris the Frenchman Henri
Becquerel was trying to discover whether phosphorescent substances which glow in the dark
could also emit X-rays. Instead he found that uranium compounds emitted radiation whether
they were phosphorescent or not. Becquerel's announcement of his uranic rays aroused little
scientific curiosity and no newspapers clamored to report his discovery. Only a handful of physicists
were interested in Becquerel's rays for, like their discoverer, most believed that only uranium
compounds emitted them. However Rutherford decided to investigate the effects of
uranic rays on the electrical conductivity of gases. It was a decision he later described as
the most important of his life. Testing the penetration of uranium radiation using wafer
thin layers of Dutch metal, a copper zinc alloy, Rutherford found that the amount of radiation
detected depended on the number of layers used. At a certain point adding further layers had little
effect in reducing the intensity of radiation, but then, surprisingly, it began to fall once again
as more layers were added. After repeating the experiment with different materials and finding
the same general pattern, Rutherford could offer only one explanation. Two types of radiation were
being emitted and he called them alpha and beta rays. When the German physicist Gerhard Schmitt
announced that thorium and its compounds also emitted radiation, Rutherford compared it with
alpha and beta rays. He found the thorium radiation to be more powerful and concluded that
rays of a more penetrative kind were present. These were later called gamma rays. It was Marie
Curie who introduced the term radioactivity to describe the emission of radiation and who labeled
substances that emitted becquerel rays as radioactive. She believed that since radioactivity
was not confined to uranium alone, it must be an atomic phenomenon. It set her on the path to
discovering with her husband Pierre the radioactive elements radium and polonium.
In April, 1898 as Curie's first paper was published in Paris, Rutherford learned that there was a
vacant professorship at McGill University in Montreal, Canada. Although acknowledged as a
pioneer in the new field of radioactivity, Rutherford put his name forward with little
expectation of being appointed, despite a glowing letter of recommendation from Thomson.
I have never had a student with more enthusiasm or ability for original research than Mr. Rutherford,
wrote Thomson, and I am sure if elected he would establish a distinguished school of physics at
Montreal. He concluded, I should consider any institution fortunate that secured the services
of Mr. Rutherford as professor of physics. After a stormy voyage, Rutherford just turned
27, arrived in Montreal at the end of September and stayed for the next nine years.
Even before he left England he knew that he was expected to do a lot of original work and to
form a research school to knock the shine out of the Yankees. He did just that. Beginning with the
discovery that the radioactivity of thorium decreased by half in one minute and then by half
in one minute and then by half again in the next. After three minutes it had fallen to an eighth of
its original value. Rutherford called this exponential reduction of radioactivity the
half-life, the time taken for the intensity of radiation emitted to fall by half.
Each radioactive element had its own characteristic half-life. Then came the discovery that would
earn him the professorship in Manchester and a Nobel Prize. In October 1901 Rutherford and
Frederick Soddy, a 25-year-old British chemist at Montreal, began a joint study of thorium and its
radiation and were soon faced with the possibility that it could be turning into another element.
Soddy recalled how he stood stunned at the thought and let slip. This is transmutation.
For Mike's sake Soddy don't call a transmutation warned Rutherford. They'll have our heads off as
alchemists. The pair were soon convinced that radioactivity was the transformation of one
element into another through the emission of radiation. Their heretical theory was met with
widespread skepticism but the experimental evidence quickly proved decisive. Their critics had to
discard long cherished beliefs in the immutability of matter. No longer an alchemist's dream,
but a scientific fact. All radioactive elements did spontaneously transform into other elements,
the half-life measuring the time it took for half the atoms to do so.
Youthful, energetic, boisterous he suggested anything but the scientist,
is how Chaim Weitzman, later the first president of Israel, but then a chemist at Manchester
University, remembered Rutherford. He talked readily and vigorously on any subject under
the sun often without knowing anything about it. Going down to the refectory for lunch,
I would hear the loud friendly voice rolling up the corridor.
Weitzman found Rutherford devoid of any political knowledge or feelings,
being entirely taken up with his epoch-making scientific work.
At the centre of that work lay his use of the alpha particle to probe the atom.
But what exactly was an alpha particle? It was a question that had long vexed Rutherford
after he discovered that alpha rays were in fact particles with a positive charge
that were deflected by strong magnetic fields. He believed that an alpha particle was a helium
ion, a helium atom that had lost two electrons, but never said so publicly because the evidence
was purely circumstantial. Now, almost 10 years after discovering alpha rays, Rutherford hoped
to find definitive proof of their true character. Beta rays had already been identified as fast
moving electrons. With the help of another young assistant, this time 25-year-old German
Hans Geiger. Rutherford confirmed in the summer of 1908 what he had long suspected.
An alpha particle was indeed a helium atom that had lost two electrons.
The scattering is the devil, Rutherford had complained as he and Geiger tried to unmask
the alpha particle. He had first noticed the effect two years earlier in Montreal when some
alpha particles that had passed through a sheet of mica were slightly deflected from their straight
line trajectory, causing fuzziness on a photographic plate. Rutherford made a mental
note to follow it up. Soon after arriving in Manchester, he had drawn up a list of potential
research topics. Rutherford now asked Geiger to investigate one of those items, the scattering
of alpha particles. Together they devised a simple experiment that involved counting
scintillations, tiny flashes of light produced by alpha particles when they strike a paper screen
coated with zinc sulfide after passing through a thin sheet of gold foil. Counting scintillations
was an arduous task with long hours spent in total darkness. Luckily, according to Rutherford,
Geiger was a demon at the work and could count at intervals for a whole night without disturbing
his equanimity. He found that alpha particles either passed straight through the gold foil
or were deflected by one or two degrees. This was as expected. However, surprisingly,
Geiger also reported finding a few alpha particles deflected through quite an appreciable angle.
Before he could fully consider the implications if any of Geiger's results, Rutherford was awarded
the Nobel Prize for Chemistry for discovering that radioactivity was the transformation of
one element into another. For a man who regarded all sciences either physics or stamp collecting,
he appreciated the funny side of his own instant transmutation from physicist to chemist.
After returning from Stockholm with his prize, Rutherford learned to evaluate the probabilities
associated with different degrees of alpha particle scattering. His calculations revealed
that there was a very small chance, almost zero, that an alpha particle passing through
gold foil would undergo multiple scatterings, resulting in an overall large angle, deflection.
It was while Rutherford was preoccupied with these calculations that Geiger spoke to him
about assigning a project to Ernest Marston, a promising undergraduate.
Why not? said Rutherford. Let him see if any alpha particles can be scattered through a large
angle. He was surprised when Marston did. As the search continued at ever larger angles,
there should have been none of the telltale flashes of light that Marston had seen,
signaling alpha particles crashing into the zinc sulfide screen.
As Rutherford struggled to make sense of the nature of the huge electric or magnetic forces
which could turn aside or scatter a beam of alpha particles, he asked Marston to check if
any were reflected backwards. Not expecting him to find anything, he was utterly astonished when
Marston discovered alpha particles bouncing off the gold foil. It was, Rutherford said,
almost as incredible as if you had fired a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper,
and it came back and hit you. Geiger and Marston said about making comparative measurements using
different metals. They found that gold scattered backwards almost twice as many alpha particles
as silver and 20 times more than aluminum. Only one alpha particle in every 8,000 bounced off a
sheet of platinum. When they published these and other results in June 1909, Geiger and Marston
simply recounted the experiments and stated the facts without further comment. A baffled Rutherford
brooded for the next 18 months as he tried to think his way through to an explanation.
The existence of atoms had been a matter of considerable scientific and philosophical debate
throughout the 19th century, but by 1909 the reality of atoms had been established beyond
any reasonable doubt. The critics of atomism were silenced by the sheer weight of evidence
against them, two key pieces of which were Einstein's explanation of Brownian motion
and its confirmation, and Rutherford's discovery of the radioactive transformation of elements.
After decades of argument in which many eminent physicists and chemists had denied its existence,
the most favored representation of the atom to emerge was the so-called
plum pudding model put forward by J. J. Thompson.
In 1903, Thompson suggested that the atom was a ball of massless, positive charge in which
were embedded like plums in a pudding, the negatively charged electrons he had discovered
six years earlier. The positive charge would neutralize the repulsive forces between the
electrons that would otherwise tear the atom apart. For any given element, Thompson envisaged
these atomic electrons to be uniquely arranged in a set of concentric rings. He argued that it
was the different number and distribution of electrons in gold and lead atoms, for example,
which distinguished the metals from one another. Since all the mass of a Thompson atom was due
to the electrons it contained, it meant that there were thousands in even the lightest atoms.
Exactly 100 years earlier in 1803 the English chemist John Dalton first put forward the idea
that atoms of every element were uniquely characterized by their weight. With no direct way
of measuring atomic weights, Dalton determined their relative weights by examining the proportions
in which different elements combined to form various compounds. First, he needed a benchmark,
hydrogen being the lightest known element Dalton assigned it, an atomic weight of one.
The atomic weights of all the other elements were then fixed relative to that of hydrogen.
Thompson knew his model was wrong after studying the results of experiments involving the scattering
of x-rays and beta particles by atoms. He had overestimated the number of electrons.
According to his new calculations, an atom could not have more electrons than prescribed by its
atomic weight. The precise number of electrons in the atoms of the different elements was unknown,
but this upper limit was quickly accepted as a first step in the right direction.
The hydrogen atom with an atomic weight of one could have only one electron. However,
the helium atom with an atomic weight of four could have two, three or even four electrons,
and so on for the other elements. This drastic reduction in electron numbers revealed that most
of the weight of an atom was due to the diffuse sphere of positive charge. Suddenly what Thompson
had originally invoked as nothing more than a necessary artifice to produce a stable, neutral
atom took on a reality of its own. But even this new improved model could not explain alpha
particle scattering and failed to pin down the exact number of electrons in a particular atom.
Rutherford believed that alpha particles were scattered by an enormously strong electric field
within the atom. But inside JJ's atom with its positive charge evenly distributed throughout,
there was no such intense electric field. Thompson's atom simply could not send alpha
particles hurtling backwards. In December 1910 Rutherford finally managed to devise an atom
much superior to JJ's. Now, he told Geiger, I know what the atom looks like.
It was nothing like Thompson's. Rutherford's atom consisted of a tiny,
positively charged central core, the nucleus, which contained virtually all the atom's mass.
It was 100,000 times smaller than the atom, occupying only a minute volume, like a fly in a
cathedral. Rutherford knew that electrons inside an atom could not be responsible for the large
deflection of alpha particles. So to determine their exact configuration around the nucleus was
unnecessary. His atom was no longer the nice hardfellow red or gray in color, according to taste,
that he once tongue in cheek said he had been brought up to believe in.
Most alpha particles would pass straight through Rutherford's atom in any collision,
since they were too far from the tiny nucleus at its heart to suffer any deflection.
Others would veer off course slightly as they encountered the electric field,
generated by the nucleus, resulting in a small deflection. The closer they passed to the nucleus,
the stronger the effect of its electric field, and the greater the deflection from their original
path. But if an alpha particle approached the nucleus, head on, the repulsive force between
the two would cause it to recoil straight back, like a ball bouncing off a brick wall.
As Geiger and Marsden had found such direct hits were extremely rare.
It was, Rutherford said, like trying to shoot a gnat in the Albert Hall at night.
Rutherford's model allowed him to make definite predictions, using a simple formula he had derived,
about the fraction of scattered alpha particles to be found at any angle of deflection.
He did not want to present his atomic model until it had been tested by a careful investigation
of the angular distribution of scattered alpha particles. Geiger undertook the task and found
alpha particle distribution to be in total agreement with Rutherford's theoretical estimates.
On 7 March 1911, Rutherford announced his atomic model in a paper presented at a meeting
of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. Four days later, he received a letter
from William Henry Bragg, the professor of physics at Leeds University, informing him that,
about five or six years ago, the Japanese physicist Hantaro Nagaoka had constructed an atom with a
big, positive center. Unknown to Bragg, Nagaoka had visited Rutherford the previous summer as part
of a grand tour of Europe's leading physics laboratories. Less than two weeks after Bragg's
letter, Rutherford received one from Tokyo. Nagaoka wrote offering his gratitude for the
great kindness you showed me in Manchester, and pointing out that in 1904 he had proposed
a Saturnian model of the atom. It consisted of a large heavy center, surrounded by rotating rings
of electrons. You will notice that the structure assumed in my atom is somewhat similar to that
suggested by you in your paper some years ago, acknowledged Rutherford in his reply.
Though alike in some respects, there were significant differences between the two models.
In Nagaoka's the central body was positively charged, heavy, and occupied most of the flat
pancake-like atom, whereas Rutherford's spherical model had an incredibly tiny,
positively charged core that contained most of the mass, leaving the atom largely empty.
However, both models were fatally flawed and few physicists gave them a second thought.
An atom with stationary electrons positioned around a positive nucleus would be unstable,
because the electrons with their negative charge would be irresistibly pulled towards it.
If they moved around the nucleus, like planets orbiting the Sun, the atom would still collapse.
Newton had shown long ago that any object moving in a circle undergoes acceleration.
According to Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism, if it is a charged particle, like an electron,
it will continuously lose energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation as it accelerates,
and orbiting electron would spiral into the nucleus within a thousandth of a billionth of a
second. The very existence of the material world was compelling evidence against Rutherford's nuclear
atom. He had long been aware of what appeared to be an intractable problem. This necessary loss
of energy from an accelerated electron Rutherford wrote in his 1906 book, Radioactive Transformations,
has been one of the greatest difficulties met with in endeavoring to deduce the constitution
of a stable atom. But in 1911, he chose to ignore the difficulty.
The question of the stability of the atom proposed need not be considered at this stage,
for this will obviously depend upon the minute structure of the atom and on the motion of the
constituent charged part. Geiger's initial testing of Rutherford's scattering formula
had been quick and limited in scope. Marsden now joined him in spending most of the next year
conducting a more thorough investigation. By July 1912, the results confirmed the scattering formula
and the main conclusions of Rutherford's theory. The complete check, Marsden recalled years later,
was a laborious but exciting task. In the process they also discovered that the charge of the nucleus,
taking into account experimental error was about half the atomic weight. With the exception of
hydrogen with an atomic weight of one, the number of electrons in all other atoms had to be approximately
equal to half the atomic weight. It was now possible to nail down the number of electrons
in a helium atom, for example, as two, where previously it could have been as many as four.
However, this reduction in the number of electrons implied that Rutherford's atom
radiated energy even more strongly than had previously been suspected.
As Rutherford recounted tales from the First Solvay Conference for Bohr's benefit,
he failed to mention that in Brussels neither he nor anyone else discussed his nuclear atom.
Back in Cambridge, the intellectual rapport that Bohr sought with Thompson never happened.
Years later Bohr identified one possible reason for the failure. I had no great knowledge of
English and therefore I did not know how to express myself. And I could say only that this is
incorrect, and he was not interested in the accusation that it was not correct.
Infamous for neglecting papers and letters from students and colleagues alike,
Thompson was also no longer actively engaged in electron physics.
Increasingly disenchanted, Bohr met Rutherford again at the Cavendish Research
Students' Annual Dinner. Held in early December it was a rowdy informal affair with toasts,
songs and limericks, following a 10-course meal. Once again struck by the personality
of the man Bohr seriously began thinking about swapping Cambridge and Thompson for Manchester
and Rutherford. Later that month he went to Manchester and discussed the possibility with
Rutherford. A young man separated from his fiancée, Bohr desperately wanted something
tangible to show for their year apart. Telling Thompson that he wanted to know something about
radioactivity, Bohr was granted permission to leave at the end of the new term. The whole thing
was very interesting in Cambridge he admitted many years later, but it was absolutely useless.
With only four months left in England, Bohr arrived in Manchester in the middle of March 1912
to begin a seven-week course in the experimental techniques of radioactive research. With no
time to lose, Bohr spent his evenings working on the application of electron physics to provide a
better understanding of the physical properties of metals. With Geiger and Mars' dinner among the
instructors, he successfully completed the course and was given a small research project by Rutherford.
Rutherford is a man whom one cannot be mistaken about, Bohr wrote to Harold. He comes regularly
to hear how things are going and talk about every little thing. Unlike Thompson, who seemed to him
unconcerned about the progress of his students, Rutherford was really interested in the work
of all people who are around him. He had an uncanny ability to recognize scientific promise.
Eleven of his students along with several close collaborators would win the Nobel Prize.
As soon as Bohr arrived in Manchester, Rutherford wrote to a friend. Bohr, a dain,
has pulled out of Cambridge and turned up here to get some experience in radioactive work.
Yet, there was nothing in what Bohr had done to date to suggest that he was
any different from the other eager young men in his laboratory, except the fact that he was a theorist.
Rutherford held a generally low opinion of theorists and never lost an opportunity to
err it. They play games with their symbols, he once told a colleague, but we turn out the real
solid facts of nature. On another occasion when invited to deliver a lecture on the trends of
modern physics, he replied, I can't give a paper on that. They would only take two minutes. All I
could say would be that the theoretical physicists have got their tails up and it is time that we
experimentalists pulled them down again. Yet, he had immediately liked the 26-year-old dain.
Bohr's different, he would say. He's a football player.
Late every afternoon work in the laboratory stopped as the research students and staff
gathered to chat over tea, cakes and slices of bread and butter. Rutherford would be there,
sitting on a stool with plenty to say whatever the subject, but most of the time the talk was
simply of physics, particularly of the atom and radioactivity. Rutherford had succeeded in creating
a culture where there was an almost tangible sense of discovery in the air, where ideas were openly
exchanged and discussed in the spirit of cooperation with no one afraid to speak, even a newcomer.
At its center was Rutherford, who Bohr knew was always prepared to listen to every young man
when he felt he had any idea however modest on his mind. The only thing Rutherford could not stand
was pompous talk. Bohr loved to talk. Unlike Einstein who spoke and wrote fluently,
Bohr frequently paused as he struggled to find the right words to express himself,
whether in Danish, English or German. When Bohr spoke, he was often only thinking aloud
in search of clarity. It was during the tea breaks that he got to know the Hungarian Georg von
Heveshi, who would win the 1943 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for developing the technique
of radioactive tracing that was to become a powerful diagnostic tool in medicine,
with widespread applications in chemical and biological research.
Strangers in a strange country, speaking a language that both had yet to master,
the pair formed an easy friendship that lasted a lifetime. He knew how to be helpful to a foreigner,
Bohr said as he recalled how Heveshi, only a few months older,
helped him ease into the life of the laboratory. It was during their conversations that Bohr
first began to focus on the atom, as Heveshi explained that so many radioactive elements
had been discovered that there was not enough room to accommodate them all in the periodic table.
The very names given to these radio elements spawned in the process of radioactive disintegration
of one atom into another, captured the sense of uncertainty and confusion surrounding their
true place within the atomic realm. Uranium X, actinium B, thorium C.
But there was, Heveshi told Bohr, a possible solution proposed by Rutherford's former
Montreal collaborator, Frederick Soddy. In 1907, it was discovered that two elements produced
during radioactive decay, thorium and radiothorium, were physically different,
but chemically identical. Every chemical test they were subjected to failed to tell them apart.
During the next few years other such sets of chemically inseparable elements were discovered.
Soddy, now based at Glasgow University, suggested that the only difference between
these new radio elements and those with which they shared complete chemical identity
was their atomic weight. They were like identical twins whose only distinguishing feature
was a slight difference in weight. Soddy proposed in 1910 that chemically inseparable
radio elements, isotopes, as he later called them, were just different forms of the same element
and should therefore share its slot in the periodic table. It was an idea at odds with
the existing organization of elements within the periodic table, which listed them in order
of increasing atomic weight, with hydrogen first, and uranium last. Yet the fact that radiothorium,
radioactinium, ionium, and uranium X were all chemically identical to thorium,
was strong evidence in favor of Soddy's isotopes. Until his chats with Heveshi,
Bohr had shown no interest in Rutherford's atomic model, but he now had an idea.
It was not enough to distinguish between the physical and chemical properties of an atom,
one had to differentiate between nuclear and atomic phenomena. Ignoring the problem of its
inevitable collapse, Bohr took Rutherford's nuclear atoms seriously as he tried to reconcile
isotopes with the use of atomic weights to order the periodic table.
Everything, he said later, then fell into line.
Bohr understood that it was the charge of the nucleus in Rutherford's atom that fixed
the number of electrons it contained. Since an atom was neutral, possessing no overall charge,
he knew that the positive charge of the nucleus had to be balanced by the combined negative charge
of all its electrons. Therefore the Rutherford model of the hydrogen atom must consist of a
nuclear charge of plus one and a single electron with a charge of minus one.
Helium with a nuclear charge of plus two must have two electrons. This increase in nuclear charge
coupled to a corresponding number of electrons led all the way up to the then heaviest known element,
uranium, with a nuclear charge of 92. For Bohr the conclusion was unmistakable.
It was nuclear charge and not atomic weight that determined the position of an element within the
periodic table. From here he took the short step to the concept of isotopes. It was Bohr,
not Saadi, who recognized nuclear charge as being the fundamental property that tied
together different radio elements that were chemically identical but physically different.
The periodic table could accommodate all the radio elements, they just had to be housed according
to nuclear charge. At a stroke Bohr was able to explain why Heather she had been unable to separate
lead and radium D. If the electrons determined the chemical properties of an element then any two
with the same number and arrangement of electrons would be identical twins chemically inseparable.
Lead and radium D had the same nuclear charge 82 and therefore the same number of electrons
82 resulting in complete chemical identity. Physically they were distinct because of their
different nuclear masses approximately 207 for lead and 210 for radium D. Bohr had worked out
that radium D was an isotope of lead and as a result it was impossible to separate the two by
any chemical means. Later all isotopes were labeled with the name of the element of which
they were an isotope and their atomic weight. Radium D was lead 210. Bohr had grasped the
essential fact that radioactivity was a nuclear and not an atomic phenomenon. It allowed him to
explain the process of radioactive disintegration in which one radio element decayed into another
with the emission of alpha, beta or gamma radiation as a nuclear event. Bohr realized that if radio
activity originated in the nucleus then a uranium nucleus with a charge of plus 92 transmuting into
uranium X by emitting an alpha particle lost two units of positive charge leaving behind a nucleus
with a charge of plus 90. This new nucleus could not hold on to all of the original 92 atomic
electrons quickly losing two to form a new neutral atom. Every new atom formed as the
product of radioactive decay immediately either acquires or loses electrons so as to regain its
neutrality. Uranium X with a positive nuclear charge of 90 is an isotope of thorium they both
possessed the same nuclear charge and differed only in the mass and intrinsic structure of
the nucleus, explained Bohr. It was the reason why those who tried failed to separate thorium
with an atomic weight of 232 and uranium X, thorium 234.
His theory of what was happening at the nuclear level in radioactive disintegration implied, Bohr
said later, that by radioactive decay the element quite independently of any change in its atomic
weight would shift its place in the periodic table by two steps down or one step up corresponding to
the decrease or increase in the nuclear charge accompanying the emission of alpha or beta rays
respectively. Uranium decaying with the emission of an alpha particle into thorium 234 ended up
two places further back in the periodic table. Beta particles being fast-moving electrons
have a negative charge of minus one. If a nucleus emits a beta particle its positive charge increases
by one as if two particles one positive and the other negative that existed in harmony as a neutral
pair had been ripped apart with the ejection of the electron leaving behind its positive partner.
The new atom produced by beta decay has a nuclear charge that is one greater than the
disintegrating atom moving it one place to the right in the periodic table.
When Bohr took his ideas to Rutherford he was warned about the danger of extrapolating from
comparatively meager experimental evidence. Surprised by this muted reception he attempted
to convince Rutherford that it would be the final proof of his atom. He failed.
Part of the problem lay in Bohr's inability to express his ideas clearly. Rutherford preoccupied
with writing a book did not make the time to fully grasp the significance of what Bohr had done.
Rutherford believed that although alpha particles were emitted from the nucleus beta
particles were just atomic electrons somehow ejected from a radioactive atom. Despite
Bohr's trying on five separate occasions to persuade him Rutherford hesitated in following
his logic all the way to its conclusion. Sensing that Rutherford was by now becoming
a bit impatient with him and his ideas Bohr decided to let the matter rest. Others did not.
Frederick Soddy soon spotted the same displacement laws as Bohr but unlike the young Dane he was
able to publish his research without first having to seek approval of a superior. Nobody was surprised
that Soddy was at the forefront of these breakthroughs but no one could have guessed
that an eccentric 42 year old Dutch lawyer would introduce an idea of fundamental importance.
In July 1911 in a short letter to the journal Nature Antonius Johannes Vandenbroek speculated
that the nuclear charge of a particular element is determined by its place in the periodic table
its atomic number not its atomic weight. Inspired by Rutherford's atomic model Vandenbroek's idea
was based upon various assumptions that turned out to be wrong such as nuclear charge being equal to
half the atomic weight of the element. Rutherford was suitably annoyed that a lawyer should publish
a lot of guesses for fun without sufficient foundation. Having failed to gain any support on
27 November 1913 in another letter to Nature Vandenbroek dropped the assumption that the
nuclear charge was equal to half the atomic weight. He did so after the publication of the
extensive study by Geiger and Marsden into alpha particle scattering. A week later Soddy wrote to
Nature explaining that Vandenbroek's idea made clear the meaning of the displacement laws.
Then came an endorsement from Rutherford. The original suggestion of Vandenbroek that the
charge on the nucleus is equal to the atomic number and not to half the atomic weight seems to
be very promising. He was writing in praise of Vandenbroek's proposal a little more than 18 months
after advising Bohr against pursuing similar ideas. Bohr never complained that he had missed out on
being the first to publish the concept of atomic number or those ideas that won Soddy the Nobel
Prize for Chemistry in 1921 due to Rutherford's lack of enthusiasm. The confidence in his judgment
Bohr fondly remembered and our admiration for his powerful personality was the basis for the
inspiration felt by all in his laboratory and made us all try our best to deserve the kind and
untiring interest he took in the work of everyone. In fact Bohr continued to regard an approving
word from Rutherford as the greatest encouragement for which any of us could wish. The reason why
he could afford to be so generous when others would have been left feeling disappointed and bitter
was what happened next. After Rutherford dissuaded him from publishing his innovative ideas,
by chance Bohr came across a recently published paper that grabbed his attention.
It was the work of the only theoretical physicist on Rutherford's staff, Charles
Galton Darwin, the grandson of the great naturalist. The paper concerned the energy lost by alpha
particles as they passed through matter rather than being scattered by atomic nuclei.
It was a problem that J. J. Thompson had originally investigated using his own atomic model
but which Darwin now reexamined on the basis of Rutherford's atom.
Rutherford had developed his atomic model using the large angle alpha particle scattering data
gathered by Geiger and Marsden. He knew that atomic electrons could not be responsible for such
large angle scattering and so ignored them. In formulating his scattering law that predicted
the fraction of scattered alpha particles to be found at any angle of deflection,
Rutherford had treated the atom as a naked nucleus. Afterwards he simply placed the nucleus at
the center of the atom and surrounded it with electrons without saying anything about their
possible arrangement. In his paper Darwin adopted a similar approach when he ignored any influence
that the nucleus may have exerted on the passing alpha particles and concentrated solely on the
atomic electrons. He pointed out that the energy lost by an alpha particle as it passed through
matter was due almost entirely to collisions between it and atomic electrons. Darwin was
unsure how electrons were arranged inside Rutherford's atom. His best guess was that they were evenly
distributed either throughout the atom's volume or over its surface. His results depended only on
the size of the nuclear charge and the atom's radius. Darwin found that his values for various
atomic radii were in disagreement with existing estimates. As he read this paper, Bohr quickly
identified where Darwin had gone wrong. He had mistakenly treated the negatively charged electrons
as if they were free instead of being bound to the positively charged nucleus.
Bohr's greatest asset was his ability to identify and exploit failures in existing theory. It was a
skill that served him well throughout his career as he started much of his own work from spotting
errors and inconsistencies in that of others. On this occasion Darwin's mistake was Bohr's
point of departure. While Rutherford and Darwin had considered the nucleus and the atomic electrons
separately, each ignoring the other component of the atom, Bohr realized that a theory that
succeeded in explaining how alpha particles interacted with atomic electrons might reveal
the true structure of the atom. Any lingering disappointment over Rutherford's reaction to
his earlier ideas was forgotten as he said about trying to rectify Darwin's mistake.
Bohr abandoned his usual practice of drafting letters even to his brother.
I am not getting along badly at the moment, Bohr reassured Harold. A couple of days ago
I had a little idea with regard to understanding the absorption of alpha rays.
It happened in this way. A young mathematician here, C. G. Darwin, grandson of the real Darwin,
has just published a theory about this problem, and I felt that it not only wasn't quite right
mathematically, however only slightly wrong, but very unsatisfactory in the basic conception.
And I have worked out a little theory about it which, even if it isn't much,
perhaps may throw some light on certain things connected with the structure of atoms.
I am planning to publish a little paper about it very soon.
Not having to go to the laboratory has been wonderfully convenient for working out my little
theory, he admitted. Until he had put flesh onto the bare bones of his emerging ideas,
the only person in Manchester whom Bohr was willing to confide in was Rutherford.
Though surprised by the direction the Dane had taken, Rutherford listened,
and this time encouraged him to continue. With his approval Bohr stopped going to the laboratory.
He was under pressure since his time in Manchester was almost up.
I believe I have found out a few things, but it is certainly taking more time to work them out
than I was foolish enough to believe at first, he wrote to Harold on 17 July,
a month after first sharing his secret. I hope to have a little paper ready to show
Rutherford before I leave, so I'm busy. So busy. But the unbelievable heat here in Manchester
doesn't exactly help my diligence. How I look forward to talking to you.
He wanted to tell his brother that he hoped to fix Rutherford's flawed nuclear atom
by turning it into the quantum atom.
Chapter 4 The Quantum Atom
Sligelsa, Denmark Thursday, 1st of August, 1912.
The cobbled streets of the small picturesque town some 50 miles southwest of Copenhagen
were decked out in flags. Yet it was not in the beautiful medieval church but in the civic
hall that Niels Bohr and Margrethe Nirland were married in a two-minute ceremony conducted by
the chief of police. The mayor was away on holiday, Harold was best man, and only close family were
present. Like his parents before him Bohr did not want a religious ceremony. He had stopped
believing in God as a teenager when he had confessed to his father,
I cannot understand how I could be so taken in by all this. It means nothing whatsoever to me.
Had he lived, Christian Bohr would have approved when a few months before the wedding,
his son formally resigned from the Lutheran church.
Originally intending to spend their honeymoon in Norway, the couple were forced to change their
plans as Bohr failed to finish a paper on alpha particles in time. Instead, the newlyweds traveled
to Cambridge for a two-week stay during their month-long honeymoon. In between visits to old
friends and showing Margrethe around Cambridge, Bohr completed his paper. It was a joint effort,
Niels dictated, always struggling for the right word to make his meaning clear,
while Margrethe corrected and improved his English. They worked so well together that for the next
few years Margrethe effectively became his secretary. Bohr disliked writing and avoided doing so whenever
he could. He was able to complete his doctoral thesis only by dictating it to his mother.
You mustn't help Niels so much. You must let him learn to write himself, his father had urged,
to no avail. When he did put pen to paper Bohr wrote slowly and in an almost indecipherable scroll.
First and foremost, recalled a colleague, he found it difficult to think and write at the same time.
He needed to talk, to think aloud as he developed his ideas. He thought best while on the move,
usually circling a table. Later an assistant or anyone he could find for the task would sit with
pen poised as he paced about dictating in one language or other. Rarely satisfied with the
composition of a paper or lecture, Bohr would rewrite it up to a dozen times. The end result
of this excessive search for precision and clarity was often to lead the reader into a forest where
it was difficult to see the wood for the trees. With the manuscript finally completed and safely
packed away, Niels and Margrethe boarded the train to Manchester. On meeting his bride,
Ernest and Mary Rutherford knew that the young Dane had been lucky enough to find the right woman.
The marriage indeed proved to be a long and happy one that was strong enough to endure the death of
two of their six sons. Rutherford was so taken with Margrethe that for once there was little talk
of physics, but he made time to read Bohr's paper and promised to send it to the Philosophical
magazine with his endorsement. Relieved and happy, a few days later the Bohrs travelled to Scotland
to enjoy the remainder of their honeymoon. Returning to Copenhagen at the beginning of September,
they moved into a small house in the prosperous coastal suburb of Hellerup.
In a country with only one university physics posts rarely became vacant. Just before his
wedding day Bohr had accepted a job as a teaching assistant at the Lawrence Stalt, the Technical
College. Each morning Bohr would cycle to his new office. He would come into the yard pushing his
bicycle faster than anybody else, recalled a colleague later. He was an incessant worker and
seemed always to be in a hurry. The relaxed pipe-smoking elder statesmen of physics lay in the future.
Bohr also began teaching thermodynamics as a Privat Dotsen at the university.
Like Einstein he found preparing a lecture course arduous. Nevertheless at least one student
appreciated the effort and thanked Bohr for the clarity and conciseness with which he had arranged
the difficult material and the good style with which it had been delivered. But teaching combined
with his duties as an assistant left him precious little time to tackle the problems besetting
Rutherford's atom. Progress was painfully slow for a young man in a hurry. He had hoped that a
report written for Rutherford while still in Manchester on his nascent ideas about atomic
structure later dubbed the Rutherford Memorandum would serve as the basis of a paper ready for
publications soon after his honeymoon. It was not to be. You see, Bohr said 50 years later in one of
the last interviews he gave. I'm sorry because most of that was wrong. However he had identified
the key problem, the instability of Rutherford's atom. Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism predicted
that an electron circling the nucleus should continuously emit radiation. This incessant
leaking of energy sends the electrons spiraling into the nucleus as its orbit rapidly decays.
Radiative instability was such a well known failing that Bohr did not even mention it
in his memorandum. What really concerned him was the mechanical instability that plagued Rutherford's
atom. Beyond assuming that electrons revolved around the nucleus in the manner of planets
around the sun, Rutherford had said nothing about their possible arrangement. A ring of negatively
charged electrons circling the nucleus was known to be unstable due to the repulsive forces the
electrons exert on each other because they have the same charge. Nor could the electrons be stationary
since opposite charges attract, the electrons would be dragged toward the positively charged core.
It was a fact that Bohr recognized in the opening sentence of his memo.
In such an atom there can be no equilibrium configuration without the motion of electrons.
The problems that the young Dane had to overcome were mounting up. The electrons could not form a
ring, they could not be stationary, and they could not orbit the nucleus. Lastly,
with a tiny, point-like nucleus at its heart, there was no way in Rutherford's model to fix the
radius of an atom. Whereas others had interpreted these problems of instability as damming evidence
against Rutherford's nuclear atom, for Bohr they signaled the limitations of the underlying physics
that predicted its demise. His identification of radioactivity as a nuclear and not an atomic
phenomenon, his pioneering work on radio elements, what Soddy later called isotopes,
and on nuclear charge convinced Bohr that Rutherford's atom was indeed stable.
Although it could not bear the weight of established physics it did not suffer the
predicted collapse. The question that Bohr had to answer was, why not?
Since the physics of Newton and Maxwell had been impeccably applied and forecast electrons
crashing into the nucleus, Bohr accepted that the question of stability must therefore be
treated from a different point of view. He understood that to save Rutherford's atom would
require a radical change, and he turned to the quantum discovered by a reluctant plonk
and championed by Einstein. The fact that in the interaction between radiation and matter
energy was absorbed and emitted in packets of varying size, rather than continuously,
was something beyond the realm of time-honored, classical physics. Even though like almost
everyone else he did not believe in Einstein's light quanta, it was clear to Bohr that the atom
was in some way regulated by the quantum. But in September 1912 he had no idea how.
All his life Bohr loved to read detective stories. Like any good private eye he looked
for clues at the crime scene. The first were the predictions of instability. Certain that
Rutherford's atom was stable, Bohr came up with an idea that proved crucial to his ongoing
investigation, the concept of stationary states. Plonk had constructed his black body formula to
explain the available experimental data. Only then did he attempt to derive his equation,
and in the process stumbled across the quantum. Bohr adopted a similar strategy. He would begin
by rebuilding Rutherford's atomic model so that electrons did not radiate energy as they
orbited the nucleus. Only later would he try to justify what he had done.
Classical physics placed no restrictions on an electron's orbit inside an atom. But Bohr did.
Like an architect designing a building to the strict requirements of a client,
he restricted electrons to certain, special orbits in which they could not continuously
emit radiation and spiral into the nucleus. It was a stroke of genius. Bohr believed that
certain laws of physics were not valid in the atomic world and so he quantized electron orbits.
Just as Plonk had quantized the absorption and emission of energy by his imaginary oscillators,
so as to derive his black body equation, Bohr abandoned the accepted notion that an electron
could orbit an atomic nucleus at any given distance. An electron, he argued, could occupy only a few
select orbits, the stationary states out of all the possible orbits allowed by classical physics.
It was a condition that Bohr was perfectly entitled to impose as a theorist trying to piece
together a viable working atomic model. It was a radical proposal, and for the moment all he had
was an unconvincing circular argument that contradicted established physics. Electrons occupied
special orbits in which they did not radiate energy. Electrons did not radiate energy because
they occupied special orbits. Unless he could offer a real, physical explanation for his stationary
states, the permissible electron orbits, they would be dismissed as nothing more than theoretical
scaffolding erected to hold up a discredited atomic structure.
I hope to be able to finish the paper in a few weeks, Bohr wrote to Rutherford at the beginning
of November. Reading the letter and sensing Bohr's mounting anxiety, Rutherford replied that there was
no reason to feel pressed to publish in a hurry since it was unlikely anyone else was working
along the same lines. Bohr was unconvinced as the weeks passed without success. If others were
not already actively engaged in trying to solve the mystery of the atom, then it was only a matter
of time. Struggling to make headway, in December he asked for and was granted a few months sabbatical
by Knudsen. Together with Margrethe, Bohr found a secluded cottage in the countryside as he set
about searching for more atomic clues. Just before Christmas he found one in the work of John
Nicholson. At first he feared the worst, but he soon realized that the Englishman was not the
competitor he dreaded. Bohr had met Nicholson during his abortive stay in Cambridge and had not
been overly impressed. Only a few years older at 31, Nicholson had since been appointed Professor
of Mathematics at King's College, University of London. He had also been busy building an atomic
model of his own. He believed that the different elements were actually made up of various combinations
of four primary atoms. Each of these primary atoms consisted of a nucleus surrounded by a
different number of electrons that formed a rotating ring. Though, as Rutherford said,
Nicholson had made an awful hash of the atom, Bohr had found his second clue. It was the physical
explanation of the stationary states, the reason why electrons could occupy only certain orbits
around the nucleus. An object moving in a straight line has momentum. It is nothing more than the
object's mass times its velocity. An object moving in a circle possesses a property called
angular momentum. An electron moving in a circular orbit has an angular momentum labeled l. That is
just the mass of the electron multiplied by its velocity multiplied by the radius of its orbit,
or simply l equals mvr. There were no limits in classical physics on the angular momentum of an
electron or any other object moving in a circle. When Bohr read Nicholson's paper, he found his
former Cambridge colleague arguing that the angular momentum of a ring of electrons could change
only by multiples of h over 2 pi, where h is Planck's constant, and pi is the well-known
numerical constant from mathematics, 3.14, etc. Nicholson showed that the angular momentum of
a rotating electron ring could only be h over 2 pi, or 2 h over 2 pi, or 3 h over 2 pi, or 4 h over
2 pi, all the way to n h over 2 pi, where n is an integer, a whole number. For Bohr, it was the
missing clue that underpinned his stationary states. Only those orbits were permitted in which
the angular momentum of the electron was an integer n multiplied by h and then divided by 2 pi,
letting n equal 1, 2, 3, and so on, generated the stationary states of the atom in which an
electron did not emit radiation and could therefore orbit the nucleus indefinitely.
All other orbits, the non-stationary states, were forbidden. Inside an atom, angular momentum was
quantized. It could only have the values l equals n h over 2 pi and no others.
Just as a person on a ladder can stand only on its steps and nowhere in between, because
electron orbits are quantized, so are the energies that an electron can possess inside an atom.
For hydrogen, Bohr was able to use classical physics to calculate its single electron's energy
in each orbit. The set of allowed orbits and their associated electron energies are the
quantum states of the atom, its energy levels, e, n. The bottom rung of this atomic energy ladder is
n equals 1 when the electron is in the first orbit, the lowest energy quantum state.
Bohr's model predicted that the lowest energy level, e1, called the ground state,
for the hydrogen atom would be negative 13.6 ev, where an electron volt, ev, is the unit of
measurement adopted for energy on the atomic scale, and the minus sign indicates that the
electron is bound to the nucleus. If the electron occupies any other orbit but n equals 1, then
the atom is said to be in an excited state. Later called the principal quantum number,
n is always an integer, a whole number, which designates the series of stationary states that
an electron can occupy and the corresponding set of energy levels, e, n, of the atom. Bohr calculated
the values of the energy levels of the hydrogen atom and found that the energy of each level
was equal to the energy of the ground state divided by n squared, e1 over n squared ev.
Thus the energy value for n equals 2, the first excited state, is negative 13.6 over 4 equals
negative 3.40 ev. The radius of the first electron orbit, n equals 1, determines the size of the
hydrogen atom in the ground state. From his model Bohr calculated it as 5.3 nanometers,
where a nanometer is a billionth of a meter, in close agreement with the best experimental
estimates of the day. He discovered that the radius of the other allowed orbits increased
by a factor of n squared, when n equals 1, the radius is r, when n equals 2, then the radius
is 4r, when n equals 3, the radius is 9r, and so on. I hope very soon to be able to send you
my paper on the atoms, Bohr wrote to Rutherford on 31st of January, 1913. It has taken far more
time than I had thought, I think however, that I have made some progress in it in the latest time.
He had stabilized the nuclear atom by quantizing the angular momentum of the orbiting electrons,
and thereby explained why they could occupy only a certain number, the stationary states,
of all possible orbits. Within days of writing to Rutherford Bohr came across the third and final
clue that allowed him to complete the construction of his quantum atomic model.
Hans Hansen, a year younger and a friend of Bohr's from their student days in Copenhagen,
had just returned to the Danish capital after completing his studies in Göttingen.
When they met, Bohr told him about his latest ideas on atomic structure.
Having conducted research in Germany in spectroscopy, the study of the absorption and
emission of radiation by atoms and molecules, Hansen asked Bohr if his work shed any light on
the production of spectral lines. It had long been known that the appearance of a naked flame
changed color depending on which metal was being vaporized, bright yellow with sodium, deep red with
lithium, and violet with potassium. In the 19th century it had been discovered that each element
produced a unique set of spectral lines, spikes in the spectrum of light. The number, spacing,
and wavelengths of the spectral lines produced by the atoms of any given element are unique,
a fingerprint of light that can be used to identify it.
Spectra appeared far too complicated given the enormous variety of patterns displayed by the
spectral lines of the different elements for anyone to seriously believe that they could
be the key to unlocking the inner workings of the atom.
The beautiful array of colors on a butterfly's wing were all very interesting, Bohr said later,
but nobody thought that one could get the basis of biology from the coloring of the
wing of a butterfly. There was, obviously, a link between an atom and its spectral lines,
but at the beginning of February 1913 Bohr had no inkling what it could be.
Hansen suggested that he take a look at Balmer's formula for the spectral lines of hydrogen.
As far as Bohr could remember he had never heard of it. More likely, he had simply forgotten it.
Hansen outlined the formula and pointed out that no one knew why it worked.
Johann Balmer was a Swiss mathematics teacher at a girl's school in Basel
and a part-time lecturer at the local university. Knowing that he was interested in numerology,
a colleague told Balmer about the four spectral lines of hydrogen
after he had complained about having nothing interesting to do.
Intrigued, he set out to find a mathematical relationship between the lines where none
appeared to exist. The Swedish physicist Anders Angstrom had in the 1850s measured the wavelengths
of the four lines in the red, green, blue and violet regions of the visible spectrum of hydrogen
with remarkable accuracy. Labeling them alpha, beta, gamma and delta respectively,
he found their wavelengths to be 656.210, 486.074, 434.01, and 410.12 nanometers.
In June 1884, as he approached 60, Balmer found a formula that reproduced the wavelengths,
lambda, of the four spectral lines. Lambda equals B, M squared over M squared,
negative N squared, in which M and N are integers and B is a constant, a number determined by
experiment as 364.56 nanometers. Balmer discovered that if N was fixed as two,
but M said equal to three, four, five or six, then his formula gave an almost exact
match for each of the four wavelengths in turn. For example, when N equals two and M equals three
is plugged into the formula, it gives the wavelength of the red alpha line. However,
Balmer did more than just generate the four known spectral lines of hydrogen. Later named the Balmer
series in his honor, he predicted the existence of a fifth line when N equals two but M equals seven.
Unaware that Angstrom, whose work was published in Swedish, had already discovered and measured its
wavelength, the two values, experimental and theoretical, were in near perfect agreement.
Had Angstrom lived, he died in 1874 aged 59. He would have been astounded by Balmer's use of
his formula to predict the existence of other series of spectral lines for the hydrogen atom in
the infrared and the ultraviolet regions by simply setting N to one, three, four and five,
while letting M cycle through different numbers. As he had done with N, set it two to generate the
four original lines. For example, with N equals three and M equals four or five or six or seven,
Balmer predicted the series of lines in the infrared that were discovered in 1908 by Friedrich
Passchen. Each of the series forecast by Balmer was later discovered, but no one had been able
to explain what lay behind the success of his formula. What physical mechanism did the formula
arrived at through a process of trial and error symbolize? As soon as I saw Balmer's formula,
Bohr said later, the whole thing was immediately clear to me. It was electrons jumping between
different allowed orbits that produced the spectral lines emitted by an atom. If a hydrogen atom in
the ground state N equals one absorbs enough energy, then the electron jumps to a higher energy
orbit such as N equals two. The atom is then in an unstable, excited state and quickly returns to
the stable ground state when the electron jumps down from N equals two to N equals one. It can
do so only by emitting a quantum of energy that is equivalent to the difference in energy of the two
levels, 10.2 EV. The wavelength of the resulting spectral line can be calculated using the Planck
Einstein formula, E equals HV, where V is the frequency of the emitted electromagnetic radiation.
An electron jumping from a range of higher energy levels to the same lower energy level
produced the four spectral lines of the Balmer series. The size of the quanta emitted depended
only on the initial and final energy levels involved. This was why Balmer's formula generated
the correct wavelengths when N was said equal to two, but M was three, four, five or six in turn.
Bohr was able to derive the other spectral series predicted by Balmer
by fixing the lowest energy level that the electron could jump to. For example,
transitions ending with the electron jumping to N equals three produced the passion series in the
infrared, while those that ended at N equals one generated the so-called Lyman series in the ultra
violet region of the spectrum. There is, as Bohr discovered, a very strange feature associated
with an electron's quantum leap. It is impossible to say where an electron actually is during a jump.
The transition between orbits, energy levels, has to occur instantaneously, otherwise as the
electron traveled from one orbit to another, it would radiate energy continuously. In Bohr's atom,
an electron could not occupy the space between orbits. As if by magic, it disappeared while in
one orbit and instantly reappeared in another. I'm fully convinced that the problem of spectral
lines is intimately tied to the question of the nature of the quantum. Remarkably,
it was Planck in February 1908 who wrote these words in a notebook. But in his ongoing struggle
to minimize the impact of the quantum and before the Rutherford atom, it was as far as Planck could
go. Bohr embraced the idea that electromagnetic radiation was emitted and absorbed by atoms in
quanta. But in 1913 he did not accept that electromagnetic radiation itself was quantized.
Even six years later in 1919, few believed in Einstein's quantum of light when Planck declared
in his Nobel Prize lecture that Bohr's quantum atom was the long sought key to the entrance gate
into the wonderland of spectroscopy. On 6 of March 1913 Bohr sent Rutherford the first of a trilogy
of papers and asked him to send it on to the Philosophical Magazine. At the time, and for many
years to come, every junior scientist like Bohr needed someone of Rutherford's seniority to
communicate a paper to a British journal to ensure swift publication.
I am very anxious to know what you may think of it all, he wrote to Rutherford.
He was particularly concerned about the reaction to his mixing of the quantum and classical physics.
Bohr did not have to wait long for the answer. Your ideas as to the mode of origin of spectra
in hydrogen are very ingenious and seem to work out well, but the mixture of Planck's ideas
with the old mechanics make it very difficult to form a physical idea of what is the basis of it all.
Rutherford, as others would, was having trouble picturing how the electron in the hydrogen atom
jumped between energy levels. The difficulty lay in the fact that Bohr had violated a cardinal rule
of classical physics. An electron moving in a circle is an oscillating system with one complete
orbit being an oscillation and the number of orbits per second being the frequency of oscillation.
An oscillating system radiates energy at the frequency of its oscillation, but since two
energy levels are involved in an electron making a quantum jump, there are two frequencies of
oscillation. Rutherford was complaining that there was no link between these frequencies,
between the old mechanics, and the frequency of the radiation emitted as the electron jumps
between energy levels. He also identified another more serious problem.
There appears to me one grave difficulty in your hypothesis which I have no doubt you fully realize.
Namely, how does an electron decide what frequency it is going to vibrate at when it passes from
one stationary state to the other? It seems to me that you would have to assume that the electron
knows beforehand where it is going to stop. An electron in the n equals 3 energy level can jump
down to either the n equals 2 or n equals 1 levels. In order to make the jump, the electron appears to
know to which energy level it is heading so that it can emit radiation of the correct frequency.
These were weaknesses of the quantum atom to which Bohr had no answer.
There was another more minor criticism that concerned Bohr far more deeply.
Rutherford thought the paper really ought to be cut down since long papers have a way of
frightening readers who feel that they have not time to dip into them. After offering to correct
Bohr's English where necessary Rutherford added a post script. I suppose you have no objection
to my using my judgment to cut out any matter I may consider unnecessary in your paper?
Please reply. When Bohr received the letter he was horrified, for a man who agonized over the
choice of every word and went through endless drafts and revisions, the idea that someone else
even Rutherford would make changes was appalling. Two weeks after posting the original paper Bohr
sent a longer revised manuscript containing alterations and additions. Rutherford agreed
that the changes were excellent and appear quite reasonable but he once again urged Bohr to cut
the length. Even before he received this latest letter he wrote to Rutherford telling him
that he was coming to Manchester on holiday. When Bohr knocked on the front door Rutherford was
busy entertaining his friend Arthur Eve. He later recalled that Rutherford immediately took the
slight looking boy into his study leaving Mrs Rutherford to explain that the visitor was a
young Dane and her husband thought very highly indeed of his work. Through hour after hour of
discussions over several long evenings during the days that followed Bohr admitted that Rutherford
showed an almost angelic patience as he tried to defend every word in his paper.
An exhausted Rutherford finally gave in and afterwards began regaling his friends and
colleagues with tales of the encounter. I could see that he had weighed up every word in it and
it impressed me how determinately he held on to every sentence, every expression, every quotation,
everything had a definite reason and although I first thought that many sentences could be omitted
it was clear when he explained to me how closely knit the whole was that it was impossible to change
anything. Ironically Bohr admitted years later that Rutherford had been right in objecting to the
rather complicated presentation. Bohr's trilogy was published virtually unchanged in the Philosophical
magazine as On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules. The first, dated 5th of April 1913,
appeared in July. The second and third parts published in September and November
were a presentation of ideas concerning the possible arrangements of electrons inside atoms
that would preoccupy Bohr for the next decade as he used the quantum atom to explain the periodic
table and the chemical properties of the elements. Bohr had built his atom using a
heady cocktail of classical and quantum physics. In the process he had violated tenets of accepted
physics by proposing that electrons inside atoms can occupy only certain orbits, the stationary
states. Electrons cannot radiate energy while in those orbits. An atom can be in only one of a
series of discrete energy states, the lowest being the ground state. Electrons can somehow jump
from a stationary state of high energy to a stationary state of low energy and the difference
in energy between the two is emitted in a quantum of energy. Yet, his model correctly predicted
various properties of the hydrogen atom such as its radius and it provided a physical explanation
for the production of spectral lines. The quantum atom, Rutherford said later was
a triumph of mind over matter and until Bohr unveiled it he believed that it would require
centuries to solve the mystery of the spectral lines. A true measure of Bohr's achievement
was the initial reactions to the quantum atom. It was discussed publicly for the first time
on 12th of September 1913 at the 83rd annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement
of Science, B.A.A.S., held that year in Birmingham. With Bohr in the audience it received a muted
and mixed reception. J.J. Thompson, Rutherford, Rayleigh and Jeans were all there while the
distinguished foreign contingent included Lawrence and Curie. Men over 70 should not be hasty in
expressing opinions on new theories was Rayleigh's diplomatic response when pressed for his opinion
about Bohr's atom. In private, however, Rayleigh did not believe that nature behaved in that way
and admitted that he had difficulty in accepting it as a picture of what actually takes place.
Thompson objected to Bohr's quantization of the atom as totally unnecessary.
James Jeans begged to differ. He pointed out in a report to the Pact Hall
that the only justification that Bohr's model required was the very weighty one of success.
In Europe, the quantum atom was greeted with disbelief.
This is all nonsense. Maxwell's equations are valid under all circumstances, said Moxon
Lau during one heated discussion. An electron in a circular orbit must emit radiation.
While Paul Ehrenfest confessed to Lawrence that Bohr's atom has driven me to despair.
If this is the way to reach the goal, he continued, I must give up doing physics.
In Göttingen, Bohr's brother Harold reported that there was great interest in his work,
but that his assumptions were deemed too bold and fantastic.
One early triumph for Bohr's theory clinched the support of some, including Einstein.
Bohr predicted that a series of lines found in the spectrum of light from the sun that had
been attributed to hydrogen actually belonged to ionized helium, helium with one of its two
electrons removed. This interpretation of the so-called Pickering Fowler lines
was at odds with that of its discoverers. Who was right?
The issue was settled by one of Rutherford's team in Manchester after a detailed study of
the spectral lines instigated at the behest of Bohr. Just in time for the BAAS meeting in Birmingham,
it was found that the Dane had been correct in his assignment of the Pickering Fowler lines
to helium. Einstein heard the news during a conference in Vienna at the end of September
from Bohr's friend Georg von Heveshi. The big eyes of Einstein reported Heveshi in a letter to
Rutherford, looked still bigger, and he told me, then it is one of the greatest discoveries.
By the time Part 3 of the trilogy was published in November 1913, another member of Rutherford's
group, Henry Mosley, had confirmed the idea that the nuclear charge of an atom, its atomic number,
was a unique whole number for a given element in the key parameter that decided its position
within the periodical table. It was only after Bohr visited Manchester in July that year and
spoke to Mosley about the atom that the young Englishmen began shooting beams of electrons
at different elements and examined the resulting X-ray spectra. By then it was known that X-rays
were a form of electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths thousands of times shorter than
those of visible light, and that they were produced when electrons with sufficient energy
struck a given metal. Bohr believed that X-rays were emitted because one of the innermost electrons
was knocked out of an atom, and an electron moved down from a higher energy level to fill the vacancy.
The difference in the two energy levels was such that the quantum of energy emitted in the transition
was an X-ray. Bohr realized that using his atomic model, it was possible to determine the charge
of the nucleus using the frequencies of the emitted X-rays. It was this intriguing fact
that he had discussed with Mosley. With a prodigious capacity for work matched only by
his stamina while others slept, Mosley stayed in the laboratory working through the night.
Within a couple of months he had measured the frequencies of X-rays emitted by every element
between calcium and zinc. He discovered that as the elements he bombarded got heavier,
there was a corresponding increase of frequencies of the emitted X-rays. Mosley predicted the
existence of missing elements with atomic numbers 42, 43, 72 and 75 on the basis that
each element produced a characteristic set of X-ray spectral lines, and those adjacent
to each other in the periodic table had very similar ones. All four were later discovered,
but by then, Mosley was dead. When the First World War began he enlisted in the royal engineers
and served as a signals officer. He died, shot through the head, in Gallipoli, on 10th of August
1915. His tragic death at the age of 27 robbed him of a certain Nobel Prize.
Rutherford personally gave him the highest possible accolade. He hailed Mosley as a
born experimenter.
Bohr's correct assignment of the Pickering Fowler Lines and Mosley's groundbreaking work on nuclear
charge were beginning to win support for the quantum atom. A more significant turning point
in its acceptance came in April 1914 when the young German physicists James Franck and Gustav
Hertz bombarded mercury atoms with electrons and found that the electrons lost 4.9 EV of energy
during these collisions. Franck and Hertz believed they had succeeded in measuring the amount of
energy required to rip an electron from a mercury atom. Not having read his paper due to the initial
widespread skepticism that greeted it in Germany, it was left to Bohr to provide the correct
interpretation of their data. When the electrons fired at the mercury atoms had energies of less
than 4.9 EV nothing happened. But when a bombarding electron with energy above 4.9 EV scored a direct
hit, it lost that amount of energy and the mercury atom emitted an ultraviolet light. Bohr pointed
out that 4.9 EV was the energy difference between the ground state of the mercury atom and its first
excited state. It corresponded to an electron jumping between the first two energy levels
in the mercury atom and the energy difference between these levels was exactly as predicted by
his atomic model. When the mercury atom returns to its ground state as the electron jumps down to
the first energy level, it emits a quantum of energy that produces an ultraviolet light of wavelength
253.7 nanometers in the mercury line spectra. The Franck-Hertz results provided direct
experimental evidence for Bohr's quantized atom and the existence of atomic energy levels.
Despite initially having misinterpreted their data, Franck and Hertz were awarded the 1925 Nobel
Prize in physics. Just as part one of the trilogy was published in July 1913, Bohr had finally been
appointed to a lecture ship at Copenhagen University. Before long, he was unhappy as his major
responsibility was to teach elementary physics to medical students. At the beginning of 1914 with
his reputation on the rise, Bohr set about trying to establish a new professorship in theoretical
physics for himself. It would be difficult, as theoretical physics as a distinct discipline
was still poorly recognized as such outside Germany. In my opinion Dr Bohr is one of the most
promising and able of the young mathematical physicists in Europe today, wrote Rutherford
in the testimonial to the Department of Religious and Educational Affairs in support of Bohr and
his proposal. The immense interest that his work had attracted internationally ensured that Bohr
received the backing of the faculty. But once again the university hierarchy chose to postpone
any decision. It was then that a dejected Bohr received a letter from Rutherford, offering an
escape route. I dare say you know Darwin's tenure of readership has expired and we are now advertising
for a successor at 200 pounds, Rutherford wrote. Preliminary inquiries show that not many men of
promise are available. I should like to get a young fellow with some originality in him. Having
already told the Dane that his work showed great originality and merit, Rutherford wanted Bohr,
without explicitly saying so. In September 1914, having been granted a
year's leave of absence, as any decision on the professorship he wanted was unlikely before then,
Niels and Margrethe Bohr arrived in Manchester to a warm welcome at their safe arrival
after a stormy voyage around Scotland. The First World War had begun and much had changed.
The wave of patriotism that swept the country had virtually emptied the laboratories as those
eligible to fight, signed up. The hope that the war would be short and sharp receded by the day,
as the Germans smashed through Belgium and into France. Men who had only recently been
colleagues were now fighting on opposing sides. Marsden was soon at the western front.
Geiger and Heveshi had joined the armies of the Central Powers.
Rutherford was not in Manchester when Bohr arrived. He had left in June to attend the
annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,
being held that year in Melbourne, Australia. Recently nighted, he visited his family in New
Zealand, before travelling on to America and Canada as planned. Once back in Manchester,
Rutherford devoted much of his time to anti-submarine warfare. Since Denmark was neutral, Bohr was not
allowed to take part in any war-related activities. He concentrated largely on teaching and what
research was possible was impeded by the lack of journals and the censorship of letters from
and to Europe. Originally planning to spend just a year in Manchester, Bohr was still there when in
May 1916, he was formally appointed to the newly created post of Professor of Theoretical Physics
in Copenhagen. The growing recognition of his work had secured the post, but despite its successes
there were problems that the quantum atom could not solve. The answers it gave for atoms with
more than one electron failed to tally with experiments. It could not even account for helium
with just two electrons. Worse, Bohr's atomic model predicted spectral lines that could not be
found. In spite of the introduction of ad hoc selection rules to explain why some lines were
observed and others were not, all the central elements of Bohr's atom were accepted by the end
of 1914, the existence of discrete energy levels, the quantization of angular momentum of the orbiting
electrons, and the origin of spectral lines. However if there existed a single spectral line
that could not be explained, even with the imposition of some new rule, then the quantum atom was in
trouble. In 1892 improved equipment appeared to show that the red alpha and blue gamma-balmer
lines of the hydrogen spectrum were not single lines at all, but were each split in two. For
more than 20 years it remained an open question whether these lines were true doublets or not.
Bohr thought not. It was at the beginning of 1915 that he changed his mind as new experiments
revealed that the red, blue, and violet-balmer lines were all doublets. Using his atomic model
Bohr could not explain this fine structure as the splitting of the lines was called.
As he settled into his new role as a professor in Copenhagen, Bohr found a batch of papers waiting
for him from a German who had solved the problem by modifying his atom. Arnold Sommerfeld was a
48-year-old distinguished professor of theoretical physics at Munich University. Over the years,
some of the most brilliant young physicists and students would work under his watchful eye as
he turned Munich into a thriving center of theoretical physics. Like Bohr he loved skiing
and would invite students and colleagues to his house in the Bavarian Alps to ski and talk physics.
But let me assure you that if I were in Munich and had the time I would sit in on your lectures in
order to perfect my knowledge of mathematical physics, Einstein had written to Sommerfeld in
1908 while still at the patent office. It was some compliment coming from a man described
as a lazy dog by his maths professor in Zurich. To simplify his model, Bohr had confined electrons
to move only in circular orbits around the nucleus. Sommerfeld decided to lift this restriction,
allowing electrons to move in elliptical orbits, like the planets in their journey around the sun.
He knew that mathematically speaking circles were just a special class of ellipse,
therefore circular electron orbits were only a subset of all possible quantized elliptical orbits.
The quantum number N in the Bohr model specified a stationary state, a permitted circular electron
orbit and the corresponding energy level. The value of N also determined the radius of a given
circular orbit. However, two numbers are required to encode the shape of an ellipse.
Sommerfeld therefore introduced k, the orbital quantum number, to quantize the shape of an
elliptical orbit. Of all the possible shapes of an elliptical orbit, k determined those that were
allowed for a given value of N. In Sommerfeld's modified model, the principal quantum number
N determined the values that k could have. If N equals 1, then k equals 1. When N equals 2,
k equals 1 and 2. When N equals 3, k equals 1, 2 and 3.
For a given N, k is equal to every whole number from 1 up to and including the value of N.
When N equals k, the orbit is always circular. However, if k is less than N, then the orbit
is elliptical. For example, when N equals 1 and k equals 1, the orbit is circular with a radius r
called the Bohr radius. When N equals 2 and k equals 1, the orbit is elliptical, but N equals 2
and k equals 2 is a circular orbit with a radius 4r. Thus, when the hydrogen atom is in the
N equals 2 quantum state, its single electron can be in either the k equals 1 or k equals 2 orbits.
In the N equals 3 state, the electron can occupy any one of 3 orbits. N equals 3 and k equals 1
elliptical, N equals 3 and k equals 2 elliptical, N equals 3 and k equals 3 circular.
Whereas in Bohr's model N equals 3 was just one circular orbit in Sommerfeld's modified quantum
atom, there were three permitted orbits. These extra stationary states could explain the splitting
of the spectral lines of the Ballmer series. To account for the splitting of the spectral lines,
Sommerfeld turned to Einstein's theory of relativity. Like a comet in orbit around the sun,
as an electron in an elliptical orbit heads towards the nucleus, its speed increases.
Unlike a comet, the speed of the electron is great enough for its mass to increase as predicted
by relativity. This relativistic mass increase gives rise to a very small energy change.
The N equals 2 states, the two orbits, k equals 1 and k equals 2, have different energies because k
equals 1 is elliptical and k equals 2 circular. This minor energy difference leads to two energy
levels that yield two spectral lines where only one was predicted by Bohr's model. However,
the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantum atom was still unable to explain two other phenomena.
In 1897, the Dutch physicist Peter Ziemen discovered that in a magnetic field a single
spectral line split into a number of separate lines or components. This was called the Ziemen
effect, and once the magnetic field was switched off, the splitting disappeared.
Then in 1913 the German physicist Johannes Stark found that a single spectral line splits up into
several lines when atoms are placed in an electric field. Rutherford contacted Bohr as Stark published
his findings. I think it is rather up to you at the present time to write something on the Ziemen
and electric effects if it is possible to reconcile them with your theory.
Rutherford was not the first to ask. Soon after the publication of part one of his trilogy,
Bohr had received a letter of congratulations from Sommerfeld.
Will you also apply your atomic model to the Ziemen effect? he asked. I want to tackle this.
Bohr was unable to explain it, but Sommerfeld did. His solution was ingenious. Earlier he
adopted for elliptical orbits and thereby increased the number of possible quantized
orbits that an electron could occupy when an atom was in a given energy state such as n equals 2.
Bohr and Sommerfeld had both pictured orbits whether circular or elliptical as lying in a plane.
As he tried to account for the Ziemen effect, Sommerfeld realized that the orientation of
an orbit was the vital missing component. In a magnetic field, an electron can select from
more permitted orbits pointing in various directions with respect to the field. Sommerfeld
introduced what he called the magnetic quantum number m to quantize the orientation of those orbits.
For a given principal quantum number n, m can only have values that range from negative n to n.
If n equals 2 then m has the values negative 2, negative 1, 0, 1, 2.
I do not believe ever to have read anything with more joy than your beautiful work,
Bohr wrote to Sommerfeld in March 1916. The orientation of electron orbits or space quantization
as it became known was experimentally confirmed five years later in 1921. It made available
extra energy states, now labeled by the three quantum numbers n, k and m, which an electron
could occupy in the presence of an external magnetic field leading to the Ziemen effect.
Necessity being the mother of invention, Sommerfeld had been forced to introduce his two new quantum
numbers k and m to explain facts revealed by experiments. Leaning heavily on the work of
Sommerfeld, others explained the stark effect as resulting from the changes in the spacing between
energy levels due to the presence of an electric field. Although there were still weaknesses,
such as the inability to reproduce the relative intensity of the spectral lines, the successes
of the Bohr-Sommerfeld atom further enhanced Bohr's reputation and earned him an institute
of his own in Copenhagen. He was on his way to becoming, as Sommerfeld called him later,
the director of atomic physics through his work and the inspiration he gave others.
It was a compliment that would have pleased Bohr who had always wanted to replicate the way in
which Rutherford had run his laboratory and the spirit he had succeeded in creating among all
those who worked there. Bohr had learned more than just physics from his mentor. He saw how
Rutherford was able to galvanize a group of young physicists into producing their best.
In 1917 Bohr set out to replicate what he had been fortunate enough to experience in Manchester.
He approached the authorities in Copenhagen about establishing an institute for theoretical
physics at the university. The institute was approved as friends raised the money necessary
for buildings and land. Construction began the following year, soon after the end of the war,
at a site on the edge of a beautiful park not far from the city centre.
Work had only just begun when a letter arrived that, unsettled Bohr. It was from Rutherford,
who was offering him a permanent professorship in theoretical physics, back in Manchester.
I think the two of us could try and make physics boom, wrote Rutherford.
It was tempting, but Bohr could not leave Denmark just as he was about to be given
everything that he wanted. Maybe if he had gone Rutherford would not have left Manchester in
1919 to take over from J. J. Thompson as the director of the Cavendish laboratory at Cambridge.
Always known as the Bohr Institute, the Universitäts Institute for Theoretisk
Physics was formally opened on 3rd March 1921. The Bohrs had already moved into the seven-room
flat on the first floor with their growing family. Following the upheavals of war and the hardship
of the years that followed in its wake, the institute was soon the creative haven Bohr hoped
it would be. It quickly became a magnet for many of the world's brightest physicists. But,
the most talented of them all, would always remain an outsider.
Chapter 5 When Einstein Met Bohr
Those are the madmen who do not occupy themselves with quantum theory.
Einstein told a colleague as they looked out of the window of his office in the Institute of
Theoretical Physics at the German University in Prague. After his arrival from Zurich in April
1911, he had been puzzled as to why only women used the grounds in the morning and only men in
the afternoons. As he struggled with his own demon, he discovered that the beautiful garden
next door belonged to a lunatic asylum. Einstein was finding it difficult to live with the quantum
and the dual nature of light. I wish to assure you in advance that I am not the orthodox light
quantizer for whom you take me, he told Hendrik Lawrence. It was a faulty impression that arose,
he claimed, from my imprecise way of expressing myself in my papers. Soon he gave up even asking
if quantum really exists. By the time he returned from the First Solvay Conference in November
1911, on the theory of radiation and the quanta, Einstein had decided that enough was enough and
pushed the lunacy of the quantum to one side. Over the next four years, as Bohr and his atom
took center stage, Einstein effectively abandoned the quantum to concentrate on
extending his theory of relativity to encompass gravity.
Founded in the mid-14th century, Prague University was divided in 1882 along lines of
nationality and language into two separate universities, one Czech and the other German.
It was a division that reflected a society where Czechs and Germans
harbored a deep-seated suspicion and mistrust of each other.
After the easygoing, tolerant atmosphere of Switzerland and the cosmopolitan mix of Zurich,
Einstein was ill at ease in spite of the full professorship and the salary that enabled him
to live in some comfort. It provided just a quantum of solace against the creeping sense
of isolation. By the end of 1911, as Bohr contemplated his move from Cambridge to Manchester,
Einstein desperately wanted to return to Switzerland, and it was then that an old friend
came to his rescue. Recently appointed as the Dean of the Mathematics and Physics Section
of the Swiss Federal Technical University, ETH, Marcel Grossmann offered Einstein a
professorship in Zurich at the renamed former polytechnic. Although the job was his, there were
formalities that Grossmann had to observe. High on the list was seeking the advice of
eminent physicists about Einstein's possible appointment. One of those asked was Francis
Premier theorist Henri Poincaré, who described Einstein as, one of the most original minds,
he knew. The Frenchman admired the ease with which he adapted to new concepts,
his ability to see beyond classical principles, and when faced with a physics problem,
he promptly envisages all possibilities. Where Einstein had once failed to get a job as an assistant,
in July 1912 he returned as a master physicist. It was inevitable that sooner rather than later
Einstein would become a prime target for the men in Berlin. In July 1913 Max Planck and Walter
Nernst boarded the train to Zurich. They knew that it would not be easy to persuade Einstein to return
to a country he had left almost twenty years ago, but they were prepared to make him an offer he
simply could not refuse. As Einstein met them off the train, he knew why Planck and Nernst had come,
but not the details of the proposal they were about to make. Having just been elected a member of
the prestigious Prussian Academy of Sciences, he was being offered one of its two salaried positions.
This alone was a great honor, but the two emissaries of German science also offered a unique
research professorship without any teaching duties, and the directorship of the Kaiser
Wilhelm Institute of Theoretical Physics once it was established. He needed time to mull over the
unprecedented package of three jobs. Planck and Nernst went on a short sightseeing train ride as
he considered whether or not to accept. Einstein told them that they would have his answer when
they returned, by the color of the rose he carried. If red, he would go to Berlin, if white, he would
stay in Zurich. As they got off the train, Planck and Nernst knew they had got their man when they
saw Einstein clutching a red rose. Part of the lure of Berlin for Einstein was the freedom to
give myself over completely to rumination with no obligations to teach. But with it came the
pressure of having to deliver the sort of physics that made him the hottest property in science.
The Berliners are speculating with me as with a prize-winning laying hen, he told a colleague
after his farewell dinner. But I don't know if I can still lay eggs.
After celebrating his 35th birthday in Zurich, Einstein moved to Berlin at the end of March,
1914. Whatever reservations he might have had about returning to Germany, he was soon enthusing
intellectual stimulation abounds here, there is just too much of it. The likes of Planck,
Nernst and Rubens were all within easy reach. But there was another reason why he found
odious Berlin exciting. His cousin, Elsa Leuenthal.
Two years earlier in March 1912, Einstein had begun an affair with the 36-year-old
divorcee with two young daughters. Elsa, aged 13 and Margo, 11.
I treat my wife like an employee whom I cannot fire, he told Elsa.
Once in Berlin Einstein would often disappear for days without a word of explanation. Soon,
he moved out of the family home altogether and drew up a remarkable list of conditions under
which he was willing to return. If Milleva accepted his terms, she would indeed become
an employee. And one her husband was determined to fire.
Einstein demanded, one, that my clothes and laundry are kept in good order and repair.
Two, that I receive my three meals regularly in my room.
Three, that my bedroom and my office are always kept neat, in particular that the desk is available,
to me alone. Further, she was to renounce all personal relations,
and refrain from criticizing him either in word or deed in front of my children.
Finally, he insisted that Milleva adhere to the following points.
One, you are neither to expect intimacy from me nor reproach me in any way.
Two, you must desist immediately from addressing me if I request it.
Three, you must leave my bedroom or office immediately without protest if I so request.
Milleva agreed to his demands, and Einstein returned. But it could not last.
At the end of July, after just three months in Berlin, Milleva and the boys went back to Zurich.
As he stood on the platform waving goodbye, Einstein wept, if not for Milleva and the
memories of what had been, then for his two departing sons.
But, within a matter of weeks he was happily enjoying living alone, in my large apartment,
in undiminished tranquility. It was a tranquility that few would enjoy, as Europe descended into war.
One day the great European war will come out of some damned foolish thing in the Balkans,
Bismarck was once reported as saying. That day, was Sunday, 28 June, 1914.
And it was the assassination in Sarajevo of Archduke Franz Ferdinand,
the heir to the crowns of Austria and Hungary. Austria, supported by Germany, declared war on
Serbia. Germany declared war on Serbia's ally Russia on 1st of August, and on France two days
later. Britain, who guaranteed Belgian independence declared war on Germany, on the 4th of August,
after it had violated Belgium's neutrality. Europe in its madness has now embarked on
something incredibly preposterous, Einstein wrote on 14 August to his friend Paul Ehrenfest.
While Einstein felt, only a mixture of pity and disgust,
nernst, at 50, volunteered as an ambulance driver. Plunk, unable to contain his patriotism declared,
it is a great feeling to be able to call oneself a German.
Believing that it was a glorious time to be alive, as rector of Berlin University,
Plunk sent his students to the trenches in the name of a just war.
Einstein could hardly believe it when he discovered that Plunk, Nernst,
Rentgen and Wien, were among the 93 luminaries who signed the appeal to the cultured world.
This manifesto was published on 4th of October 1914, in leading German newspapers and in others
abroad. Its signatories protesting against the lies and defamations with which our enemies
are trying to besmirch Germany's pure cause in the hard life and death struggle forced upon it.
They asserted that Germany bore no responsibility for the war,
had not violated Belgian neutrality and had committed no atrocities. Germany was
a cultured nation to whom the legacy of Goethe, Beethoven and Kant is fully as sacred as its
hearths and plots of land. Plunk quickly regretted having signed and in private began apologizing
to his friends among foreign scientists. Of all those that lent their names to the falsehoods and
half truths of the manifesto of the 93 as it became known, Einstein had expected better from Plunk.
Even the German Chancellor had publicly admitted that Belgium's neutral status had been violated.
The wrong that we are committing we will endeavor to make good as soon as our military goal is
reached. As a Swiss citizen Einstein was not asked to add his signature, however he was deeply
concerned at the long-term effect of the unbridled national chauvinism of the manifesto
and was involved in producing a counter-manifesto entitled An Appeal to Europeans. It called on
educated men of all states to ensure that the conditions of peace did not become the source
of future wars. It challenged the attitude expressed by the manifesto of the 93 as
unworthy of what until now the whole world has understood by the term culture and it would be
a disaster if it were to become the common property of educated people. It castigated German
intellectuals for behaving almost to a man as though they had relinquished any further desire
for the continuance of international relations. However, including Einstein, there were only four
signatories. By the spring of 1915 the attitudes of his colleagues at home and abroad had left
Einstein feeling deeply disheartened. Even scholars of the various nations behave as if their cerebrums
had been amputated eight months ago. Soon all hope that the war would be short-lived evaporated,
leaving him by 1917 constantly very depressed about the endless tragedy we must witness.
Even the habitual flight into physics does not always help, he confessed to Lawrence.
Yet the four years of war proved to be among his most productive and creative,
as Einstein published a book and some fifty scientific papers, and in 1915 completed his
masterpiece, General Relativity. Even before Newton, it had been assumed that time and space were fixed
and distinct, the stage on which the never-ending drama of the cosmos was played out.
It was an arena where mass, length and time were absolute and unvarying. It was a theater in which
spatial distances and time intervals between events were identical for all observers.
Einstein, however, discovered that mass, length and time were not absolute and unchanging.
Spatial distances and time intervals depended on the relative motion of observers.
Compared to his earthbound twin for an astronaut traveling at near light speed,
time slows down, the hands on a moving clock are slower, space contracts, the length of a
moving object shrinks, and a moving object gains mass. These were the consequences of special
relativity, and each would be confirmed by experiments in the 20th century, but the theory
did not incorporate acceleration. General relativity did. In the midst of his struggle
to construct it, Einstein said that it made special relativity look like child's play.
Just as the quantum was challenging the accepted view of reality in the atomic realm,
Einstein took humanity closer to understanding the true nature of space and time.
General relativity was his theory of gravity, and it would lead others to the big bang origin
of the universe. In Newton's theory of gravity, the force of attraction between two objects,
such as the sun and the earth, is proportional to the product of their respective masses,
and inversely proportional to the square of the distance separating their centers of mass.
With no contact between the masses, in Newtonian physics gravity is a mysterious
action at a distance force. In general relativity, however, gravity is due to the warping of space
caused by the presence of a large mass. The earth moves around the sun not because some
mysterious invisible force pulls it, but because of the warping of space due to the sun's enormous
mass. In short, matter warps space, and warped space tells matter how to move.
In November 1915, Einstein tested general relativity by applying it to a feature of
Mercury's orbit that could not be explained using Newton's gravitational theory.
In its journey around the sun, Mercury does not trace out exactly the same path every orbit.
Astronomers had precise measurements that revealed that the planet's orbit rotated
slightly. Einstein used general relativity to calculate this orbital shift. When he saw that
the number matched the data within the margins of error, he had palpitations of the heart and felt
as if something had snapped inside. The theory is beautiful beyond comparison, he wrote.
With his boldest dreams fulfilled, Einstein was content,
but the Herculian effort left him worn out. When he recovered, he turned to the quantum.
Even as he worked on the general theory in May 1914, Einstein was among the first to grasp that
the Frank Hertz experiment was a confirmation of the existence of energy levels in atoms and a
striking verification of the quantum hypothesis. By the summer of 1916, Einstein had a brilliant
idea of his own about an atom's emission and absorption of light. It led him to an
astonishingly simple derivation, I should say, the derivation of Planck's formula.
Soon Einstein was convinced that light quanta are as good as established. However,
it came at a price. He had to abandon the strict causality of classical physics and
introduce probability into the atomic domain. Einstein had offered alternatives before,
but this time he could derive Planck's law from Bohr's quantum atom. Starting with a simplified
Bohr atom with only two energy levels, he identified three ways in which an electron could jump from
one level to the other. When an electron jumps from a higher to a lower energy level and emits a
quantum of light, Einstein called this spontaneous emission. It occurs only when an atom is in an
excited state. The second type of quantum leap happens when an atom becomes excited as an electron
absorbs a light quantum and jumps from a lower to a higher energy field. Bohr had invoked both types
of quantum leap to explain the origin of atomic emission and absorption spectra,
but Einstein now revealed a third, stimulated emission. It occurs when a light quantum strikes
an electron in an atom that is already in an excited state. Instead of absorbing the incoming
light quantum, the electron is stimulated, nudged to leap to a lower energy, emitting a light quantum.
Four decades later, stimulated emission formed the basis of the laser, an acronym for light
amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. Einstein also discovered that light
quanta had momentum, which, unlike energy, is a vector quantity. It has direction as well as
magnitude. However, his equations clearly showed that the exact time of spontaneous transition
from one energy level to another and the direction in which an atom emits a light quantum was entirely
random. Spontaneous emission was like the half-life of a radioactive sample. Half the atoms will
decay in a certain amount of time, the half-life, but there was no way of knowing when any given
atom would decay. Likewise, the probability that a spontaneous transition will take place
could be calculated, but the exact details were entirely left to chance with no connection between
cause and effect. This concept of a transition probability that left the time and direction
of the emission of a light quantum down to pure chance was for Einstein a weakness of his theory.
It was something he was prepared to tolerate for the moment in the hope that it would be
removed with the further development of quantum physics. Einstein was uneasy with this discovery
of chance and probability at work in the heart of the quantum atom. Causality appeared to be
at risk even though he no longer doubted the reality of quanta. That business about causality
causes me a lot of trouble too, he wrote to Max Born three years later, in January 1920.
Can the quantum absorption and emission of light ever be understood in the sense of the
complete causality requirement or would a statistical residue remain? I must admit
that there I lack the courage of my convictions, but I would be very unhappy to renounce complete
causality. What troubled Einstein was a situation akin to an apple being held above the ground
that when let go did not fall. Once the apple is let go it is in an unstable state with respect
to the state of lying on the ground so gravity acts immediately on the apple causing it to fall.
If the apple behaved like an electron in an excited atom then instead of falling back as
soon as it was let go it would hover above the ground falling at some unpredictable time that
can be calculated only in terms of probability. There may be a high probability that the apple
will fall within a very short time but there is a small probability that the apple will just
hover above the ground for hours. An electron in an excited atom will fall to a lower energy level
resulting in the more stable ground state of the atom but the exact moment of the transition
is left to chance. In 1924 Einstein was still struggling to accept what he had unearthed.
I find the idea quite intolerable that an electron exposed to radiation
should choose of its own free will not only its moment to jump off but also its direction.
In that case I would rather be a cobbler or even an employee in a gaming house than a physicist.
It was inevitable that the years of intense intellectual effort coupled with his bachelor
lifestyle would take their toll. In February 1917 aged only 38. Einstein collapsed with
intense stomach pains and the diagnosis was a liver complaint. Within two months he lost
56 pounds as his health deteriorated. It was the beginning of a series of illnesses including
gallstones, a duodenal ulcer and jaundice that dogged him over the next few years.
Plenty of rest and a strict diet were the prescribed cure. It was easier said than done
as life was transformed beyond recognition by the trials and tribulations of war.
Even potatoes were a rarity by then in Berlin and most Germans went hungry. Few actually starved
to death but malnutrition claimed lives and estimated 88,000 in 1915. The following year
it rose to more than 120,000 as riots erupted in more than 30 German cities. It was hardly
surprising as people were forced to eat bread made from ground straw instead of wheat.
There was an ever-growing list of such ersatz foods. Plant husks mixed with animal hides replaced
meat and dried turnips were used to make coffee. Ash, masqueraded as pepper and people spread a
mixture of soda and starch on their bread pretending it was butter. Constant hunger made cats, rats
and horses appear tasty alternatives for Berliners. If a horse dropped dead in the street it was
swiftly butchered. They fought each other for the best pieces their faces and clothing covered in
blood reported an eyewitness to one such incident. Real food was scarce but still available to those
who could afford to pay. Einstein was luckier than most as he received food parcels from
relatives in the south and from friends in Switzerland. Amid all the suffering Einstein felt
like a drop of oil on water isolated by mentality and outlook on life. Yet he could not look after
himself and reluctantly moved into a vacant apartment next door to Elsa's. With Milleva
still unwilling to grant a divorce Elsa finally had Einstein as near to her as propriety would allow.
Nursing Albert slowly back to health gave Elsa the perfect opportunity to pressurize him into
doing whatever it took to get a divorce. Einstein initially had no intention of rushing into marriage
a second time as the first felt like ten years of prison but eventually he relented.
Milleva agreed after Einstein proposed to increase his existing payments, make her the
recipient of his widow's pension and offer her the money when he won the Nobel Prize.
By 1918 having been nominated in six of the previous eight years he was a dead certainty
to be awarded the prize sometime soon. Einstein and Elsa married in June 1919.
He was 40, she three years older. What happened next was beyond anything that Elsa could have
imagined. Before the end of the war the lives of the newlyweds were transformed as Einstein became
world famous. He was hailed as the new Copernicus by some derided by others.
In February 1919 just as Einstein and Milleva were finally divorced two expeditions set off
from Britain. One petted to the island of Principe off the coast of West Africa the other to Sobral
in the northwest of Brazil. Each destination had been carefully chosen by astronomers as a perfect
site from which to observe the solar eclipse on 29 May. Their aim was to test a central prediction
of Einstein's general theory of relativity, the bending of light by gravity. The plan was
to photograph stars in close proximity to the sun that would be visible only during the few
minutes of blackout of a total solar eclipse. In reality of course these stars were nowhere
near the sun but their light passed very close to it before reaching the earth.
The photographs would be compared with those taken at night six months earlier when the earth's
position in relation to the sun ensured that the light from these same stars passed nowhere near
the neighborhood of the sun. The bending of light due to the presence of the sun warping the space
time in its vicinity would be revealed by small changes in the position of the stars in the two
sets of photographs. Einstein's theory predicted the exact amount of displacement due to the bending
or deflection of light that should be observed. At a rare joint meeting of the Royal Society
and the Royal Astronomical Society on 6 November in London the cream of British science gathered
here whether Einstein was right or not. Revolution in science, new theory of the universe,
Newtonian ideas overthrown were the headlines on page 12 of the London Times the following morning.
Three days later on 10th of November the New York Times carried an article with six headings,
lights all askew in the heavens, man of science more or less agog over results of eclipse
observation. Einstein theory triumphs, stars not where they seem or were calculated to be
but nobody need worry. A book for twelve wise men no more in all world could comprehend it said
Einstein when his daring publishers accepted it. Einstein had never said any such thing but it made
good copy as the press latched on to the mathematical sophistication of the theory and the ideas of
warped space. One of those who unwittingly contributed to the mystique surrounding general
relativity was Sir J. J. Thompson the president of the Royal Society. Perhaps Einstein has made
the greatest achievement in human thought he told a journalist afterwards but no one has yet
succeeded in stating in clear language what the theory of Einstein's really is. In fact by the
end of 1916 Einstein had already published the first popular book on both the special and general
theories. The general theory of relativity is being received with downright enthusiasm among
my colleagues. Einstein reported to his friend Heinrich Zanger in December 1917. However in the
days and weeks that followed the first press reports there were many who came forth to pour
scorn on the suddenly famous Dr. Einstein and his theory. One critic described relativity as
voodoo nonsense and the moronic brain child of mental colic. With supporters like Planck and
Lawrence Einstein did the only sensible thing. He ignored his detractors. In Germany Einstein was
already a well-known public figure when the Berliner illustrierte Zeitung gave over its
entire front page to a photograph of him. A new figure in world history whose investigations
signify a complete revision of nature and are on a par with insights of Copernicus,
Kepler and Newton read the accompanying caption. Just as he refused to be riled by his critics
Einstein kept a sense of perspective about being anointed the successor of
three of history's great scientists. Since the light deflection result became public
such a cult has been made out of me that I feel like a pagan idol, he wrote after the
Berliner illustrierte Zeitung hit the newsstands. But this too, God willing, will pass. It never did.
Part of the widespread public fascination with Einstein and his work lay in a world still coming
to terms with the upheavals in the aftermath of the First World War which ended at 11 a.m. on 11th
November 1918. Two days earlier, on the 9th of November, Einstein had cancelled his relativity
course lecture because of revolution. Later that day Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated and fled to
Holland as a republic was proclaimed from a balcony of the Reichstag. Germany's economic
problems were among the most difficult challenges facing the new Weimar Republic.
Inflation was quickly on the rise as Germans lost confidence in the mark and were busy either
selling it or buying anything they could before it fell further. It was a vicious circle that war
reparations sense spiraling out of control and the economy went into meltdown as Germany
defaulted on its payments of wood and coal towards the end of 1922 and 7,000 marks bought one U.S.
dollar. However, that was nothing to the hyperinflation that occurred throughout 1923.
In November that year, one dollar was worth 4,210,500,000,000 marks, a glass of beer cost 150,000,000
marks, and a loaf of bread, 80,000,000,000. With the country in danger of imploding the
situation was brought under control only with the help of American loans and a reduction in
reparation payments. Amid the suffering, talk of warped space bending light beams and shifting
stars that only 12 wise men could comprehend fired the public imagination. However, everyone
thought they had an intuitive grasp of concepts like space and time. As a result, the world appeared
to Einstein to be a curious madhouse as every coachman and every waiter argues about whether or not
relativity theory is correct. Einstein's international celebrity and his well-known
anti-war stance made him an easy target for a campaign of hate. Antisemitism is strong here
and political reaction is violent, Einstein wrote to Aaron Fest in December 1919. Soon he began
receiving threatening mail and on occasions suffered verbal abuse as he left his apartment or office.
In February 1920, a group of students disrupted his lecture at the university,
one of them shouting, I'm going to cut the throat of that dirty Jew. But the political
leaders of the Weimar Republic knew what an asset Einstein was, as its scientists faced
exclusion from international conferences after the war. The minister of culture wrote to reassure
him that Germany was and will forever be proud to count you highly honored hair professor among
the finest ornaments of our science. Niels Bohr did as much as anyone to ensure that personal
relations between scientists on opposing sides were restored as quickly as possible after the war.
As a citizen of a neutral country Bohr felt no resentment towards his German colleagues. He
was among the first to extend an invitation to a German scientist when he asked Arnold Sommerfeld
to lecture in Copenhagen. We had long discussions on the general principle of the quantum theory
and the application of all kinds of detailed atomic problems, Bohr said after Sommerfeld's visit.
Excluded for the foreseeable future from international meetings, German scientists
and their hosts knew the value of these personal invitations. So when he received one from Mox
Plunk to give a lecture on the quantum atom and the theory of atomic spectra in Berlin, Bohr
gladly accepted. When the date was fixed as Tuesday 27th of April 1920,
he was excited at the prospect of meeting Plunk and Einstein for the first time.
His must be a first-rate mind extremely critical and far-seeing,
which never loses track of the grand design, was Einstein's assessment of the young Dane
six years his junior. It was October 1919 and such an appraisal was a spur for Plunk
to get Bohr to Berlin. Einstein had long been an admirer. In the summer of 1905 as the creative
storm that had broken loose in his mind began to subside, Einstein found nothing that was
really exciting to tackle next. There would of course be the topic of spectral lines,
he told his friend Konrad Habicht. But I believe that a simple relationship between these phenomena
and those already investigated does not exist at all, so that for the moment the thing looks
rather unpromising to me. Einstein's nose for a physics problem right for attack was second
to none. Having passed on the mystery of spectral lines, he came up with E equals mc squared,
which said that mass and energy were inter-convertible. But for all he knew God Almighty was having a
laugh at his expense by leading him around by the nose. So when in 1913 Bohr showed how his
quantized atom solved the mystery of atomic spectra, it appeared to Einstein like a miracle.
The uneasy mixture of excitement and apprehension that had taken hold of his stomach as Bohr made
his way from the station to the university vanished as soon as he met Planck and Einstein.
They put him at his ease by moving quickly from pleasantries to talk of physics.
The two men could not have been more dissimilar. Planck was the epitome of Prussian formality
and rectitude, while Einstein with his big eyes, unruly hair and trousers that were just a little
too short gave the impression of a man at ease with himself. If not the troubled world in which he
lived. Bohr accepted Planck's invitation to stay at his home during the visit.
His days in Berlin Bohr said later were spent discussing theoretical physics from morning
to night. It was the perfect break for the man who just loved to talk physics. He particularly
enjoyed the lunch that the younger university physicists had thrown for him, from which they
excluded all the big wigs. It was a chance for them to quiz Bohr after his lecture had left them
somewhat depressed because we had the feeling that we had understood very little.
Einstein however understood perfectly well what Bohr was arguing and he did not like it.
Like virtually everyone else Bohr did not believe in the existence of Einstein's
light quanta. He accepted, like Planck, that radiation was emitted and absorbed in quanta,
but not that radiation itself was quantized. For him there was just too much evidence in
favor of the wave theory of light, but with Einstein in the audience Bohr told the assembled
physicists, I shall not consider the problem of the nature of radiation. However he had been
deeply impressed by Einstein's work of 1916 on spontaneous and stimulated emission of
radiation and electron transitions between energy levels. Einstein had succeeded where
he had failed by showing that it was all a matter of chance and probability.
Einstein continued to be troubled by the fact that his theory could not predict either the time or
the direction in which the light quantum emitted as an electron jumps from one energy level to a
lower one. Nevertheless he had written in 1916, I fully trust in the reliability of the road taken.
He believed it was a road that would eventually lead to a restoration of causality.
In his lecture Bohr argued that no exact determination of time and direction was ever
possible. The two men found themselves on opposite sides. In the days that followed each tried to
convert the other to his point of view as they walked the streets of Berlin together or dined at
Einstein's home. Seldom in my life has a person given me such pleasure by his mere presence as
you have, Einstein wrote to Bohr soon after he returned to Copenhagen. I am now studying your
great publications and, unless I happen to get stuck somewhere, have the pleasure of seeing before
me your cheerful boyish face smiling and explaining. The Dane had made a deep and lasting impression.
Bohr was here and I am just as enamored of him as you are, Einstein told Paul Ehrenfest a few
days later. He is like a sensitive child and walks about this world in a kind of hypnosis.
Bohr was equally intent in trying to convey in his less than polished German what it meant to him
to have met Einstein. It was to me one of my greatest experiences to have met you and to talk
to you. You cannot imagine what a great inspiration it was for me to hear your views from you in person.
Bohr did so again quite soon as Einstein made a fleeting visit as he stopped off in Copenhagen
in August on his way back from a trip to Norway. He is a highly gifted and excellent man,
Einstein wrote to Lawrence after seeing Bohr. It is a good omen for physics that prominent
physicists are mostly also splendid people. Einstein had become the target of two men who were
not. Philippe Lennard, whose experimental work on the photoelectric effect Einstein had used in
1905 in support of his light quanta and Johannes Stark, the discoverer of the splitting of spectral
lines by an electric field, had become rabid anti-Semites. The two Nobel laureates were behind
an organization calling itself the working group of German scientists for the preservation of pure
science whose prime aim was to denounce Einstein and relativity. On 24th of August 1920 the group
held a meeting at Berlin's Philharmonic Hall and attacked relativity as Jewish physics and its
creator as both a plagiarist and a charlatan. Not to be intimidated Einstein went along with
Walter Nernst and watched the proceedings from a private box as he was vilified,
refusing to rise to the bait he said nothing. Nernst, Heinrich Rubens and Max von Lauch wrote
to the newspapers defending Einstein against the outrageous charges leveled at him. Many of his
friends and colleagues were therefore dismayed when Einstein wrote an article for the Berlin
Erzbägerblatt entitled, My Reply. He pointed out that had he not been Jewish and an internationalist
he would not have been denounced nor his work attacked. Einstein immediately regretted having
been riled into writing the article. Everyone has to sacrifice at the altar of stupidity from time
to time to please the deity and the human race, he wrote to the physicist Max Born and his wife.
He was well aware that his celebrity status meant that, like a man in the fairy tale who
turned everything into gold so with me everything turns into a fuss in the newspapers. Soon there
were rumors that Einstein might leave the country but he chose to stay in Berlin, the place to which
I am most closely tied by human and scientific connections.
In the two years after their meetings in Berlin and Copenhagen,
Einstein and Bohr continued their individual struggles with the quantum. Both were beginning
to feel the strain. I suppose it's a good thing that I have so much to distract me,
Einstein wrote to Ehrenfest in March 1922, else the quantum problem would have got me
into a lunatic asylum. A month later Bohr confessed to Sommerfeld, in the last few years I have often
felt myself scientifically very lonesome, under the impression that my effort to develop the
principles of the quantum theory systematically, to the best of my ability, has been received with
very little understanding. His feelings of isolation were about to end. In June 1922 he traveled to
Germany and gave a celebrated series of seven lectures spread over eleven days at Göttingen
University that became known as the Bohrfest Spiele. More than a hundred physicists, old and young,
came from all over the country to hear Bohr explain his electron shell model of the atom.
It was his new theory about the arrangement of electrons inside atoms that explained the placing
and grouping of elements within the periodic table. He proposed that orbital shells, like layers of an
onion, surrounded an atomic nucleus. Each such shell was actually made up of a set, or subset,
of electron orbits and was able to accommodate only a certain maximum number of electrons.
Elements that shared the same chemical properties Bohr argued did so because they had the same
numbers of electrons in their outermost shell. According to Bohr's model, sodium's eleven
electrons are arranged two, eight, and one. Caesium's fifty-five electrons are arranged in a
two, eight, eighteen, eighteen, eight, one configuration. It is because the outer shell of
each element has a single electron that sodium and caesium share similar chemical properties.
During the lectures Bohr used his theory to make a prediction.
The unknown element with atomic number seventy-two would be chemically similar to zirconium,
atomic number forty, and titanium, atomic number twenty-two. The two elements in the same column
of the periodic table, it would not, Bohr said, belong to the rare earth group of elements that
were on either side of it in the table, as predicted by others. Einstein did not attend
Bohr's Gertingen lectures, as he feared for his life, following the murder of Germany's Jewish
foreign minister. Walter Rappenau, a leading industrialist, had been in office only a few
short months when he was gunned down in broad daylight on the twenty-fourth of June 1922
to become the three hundred fifty-fourth political assassination by the right since the end of the
war. Einstein was one of those who had urged Rappenau not to take such a high profile post
within government. When he did it was deemed an absolutely unheard of provocation of the people
by the right-wing press. Here our daily lives have been nerve-racking since the shameful assassination
of Rappenau, Einstein wrote to Maurice Sullivan. I am always on the alert. I have stopped my lectures
and am officially absent, though I am actually here all the time. Warned by reliable sources that
he was a prime target for assassination, Einstein confided to Marie Curie that he was thinking
about giving up his post at the Prussian Academy to find a quiet place to settle down as a private
citizen. For the man who in his youth had hated authority had now become a figure of authority.
He was no longer simply a physicist but was a symbol of German science and of Jewish identity.
Despite the turmoil, Einstein read Bohr's published papers including The Structure of the Atoms and
the Physical and Chemical Properties of the Elements, which appeared in the Zeitschrift
for Physics in March 1922. He recalled nearly half a century later how Bohr's
electron shells of the atoms together with their significance for chemistry appeared to
me like a miracle. It appears to me as a miracle even today. It was, Einstein said, the highest form
of musicality in the sphere of thought. What Bohr had done was indeed as much art as science.
Using evidence gathered from a variety of different sources such as atomic spectra and chemistry,
Bohr had built up a particular atom, one electron shell, at a time, layer by onion layer,
until he had reconstructed every element in the entire periodic table.
At the heart of his approach lay Bohr's belief that quantum rules apply on the atomic scale,
but any conclusion drawn from them must not conflict with observations made on the macroscopic
scale where classical physics rules. Calling it the correspondence principle allowed him
to eliminate ideas on the atomic scale that when extrapolated did not correspond to results that
were known to be correct in classical physics. Since 1913 the correspondence principle had helped
Bohr bridge the divide between quantum and classical. Some viewed it as a magic wand which did not
act outside Copenhagen, recalled Bohr's assistant Hendrik Kramer's. Others might have struggled to
wave it but Einstein recognized a fellow sorcerer at work. Whatever reservations there might have
been at the lack of hard mathematics to underpin Bohr's theory of the periodic table, everyone
had been impressed by the Dain's latest ideas and gained a greater appreciation of the problems that
remained. My entire stay in Göttingen was a wonderful and instructive experience for me,
Bohr wrote on his return to Copenhagen, and I cannot say how happy I was for all the friendship
shown me by everybody. He was no longer feeling underappreciated and isolated.
Later that year there was further confirmation if he needed it.
As the telegrams of congratulation landed on Bohr's desk in Copenhagen none meant more to him
than the one from Cambridge. We are delighted that you have been awarded the Nobel Prize,
Rutherford wrote. I knew it was merely a question of time but there is nothing like the accomplished
fact. It is well merited recognition of your great work and everybody here is delighted in the news.
In the days that followed the announcement Rutherford had never been far from Bohr's thoughts.
I have felt so strongly how much I owe you, he told his old mentor. Not only for your direct
influence on my work and your inspiration, but also for your friendship. In these 12 years since
I had the great fortune of meeting you for the first time in Manchester. The other person Bohr
could not help thinking about was Einstein. He was delighted and relieved that the day he received
the 1922 Prize, Einstein had been awarded the Nobel Prize for 1921 that had been deferred for a year.
I know how little I have deserved it, he wrote to Einstein, but I should like to say that I consider
it a good fortune that your fundamental contribution in the special area in which I work, as well as
contributions by Rutherford and Planck, should be recognized before I was considered for such an honour.
Einstein was on a ship bound for the other side of the world when the Nobel Prize winners were
announced. On 8th of October still fearing for his safety, Einstein and Elsa had left for a lecture
tour of Japan. He welcomed the opportunity of a long absence from Germany, which took me away
from temporarily increased danger. He did not return to Berlin until February 1923. The original
six-week itinerary turned into a grand tour lasting five months, during which he had received Bohr's
letter. He replied during the voyage home, I can say without exaggeration that your letter pleased
me as much as the Nobel Prize. I find especially charming your fear that you might have received
the award before me, that is typically Bohr-like. A blanket of snow covered the Swedish capital
on 10th of December 1922, as the invited guests assembled in the great hall of the Academy of
Music in Stockholm to watch the presentation of the Nobel Prizes. The ceremony began at five o'clock
in the presence of King Gustav V. The German ambassador to Sweden received the prize on
behalf of the absent Einstein, but only after winning a diplomatic argument with the Swiss
over the physicist's nationality. The Swiss were claiming Einstein as one of their own,
until the Germans discovered that by accepting the appointment at the Prussian Academy in 1914,
Einstein had automatically become a German citizen, even though he had not given up his
Swiss nationality. Having renounced his German citizenship in 1896 and taken Swiss citizenship
five years later, Einstein was surprised to learn that he was a German after all. Whether he liked
it or not, the needs of the Weimar Republic meant that Einstein officially had dual nationality.
By an application of the theory of relativity to the taste of readers,
Einstein had written in November 1919 in an article for the London Times,
Today in Germany I am called a German man of science, and in England I am represented as a
Swiss Jew. If I come to be regarded as a Bête Noir, their descriptions will be reversed and I
shall become a Swiss Jew for the Germans and a German man of science for the English.
Einstein might have recalled these words had he been at the Nobel banquet and heard the German
ambassador propose a toast that expressed the joy of my people that once again one of them
has been able to achieve something for all of mankind. Boer rose after the German ambassador and
gave a short speech as tradition demanded. After paying tribute to J.J. Thompson, Rutherford,
Planck and Einstein, Boer proposed a toast to the international cooperation for the advancement of
science, which is I may say in these so manifoldly depressing times one of the bright spots visible
in human existence. Given the occasion it is understandable that he chose to forget the
continuing exclusion of German scientists from international conferences. The next day Boer was
on firmer ground as he gave his Nobel lecture on the structure of the atom. The present state of
atomic theory is characterized by the fact that we not only believe the existence of atoms to be
proved beyond a doubt, he began, but we even believe that we have an intimate knowledge
of the constituents of the individual atoms. Having given a survey of the developments in
atomic physics of which he had been such a central figure in the past decade,
Boer concluded his lecture with a dramatic announcement.
In his Göttingen lectures, Boer had predicted the properties that the missing element with an
atomic number of 72 should possess, based upon his theory of the arrangement of electrons in atoms.
At exactly that time a paper was published outlining an experiment performed in Paris
that confirmed a long-standing rival French claim that element 72 was a member of the rare
earth family of elements that occupied slots 57 to 71 in the periodic table.
After the initial shock, Boer began having serious doubts about the validity of the French results.
Fortunately, his old friend Georg von Heveshi, who was now in Copenhagen,
and Dirk Koster devised an experiment to settle the dispute about element 72.
Boer had already left for Stockholm by the time Heveshi and Koster completed their investigation.
Koster telephoned Boer shortly before his lecture and he was able to announce that
appreciable quantities of element 72 had been isolated, the chemical properties of which show
a great similarity to those of Zirconium and a decided difference from those of the rare earths.
Later called Hothnium, after the ancient name for Copenhagen, it was a fitting conclusion to
Boer's work on the configuration of electrons within atoms that he had begun in Manchester
a decade earlier. In July 1923 Einstein gave his Nobel lecture on the theory of relativity as part
of the 300th anniversary celebrations of the founding of the Swedish city of Gothenburg.
He broke with tradition by choosing relativity when he had been awarded the prize
for his attainments in mathematical physics and especially for his discovery of the law
of the photoelectric effect. By limiting the award of the prize for the law,
the mathematical formula that accounted for the photoelectric effect, the committee
deftly sidestepped endorsing Einstein's controversial underlying physical explanation,
the light quantum. In spite of its heuristic value however the hypothesis of light quanta,
which is quite irreconcilable with so-called interference phenomena, is not able to throw
light on the nature of radiation, Boer had said during his own Nobel lecture.
It was a familiar refrain echoed by every self-respecting physicist, but as Einstein
went to meet Boer for the first time in nearly three years, he knew that an experiment performed
by a young American meant that he no longer stood alone in defense of the quantum of light.
Boer had heard the dreaded news before Einstein.
In February 1923 Boer received a letter dated 21 January from Arnold Sommerfeld,
alerting him to the most interesting thing that I've experienced scientifically in America.
He had swapped Munich Bavaria from Madison, Wisconsin for a year
and managed to escape the worst of the hyperinflation about to engulf Germany.
It had been a shrewd financial move for Sommerfeld. To get an early glimpse of the work of Arthur
Holly Compton before his European colleagues was an unexpected bonus.
Compton had made a discovery that challenged the validity of the wave theory of x-rays.
Since x-rays were electromagnetic waves, a form of short wavelength invisible light,
Sommerfeld was saying that the wave nature of light, contrary to all the evidence in
its favor, was in serious trouble. I do not know if I should mention his results,
wrote Sommerfeld somewhat coyly, since Compton's paper had not yet been published.
I want to call your attention to the fact that, eventually, we may expect a completely
fundamental and new lesson. It was a lesson that Einstein had been trying to teach with
varying degrees of enthusiasm since 1905. Light was quantized.
Compton was one of America's leading young experimenters. He had been appointed professor
and head of physics at the University of Washington in St. Louis, Missouri in 1920,
at just 27. His investigations into the scattering of x-rays conducted two years later would be
described as the turning point in 20th century physics. What Compton did was fire a beam of
x-rays at a variety of elements such as carbon in the form of graphite and measure the secondary
radiation. When the x-rays slammed into the target most of them passed straight through but some
were scattered at a variety of angles. It was these secondary or scattered x-rays that interested
Compton. He wanted to find out if there was any change in their wavelength compared to the x-rays
that had struck the target. He found that the wavelengths of the scattered x-rays were always
slightly longer than those of the primary or incident x-rays. According to the wave theory,
they should have been exactly the same. Compton understood that the difference in wavelength,
and therefore frequency, meant the secondary x-rays were not the same as the ones that had
been fired at the target. It was as strange as shining a beam of red light at a metal surface
and finding blue light being reflected. Unable to make his scattering data tally with the predictions
of a wave-like theory of x-rays, Compton turned to Einstein's light quanta. Almost at once he
found that the wavelength and intensity of the scattered rays are what they should be if a
quantum of radiation bounced from an electron, just as one billiard ball bounces from another.
If x-rays came in quanta, then a beam of x-rays would be similar to a collection of microscopic
billiard balls slamming into the target. Although some would pass through without hitting anything,
others would collide with electrons inside atoms of the target. During such a collision,
an x-ray quantum would lose energy as it was scattered, and the electron sent recoiling from
the impact. Since the energy of an x-ray quantum is given by e equals hv, where h is Planck's constant,
and v its frequency, then any loss of energy must result in a drop in frequency. Given that
frequency is inversely proportional to wavelength, the wavelength associated with a scattered x-ray
quantum increases. Compton constructed a detailed mathematical analysis of how the
energy lost by the incoming x-ray, and the resulting change in the wavelength, frequency,
of the scattered x-ray was dependent upon the angle of scattering. No one had ever observed
the recoiling electrons that Compton believed should accompany the scattered x-rays, but then
no one had been looking for them. When he did, Compton soon found them.
The obvious conclusion, he said, would be that x-rays, and so also light, consist of discrete
units, proceeding in definite directions, each unit possessing the energy hv and the corresponding
momentum h lambda. The Compton effect, the increase in wavelength of x-rays when they
are scattered by electrons, was irrefutable evidence for the existence of light quanta,
which until then many had dismissed at best as science fiction. It was by assuming that
energy and momentum are conserved in the collision between an x-ray quantum and an electron,
that Compton was able to explain his data. It was Einstein, in 1916 who had been the first
to suggest that light quanta possessed momentum, a particle-like property.
In November 1922, Compton announced his discovery at a conference in Chicago. However,
although he sent his paper to the physical review just before Christmas,
it was not published until May 1923 as the editors failed to understand the significance
of its content. The avoidable delay meant that the Dutch physicist Peter de Beyt beat Compton
into print with the first complete analysis of the discovery. A former Sommerfeld assistant,
Debye had submitted his paper to a German journal in March. Unlike their American counterparts,
the German editors recognized the importance of the work and published it the following month.
However, Debye and everyone else gave the talented young American the credit and recognition he
deserved. It was sealed when Compton was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1927. By then,
Einstein's light quantum had been rechristened, the photon.
There had been two thousand at his Nobel lecture in July 1923, but Einstein knew that most of them
had come to see rather than to listen to him. Sitting on the train as he made his way from
Goetheborg to Copenhagen, Einstein was looking forward to meeting a man who would listen to
his every word and probably disagree. When he got off the train, Bohr was there to greet him.
We took the streetcar and talked so animatedly that we went much too far, Bohr recalled almost
forty years later. Speaking in German they were oblivious to the curious stares of fellow passengers.
Whatever was discussed, as they rode back and forth missing their stop, it was sure to include
the Compton effect, soon to be described by Sommerfeld as, probably the most important
discovery that could have been made in the current state of physics. Bohr was unconvinced
and refused to accept that light was made up of quanta. It was he, not Einstein who was now in
the minority. Sommerfeld was in no doubt that the death knell of the wave theory of radiation had
been sounded by Compton. Like the doomed hero in the westerns that he later liked to watch,
Bohr was outnumbered as he made one last stand against the quantum of light.
In collaboration with his assistant, Hendrik Kramer's, and a visiting young American theorist,
John Slater, Bohr proposed sacrificing the law of conservation of energy. It was a vital component
in the analysis leading to the Compton effect, if the law was not strictly enforced on the atomic
scale as it was in the everyday world of classical physics, then Compton's effect was no longer in
controversial evidence for Einstein's light-quanta. The BKS proposal, as it became known after Bohr,
Kramer's, and Slater, appeared to be a radical suggestion, but was in truth an act of desperation
that showed how much Bohr abhorred the quantum theory of light. The law had never been experimentally
tested at the atomic level, and Bohr believed that the extent of its validity
remained an open question in processes such as the spontaneous emission of light-quanta.
Einstein believed that energy and momentum were conserved in every single collision between a
photon and an electron, while Bohr believed they were valid only as a statistical average.
It was 1925 before experiments by Compton, then at Chicago University,
and by Hans Geiger and Walter Botha at the Physikalische Technische Reichs-Instalt,
confirmed that energy and momentum were conserved in collisions between a photon and an electron.
Einstein had been right, and Bohr, wrong. Confident as ever, on 20 April 1924 more than a year
before experiments silenced the doubters, Einstein eloquently summed up the situation
for the readers of the Berliner Dagoblatt. There are, therefore, now two theories of light,
both indispensable and, as one must admit today despite 20 years of tremendous effort on the
part of theoretical physicists, without any logical connection. Einstein meant that both the wave
theory of light and quantum theory of light were in some way valid. Light-quanta could not be invoked
to explain the wave phenomena associated with light, such as interference and diffraction.
Conversely, a full explanation of Compton's experiment and the photoelectric effect
could not be provided without recourse to the quantum theory of light.
Light had a dual, wave-particle character, which physicists just had to accept.
One morning, not long after the article appeared, Einstein received a parcel with a
Paris postmark. Opening it, he discovered a note from an old friend seeking his opinion of the
accompanying doctoral thesis written by a French prince on the nature of the matter.
Chapter 6 The Prince of Duality
Science is an old lady who does not fear mature men, his father had once said.
But he, like his elder brother, had been seduced by science. Prince Louis Victor Pierre Raymond
de Broglie, a member of one of France's leading aristocratic families, had been expected to follow
in the footsteps of his illustrious forebears. The de Broglie family, originally from Piedmont,
had served French kings as soldiers, statesmen and diplomats with high distinction,
since the middle of the 17th century. In recognition of the service he had rendered,
an ancestor was given the hereditary title of Duke in 1742 by Louis XV.
The Duke's son, Victor Francois, inflicted a crushing defeat on an enemy of the Holy Roman
Empire, and a grateful emperor rewarded him with the title of Prince. Henceforth, all of his
descendants would be either a prince or princess. So it was that the young scientist would one day
be both a German prince and a French duke. It is an unlikely family history for the man who
made a fundamental contribution to quantum physics, which Einstein described as,
the first feeble ray of light on this worst of our physics enigmas.
The youngest of the four surviving children, Louis was born in Dieppe, on 15 August 1892.
In keeping with their elevated position in society, the Du Bois were educated at the
ancestral home by private tutors. While other boys might have been able to recite the names of
the great steam engines of the day, Louis could recite the names of all the ministers of the
Third Republic. To the amusement of the family he began giving speeches based upon the political
coverage in the newspapers. With a grandfather who had been prime minister, before long, a great
future as a statesman was predicted for Louis, recalled his sister Pauline. It might have been
the case, had his father not died in 1906, when he was 14. His elder brother Maurice at 31 was now
the head of the family. As tradition demanded, Maurice had pursued a military career but had
chosen the navy, rather than the army. At Naval College he excelled at science. As a promising
young officer he found a navy in a period of transition as it prepared for the 20th century.
Given his scientific interests, it was only a matter of time before Maurice became involved
in attempts at establishing a reliable, ship-to-ship wireless communication system.
In 1902 he wrote his first paper on radioelectric waves and, despite the opposition of his father,
it strengthened his determination to leave the navy and devote himself to scientific research.
In 1904, after nine years in the service, he quit the navy. Two years later his father was dead
and he had to shoulder new responsibilities as the sixth Duke.
On Maurice's advice, Louis was sent to school. Having experienced myself the inconvenience
of a pressure exercised on the studies of a young man I refrained from imparting a rigid
direction to the studies of my brother, although at times his vacillations gave me some concerns,
he wrote almost half a century later. Louis did well in French, history, physics and philosophy.
In mathematics and chemistry he was indifferent. After three years Louis graduated in 1909 at
the age of 17 with both the baccalaureate of philosophy and that of mathematics.
A year later, Maurice had acquired his PhD under Paul Langevan
at the Collège du France and set up a laboratory in his Parisian mansion on the Rue Chateaubriand.
Rather than seek employment in a university, the creation of a private laboratory,
in which to pursue his new vocation, helped soften the disappointment of some of the family
at a de Broglie abandoning military service for science.
Unlike Maurice, Louis was at the time set for a more traditional career as he studied
medieval history at the University of Paris. However the 20-year-old prince soon discovered
that the critical study of texts, sources and documents of the past held little interest for him.
Maurice said later that his brother was not far from losing faith in himself.
Part of the problem was a burgeoning interest in physics fostered by time spent with Maurice
in the laboratory. The enthusiasm of his elder brother about his research on x-rays had proved
contagious. However Louis was consumed by doubts about his abilities that were aggravated by
failing a physics exam. Was he, Louis wondered, destined to be a failure?
Gone the gaiety in high spirits of his adolescence, the brilliant chatter of his childhood has been
muted by the depth of his reflections, was how Maurice remembered the introvert he hardly recognized.
Louis would become according to his brother an austere and fairly untamed scholar who did not
like leaving his own home. The first time Louis traveled abroad it was to Brussels in October
1911. He was 19. In the years since he left the navy, Maurice had become a much respected
scientist specializing in x-ray physics. When the invitation arrived to be one of the two
scientific secretaries entrusted with the smooth running of the first Solvay conference, he readily
accepted. Even though it was an administrator's role, the chance to discuss the quantum with
the likes of Planck, Einstein and Lawrence was just too tempting to forego. The French would
be well represented. Curie, Poincaré, Peran and his former supervisor Langevant would all be there.
Staying at the hotel metropole with all the delegates, Louis kept his distance. It was only
after they returned and Maurice recounted the discussions about the quantum that took place
in the small room on the first floor that Louis began taking an even greater interest in the new
physics. When the proceedings of the conference were published, Louis read them and resolved to
become a physicist. By then he had already swapped history books for those of physics and in 1913,
he obtained his Lisance et Ciens, the equivalent of a degree. His plans had to wait as a year of
military service beckoned. Despite the three marshals of France that the de Broyes could boast,
Louis entered the army as a lowly private in a company of engineers stationed just outside Paris.
With Maurice's help he was soon transferred to the service of wireless communication.
Any hopes of a quick return to his study of physics evaporated with the outbreak of the
First World War. He spent the next four years as a radio engineer stationed underneath the Eiffel
Tower. Discharged in August 1919 he deeply resented having spent six years from the age of 21 to 27
in uniform. Louis was more determined than ever to continue down his chosen path.
He was helped and encouraged by Maurice and spent time in his well-equipped laboratory
following the research being done on x-rays and the photoelectric effect. The brothers had long
discussions on the interpretation of the experiments being conducted. Maurice reminded Louis of the
educational value of the experimental sciences and that theoretical constructions of science
have no value unless they are supported by facts. He wrote a series of papers on the absorption of
x-rays while thinking about the nature of electromagnetic radiation. The brothers accepted
that both the wave and particle theories of light were in some sense correct since neither on its
own could explain diffraction and interference and also the photoelectric effect. In 1922 the
year Einstein lectured in Paris at the invitation of Langevin and received a hostile reception for
having remained in Berlin throughout the war, de Broglie wrote a paper in which he explicitly
adopted the hypothesis of quanta of light. He had already accepted the existence of atoms of light
at a time when Compton had yet to make any sort of announcement concerning his experiments.
By the time the American published his data and analysis of the scattering of x-rays by electrons
and thereby confirmed the reality of Einstein's light quanta de Broglie had already learned to
live with the strange duality of light. Others however were only half joking when they complained
about having to teach the wave theory of light on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays and the particle
theory on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. After long reflection in solitude and meditation
de Broglie wrote later, I suddenly had the idea during the year 1923 that the discovery made
by Einstein in 1905 should be generalized by extending it to all material particles and notably
to electrons. De Broglie had dared to ask the simple question if light waves can behave like
particles can particles such as electrons behave like waves? His answer was yes as de Broglie
discovered that if he assigned to an electron a fictitious associated wave with a frequency v
and wavelength lambda he could explain the exact location of the orbits in Bohr's quantum atom.
An electron could occupy only those orbits that could accommodate a whole number of wavelengths
of its fictitious associated wave. In 1913 to prevent Rutherford's model of the hydrogen
atom from collapsing as its orbiting electron radiated energy and spiraled into the nucleus,
Bohr had been forced to impose a condition for which he could offer no other justification.
An electron in a stationary orbit around the nucleus did not emit radiation. De Broglie's
idea of treating electrons as standing waves was a radical departure from thinking about
electrons as particles orbiting an atomic nucleus. Standing waves can easily be generated in strings
tethered at both ends such as those used in violins and guitars. Plucking such a string produces a
variety of standing waves with the defining characteristic that they are made up of a whole
number of half wavelengths. The longest standing wave possible is one with a wavelength twice as
long as the string. The next standing wave is made up of two such half wavelength units,
giving a wavelength equal to the physical length of the string. The next is a standing wave consisting
of three half wavelengths and so on up the scale. This whole number sequence of standing waves is
the only one that is physically possible and each has its own energy. Given the relationship between
frequency and wavelength, this is equivalent to the fact that a plucked guitar string can vibrate
only at certain frequencies beginning with the fundamental tone, the lowest frequency.
De Broglie realized that this whole number condition restricted the possible electron
orbits in the Bohr atom to those with a circumference that permitted the formation of standing waves.
These electron standing waves were not bound at either end like those on a musical instrument
but were formed because a whole number of half wavelengths could be fitted into the circumference
of the orbit. Where there was no exact fit, there could be no standing wave and therefore no stationary
orbit. If viewed as a standing wave around the nucleus instead of a particle in orbit,
an electron would experience no acceleration and therefore no continual loss of radiation
sending it crashing into the nucleus as the atom collapsed. What Bohr had introduced, simply to
save his quantum atom, found its justification in De Broglie's wave particle duality. When he did
the calculations, De Broglie found that Bohr's principal quantum number, N, labeled only those
orbits in which electron standing waves could exist around the nucleus of the hydrogen atom.
It was the reason why all other electron orbits were forbidden in the Bohr model.
When De Broglie outlined why all particles should be viewed as having a dual wave particle
character in three short papers in the autumn of 1923, it was not immediately clear what was the
nature of the relationship between the billiard ball-like particles and the fictitious associated
wave. Was De Broglie suggesting that it was akin to a surfer riding a wave? It was later
established that such an interpretation would not work and that electrons and all other particles
behaved exactly like photons. They are both wave and particle.
De Broglie wrote up his ideas in an expanded form and presented them as his PhD thesis in
the spring of 1924. The necessary formalities of acceptance and its reading by the examiners
meant that De Broglie did not defend his doctoral dissertation until the 25th of November.
Three of the four examiners were professors at the Sorbonne, Jean Perin, who had been instrumental
in testing Einstein's theory of Brownian motion, Charles Moguin, a distinguished physicist working
on the properties of crystals, and Elie Cartin, a renowned mathematician. The last member of the
quartet was the external examiner, Paul Langevin. He alone was well versed in quantum physics and
relativity. Before officially submitting his dissertation, De Broglie approached Langevin
and asked him to look at his conclusions. Langevin agreed and afterwards told a colleague,
I am taking with me the little brother's thesis. Looks far-fetched to me.
Louis De Broglie's ideas may have been fanciful, but Langevin did not quickly dismiss them. He needed
to consult another. Langevin knew that Einstein had publicly stated in 1909 that future research into
radiation would reveal a kind of fusion of the particle and wave. Compton's experiments had
convinced almost everyone that Einstein had been right about light. It did after all appear to be
a particle in collisions with electrons. Now De Broglie was suggesting the same kind of fusion,
wave particle duality, for all of matter. He even had a formula that linked the wavelength
lambda of the particle to its momentum, p. Lambda equals h over p, where h is Planck's constant.
Langevin asked the physicist Prince for a second copy of the dissertation and sent it to Einstein.
He has lifted a corner of the great veil, Einstein wrote back to Langevin.
The judgment of Einstein was enough for Langevin and the other examiners.
They congratulated De Broglie for having pursued with a remarkable mastery
an effort that had to be attempted in order to overcome the difficulties
in the midst of which the physicists found themselves.
Moghwan later admitted that he did not believe at the time in the physical reality of the waves,
associated with grains of matter. All Peran knew for sure was that De Broglie was
very intelligent. As for the rest he had no idea. With Einstein's support, aged 32,
he was no longer just Prince Louis Victor Pierre Raymond De Broglie,
but had earned the right to call himself plain Dr. Louis De Broglie.
Having an idea was one thing, but could it be tested?
De Broglie had quickly realized in September 1923 that if matter has wave properties then a
beam of electrons should spread out, like a beam of light, they should be diffracted.
In one of his short papers written that year, De Broglie had predicted that a group of electrons
that passes through a small aperture should show diffraction effects. He tried, but failed to convince
any of the skilled experimentalists, working in his brother's private laboratory,
to put his idea to the test. Busy with other projects they simply thought the experiments
too difficult to perform. Already indebted to his brother Maurice for continually directing
his attention to the importance and the undeniable accuracy of the dual particulate and wave
properties of radiation, Louis did not pursue the matter. However,
Walter L. Sasser, a young physicist at Goettingen University soon pointed out
that if De Broglie was right, a simple crystal would diffract a beam of electrons hitting it,
since the spacing between adjacent atoms in a crystal would be small enough for an object
the size of an electron to reveal its wave character.
Young man you are sitting on a gold mine, Einstein told L. Sasser when he heard of his
proposed experiment. It was not a gold mine, but something a bit more precious, a Nobel prize.
But as in any gold rush one cannot wait too long before getting started, L. Sasser did,
and two others staked their claims first, and grabbed the prize.
Thirty-four-year-old Clinton Davison of the Western Electric Company in New York,
later better known as the Bell Telephone Laboratories, had been investigating the
consequences of smashing a beam of electrons into various metal targets when, one day,
in April 1925, a strange thing happened. A bottle of liquefied air exploded in his laboratory and
broke the evacuated tube containing the nickel target that he was using. The air caused the
nickel to rust. As a result of cleaning the nickel by heating it, Davison had accidentally turned
the array of tiny nickel crystals into just a few large ones, which caused electron diffraction.
When he continued his experiments he soon realized that his results were different.
Unaware that he had diffracted electrons he simply wrote up the data and published it.
It seems impossible that we will be in Oxford a month from today, doesn't it?
We should have a lovely time, Lottie Darling. It will be a second honeymoon,
and should be sweeter even than the first, Davison wrote to his wife in July 1926.
With the children being looked after by relatives back home, the Davisons could enjoy a much needed
break touring England before heading to Oxford and the British Association for the Advancement
of Science Conference. It was there that Davison was astonished to learn that some physicists
believed that the data from his experiment supported the idea of a French prince.
He had not heard of DuProy or his suggestion that wave particle duality
be extended to encompass all matter. Davison was not alone.
Few people had read DuProy's three short papers because they had been published in the French
journal Comptez Rendu. Fewer still knew of the existence of the doctoral dissertation.
On returning to New York, Davison and a colleague Lester Germer
immediately said about checking whether electrons really were diffracted.
It was January 1927 before they had conclusive evidence that matter was diffracted.
It did behave like waves. When Davison calculated the wave lengths of the
diffracted electrons from the new results and found they matched those predicted by DuProy's
theory of wave particle duality, Davison later admitted that the original experiments were really
undertaken as a sort of sideline in the wake of others that he had been conducting on
behalf of his employers who were defending a lawsuit from a rival company.
Max Knoll and Ernst Ruska quickly utilized the wave nature of the electron with the invention
in 1931 of the electron microscope. No particle smaller than approximately half the wavelength
of white light can absorb or reflect light waves so as to make the particle visible
through an ordinary microscope. However, with wavelengths more than 100,000 times smaller
than that of light, electron waves could. The construction of the first commercial electron
microscope began in England in 1935. Meanwhile, in Aberdeen, Scotland, the English physicist
George Padgett Thompson was carrying out his own experiments with electron beams as Davison
and Germer were busy conducting theirs. He too had attended the BAAS conference in Oxford where
DuProy's work had been widely discussed. Thompson, who had a very personal interest in the nature of
the electron, immediately began experiments to detect electron diffraction. But instead of crystals,
he used specially prepared thin films that gave a diffraction pattern whose features were exactly
as DuProy predicted. Sometimes matter behaves like a wave smeared over an extended region of space
and at others, like a particle, located at a single position in space.
In a remarkable twist of fate, the dual nature of matter was embodied in the Thompson family.
George Thompson was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1937, together with Davison,
for discovering that the electron was a wave. His father, Sir J. J. Thompson, had been awarded the
Nobel Prize for Physics in 1906, for discovering that the electron was a particle.
Over a quarter of a century, the developments in quantum physics, from Planck's Blackbody
Radiation Law to Einstein's Quantum of Light, from Bohr's Quantum Atom to DuProy's Wave Particle
Duality of Matter, were the product of an unhappy marriage of quantum concepts and classical physics.
It was a union that by 1925 was increasingly under strain. The more successes the quantum
theory enjoys the more stupid it looks, Einstein had written as early as May 1912.
What was needed was a new theory, a new mechanics of the quantum world.
The discovery of quantum mechanics in the mid 1920s, said the American Nobel laureate Steven
Weinberg, was the most profound revolution in physical theory, since the birth of modern physics
in the 17th century. Given the pivotal role of young physicists in making the revolution that
shaped the modern world, these were the years of, nab in physics, boy physics.
Part 2. Boy Physics
Physics at the moment is again very muddled. In any case for me it is too complicated and I wish
I were a film comedian or something of that sort, and had never heard anything about physics.
Wolfgang Pauli
The more I think about the physical portion of the Schrödinger theory, the more repulsive I find it.
What Schrödinger writes about the visualizability of his theory, is probably not quite right,
in other words, it's crap. Werner Heisenberg
If all this damned quantum jumping were really here to stay I should be sorry I ever got
involved with quantum theory. Erwin Schrödinger
Chapter 7 Spin Doctors
One wonders what to admire most. The psychological understanding for the development of ideas,
the sureness of mathematical deduction, the profound physical insight, the capacity for lucid
systematic presentation, the knowledge of the literature, the complete treatment of the subject
matter, or the sureness of critical appraisal. Einstein was certainly impressed by the mature,
grandly conceived work he had just reviewed. It was difficult for him to believe that the
237 page article, with 394 footnotes, on relativity, was the work of a 21 year old physicist who had
been a student, and just 19, when asked to write it. Wolfgang Pauli, later nicknamed,
the Wrath of God, was a Serbic and regarded as a genius comparable only with Einstein.
Indeed, from the point of view of pure science, said Max Born, his one-time boss,
he was possibly even greater than Einstein.
Wolfgang Pauli was born on 25th of April 1900 in Vienna, a city still in the grip of
fan de cycler anxiety while enjoying the good times. His father, also called Wolfgang, had been a
physician, but abandoned medicine for science and in the process, changed his family name from
Pachelis to Pauli. The transformation was complete as he converted to Catholicism amid fears that
the rising tide of anti-Semitism threatened his academic ambitions.
His son grew up knowing nothing of the family's Jewish ancestry. At university, when another
student said that he must be Jewish, Wolfgang Jr. was astonished.
I? No, nobody has ever told me that and I don't believe that I am.
He learnt the truth from his parents during his next visit home. His father felt vindicated
by the decision to assimilate when, in 1922, he was appointed to a coveted professorship
and became the director of a new institute for medical chemistry at Vienna University.
Pauli's mother, Bertha, was a well-known Viennese journalist and writer. Her circle of friends
and acquaintances meant that Wolfgang and his sister, Hertha, six years his junior,
grew up accustomed to seeing leading figures from the arts as well as science and medicine
at the family home. His mother, a pacifist and a socialist, exerted a strong influence on Pauli.
The longer the First World War dragged on through his formative teenage years,
the keener became his opposition against it and, generally against the whole
establishment, recalled a friend. When she died two weeks before her 49th birthday in November 1927,
an obituary in the Neufrei Presse described Bertha as one of the few truly strong personalities
among Austrian women. Pauli was academically gifted but far from a model pupil, finding
school unchallenging. He began having private tuition in physics to compensate. Before long
when bored by a particularly tedious lesson at school, he began reading Einstein's papers on
general relativity hidden under his desk. Physics had always loomed large in his young life in the
form of the influential Austrian physicist and philosopher of science, Ernst Mach, his godfather.
For one who would later enjoy the company and friendship of the likes of Einstein and Bohr,
Pauli said that contact with Mach, whom he last saw in the summer of 1914, was
the most important event in my intellectual life. In September 1918 Pauli left what he called the
spiritual desert that was Vienna. With the Austria-Hungarian Empire on the verge of extinction
and Vienna's past glories faded, it was the lack of top-flight physicists at the city's
university that he was lamenting. He could have gone almost anywhere but went to Munich to study
with Arnold Sommerfeld. Having recently turned down a professorship in Vienna, Sommerfeld had
already been in charge of theoretical physics at Munich University for a dozen years when
Pauli arrived. From the beginning, in 1906, Sommerfeld set out to create an institute that would be
a nursery of theoretical physics. It was not as grand as the institute Bohr would soon create in
Copenhagen, consisting as it did of only four rooms, Sommerfeld's office, a lecture theater,
a seminar room, and a small library. There was also a large laboratory in the basement where in
1912, Max von Laus's theory that x-rays were short wavelength electromagnetic waves was tested
and confirmed, bringing quick recognition to the nursery. Sommerfeld was an exceptional teacher
with the uncanny knack of setting his students problems that tested but did not exceed their
abilities. Having already supervised more than his fair share of talented young physicists,
Sommerfeld soon recognized Pauli as someone of rare and exceptional promise. He was a man
not easily impressed but in January 1919 a paper on general relativity written by Pauli
before leaving Vienna had just been published. In his nursery he had a first-year student,
not yet 19 years old, who was already regarded by others as an expert in relativity.
Pauli quickly became known and feared for his sharp and incisive criticism of new and speculative
ideas. Someone later called him the conscience of physics for his uncompromising principles.
Stout with bulging eyes he was every inch the Buddha of physics, albeit one with a biting tongue.
Whenever he was lost deep in thought, Pauli unconsciously rocked back and forth. It was
acknowledged far and wide that his intuitive grasp of physics was unmatched among his
contemporaries and probably not even surpassed by Einstein. He judged his own work even more
harshly than that of others. At times Pauli understood physics and its problems too well
and that hampered the free exercise of his creative powers. Discoveries that he might have made if
his imagination and intuition had roamed a little more freely went instead to colleagues less
talented and unconstrained. The only person towards whom he was and remained diffident
was Sommerfeld. Even as a celebrated physicist whenever Pauli found himself in the presence of
his former professor, those who had been on the receiving end of his sharp judgments were always
amazed to see the wrath of God responding with, Ja Herr Professor, Nein Herr Professor.
They hardly recognized the man who had once ticked off a colleague. I do not mind if you think
slowly but I do object when you publish more quickly than you think. Or on another occasion
saying of a paper he had just read, it is not even wrong. He spared no one. You know what Mr
Einstein said is not so stupid, he told a packed lecture theater while still a student.
Sommerfeld sitting in the front row would not have tolerated such a remark coming from any of
his other students. But then he knew none of them would have uttered it. When it came to
evaluating physics, Pauli was self-confident and uninhibited even in the presence of Einstein.
In a clear sign of the high regard in which he held Pauli,
Sommerfeld asked him to help write a major article on relativity for the Encyclopedia
der Mathematischen Wissenschaffen. Sommerfeld had accepted the task of editing the fifth
volume of the Encyclopedia that dealt with physics. After Einstein declined, Sommerfeld decided to
write on relativity himself but found he had little time to do so. He needed help and turned to Pauli.
When Sommerfeld saw the first draft, it proved to be so masterly that I renounced all collaboration.
It was not only a brilliant exposition of the special and general theories of relativity,
but an unrivaled review of the existing literature. It remained for decades the definitive work in
the field and drew Einstein's whole hearted praise. The article appeared in 1921, two months
after Pauli received his doctorate. As a student, Pauli preferred to spend his evenings enjoying
the Munich nightlife in some café or other, returning to his lodgings to work through much
of the night. He rarely attended lectures the following morning, turning up only around noon,
but he attended enough to be drawn to the mysteries of quantum physics by Sommerfeld.
I was not spared the shock which every physicist accustomed to the classical
way of thinking experienced when he came to know Bohr's basic postulate of quantum theory
for the first time, Pauli said more than 30 years later. But he quickly got over it as he said
about tackling his doctoral thesis. Sommerfeld had set Pauli the task of applying the quantum
rules of Bohr and his own modifications to the ionized hydrogen molecule in which one of the
two hydrogen atoms that make up the molecule has had its electron ripped off. As expected,
Pauli produced a theoretically impeccable analysis. The only problem was that his results did not
agree with the experimental data. Used to one success after another Pauli was despondent at
this lack of agreement between theory and experiment. However, his thesis was regarded
as the first strong evidence that the outer limits of the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantum atom
had been reached. The ad hoc way in which quantum physics was bolted on to classical physics had
always been unsatisfactory and now Pauli had shown that the Bohr-Sommerfeld model could not even deal
with the ionized hydrogen molecule, let alone more complex atoms. In October 1921, armed with his
doctorate, Pauli left Munich for Göttingen to take up the post of assistant to the professor of
theoretical physics. Moxborn, 38, a key figure in the future development of quantum physics,
had arrived in the small university town from Frankfurt just six months before Pauli.
Growing up in Breslau, capital of the then Prussian province of Silesia, it was mathematics,
not physics that attracted Bohrn. His father like Pauli's was a highly-cultured medical man and
academic. A professor of embryology, Gustav Bohrn advised his son not to specialize too early,
once he enrolled at Breslau University. Due to Philippe Bohrn settled on astronomy and mathematics
only after having attended courses in physics, chemistry, zoology, philosophy and logic.
His studies, including time at the universities of Heidelberg and Zürich,
ended in 1906 with a doctorate in mathematics from Göttingen.
Immediately afterwards, he began a year of compulsory military service that was cut short
because of asthma. After spending six months in Cambridge as an advanced student,
where he attended the lectures of J. J. Thomson, Bohrn returned to Breslau to begin experimental
work. But quickly discovering that he possessed neither the patients nor the skills required to
be even a competent experimenter, Bohrn turned to theoretical physics. By 1912 he had done enough
to become a Privat Dotsund in the world-renowned mathematics department at Göttingen,
where they believed that physics is much too hard for physicists. Bohrn's success in tackling a
string of problems by harnessing the power of mathematical techniques unknown to most physicists
led in 1914 to an extraordinary professorship in Berlin. Just before war broke out, another newcomer
arrived at the epicenter of German science, Einstein. Before long the two men who shared a
passion for music became firm friends. When war came, Bohrn was called up for military service.
After a spell as a radio operator with the air force, he spent the rest of the war conducting
artillery research for the army. Fortunately, stationed near Berlin, Bohrn was able to attend
seminars at the university, meetings of the German physical society, and musical evenings at Einstein's
home. After the war, in the spring of 1919, Max von Lauch, an ordinary professor at Frankfurt,
suggested to Bohrn that they swap posts. Lauch had won the 1914 Nobel Prize for the theory behind
the diffraction of x-rays by crystals and wanted to work with Planck, his former supervisor,
and a scientist he idolized. Bohrn, encouraged by Einstein to definitely accept, agreed, as the
exchange meant promotion to a full professorship and independence. Less than two years later,
he moved to Göttingen to head the university's Institute of Theoretical Physics. It consisted
of one small room, one assistant, and a part-time secretary. But Bohrn was determined to build on
these humble beginnings and institute to rival Sommerfeld's in Munich. High on his list of
priorities was getting Wolfgang Pauli, whom he described as the greatest talent in the physics
area that has emerged in the last years. Bohrn had already tried once before and failed,
as Pauli opted to stay in Munich to finish his doctorate. This time, he got his man.
W. Pauli is now my assistant, he is amazingly intelligent and very able, Bohrn wrote to Einstein.
Soon he discovered that the hired help had his own way of doing things. Pauli might have been
brilliant, but he put in long hours of hard thinking as he continued his practice of
working into the middle of the night and sleeping late. Whenever Bohrn was unable to give his 11
o'clock lecture, the only way he could ensure Pauli would be there to teach in his place was
by sending the maid to wake him up at 10.30 a.m. It was clear from the beginning that Pauli was
an assistant in name only. Bohrn admitted later that he learnt more from Pauli, despite his bohemian
ways and poor timekeeping, than he was able to teach the infant prodigy. He was sad to see him
go when in April 1922 Pauli left to become an assistant at Hamburg University. Swapping the
quiet life of the small university town that he could hardly bear for the bustling nightlife of
the big city was not the only reason he left so quickly. Pauli trusted his sense of physical
intuition in pursuit of a logically flawless argument when tackling any physics problem.
Bohrn, however, turned much more readily to mathematics and allowed it to lead his search
for a solution. Two months later, in June 1922, Pauli was back in Göttingen to hear Bohr's
celebrated lecture series and met the great Dain for the first time. Impressed, Bohr asked Pauli
if he would come to Copenhagen for a year as his assistant to help edit work in progress for
publication in German. Pauli was taken aback by the offer. I answered with that certainty of which
only a young man is capable. I hardly think that the scientific demands which you will make on me
will cause me any difficulty, but the learning of a foreign tongue like Danish far exceeds my
abilities. I went to Copenhagen in the fall of 1922 where both my contentions were shown to be wrong.
It was also, he recognized later, the beginning of a new phase in his life.
Aside from helping Bohr, Pauli made a serious effort in Copenhagen to explain the anomalous
Zeeman effect, a feature of atomic spectra that the Bohr-Sommerfeld model could not explain.
If atoms were exposed to a strong magnetic field, then the resulting atomic spectra contained lines
that were split. It was quickly shown by Lawrence that classical physics predicted a splitting of
a line into a doublet or a triplet, a phenomenon known as the normal Zeeman effect, which Bohr's
atom could not accommodate. Fortunately, Sommerfeld came to the rescue with two new quantum numbers,
and the modified quantum atom resolved the problem. It involved a series of new rules governing
electrons jumping from one orbit or energy level to another based on three quantum numbers, n,
k, and m, that described the size of the orbit, the shape of the orbit, and the direction in which
the orbit was pointing. But the celebrations were short-lived when it was discovered that the splitting
of the red alpha line in the spectrum of hydrogen was smaller than expected. The situation grew
worse with the confirmation that some spectral lines actually split up into a quartet or more,
instead of just two or three lines. Although called the anomalous Zeeman effect because
the extra lines could not be explained, using either existing quantum physics or classical theory,
it was in fact far more common than the normal effect. For Pauli it signaled nothing less than
the deep-seated failure of the theoretical principles known till now. Having set himself
the task of rectifying this miserable state of affairs, Pauli could not come up with an explanation.
Up till now I have thoroughly gone wrong, he wrote to Sommerfeld, in June 1923. Consumed
by the problem Pauli later admitted that he was in complete despair for some time.
One day, another physicist from the institute met him while strolling around the streets of
Copenhagen. You looked very unhappy, said his colleague. Pauli turned on him.
How can one look happy when he is thinking about the anomalous Zeeman effect?
The use of ad hoc rules to describe the complex structure of atomic spectra was just too much
for Pauli. He wanted a deeper, more fundamental explanation of the phenomena. Part of the problem
he believed was the guesswork involved in Bohr's theory of the periodic table. Did it really describe
the correct arrangement of electrons inside atoms? By 1922 the electrons in the Bohr-Sommerfeld model
were believed to move in three-dimensional shells. These were not physical shells but
energy levels within atoms around which electrons seemed to cluster. A vital clue in helping Bohr
construct this new electron shell model was the stability of the so-called noble gases, Helium,
Neon, Argon, Krypton, Xenon, and Radon. With atomic numbers of 2, 10, 18, 36, 54, and 86,
the relatively high energies required to ionize any noble gas atom to rip away an electron and
turn it into a positive ion, together with their reluctance to chemically bond with other atoms to
form compounds, suggested that the electron configuration in these atoms were extremely stable
and consisted of closed shells. The chemical properties of the noble gases were in stark
contrast to the elements that preceded them in the periodic table, hydrogen and the halogens,
fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine. With atomic numbers 1, 9, 17, 35,
53, and 85, all of these elements easily formed compounds. Unlike the chemically inert noble
gases, hydrogen and the halogens united with other atoms because in the process, they picked up
another electron and thereby filled the single vacancy in the outermost electron shell. By doing
so, the resulting negative ion had a completely full or closed set of electron shells and acquired
the highly stable electronic configuration of a noble gas atom. Mirroring the halogens,
the alkalize group, lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium, and francium were quick to
lose an electron as they formed compounds and became positive ions with the electron distribution
of a noble gas. The chemical properties of these three groups of elements formed part of the evidence
that led Bohr to propose that the atom of each element in a row of the periodic table is built
up from the previous element by the addition of another electron to the outer electron shell.
Each row would end with a noble gas in which the outer shell was full. Since only electrons
outside the closed shells called valence electrons took part in chemical reactions,
atoms with the same number of valence electrons shared similar chemical properties and occupied
the same column in the periodic table. The halogens all have seven electrons in the outermost shell
requiring just one more electron to close it and acquire an electron configuration of a noble gas.
The alkalize on the other hand all have one valence electron.
It was these ideas that Pauli heard Bohr outline during the Göttingen lectures in June 1922.
Sommerfeld had greeted the shell model as the greatest advance in atomic structure since 1913.
If he could mathematically reconstruct the numbers 2, 8, 18 of the elements in the rows of the
periodic table then it would be, Sommerfeld told Bohr, the fulfillment of the boldest hopes of
physics. In truth, there was no hard mathematical reasoning to back up the new electron shell
model. Even Rutherford told Bohr that he was struggling to form an idea of how you arrive at
your conclusions. Nevertheless, Bohr's ideas had to be taken seriously, especially after the
announcement in his Nobel lecture in December 1922 that the unknown element with atomic number 72,
later called hafnium, did not belong to the rare earth group of elements was later confirmed to
be correct. However, there was no organizing principle or criteria behind Bohr's shell model.
It was an ingenious improvisation based on an array of chemical and physical data
that could in large part explain the chemical properties of the various groupings of elements
in the periodic table. Its crowning glory was hafnium. As he continued to fret over the anomalous
Zeeman effect and the shortcomings of the electron shell model, Pauli's time in Copenhagen came to
an end. In September 1923, he returned to Hamburg, where the following year he was promoted from
assistant to Privatdotsand. But with Copenhagen a short train journey and a ferry across the Baltic
Sea, Pauli was still a regular visitor to the Institute. He concluded that Bohr's model could
work only if there was a restriction on how many electrons could occupy any given shell.
Otherwise, in contradiction of the results of atomic spectra, there seemed nothing to prevent
all the electrons in any atom from occupying the same stationary state, the same energy level.
At the end of 1924, Pauli discovered the fundamental organizing rule, the exclusion principle,
that provided the theoretical justification that had been missing in Bohr's empirically devised
electron shell atomic model. Pauli was inspired by the work of a Cambridge postgraduate student.
Edmund Stoner, 35, was still working on his doctorate under Rutherford when, in October 1924,
his paper, The Distribution of Electrons Among Atomic Levels, was published in the Philosophical
Magazine. Stoner argued that the outermost or valence electron of an alkali atom has as many
energy states to choose from as there are electrons in the last closed shell of the first inert noble
gas that follows it in the periodic table. For example, lithium's valence electron could occupy
any one of eight possible energy states, exactly the number of electrons in the corresponding
closed shell of the gas neon. Stoner's idea implied that a given principal quantum number
n corresponds to a Bohr electron shell, which would be completely full or closed,
when the number of electrons it contains reaches twice its number of possible energy states.
If each electron in an atom is assigned the quantum numbers n, k, m, and each unique set
of numbers labels a distinct electron orbit or energy level, then according to Stoner,
the number of possible energy states for, say, n equals 1, 2, and 3 would be 2, 8, and 18.
For the first shell, n equals 1, k equals 1, and m equals 0. These are the only possible values the
three quantum numbers can have, and they label the energy state 1, 1, 0. But according to Stoner,
the first shell is closed when it contains two electrons, double the number of available
energy states. For n equals 2, either k equals 1 and m equals 0, or k equals 2, and m equals
negative 1, 0, 1. Thus, in this second shell there are four possible sets of quantum numbers that
can be assigned to the valence electron, and the energy states it can occupy. 2, 1, 0, 2, 2,
negative 1, 2, 2, 0, 2, 2, 1. Therefore, the shell n equals 2 can accommodate 8 electrons when it is
useful. The third shell, n equals 3, has nine possible electron energy states. 3, 1, 0, 3, 2,
negative 1, 3, 2, 0, 3, 2, 1, 3, 3, negative 2, 3, 3, negative 1, 3, 3, 0, 3, 3, 1, 3, 3, 2.
Using Stoner's rule, the n equals 3 shell can contain a maximum of 18 electrons.
Pali had seen the October issue of the Philosophical Magazine but ignored Stoner's paper.
Not known for his athleticism, Pali ran to the library to read it after Somerfeld mentioned
Stoner's work in the preface to the fourth edition of his textbook, Atomic Structure and
Spectral Lines. Pali realized that for a given value of n, the number of available energy states,
n, in an atom that an electron could occupy, was equivalent to all the possible values that the
quantum numbers k and m could take, and was equal to 2n squared. Stoner's rule yielded the correct
series of numbers, 2, 8, 18, 32, for the elements in the rows of the periodic table, but y was the
number of electrons in a closed shell twice the value of n or n squared. Pali came up with the
answer. A fourth quantum number had to be assigned to electrons in atoms. Unlike the other numbers,
n, k and m, Pali's new number could have only two values. So he called it Zvidotikite.
It was this two-valuedness that doubled the number of electron states,
where there had previously been a single energy state with a unique set of three quantum numbers,
n, k and m. There were now two energy states, n, k, m, a, and n, k, m, b. These extra states
explained the enigmatic splitting of spectral lines of the anomalous Zeeman effect. Then the
two-valued fourth quantum number led Pali to the exclusion principle, one of the great commandments
of nature. No two electrons in an atom can have the same set of four quantum numbers.
The chemical properties of an element are not determined by the total number of electrons
in its atom but only by the distribution of its valence electrons. If all the electrons in an
atom occupied the lowest energy level, then all the elements would have the same chemistry.
It was Pali's exclusion principle that managed the occupancy of the electron shells
in Bohr's new atomic model and prevented all of them from gathering in the lowest energy level.
The exclusion principle provided the underlying explanation for the arrangement of the elements
in the periodic table and the closing of shells with chemically inert rare gases.
Yet, despite these successes, Pali admitted in his paper, on the connection between the
closing of electron groups in atoms and the complex structure of spectra, published on 21st
of March 1925 in Zeitschrift für Physik, we cannot give a more precise reason for this rule.
Why four quantum numbers and not three were needed to specify the position of electrons
in an atom was a mystery. It had been accepted since the seminal work of Bohr and Sommerfeld
that an atomic electron in orbital motion around a nucleus moves in three dimensions and therefore
requires three quantum numbers for its description. What was the physical basis of Pali's fourth
quantum number? In the late summer of 1925, two Dutch postgraduate students, Samuel Goudsmit
and George Julenbeck, realized that the property of two-valuedness that Pali had proposed was not
just another quantum number. Unlike the three existing quantum numbers N, K and M that specify
the angular momentum of the electron in its orbit, the shape of that orbit, and its spatial
orientation respectively, two-valuedness was an intrinsic property of an electron that Goudsmit
and Julenbeck called spin. It was an unfortunate choice of name that conjured up images of spinning
objects, but electron spin was a purely quantum concept that solved some of the problems still
be setting the theory of atomic structure while neatly providing the physical justification
of the exclusion principle. George Julenbeck, 24, had enjoyed his time in Rome as a private tutor
to the son of the Dutch ambassador. He had secured the position in September 1922 after
having gained the equivalent of a bachelor's degree in physics from Leiden University.
No longer wishing to be a financial burden to his parents, it was the perfect opportunity for
Julenbeck to be self-sufficient as he worked towards his master's degree. With no formal
lectures to attend he learned most of what he needed from books, with only the summer back at
the university. Unsure whether to pursue a doctorate when he returned to Leiden in June 1925,
Julenbeck went to see Paul Ehrenfest, who had succeeded Hendrik Lorenz as professor of physics
in 1912 after Einstein chose Zurich. Ehrenfest, born in Vienna in 1880, had been a student of
the great Boltzmann. Together with his Russian wife Tatiana, who was a mathematician, Ehrenfest
had produced a series of important papers in statistical mechanics as he eeked out a living
as a physicist in Vienna, Göttingen, and St. Petersburg. Over the twenty years as Lorenz's
successor, Ehrenfest established Leiden as a center of theoretical physics and in the process
became one of the most respected figures in the field. He was renowned for his ability to clarify
difficult areas of physics rather than for any original theories of his own. His friend Einstein
later described Ehrenfest as the best teacher in our profession and one passionately preoccupied
with the development and destiny of men, especially his students. It was this concern for his students
that led Ehrenfest to offer the wavering Julenbeck a two-year post as an assistant while he said
about getting a doctorate. The offer proved irresistible. Ehrenfest, who ensured whenever
possible that his trainee physicists worked together in pairs, introduced him to another
graduate student, Samuel Goudsmit. A year and a half younger than Julenbeck, Goudsmit had already
published well-received papers on atomic spectra. He had arrived in Leiden in 1919, not long after
Julenbeck, who called Goudsmit's first paper at only eighteen, a most presumptuous display of
self-confidence, but highly creditable. Given his doubts, a clearly talented younger collaborator
might have intimidated others but not Julenbeck. Physics, Goudsmit said towards the end of his life,
was not a profession but a calling, like creative poetry, music composition or painting. However,
he had chosen physics simply because he had enjoyed science and mathematics at school.
It was Ehrenfest who kindled a real passion for physics in the teenager as he set him tasks related
to analyzing and finding order in the fine structure of atomic spectra. While he was
not the most studious, Goudsmit possessed an uncanny skill at making sense out of empirical data.
By the time Julenbeck returned to Leiden from his time in Rome, Goudsmit was spending three
days a week in Amsterdam working in Peter Zeeman's spectroscopy laboratory.
The trouble with you is, I don't know what to ask, all you know is spectral lines, Ehrenfest
complained as he fretted about setting Goudsmit a much delayed exam. Despite concerns that his
flair for spectroscopy was having a detrimental impact on his all-round development as a physicist,
Ehrenfest asked Goudsmit to teach Julenbeck the theory of atomic spectra.
After Julenbeck was brought up to date on the latest developments, Ehrenfest wanted the pair
to work on the alkali doublet lines, the splitting of spectral lines due to an external magnetic field.
He knew nothing. He asked all those questions which I never asked, said Goudsmit.
Whatever his shortcomings, Julenbeck had a thorough knowledge of classical physics
that led him to pose intelligent questions that challenged Goudsmit's understanding.
It was an inspired piece of pairing by Ehrenfest that ensured that each would learn from the other.
Throughout the summer of 1925, Goudsmit taught Julenbeck everything he knew about spectral lines.
Then, one day, they discussed the exclusion principle, which Goudsmit thought was no more
than another ad hoc rule that brought a little more order to the unholy mess of atomic spectra.
However, Julenbeck immediately hit upon an idea that Pauli had already dismissed.
An electron could move up and down, back and forth, and side to side. Each of these different ways
of moving physicists called a degree of freedom. Since each quantum number corresponds to a degree
of freedom of the electron, Julenbeck believed that Pauli's new quantum number must mean that
the electron had an additional degree of freedom. To Julenbeck, a fourth quantum number implied
that the electron must be rotating. However, spin in classical physics is a rotational motion
in three dimensions. So if electrons spin in the same way like the earth about its axis,
there was no need for a fourth number. Pauli argued that his new quantum number referred to
something which cannot be described from the classical point of view. In classical physics,
angular momentum, everyday spin, can point in any direction. What Julenbeck was proposing was
quantum spin, two-valued spin, spin up or spin down. He pictured these two possible spin states
as an electron spinning either clockwise or anti-clockwise, about a vertical axis as it orbits
the atomic nucleus. As it did so, the electron would generate its own magnetic field and act
like a subatomic bar magnet. The electron can line up either in the same or in the opposite
direction as an external magnetic field. Initially it was believed that any allowed
electron orbit could accommodate a pair of electrons provided that one had spin up,
and the other spin down. However, these two spin directions have very similar,
but not identical energies, resulting in the two slightly different energy levels
that gave rise to the alkali doublet lines, two closely spaced lines in the spectra, instead of one.
Julenbeck and Goudsmit showed that electrons spin could be either plus or minus half,
values that satisfied Pauli's restriction for the fourth quantum number to be
two-valued. By the middle of October, Julenbeck and Goudsmit had written a one-page paper and
showed it to Ehrenfest. He suggested that the normal alphabetical order of names be reversed,
since Goudsmit had already published several well-received papers on atomic spectra.
Ehrenfest was concerned that readers would think that Julenbeck was the junior partner.
Goudsmit agreed, as it was Ehlenbeck who had thought of spin.
But as to the soundness of the concept itself, Ehrenfest was unsure. He wrote to Lawrence,
asking for his judgment and advice on a very witty idea.
Although 72 retired and living in Harlem, Lawrence still traveled to Leiden once a week to teach.
Julenbeck and Goudsmit met him one Monday morning after his lecture.
Lawrence was not discouraging, said Julenbeck. He was a little bit reticent, said that it was
interesting and that he would think about it. A week or two later Julenbeck went back to receive
Lawrence's verdict and was given a stack of papers full of calculations in support of an
objection to the very notion of spin. A point on the surface of a spinning electron, Lawrence
pointed out, would move faster than the speed of light, something forbidden by Einstein's
special theory of relativity. Then another problem was discovered. The separation of the
alkali doublet spectral lines predicted using electron spin was twice the measured value.
Julenbeck asked Ehrenfest not to submit the paper. It was too late. He had already sent it to a journal.
You are both young enough to be able to afford a stupidity, Ehrenfest reassured him.
When the paper was published on 20 November, Bohr was deeply skeptical. The following month
he traveled to Leiden to participate in the celebrations to mark the 50th anniversary of
Lawrence receiving his doctorate. As his train pulled into Hamburg, Pauli was waiting on the
platform to ask Bohr what he thought about electron spin. The concept was very interesting,
said Bohr. His well-worn put down meant he believed that electron spin was flawed.
How, he asked, could an electron moving in the electric field of the positively charged
nucleus experience the magnetic field necessary for producing the fine structure?
When he arrived at Leiden, two men impatient to know his views on spin met Bohr at the station,
Einstein, and Ehrenfest. Bohr outlined his objection about the magnetic field and was amazed
when Ehrenfest said that Einstein had already resolved the problem by invoking relativity.
Einstein's explanation, Bohr admitted later, was a complete revelation. He now felt confident that
any remaining problems surrounding electron spin would all sooner rather than later be overcome.
Lawrence's objection was based on classical physics, of which he was a master. However,
electron spin was a quantum concept. So this particular problem was not as
serious as it first appeared. The British physicist Llewellyn Thomas solved the second.
He showed that an error in the calculation of the relative motion of the electron in its orbit
around the nucleus was responsible for the extra factor of two in the separation of the doublet
lines. I have never since faltered in my conviction that we are at the end of our sorrows, Bohr
wrote in March 1926. On the return leg of his trip, Bohr met more physicists eager to hear what he
had to say about quantum spin. When his train stopped at Göttingen, Werner Heisenberg,
who just a few months earlier had finished his stint as Bohr's assistant, and Pascal Jordan
were waiting at the station. Electron spin, he told them, was a great advance. He then traveled to
Berlin to attend the 25th anniversary celebrations of Planck's famous lecture
to the German Physical Society in December 1900. That was the official birthday of the quantum.
Pauli lay in wait at the station, having traveled from Hamburg to quiz the Dane once again.
As he feared, Bohr had changed his mind and was now the prophet of electron spin. Unmoved by
initial attempts to convert him, Pauli called quantum spin, a new Copenhagen heresy.
A year earlier he had dismissed the idea of electron spin when a 21 year old German American,
Ralph Cronig, had first proposed it. On a two year odyssey around some of Europe's leading
centers of physics, after gaining his PhD at Columbia University, Cronig arrived in Tobingen
on 9 January 1925. Prior to spending the next 10 months at Bohr's institute.
Interested in the anomalous Zeeman effect, Cronig was excited when his host Alfred Lande
told him that Pauli was expected the following day. He was coming to talk to Lande about the
exclusion principle before submitting his paper for publication. Having studied under Sommerfeld
and later served as Born's assistant in Frankfurt, Lande was highly regarded by Pauli.
Lande showed Cronig a letter Pauli had written to him the previous November.
In the course of his life Pauli wrote thousands of letters. As his reputation grew and the number
of correspondence increased, his letters were highly prized and passed around and studied.
For Bohr, who saw past the sarcastic wit, a letter from Pauli was an event. He would slip
it into his jacket pocket and carry it around for days, showing it to anyone remotely interested
in whatever problem or idea Pauli was dissecting. Under the cover of drafting a reply, Bohr would
conduct an imaginary dialogue as though Pauli were seated in front of him smoking a pipe.
Probably all of us are afraid of Pauli but then again we are not so afraid of him that we dare
not admit it. He once playfully declared. Cronig later recalled that as he read Pauli's letter
to Lande his curiosity was aroused. Pauli had outlined the need to label every electron inside
an atom with a unique set of four quantum numbers and its consequences. Immediately Cronig began
thinking about the possible physical interpretation of the fourth quantum number and came up with
the idea of an electron rotating about its axis. He was quick to appreciate the difficulties attached
to such a spinning electron. However, finding it a fascinating idea, Cronig spent the rest
of the day developing the theory and doing the mathematics. He'd worked out much of what Eulen
Beck and Goudsmit would announce in November. When he explained his findings to Lande, both men
were impatient for Pauli to arrive and give his seal of approval. Cronig was taken aback when
Pauli ridiculed the notion of electron spin. That is surely quite a clever idea but nature
is not like that. So fervent had Pauli been in rejecting the proposal, Lande tried to soften
the blow. Yes, if Pauli says so, then it is not like that. Dejected, Cronig abandoned the idea.
Unable to contain his anger when electron spin was quickly embraced, in March 1926,
Cronig wrote to Bohr's assistant Hendrik Kramer's. He reminded Kramer's that he had been the first
to suggest electron spin and had not published because of Pauli's derisive reaction.
In future I shall trust my own judgment more and that of others less, he lamented,
having learnt the lesson too late. Disturbed by Cronig's letter Kramer's showed it to Bohr.
No doubt remembering his own dismissal of electron spin when Cronig had disgusted with him
and others during his stay in Copenhagen, Bohr wrote to express his consternation
and deep regret. I should not have mentioned the matter at all if it were not to take a
fling at the physicists of the preaching variety, who are always so damned sure of and inflated with
the correctness of their own opinion, replied Cronig. Despite feeling robbed, Cronig was
sensitive enough to ask Bohr not to mention the whole sorry affair in public since Goudsmit
and Eulenbeck would hardly be very happy about it. He knew they were entirely blameless. However,
both Goudsmit and Eulenbeck became aware of what had happened. Eulenbeck later openly
acknowledged that he and Goudsmit were clearly not the first to propose a quantized rotation of
the electron and there is no doubt that Ralph Cronig anticipated what certainly was the main
part of our ideas in the spring of 1925 and that he was discouraged mainly by Pauli from publishing
his results. It was proof, a physicist told Goudsmit, that the infallibility of the deity
does not extend to his self-styled vicar on earth. In private, Bohr believed that Cronig
was a fool. If he was convinced of the correctness of his idea, then he should have published
no matter what others thought. Publish or perish is a rule not to be forgotten in science.
In his heart Cronig must have reached a similar conclusion. His initial outburst of
bitterness toward Pauli amid the disappointment of missing out on electron spin had dissipated
by the end of 1927. At only 28 Pauli was appointed Professor of Theoretical Physics
at the ETH in Zurich. He asked Cronig who was once again spending time in Copenhagen
to become his assistant. Every time I say something contradict me with detailed arguments,
Pauli wrote to Cronig after he accepted the offer. By March 1926 the problems that had
led Pauli to reject electron spin had all been resolved. Now there is nothing else I can do then
to capitulate completely, he wrote to Bohr. Years later most physicists assumed that Goudsmit
and Eulenbeck had received the Nobel Prize. After all electron spin was one of the seminal
ideas of 20th century physics, an entirely new quantum concept. But the Pauli-Cronig
affair meant that the Nobel committee shied away from giving them the prestigious award.
Pauli always felt guilty for discouraging Cronig just as he did for receiving the Nobel Prize
in 1945 for the discovery of the exclusion principle while the Dutchmen were denied.
I was so stupid when I was young, he said later. On 7th of July 1927 Eulenbeck and Goudsmit
received their doctorates within an hour of each other. Flouting convention the ever-thoughtful
Ehrenfest had arranged it that way. He had also secured both of them jobs at the University of
Michigan. With few positions then available, Goudsmit said toward the end of his life the post
in America was for me a far more significant award than a Nobel Prize. Goudsmit and Eulenbeck
provided the first concrete evidence that existing quantum theory had reached the limits of its
applicability. Theorists could no longer use classical physics to gain a foothold before
quantizing a piece of existing physics because there was no classical counterpart to the quantum
concept of electron spin. The discoveries of Pauli and the Dutch spin doctors brought to
a close the achievements of the old quantum theory. There was a sense of crisis. The state of physics
was from a methodological point of view, a lamentable hodge-podge of hypothesis,
principles, theorems, and computational recipes, rather than a logical, consistent theory.
Progress was often based on artful guessing and intuition rather than scientific reasoning.
Physics at the moment is again very muddled. In any case, for me it is too complicated,
and I wish I were a film comedian or something of that sort, and had never heard anything about
physics, wrote Pauli in May 1925, some six months after discovering the exclusion principle.
Now I do hope nevertheless that Bohr will save us with a new idea. I beg him to do so urgently,
and convey to him my greetings and many thanks for all his kindness and patience toward me.
However, Bohr had no answers to our present theoretical troubles. That spring, it seemed that
only a quantum magician could conjure up the yearned for new quantum theory. Quantum Mechanics
