It's a big honor to speak here, and yeah, I'm very glad to be here, and yeah.
So my topic is the homology of algebraic varieties.
So that's a very general title, and so I can say anything, no?
So I guess my object of interest has some kind of number series.
I can try to, yes.
So I've asked some, let's put myself into the simplest possible situation, so let's
assume it's projective and smooth, the kind of thing I want to consider, and let's say
it lives over, it's defined by polynomial equations with actually integral coefficients.
And now the expert might intervene and say that there are actually not so many examples
of this happening, so you're allowed to assume it just lives over spec z where you localize
at some prime, then there are many examples, but I don't want to say, like, you should
always stick away from the primes dividing n in that case, and I don't want to keep track
of this.
All right, so what is such an object in first approximation?
So in first approximation, you can try to understand this by looking at the complex solution
to some set of polynomial equations, so that gives you some close subspace in some complex
projective space, which is some complex manifold, but it's somehow one which is defined by polynomial
equations, equations with integral coefficients, okay, why is everybody laughing?
And so I guess the goal is to understand the homology, I'll try not to move too much,
so understand the homology of x.
And I put z in quotation marks here because actually there's a simple reason why there's
actually a lot of homologies of x.
One reason is that one can vary for coefficients, one can take homology with coefficients, well,
the best thing I guess is if you can take homology with integral coefficients, that's
pretty good, but sometimes as will happen in some situations, we will interest in algebraic
geometry, sometimes you can only take coefficients in fL or maybe zL, which is, here we already
have these LA numbers, it's the inverse limit, so L is some prime, and you can either look
at z mod L coefficients or compatible systems with z mod L to zN coefficients, or maybe
you cannot look at complex coefficients.
And on the other hand, somebody has this x, it's defined by integral coefficients and
so in algebraic geometry we actually like to regard this as a family of something like
complex manifolds.
So it has various fibers, which I will denote by x over, I'll find a few of those p elements
which I'm going to live over in the spectrum of fp, and so here p is also a prime.
And two primes p and l will play very different roles because one is there to keep track of
the, like, which co-mology coefficients we take, and the other is keeping track of where
we are.
So some of there is a spectrum of the integers, which has as close points, it has all the
prime numbers, and then maybe somewhere there's also some kind of infinite points.
There was the infinite point, we should imagine that there we are looking at this complex
manifold x of c, we have some kind of torus over there maybe, and then we also have some
kind of spaces which maybe, we should also imagine that there's been some kind of torus
in this case, but maybe of a slightly different sort in which there may be also some way connected
over the space.
And so the picture I'd like to fill in during this talk, as much as I can, is the following.
So there's a picture which has two speck z directions.
One is peritragism of prime p, where some are taking co-mology of different fibers of
the space x, so two, three, five, seven, and so on, somewhere over here we have infinity.
And on the other hand, there's another speck z direction, where there's some of the prime
L, which is here, so again we have all the prime numbers here, and maybe also we have
somewhere infinity, which corresponds to complex coefficients.
And so the idea of this diagram is that at some point peritrized by p and L, we have
the co-mology, whatever it is, of some of the fiber at p with mod L coefficients, whatever
that is.
All right, and so let's get started filling this diagram.
So the simplest co-mology theory that you can think about, and I guess historically
also the first one, is singular co-mology.
And so here what we're doing is somewhere we have this topological space x of c, this
complex-complex manifold, and we can just look at the singular co-mology groups of this
topological space, say, and we can do this with integral coefficients, that's no problem
whatsoever, so it seems I call them all the groups.
And this really just depends on the topological space x of c.
So these are a very nice object, so they are finally generated to be in groups, they have
p-curricularity, et cetera, so they're nice guys.
And so in our picture here, where would this go?
So we're taking the fiber of x over infinity here, and then we have integral coefficients,
so we have something that lives over all of here.
I hope the picture is not clear now, but it means it will become clear during the talk.
So let's just go through the simplest kind of example of such an x, so we could look
at the case where x is just a projective line, and so then we are looking at the singular
co-mology groups of the complex projective line, which is just topological two-sphere,
and so that's z in degrees zero and two, and zero otherwise.
But let me actually better, so the interesting co-mology process is the second one, so zero's
one just counts connected components, and that's maybe not so interesting.
So let's try to understand better the second co-mology group, and for this it's convenient
to look at a myoviatric sequence.
For the covering of p1 by the two semispheres, or algebraically, you can cover p1 by two
copies of a1, but one is the natural embedding, and one is from the other side, so in one
copy there will be a zero in it, and in the other copy you have infinity, and so the
intersection is an algebraic geometry, usually denoted by gm, which stands for the multiplicative
group.
And so of course gm of c is just c star, so gm is just a1, all right, and of course
if you take the f1 line, that's contractible, and so if you look at the myoviatric sequence,
this tells you that there's an isomorphism between the first singular co-mology of c
star and this guy we're interested in, all right, and the first singular co-mology of
c star is related to the fact that there's a circle, a topological circle inside c star
are set differently if there's a non-trivial fundamental group, and equivalently there's
some kind of non-trivial universal covering space, and so this isomorphism to z here,
this is related to the universal covering, which is the exponential map which goes from
complex numbers to c star.
And an important observation here is that this is not algebraic, right, the exponential
map is not algebraic, but one can approximate, like the universal covering is not algebraic,
but any finite sub-covering will be algebraic.
And so what are the finite coverings of c star, they're just given by covering the multiplicative
group by someone not totally winding up this topological circle inside it, but only winding
it up like n times, so the corresponding map will be somewhere x maps to x to the n.
And now x maps to x to the n is a perfectly algebraic map, so.
So this already tells us that maybe we can't expect somehow to see all of the integers
here in some algebraic way, but maybe some z mod n for any n could be seen in an algebraic
way, and that's actually what happens.
So it's also a general principle that all finite coverings of algebraic varieties are
still algebraic.
And so this brings us to the second homology, which is Grottendijk's famous et alk homology.
And so here the motivating question for Grottendijk was that if I have some variety, which does
not live all over the spectra of the integers, but which really just ellipses in the fiber
over 1 prime p, so if I have y just over the spectrum of fp, which you might, you might
in some of the context of this talk think of as a fiber of x over fp, but let's concentrate
on something that really just lives over fp for the moment.
So can one define an analog of, well, he would like to write a singular homology of y of c,
but as so y lives over only over this fiber, this is a complex value of points, so we can't
look at this.
The reason Grottendijk was interested in this is because when Weyl formulated his famous
Weyl conjectures on the numbers of solutions to polynomial equations on finite fields, he
already observed that one approach to proving such a thing would be in terms of such a conjectural
homology theory.
And sometimes Grottendijk answers this, yes, Grottendijk answers this, but you can't
get integral coefficients, you can only get the L coefficients, where for now L is not
equal to p. And so let me explain why you can hope for this in just this very simple
example of p1 or equivalently gm, so some of the h1 of gm with the L coefficients, that's
just the inverse limit of the h1 gm with the L to the n coefficients, so this is related
to the system of covers, let me write a multiplicative group now, which send x to the L to the n,
and we want this, this is really some kind of covering of the space, and so there should
really be some kind of deck transformations, some non-trivial deck transformations in the
situation, and so the deck transformations would be given by sending x to an L to the
nth root of unity times x, because if you raise it to the L to the nth power again, you get
the same result, so you say L to the n, isn't L to the nth root of unity, but it's a phenomenon
that L to the nth root of unity non-trivial root of unity exists only when L is not equal
to p, so the issue is that in characteristic p if x to the p is 1, then in characteristic
p that means that x minus 1 to the p is equal to 0, and so at least if you ever reduce space
that means that x minus 1 is equal to 0, so x is 1, and so that's the reason, that's
because eta-core homology works in characteristic p only if L is not equal to p, alright?
So in the situation that we are interested in, we're trying to fill in this diagram more,
the thing to look at is a eta-core homology group of x-base change actually to an algebraic
larger of q, so q-bar side of the complex numbers is a set of algebraic numbers, a field
of algebraic numbers, a number satisfying a polynomial equation with rational coefficients,
and so an interesting object for us to look at would be the eta-core homology with the
L-coefficient non-characteristic theory allowed to take any L, and you might think that this
is not interesting because actually that's canonically isomorphic because I defined my
q-bar inside c, to just single-core homology with the L-coefficient, so you would think
that there's nothing new, but actually some of the absolute Galois group of q is a group
which permutes this field of algebraic numbers in a way which preserves all algebraic relations,
and so this will automatically acquire an action of the absolute Galois group of q now, which
in this example of the multiplicative group would put the action on the roots of unity,
and so this is also isomorphic to the eta-core homology of x over fp-bar with the L-coefficient
as long as L is not equal to p. So in terms of the diagram now for any p, I may have
should have said this. You should think of the, sorry, you should think of like, I guess
in this case that's xz7 as a formal neighborhood of the prime 7 inside of the spectrum of the
integers, so it's like power series in the variable 7 that you have there, and so this
means that geometrically for, it's a completion at any prime p, we have somehow filled something
in which lives everywhere, works for all the primes except at 2, we have to leave at 2
then there's also something at 3 which, so I have to leave out 3 here, and so on.
All right, but someone doesn't live, it only lives near the completion at any prime but
not everywhere. All right, good. Okay, so what we have to do is we have to leave out
2, if you fit in much more already, but something that worked out and because there's nothing,
somehow if I'm interested in something characteristic p, then there's no periodic homologous theory,
and I want to get there, but I will get there through some more intermediate homologous theory,
known as the Rammkorn model. I guess the intuitive idea behind the Rammkorn model is that if you
have holes in your space which you, for the moment you should maybe think of as some complex
manifold. So these are measured by singular homology, and they're in some sense equal to
the obstructions to integrating differential forms globally. The prototypical example, of
course, being, on C star, so C minus 0, we have something like this, we have something
called the differential form dx over x, and we would like to integrate this to log x, but
there's a 2 pi i z of a duty. Well, of course, 2 pi i is the integral over S1 of this differential
form dx over x. So because as you integrate once around the circle of this differential
form, you get something non-zero, you can't find a global primitive form. And the nice
thing about this example, what you see in this example is that this differential form, which
gives you an abstraction of this algebraic, and it's the theorem of growth in Dijkstra
in general, the obstructions can already be seen on algebraic differential forms. So in
our situation, what we can do is, starting with our x or our guy over spec z, we can
build an algebraic-deron complex. So you have the sheaf of regular functions on x.
And you can differentiate them. You get a form for one x. So I should make the algebraic
one for it. And so we should take another pencil point, and then it goes on until D, which
is some of the algebraic-dimensional things. And then the Dirac homology of x is defined
as, okay, now I have a complex of sheaves, and so the way to take homology of z is to
take what's called hypercomology, but anyway, so I have this complex here on the x-bullet.
And so because we're working with something over the integer, so those are still finally
generated to be in groups, they satisfy concave radiality, et cetera, which by the way was
also true, I mean, we'll see how you'll see it for. Very nice, guys. But there's something
new. They are not the singular homology groups of the complex-complex manifold, but there
is a comparison theorem, which says that, so if you take your Dirac homology groups and
tenders them up to the complex numbers, then first of all, you can also realize them as
the wrong homology groups of this complex-complex manifold. But on the complex-complex manifold,
you have some, so this is essentially what's called the Pochere lemma. The consequence of
that is just computing the singular homology groups again after you extend scalars to the
complex numbers. And so you might, so what you get here is some, some 5-dimensional c-vector
space with two z-lettuces inside, but actually they are very different, and that gives rise
to the famous periods in algebraic geometry. So we said h1-dram and h1-singular are very
different z-lettuces. So in the simplest example somewhere, they differ by exactly what we
computed above, where we compute dx over x over s1. The point being that dx over x is
somewhere actually in a differential form with integral coefficients, so it appears in
this structure on the Duran side, where some of the s1 is maybe dual to a generator of
the first singular homology group of the multiplicative group. And so this isomorphism is
essentially given by integrating a differential form against a closed cycle, and so you get
y. So this gives rise to the famous periods. And so I'd like to draw in Duran homology into
this picture, and for this, it's important to note that the following behavior of Duran
homology. So I have Duran homology for my x, and so I can reduce the coefficients to some
prime p, but then actually what I get up to maybe some, if I would do this in derived
way, it would be true on the nose. It's just the Duran homology of the special fiber of
x. So for this homology theory, reducing the coefficients is the same thing as reducing
the space mod p. In other words, I should draw in Duran homology here at the diagonal,
and this shouldn't intersect. Right? So this gadget here is h1 Duran, and the fact that
the intersect here is a way to draw the comparison isomorphism, which takes place over the complex
numbers. So that's this point infinity and infinity sum. All right? So we were on the
search for a periodic homology theory in characteristic p. And so that's what's called crystalline
homology. So let me recall the problem. So y over fp, we have no homology i or zp coefficients.
But what we now have, we have a homology theory with fp coefficients, which we can just take
to be the Duran homology of y. In our picture, if we look over the prime 2, then maybe we
don't see the neighbor, but we just see the fiber at 2 of something, and that's the Duran homology.
And Kotnik observed that there are so-called crystalline homology groups, and those are
the ones I've talked about so far, the ones which are the hardest to get some intuition
on what they really are. So you know that by h star Chris, and for some reason I don't
put a comma here, but I put it over zp. So they are as nice as you would think, so they
are fine to generate the cp modules, and let me just say one thing, which is in some sense
the defining property of them, but you actually have to work to see that this is a definition.
The defining property is that, well, assume that we didn't have something which just lived
over fp, which actually lived over zp, then the Duran homology of this lift would give
you a theory as we're looking for, which is a smooth lift of y. Then there's a canonical
isomorphism between the crystalline homology y over zp with the Duran homology of y tilde.
At least locally, you can always find such a smooth lift, but then you need to see that
this is actually independent of the choice of the smooth lift, and that's a bit tricky.
In one word, some crystalline homology is related to deforming from fp to zp.
Well, if you have x over fp, then you just do the same thing. You just take the Duran
complex, some of the differentials over fp everywhere, et cetera.
This here?
Yeah.
Well, if I would put an r gamma here, it would be a zero, and I'd put a derived l. If there's
p torsion in here, there's a tor 1 term.
Right, so I wanted to draw this picture.
Above any prime, now we have a co-modus theory which somehow lives over the fiber and somehow
fills in something here.
Maybe also a two, but it's a bit tricky because I drew the arrow in some more place.
This here is HI, please.
All right.
Oh, I have some time left.
Some of the growth details here is that some of the rest of this diagram should be filled
in with motifs, whatever they are.
I don't understand motifs.
Maybe fill in more of this diagram by some explicit co-modus theories.
I mean, one thing that's a bit mysterious here, for example, is as you approach, some
are going from etalc homology all the way to a prime, and some etalc homology doesn't
exist anymore, but suddenly the special fiber crystalline homology exists, and some of them
maybe would like to understand what happens to this p-adec homology theory as you generate
intercharacteristic p.
So what happens is etalc homology in some sense degenerates into crystalline homology.
And note that the two are two completely different kinds of homology theories.
One is really like singular homology, and one is like differential forms, and over the
complex numbers we have this way of relating differential forms and singular encycles by
integrating them, but integrating doesn't work in the periodic world.
So for this question, let's somehow zoom in near any, near your favorite prime, and
somehow it's a prime, it's a point p, p.
So what we have there is that we have here somewhere the H.I. Chris.
So we have p here, and we have p here, and then we have the wrong homology here.
And you might complain that because I actually have some canonical lift given with x of my
writing characteristic p, these should actually be the same, but I actually like to
regard them as being slightly different objects.
But in any case, crystalline homology and derange homology are pretty, their relationship is
pretty clear, but then you somehow have to say etalc homology which lists here generically.
In the base you somehow have the spectrum of zp, which is a formal completion of spec
z at p, and then you somehow have spec qp, which is a formal neighborhood minus the close
point, so that's kind of punctured disk at p.
And over the punctured disk you can make sense of etalc homology.
And then some of these other stuff.
All right, and so the theorem I wanted to state is a recent theorem in joint work with
Parkov-Butt and Messier Morrow, which says that one can fill in this diagram
by some new homology theory.
Let me just say two words about it.
With the values in some kind of two-dimensional, complete local ring,
precisely for the experts, it's Fontaine's ring from Peer to Caught's theory called AINF.
Yeah, sorry.
So it has values in some kind of two-dimensional, complete local ring.
And I guess it's, to be expected, it's two-dimensional because we have like these two directions in this picture.
And so our theory would somehow fill in all this region here by some, something which
lives over some high-dimensional base.
So note that so far all of our homology theories just had coefficients in zp or something like
one-dimensional.
And so this homology theory would somehow, at each prime, fill in something here.
And this construction is quite complicated and I don't really understand this homology
or why it should be there or why it should behave as it does.
Let me, I will explain roughly how it's defined in a second.
Just let me state one stupid consequence of all results I said.
Some of this comparison theorem of the complex numbers tells us that the round-core homology
and singular-core homology have the same rank.
But they don't tell you anything about the torsion.
In particular, some of the torsion classes in singular-core homologies don't actually give you
obstructions to integrating differential forms.
But what falls from our result is that they give you obstructions.
Like if you have a p-torsion class in singular-core homology, then there is an obstruction to integrating
a differential form in characteristic p.
Which is kind of surprising because, like it's not at all clear that the topology of this manifold
over the complex numbers should have anything to do with integrating differential forms
in characteristic p.
Alright, so let me end some kind of conjecture which will also,
in the process of formulating the conjecture,
I will tell you a bit about how this conjecture actually looks like.
Conjecture is that there exists some kind of Q deformation of the round-core homology.
More precisely, this core homology series will have coefficients in Z-par series Q-1.
Meaning you take the polynomial algebra in an additional variable Q and completely
delete at the ideal Q-1.
So it's a Q deformation in the sense that if I specialize this guy at the point where
this Q-parameter is equal to 1, I get just the round-core homology of X.
At least in the derived sense.
Again, there might be Q-1 torsion.
And this should interpolate this homology series constructed by, but more on myself,
among all p.
So meaning that if you take this homology series and PADP is completed,
so you go to Z-par series Q-1, then you recover these gadgets which we define for any p.
And so if this homology series was there, then I could actually fill an even slightly more
of this diagram by going to a formal neighborhood of this diagonal here.
And then maybe we might start to wonder what happens to you here.
No, no, no.
So I should say that if I take the skewer homology and tensor from Z-par series Q-1
to Z-par series Q-1, that's essentially the homology series.
And so why do I call it the Q deformation of the round-core homology?
So let me just say how to compute the Q-d around-core homology of the affine line.
So the usual round-core homology would be computed by the complex times dx,
which sends some x to the n to n times x to the n minus 1 dx.
But now I do a Q deformation of this.
So I adjoin an additional variable Q, which I assume is infinitesimally close to 1.
And then the Q derivative, some of our places, is the same thing
where I put a Q and a log of n here.
Or better, let's call this dQ, like an easy formula for what this is.
So if you take the Q derivative of function f and you write it at x,
then you take this Q difference function f of Qx minus f of x over Qx minus x,
but you don't take the limit as Q goes to 1, maybe times dx.
So that's the Q derivative.
I think this has a name that's Jackson Q derivative.
This object has been studied.
You might think, well, OK, I mean, now that you have this formula,
you just write it down for a general, smooth, affine algebra,
and you easily define this.
But the problem is that the Q derivative depends totally on coordinates.
So the situation is a bit similar to what happens in crystalline-core homology,
where again, if you choose coordinates, you can easily write down a smooth lift
and hence the crystalline-core homology,
but then there's this non-trivial statement that is actually independent of the coordinates.
And there should be a similar result here,
and I have some ideas on how I might prove this,
but horribly complicated, to say the least.
And I think there must be something simple going on here,
but I have no idea what it is.
So in the case of crystalline-core homology,
it was somehow related to deforming X from Fp to Zp,
and now this is related to deforming X from Z2, where?
It's already lived over some of the universal Bayesian algebraic geometries,
so I don't know where to deform.
OK, let me stop here.
.
.
.
.
