We're going to present our proposal that it's called an integrative view of collective
action for human and social development.
So here is our outline and our general objective is to create the conversions between the ecological
psychology and the inactive approaches towards collective action.
As an example, we're going to use the case of autism spectrum disorders in order to
create this rethinking and reconsideration of collective action.
So first of all, our theoretical approaches begin from the ecological psychology.
In this sense, we are taking into account the environment based on these pivotal notions.
The first one is the envolt and also the habitat that were deeply defined by Bach's and Chameron
in 2018.
The first one that is the envolt is how it's created the individual set of affordances
given its biological setup, its development, and its individual history.
Then the next notion is the habitat, that is the environment as a set of resources for
a typical or ideal member of a species that share a form of life.
In this sense, we're highlighting this, right, like the member of species that share a form
of life in a typical or ideal way because it's a concentrated form of life from certain
group that could exclude other forms of life.
And we will further explain this in the next slides.
Then it's the affordances 2.0 notion that was deeply defined by Chameron.
Affordances 2.0 is a relational and dynamical way of thinking affordances in which affordances
and the abilities of the living organism co-interact in real time and they are culturally dependent.
As we know affordances, the term of affordances was first defined by James Gibson and Eleanor
Gibson and there are like many concepts but in this one in a dynamical and relational
way of thinking, it entails that affordances depend on the particular history of development
of the organism that is the ontogeny and thus the affordances are subjective and salient
for a particular individual when the individual perceives and acts upon them.
So the world that an organism inhabits and experiences throughout its life will depend
on its physiological needs, its repertoires of sensory motor schemes and the affordances
and a relational way of thinking that permit their individual or living organism to establish
functional partners to interact with the environment.
Now in this sense we are also going to talk about the notion of the affordative space.
So the affordative space implies many dimensions into the space that can be seen as the habitat
that as we know is a concentrated environment based on a form of life and this one was defined
by Gallagher and Ransom and it's defined as the abstract range of possibilities provided
by an any active movement in body or change in environment.
So the affordative space implies these dimensions, first the evolution that is the species anatomical
differences then is the development that involves the developmental parameters along the life
cycle of the living organism and then is the social-cultural practices that involve the
social normativity and the ontological niche.
So these dimensions will enable and constrain the individual's action possibilities.
Now the next theoretical approach is the sensory motor approach that was deeply defined by
Ezequiel de Paolo, Burman and Baran de Aran in 2017 in which as in the active view we see it
the living systems are networks of dynamical processes so dynamical processes involve also
the sensory motor regularities that cannot be also named as sensory motor contingencies
or sensory motor coordinations that happen through patterns of agent-environment interactions.
Bodyly coordinations also and also the coordinations between the environmental processes and the agent.
And as we said before the sensory motor regularities are contextualized in certain time and they are
hysterized so the movement in the sensory motor space can be generated by the closed-loop system
in a given situation during a certain period of time.
So the sensory motor abilities are coupled with the niche also.
The niche is defined as a network of affordances available to the animal.
So the sensory motor trajectories are for example when we walk in our daily life,
how we grasp, how we explore the world and how we coordinate with other agents and the environment
and with our own bodily interactions. Now the next theoretical approach is the sense-making.
So in the active view we conceive cognition as the sense-making of the world based on our
organismic self-organization, our embodiment, our needs, our skills and the situation, the
lived situation. So taking into account the previously defined concept of UNVELT that as we
know is the way the organism inhabits an experience environment based on their biological instances
or their biological organization. We are taking into account also the sensory motor schemes or
sensory motor regularities, the perception and actions situated in the space-time
that will guide what it appears to be meaningful for the agent and toward which the agent
audience her actions. So in this sense agents actively make sense of their environment in
terms of how it affects to them. And the sense-making is based on the concept of autonomy
that is also a pivotal concept of the active view in which the living organisms self-generates,
self-distinct and self-organize. So the agents establish a perspective from which interactions
with the world acquire a meaningful and normative status. So the organisms cast a web of significance
of the world grounded on their biological organization and the interaction with the world
itself. So in this sense taking all of these concepts we are kind of like proposing to rethink
collective action and also based on these next notions. First is a cultural permeation that
was introduced by Inesipolito, Daniel Huto and Gallagher in 2021. And they talk about how the
culture permeates and how it connects and influences cognition based on a dynamical coupling
in which the organism systems attune with the environment to physical, social and cultural
factors. So a great example for this kind of cultural permeation is the essay made by Iris
Marion Young who is a feminist phenomenologist in throwing like a girl, that is the name of the
essay. And she talks about how women, adolescents and girls, how we attune our physical and
perception and action capacities based not only in our censoring motor regularities but also on
the action possibilities given by the social-cultural practices imposed by the gender
structure of femininity. So I really recommend this essay if you want to look further about
this kind of thinking. And the next notion is also the social materiality and the joint action
in which the first one, the social materiality, is on how mental activities are not considered as
decontextualized or isolated but they are interwoven in interactions among living systems,
among individuals and also among the physical and social worlds with the living organisms.
So in this sense we are taking into account the objects that surrounds us,
that seem to actively contribute to the typical and a typical psychological development
that is the cognitive, affective and social development influencing to several degrees
the way that people, the way that we experience the world. So we are taking not only the agents
and the environment but also the spaces, objects and its interwoven relations. And the final
notion in this slide is the situated normativity. The situated normativity is the ability of the
skilled individuals to distinguish better or worse or adequate from inadequate or correct from
incorrect in the context of a particular situation. So the situated normativity consists in a
situated appreciation expressed in normative behavior that is concentrated by certain form of
life disconnects profoundly with the conception of habitat. And then the next notion for rethinking
collective action is the participatory sense-making that is the concept in the inactive view for
intersubjectivity. So we illustrated with the figure made by Hannah de Jagger who is a really great
philosopher from the Fourier cognition approach in which she explains that the participatory
sense-making is made by two living systems that depart from a kind of sense-making based on their
sensory motor schemes, their development, their historical cycle, their historical context.
And then they create another system that will be called their participatory sense-making.
So they participate in each other's sense-making. So the participatory sense-making involves
dynamical actions such as breakdowns, repairs, and transformations of the agent
concerning the relationship in the interaction itself. So in this sense the Fourier cognition
proposes to study the interaction itself, the inter corporeal-dialogical relationship that
we create during our interaction. Now Melina.
Problems of thinking social cognition in individual terms rather than really in
interactional terms. So as Dallager said, rather than making an inference to what the other person
is intending by starting with mobiling, bodily movements and moving from there to the level
of mental events, we see actions as meaningful in the context of the physical and inter-subjective
environment. Moreover, he highlights the importance of the environment not only as a physical location,
but as a pragmatic context in a social situation. So in this regard, the world itself
does much of the work involved in social cognition. Furthermore, I'm trying to find
a way that covers the whole interaction of the agent environment system in constant and changing
interactions. A physical model we think can explain this proposal could be found in ecological
resonance. This ecological resonance is the activity of the perceiver in her environment,
like the perceiver environment dynamics, and how it generates perceptual information that
subsequently constrains the dynamics of perceptual systems. That is the neural dynamics of perceptual
systems in terms of informational coupling or synchronization, such that the perceiver's
perceptual systems resonate to the perceiver environmental dynamics. This is proposed by Raja
in 2019 and then by Cermero Anderson and Raja 2020. Accordingly, we propose that different
approaches to collective action can be conceptualized in real-time social interactions with this
approach, arguing that some assumptions have been treated as trying, as active inference,
can contradict some of the basic features of sensory motor trajectories that we have
sketched here. In particular, the historicity of the agency and the sense-making that is explicit.
So furthermore, and as just has been published by Raja and colleagues in 2021, active inference
presupposes successful perception and actions instead of explaining them, which precisely,
in the case of ASD that we're going to treat in a few slides, many problems are presented when we
discuss the term successful. So we will expand on this. Okay, so part of our model that we are
trying to propose here has to do with understanding these interactions, the dynamics of the sensory
motor skin's trajectories in the affordative space. So these sketches that we made are based
on the Paolo's and Hanne de Jagger's proposals in several of their books. But what we are trying
to say here in the first figure is that the mutuality of the autopolytic system in interaction
with the environment is generating the necessary autonomy to develop sensory motor skins.
Then in the middle one, what we are seeing is the interactions that are depicted as the
pointed line ones, maybe, yeah, exactly those ones, and they are continuous and bi-directional,
which means that there's feedback between the body and the environment, generating affordances
for the agent and the particular sensory motor skins that get mastered over development to
configure an autonomous system with particular basic abilities, like walking, grasping, drinking,
etc. And then on the third one, we can see the bi-directional umbelts generating through
development like an affordative space that constitutes the ontogenetic niche in the environment,
which itself has its own trajectory, that transcours both the agent and the niche over time.
Yeah, so given this perspective, it is also important to acknowledge that each affordative
space generates umbelts, in this sense, for example, that have an intrinsic affectivity
that pertains to the understanding of the world of each individual. Therefore, in specific cultures,
the interactions, for example, depicted in the figure one, becoming differentiated understanding
and apprehension of the world, that is the habitat. So specific normativities portray specific
affectivities towards the world that in turn are experienced through affordances and become part
of the identity of each organism or individual. And when those experiences are shared in social
groups, then they are differentiated. So what is usually called like abnormal behaviors,
yeah, or pervasive behaviors, could be better understood as different from the norm.
Yeah, like a different relationship to the habitat understood that the generation of different
sensory motor schemes and therefore different affordances and sense makings than those that
are called typical. So there is a relation, an umbelth, and it is constituted differently,
but not abnormally or pervasively. So in this sense, we are taking into account the case of
autism spectrum disorders to rethink on how we research on collective action, right?
So autism spectrum disorders, briefly, they are conceived as the differentiated communication,
social communication, and social interaction conditions in which they present repetitive
and restrictive behaviors, such as repetitive behaviors, such as echolalia, mannerisms,
stereotypic behaviors, or also rocking, and also a steaming that is the stimulating themselves
with different parts, like objects from the world. Also hypersensitivity in different
sensory modalities, and yeah, and also they present different kinds of affectivities towards
older agents, and they can also present delay languages, no, sorry, delaying the language,
yeah, and they have differentiated communication towards other people. So the traditional view
of autism departs from these theories, basically. First one is a dysfunction triad that involves
the theory of mind, the weak coherence theory, and the executive dysfunction theory, and also the
systemizing theory. So in the dysfunction triad, they talk about, in a representational and functional
way, they talk about a deficit in autism, a deficit in, for example, theory of mind, and they relate it
to directly to a lack of, for example, activity in the nervous system, in the central nervous
system, right? And the next theory, the systemizing theory, it was defined by Simon Badon-Goen,
and he talks about autism as a hyper-masculine type of phenotype, yeah, in which he says that
by having a higher systemizing ability, they have lower empathy capacities. So apart from that,
there are many objections, for example, from your ethics, and also from the foreign cognition view,
and also from the feminist epistemology towards this kind of theories, we want to also focus on how
they depart from a biomedical model of disability and otherness in which they consider autism as a
condition to cure, eliminate, or fix. For example, it translates on applications in therapies in which
they conceive their repetitive and restrictive behaviors that are autistic traits as unpurposed,
inappropiate, or aberrant, so they prohibit them or eliminate them. So in contrast, we are departing
from an inactive and embodied cognition view that in this sense, Hannah de Jaguer deeply
defined it, and she says that autism is a distinctive sense-making. So according to her,
the autism spectrum conditions comprehend a different kind of sense-making, therefore,
a different participatory sense-making, that as we know is an active concept for intersubjectivity
or our capacity to interact socially. Accordingly, their capacity to interact, communicate,
coordinate, engage, and establish dialogical relationships will be distinct. So we put here
an instance that is pivotal because I think that it shows how the social affordances, how the
affordative space is involved is the case of autistic women and girls, because they not only
depart from this distinctive sense-making, but they also depart from the social pressure from
social normativity that is in the gender structure of femininity, in which they show how they
have to mask the autistic traits during their development, because the social pressures of
femininity for them are really, really, really tough, and they have to express themselves
in a way in which they hide their, for example, manualisms, their echolayas, or also their
stereotypic behaviors or the steaming. In this sense, we recommend the study
led by Sara Bargiela in 2016. So Hannah De Jagger says that autistic particularities of moving,
perceiving, and emoting relate to how people without autism make sense of the world. So the
restrictive and repetitive behaviors could involve an engagement with the social-cultural world,
and also an appropriation and an effective discharge through their own votes. So we are
taking the autistic traits as their own own votes, as their form of life, and also as their
own sense-making, like an autistic own vote. So in our way of rethinking collective action in
cognitive science, it's not only to take into account different own votes, but also to consider
participants in our research as autonomous agents based also in the participatory sense-making
notion. So here we put a testimony by Kieran Rose, who is an autistic woman, and she says,
we move, communicate, and think in ways that those who do not move, communicate, and think in those
ways, struggle to empathize with or understand so that others pathologize us and exclude us for it.
So in this sense, we propose not only this model for research, but also ethical and future
perspectives for cognitive sciences that involve psychology, psychiatry, pedagogy,
philosophy, data science. And in this sense, we first talk about the neurodivergence
emancipatory collective movement that is led by autistic people, first by Judy Singer,
who is also a female with autism or an autistic female. And also in this sense,
we should rethink our therapeutic applications. So here we put some examples in which we think
that they consider the autistic sense-making or the autistic own vote. That is the intensive
interaction therapy in which they depart from the sense-making in terms of communication and
interaction of autistic people in order to create a dialogical relationship between the,
for example, the psychologist and the autistic child, and then the floor time and the relationship
with the social materiality notion, because in the floor time therapy, they depart from the
horizontality between, for example, the caregiver and the autistic child in which they take into
account the autistic sense-making with the objects that surround them in order to play
and interact based in the own vote that the autistic child creates. Also another application
could be sensory-friendly spaces in which as considering autistic people as participants as
autonomous agents by themselves, we should create also spaces that are friendly for them because
they live with hyper hypersensitivities that mislead their actions or not in that sense that create
like a really bad place for them or an aversive kind of situation. And also instead of imposing
rules for interaction, we should understand their ways of engagement. And in this sense,
we also propose an engaged and anti-traded epistemologist, for example, from the feminist
standpoint from Donna Haraway, Dorothy Smith and Sandra Harding, in which we include and amplify
the voices of autistic people by taking them as experts by experience. And also for collective
action, we should research on communities and not isolated individuals. And also think on cognition
in an involved and participatory way for social understanding and collective action.
And also the critique interculturality. So Melina, thank you.
Yeah, in this sense, we also think that to treat interculturality in a horizontal way,
which is proposed by Catherine Welch, and she calls it critique interculturality,
because then we can acknowledge difference and we can acknowledge different kind of cultures. And
in this way, we are talking about an autistic disorder spectrum culture, and then be treated
like a horizontal with the normality or what is called normality. So it is also a political
standpoint to treat it in this way in critical interculturality and not as an abnormality.
So as drawing the conclusions, we say that affordances are co-created and maintained by joint
action, which form particular ecological niches or habitats and all their agencies. However,
the normative behavior settings exclude other ways of acting that differ from the
concentrated ones. So diverse ways of comprehension and action in the world
should be considered or sorry, are considered in this kind of thinking of the normative behavior
as impaired, pervasive or abnormal and can be misjudged ethically. So autistic people express
differences in participatory sense making, that is, they show different ways of acting,
emoting and communicating. So autistic people respond to the landscape of affordances,
the affordative space in such way that resonates with their sensory motor constitution.
So we're talking about different umbilts, not abnormal umbilts. So thank you very much. Here
are our emails, if you want to talk about it much more. And here also thank you for the
four recognition group that coordinates Melina. And yeah, that's all.
So whoever wants to ask questions can just get behind me in the line here and ask
Itzel and Melina their questions from the podium. Okay, so first, so I guess I have a question
about how one or maybe how how might I imagine creating spaces that both simultaneously I guess
engage sensory motor preferences or umbilts of autistic people while also allowing them an
exposure to other niches or other environments in which there are other modes of engagement,
right? Because maybe the concern I have is if you cater too much to that disposition,
there becomes no understanding or inclination to understand other mindsets or ways of interacting
with the world. And maybe it sounds clear, so help forgive me if that is.
Melina, I think I didn't understand the question. I'm sorry.
No worries. So maybe the context is
uh so you know the reframe of it is not being abnormal but different kind of umbelt, right?
I think resonates. The concern would be is only allowing them exposure into one environment
that naturally fits with their sensory motor experience does not allow them to be flexible,
right? And switch into a different niche that may not be as forgiving. Does that make sense?
So you know maybe they go to a job interview and because they've been in an environment
you know where like they didn't understand certain social norms and they started engaging
in behaviors, repetitive movements or things that that don't go well, right? Maybe it affects their
you know a chance of employment at that that firm or you know just as a random example.
Yeah, I think it resonates with our proposal. Like I think it's a good way of translating it
because they usually show these effectiveness charges of like for example their repetitive
and restricted behaviors that usually are called also like on flexibility towards the environment.
During certain situations in which they have for example anxiety crisis because the environment is
really aversive towards their sensory motor capabilities or coordinations.
For example in spaces like here in Mexico like in the center of the city that it's really really
full of hyper stimulation from all all over the place. Usually people with autism that I have
talked to because I work in a clinical space and also in a research space with autistic people.
They usually refer that it's a really aversive place in which they have to kind of like look for
something in order to calm themselves down but that is also impossible because they don't have
as we said for example in the part of the ethical and future perspectives they don't have
sensory-friendly spaces not even to calm themselves and maybe to calm the anxiety crisis.
So yeah I think it's a good way of translating what you did yeah of what you said.
And I guess just another item is you know I wonder if things like mindfulness meditation
or cognitive behavioral therapy right or certain behavioral right interventions
and cognitive methods might be helpful for facilitating and you know success in those
environments or at least not being necessarily overwhelmed. Just you know just some random ideas
and something that has a very personal aspect to it for me so thank you I want someone else to
know. Thank you Kevin. Hi there thanks for this really interesting talk. I don't study autism
but I have heard recently a lot about the phenomenon of masking where you can suppress sort of
stimming tendencies or other abnormal autistic behaviors and that the fact that masking exists
tells me that autistic individuals have maybe their usual mode of sensory motor coordination
with the world but also the capability of having neurotypical sensory motor engagements with the
world which would suggest that neurotypical folks are actually have this abnormal lack of
flexibility where the world has to be this normative way that where you've been taught
condition-interacted and can't accept other ways of interacting and so I'm wondering how would
what what is the explanation for
masking behavior and maybe like is there is there a characterization of sort of normative
behavior as actually being the abnormal inflexible behavior rather than you know good and what we
should strive for? Well I think that there is no explanation like formally speaking from
the inactive view like that there is a paper talking about how we explain the masking but
I think that we can infer based on what we are proposing and also based on for example Hannah
the Jagger's view which and also based on the lived experience referred by autistic people
and specifically autistic adolescents women and girls because they are the population that mostly
present the masking that is also referred as camouflaging
and in this sense is a cold mechanism that takes a lot of effort a lot of energy from them
and it's not something that is developed like instantly or spontaneously in the moment
is something that they shape along their history of living or sorry of coping with the normative
space for example I am thinking about a woman that I interviewed a few days ago she's an autistic
woman and she talks about how she developed a cold mechanism of masking her steaming and cold
mechanism to to hide the rocking that she does when she is really really excited and she says
that is not something that she spontaneously did like in the first time but it is much more like
an an aversive association because of the social stigma that is in the space you know so I think
that maybe we should talk about not normal or abnormal but different instances of behaving
or different instances instances of sense making and maybe also not to put like a moral imperative
on how we should behave you know like I don't know if this is making sense but yeah this was
this is really helpful context thank you I don't know if Medina also wants to say something
no for now it's okay I think you answered very well thank you very much Shannon thank you
all right hi thank you for your talk
so I would like to you elaborate a bit between the melange of concepts that you use
and especially the world what is why the world could be or similar or different or akin to affordances
of Gibson and to what extent that is similar to an action and to what extent also these three
concepts are similar to a structural coupling because these four concepts that I said have
something in common but also have substantial differences differences for example an action
if you see the chapter nine of Varela Thompson Roche the embody mind which I mean that's the
central book that they took forward for an action they make they make a substantial difference with
Gibson affordances while for Gibson affordances the reality is outside an action still believes that
or still argue that is a sense of motor in action so a sense making so is this still
there is no independent reality of the action of the organism so I would like you elaborate a bit
more between these four concepts not wealth affordances and action and structural coupling
and to what extent they relate or know to to to to active inference
yeah thank you very much for your question Sergio um yeah I mean there there's a lot of controversy
about the affordance concept so if you take it just like the Gibson's first book in 1979 in
the concept is not really clear so there have been several several approaches to it and we we skip
that part because we just took the affordances 2.0 approach from Chamero but let me expand a little
bit on this the idea is that if you see affordances as dispositions in the environment for agents to
interact with you are of course talking about an independent reality and that would contradict
an activism or or some of the basic standards of an activism but precisely what Chamero and Edward
Bax do in a paper in 2018 is to to split the idea of of the physical world which is Gibson's term
into two the habitat which is the set of affordances that are there for for the form of life which
would be for example for the species for human species and then the affordances that are there
for particular individuals that take them from the habitat so you have a difference in information
for and information about no so you have information for the species and that's the habitat that's the
the general affordances that are available for a particular form of life and then you have the
information about which is about the particular abilities of the individual which also is in
accordance with Gibson's first postulation that is to mix and and complete objectivity and subjectivity
neither one of them no which has this very famous quote that is a bit of a ambiguous no and and
everyone has talked about it so what we want to say talking about this is that umbelts
seen in this sense that is affordances for particular animals once they become in interaction with
with those affordances have two two constitutive parts and the and the and the word constitutive is
very important no there are the abilities and there are the features of the environment and the
abilities are made by sensory motor schemes so the abilities are what gets coupled or gets in
interaction with certain features of the environment and and so in that sense you can use the term
affordance in interaction with and with inactive approaches and I mean there are many inactive
theories that that support that idea in that sense no that that sensory motor interactions are
um autonomous are adaptive are um self self-defining but all the way through they have to interact
with the environment and when that interaction happens that is the structural coupling and
that's the affordance I hope I hope I made myself clear I don't yeah
yeah yes thank you indeed and right so uh the question is then and well they they in somehow
they are they are talking about the same thing um
um
you have basically I think so as far as I know you two two different approaches to how
how the the organisms acts on its environment one is a reactive paradigm which is based on
feedbacks only and feedbacks are just error counteracting behavior so the error has has to take
place in order to the organism correct that this is a very mechanistic explanation so
then you have watch what is quite a bit different in the sense that organisms are not anymore
reactive systems so that the organisms indeed anticipate and in this case make active inference
of the environment so based on uh either anticipative models of the environment
or uh generative models as as cal for instance uses to not to talk about so but roger rosen also
talks about anticipative models so how you can connect affordances and unwelled with
uh these uh these non-reactive uh behaviors of the organisms in the sense non-reactive
behaviors I am saying anticipative behavior so you are placing the organism as a passive
entity that only reacts or the organism can anticipate indeed things and can make active
inference of its environment uh and based on these active inference that the organism is doing
can change present behavior so uh how uh so far what what I got is that
there is some kind of of tension there in explanation regarding active inference so how do you place that
you go or I go okay um okay one thing is that um I hope I understood well your question but
one thing is that uh uh the prediction that you are talking about um is is is some of the things
that we are concerned about when we talk about active inference because exactly what what what
the inactive slash ecological in this sense that we just explained uh this mixture uh offers is is
more a sense of being uh of having habits uh much more in a pragmatic uh uh John Dewey's sense
than to be predicting every time we interact with the environment so the sensory motor schemes uh
become attuned with the environment and that's why we think that ecological resonance makes a good
point because it is the environment that is uh the uh leading the the way the behavioral body
reacts so there's no anticipation you have to be there to be um interacting with the affordances
and multiple affordances that are in that place so if they are not there uh you could um you couldn't
do it so even though you are predicting you wouldn't be interacting in in the in the way
you are doing in that precise time because um sometimes like like for example with depression
you can be in front of the same affordances and not being able to interact with them because
you have a particular uh state of mood or effective mood etc so what what we what we what we think is
that just talking about active inference in this sense um active inference can give us many many
answers to very interesting uh uh particularities but not to this to the trajectory of the particular
envelopes that the agent has i don't know if you want to add something itself thank you answer all
thanks i know that we are running on time yeah uh well i let the talk uh last a little bit longer
because the 430 talk is um has been canceled so we have a we do have a little more time uh
i think there was a question by Marco uh but uh it's there and Melina if you want to answer
it's fine or maybe you're tired or so it's up to you would you like would you like Marco to ask
this question yeah it's okay it's okay great i also saw that there is like a really good
discussion going on on the chat and i am really excited like it's so good yeah sorry go Marco
thank you um really interesting talk i'm a bit sleep deprived so sorry if if i'm not making
sense or if i miss something in your talk so in the chat i had just a clarification question
because there was this nice images you had with the nice loops of the bi-directional flows but
you had the n and the s within um what did they stand for uh nervous system oh okay fair enough um
and and and a more uh big picture question this is so so um i am very much empathized with many
of the points you make but but i can't um escape a kind of pessimism i think exactly um well
active inference but also ecological wrestlers i think because of the different way that we are
as in the distinctively different well as a beauty it's the diversity has a power but at the same
time i think it also means that that sometimes there is an inescapable uh unsurmountable bridge
between each other's uh lived experiences each other's let's say the reality and we see in terms
of our own reality right and so that i think creates certain barriers for that participatory sense
make sometimes um and then that's the pessimistic parts and then my question to you is is more um
regardless if you agree or not what is the best way to still um make the most out of our neuro
diverse um society for the sake collective intelligence and if you really should encourage
or impose or force this this in my opinion over romanticized idea that everyone should
perfectly along with each other i think it's more kind of respect of each other's distinctively
different than unique umwelts and wherever it is possible to find a way to have this
mutually enriching participants make we should um because like you said you know we we just have
to understand the way we work but understanding how we work doesn't always immediately translate
into a smoother ideal mutual interaction right um yeah i have some questions about active
inference and prediction but i think that's maybe a different theoretical discussion so yeah i'd
love to hear thoughts about whatever i said well i think it's a great question i also used to have
that question before uh but for example hannah the jagger takes into account uh maria lugones
perspective she's uh the colony of epistemi epistemological feminist and she talks about
world traveling um in terms of creating a situated and engaged epistemology for science and humanities
and she says that from considering the diverse ways of in this sense for example
sense making the world we should like depart from the empathy and like understand that there are
diverse ways and we can differ as you said like we are able to differ in our way of sense making
of the reality uh but that doesn't mean that we should put as i said before with charon
that doesn't mean that we should uh put a hierarchy on the sense making so we shouldn't
like this is the concentrated or this is the adequate and the only adequate form of
comprehend comprehension of the world and she talks about word traveling because she says that we
should listen and read and take into account the voices of people in the minorities sir very briefly
because i'm confused with world traveling do you mean the physical world as in traveling around
or do you mean the live worlds the lived worlds like uh world traveling in in a sense of sense
making yeah because she says that maria lugones says that we create worlds in a individual and
collective way like in an abstract way i'm not saying like in a like we should travel around the
okay maybe one day yeah more in that sense so i like that way of thinking because i think that we
shouldn't put a hierarchy on how we should think or how we should behave um i don't know if i am
answering your question i think what would be useful is is to first of all to elaborate how we
achieve that and second of all though i though i agree there shouldn't be a universal hierarchy
i think it even though difficult and challenging especially in the modern social media culture
but i do think it's useful for the communities themselves to figure out a notion a normative
framework on how to engage a participatory sense making across different contexts um i mean one
example i like to use is is uh the civil rights movement right it's it's not about just homogeneity
we're all the same there is a utility in setting norms and uh giving special rules of leadership
given that there's a consensus that it aligns with the goals of the community as a whole right i
think the the danger of of hierarchy is othering and suppression and exclusion but i think it's
fine to have a commonly held notion of what ideals strive for and and and i'm wondering
how to do that for all the different communities for example autism maybe art is a very powerful way
for them to explore their own worlds given the difficulty doing so with the rigidity of normal
language but also what particular uh let's say microcosmos or micro cultures can be creates
not just for just autism and autism people but particular artistic people with other
particular autistic people and create a culture around that how do you see the role of your work
or your views um for that direction if that makes sense yeah i think that in a pragmatic sense um
on how to do that um i get the instance is also described by Hannah de Jagger and she says
to let it be um and i know that it's kind of a cliche um but she talks also departing from this
kind of situated and the colonial thinking in which i think that it involves to break some
um paradigms from the western world of organization you know and i know that it's kind of
um maybe it's like an utopia of thinking um to think on the transformation on our way of
organist of organized yeah of organized organized and um in a pragmatic sense for example in
psychology as you saw in the slides i was considering the intensive interaction um treatment
because in that one they i think uh depart from a way of thinking in which they don't put the
typical or normal kind of communication if not they what they do is to depart from the
sense making that the autistic people create so for example there are many like cases reported in
some papers and one of them um involves a girl an autistic girl that her way of interacting with
the world was by slapping with her hands the space she couldn't talk she couldn't like
um vocalize any kind of sentence or word and what the psychologist did was to first
visualize or observe the way of behaving and interacting of the girl instead of imposing
her own way of uh communicating like instead of going to her and saying like hi my name is la lola
what she did was to depart from the way of behaving and the way of interacting of the autistic girl
and i think that in that sense it could translate to the thing that i said of maria luganes of
world traveling like to listen to other voices to listen to the minorities and that doesn't
only involve to just say that they exist but it also involves to participate in in a situated and
engaged and active way uh i think that would be like the pragmatic answer for for your question but i
don't well i like that you said let's be because one other phrase i really love from the air is
letting in as knowing right and i think you know we talk a lot about participation but i think that
is something that should be explicitly mentioned sometimes because i personally sometimes worry
i don't know if it's justified that um the the toggle that includes the spaces is sometimes used
as a let's say a short a short cuts to avoid the more difficult job of actually letting in right
so the kind of almost robotic algorithmic action of i'll do this and that policy and then
will make people feel included um but not actually try to let people in to their own reality
even if they're very different from and i think that is a distinction that that i
personally very appreciate from the actor and it's become more of discussion than the question
but thank you that that's very interesting um replies thank you very much marco i we're gonna
take that one play it in it's a really it's a service but yeah it's a great it's a great discussion
maybe we can keep it going a little bit later on um well um thank you excel and melina
for a great talk very stimulating talk um
