behaviors collect to
the final output
behaviors.

A multitude of
recognitions of
presented input
address the structure
of rings one
recognition at a
time.

final
output
behaviors
addressing
recognition
current behaviors
asserted
behaviors
ring expression
current
behaviors
detail of ring expression
Figure 8.13 An pure association expression behavior memory.

EXPERIENCE MEMORY 143

TIME AND MEMORY
enables the current behaviors to fl ow into the one addressed ring expression.

Some function of the current behaviors and remembered behaviors will fl ow
out of the ring and also back into the ring. The behaviors fl owing out of the
ring will contribute to fi nal output behaviors for the greater association expres-
sion. The ring then sits quiescent remembering the last behaviors until it is
enabled again by a recognition.

The ring memories will modify as recognitions occur over time, accumulat-
ing a memory of experience that is accessible by recognition of presented
input. The content of the rings are memory of the past that are not associated
to a specifi c relative time but to a specifi c experience. A recognition will be a
familiarity and the content of the ring the reminiscence. An appreciation
might enable more than one memory ring. A memory content might enable
other memories. Networks of memories associated by experience and behav-
ior can appreciate patterns of differentness through time that can infl uence
the ongoing behavior of the greater expression.

8.4.2 Recognition Memory
Behaviors can be associated through time in other relationships as well. Rec-
ognition content might be remembered in association with appreciation
behaviors. An expression does not have control over its input, but it does
have control over its output and there are only so many output behaviors.

An expression can generate output on a speculative basis (play) and observe
what input occurs. It can enable rings in a structure with the output behavior
and store in the rings the ensuing input recognition. The expression can
anticipate what input recognition behavior should occur, and this anticipation
can become an integral part of the appreciation of the ensuing input. Eventu-
ally an expression might gain a modicum of control over its input through its
output behavior.

8.5 A NEW FORM OF EXPRESSION
What is new with this chapter is intermediate persistence memories. Prior to
this chapter a process expression was characterized as a permanent expression
through which transient differentnesses fl owed and were appreciated. There
might be a succession of presented differentnesses to appreciate, but each
successive presentation was independent with no relationship with other pre-
sentations. There were only two extremes of persistence: the permanent
expression and the transient differentnesses that fl ow through it being appreci-
ated. The only relationship among successive presentations was the constancy
of appreciation of the expression itself. Identical differentnesses are always
identically appreciated.

With the introduction of intermediate persistence memories the nature of
expression changes dramatically. There are now direct association relation-

ships among successive presentations. An expression is now an association
structure of memories as well as a structure of appreciating operators. The
content of the intermediate memories is integral to the appreciation of each
successive presentation. The content of the memories is constantly changing.

The appreciation behavior of the expression is constantly changing. Identical
differentnesses are no longer always identically appreciated. There is no
longer a static appreciator of dynamic differentness. The appreciator is itself
dynamic.

An association expression encompassed by a pure value expression includes
a ring path from the output of the expression through the pure value expres-
sion to the input of the expression. With the cyclic behavior of the ring and
changing contents of intermediate persistence memories a new form of expres-
sion arises, dynamically making its way through the pure value expression.

8.5.1 The Expression of Memory
There is no fi rm boundary between the expression of memory and the rest of
the expression. The differential pipeline memory is a matter of initialized
wavefronts. Without the initialized wavefronts the structure does not express
a memory. The ring is just another association relationship in the greater
structure. There is no standard way of expressing memory. It can be any means
of expression that persists in relation to other expressions. It can be anything
from a serially addressable monolithic memory to the structure of an associa-
tion expression itself.

In the behavior search of Section 8.3.3 a ring stored three possible behav-
iors, and the expression searched through the three behaviors to avoid bad
experiences. It could also be expressed as an object with methods of search in
the monolithic memory of a conventional computer. It could even be expressed
as an association search that reconfi gures itself with the negative feedback.

Figure 8.14 shows a pure association expression of three binary inputs combin-
ing association relationships into a rank of threshold operators representing
Figure 8.14 Association expression can search by altering association relationships.

A NEW FORM OF EXPRESSION 145

TIME AND MEMORY
eight possible appreciation behaviors. The pattern of associations maps the
formed name to a recognizing behavior.

The expression can search through various mappings of recognition to
behavior by changing the association relationships. A negative feedback could
cause the expression to make more associations. Negative feedback just mixes
things up. In the absence of negative feedback a status quo consolidates itself.

The resulting memory of mapping recognition to behavior is an integral part
of the association expression.

It was suggested at the beginning of the chapter that it was convenient
to consider process expression purely in terms of memory. An expression
not only contains intermediate memories but is itself a memory that can
change. An expression is a structure of memories of various persistences,
with the greater expression itself simply being the most persistent memory.

As the content of the memories change, including the structure of expression
itself, the appreciation behavior of the expression changes. The ring expres-
sions of Figure 8.13 might be dynamically changing association expressions
like Figure 8.14.

8.5.2 The Expression of Time
Association through time is expressed as association between places in the
network. While some associations through time might be constant relative to
succession relationships such as with a delay memory, which always associates
the memory of the third previous wavefront with the current wavefront, other
associations will be in terms of recognition behaviors within the expression.

No Structure of Place in Time There is no coherent characterization of
“place in time.” A place in time might be a place in relation to presentation
succession. A place in time might be a place of some specifi c experience or
behavior. Different kinds of places in time are not relatable among them-
selves. They do not compose. A relative experience time cannot be related to
a relative succession time. But they can all be associated within the association
expression. These association relationships do not themselves form a coherent
network of association relationships through time. Each place of association
through time is an island of association within the association network. The
islands themselves are not necessarily associated in terms of time, but they are
all associated within the network.

Prior to the invention of the clock and the calendar there is no particular
structure to time within an association expression: no coherent characteriza-
tion of place in time.

No Boundaries in Time While the behavior of an association expression is
bounded by its input and output boundary and by the extent of its network,
there is no inherent bound to its behavior in time and no particular boundaries
of association through time. An association expression can receive input,

assert output, and remember content as long as it persists. There is no particu-
lar beginning and no particular ending of time during its persistence.

The closing of the boundaries of the expression through the pure value
expression and the expression of memories within the expression transcends
the bounds of the association expression itself. It becomes an ongoing process
extending through time and into the pure value expression with no fi rm
boundaries of expression.

8.5.3 Whither Referent?
Another aspect of the expression that becomes infi rm is the stability of the
expression itself and its role as a referent of differentness. Initially expression
was characterized as a referent for presented differentnesses. But, if an expres-
sion can change its behavior in relation to the differentnesses presented to it,
what becomes of the role of referent? The answer lies in the beginning.

Differentness and its appreciation begins in the primitive pure value expres-
sion. Each theng carries around its value and some value transform rules.

Thengs freely associate and interact. All thengs are on a level playing fi eld,
symmetrically appreciating each other. Each theng and its value is equally a
referent to appreciate the differentness of all other thengs and equally a dif-
ferentness for all other thengs to appreciate.

When thengs join in a persistent locus of association, the locus breaks the
symmetry of expression. The association expression as a whole has a greater
stride of appreciation and becomes a greater referent than any individual
theng. If the association expression changes slowly in relation to the different-
nesses fl owing through it, it does not cease to be a greater referent. It just
becomes a slightly different referent.

8.5.4 The Arrogance of Bulk
As the locus persists and grows bulkier its stride of appreciation grows and it
becomes a farther reaching referent, not only of differentness, but the associa-
tion structure and the memories of the expression begin forming referents for
