space and time. Earlier, in Section 5.2.8, it was stated that there is no inherent
place or time within the pure value expression and that there is no external
meta view to project a referent of place and time. An association expression
arising within a pure value expression becomes an internal meta observer
projecting its metrics of differentness, space, and time onto its neighborhood
content, usurping the role of meta referent with the presumptive arrogance of
self reference: a persistence with attitude—an arrogant bulk that can impose
its appreciations and its referent on lesser expressions with smaller stride of
appreciation and less persistence.

There is no meta referent for the behavior of these self-proclaimed refer-
ents. There is no ultimate “true” referent, no absolute meta referent. An
arrogant bulk is a greatest referent, and it is entirely on its own.

A NEW FORM OF EXPRESSION 147

TIME AND MEMORY
8.5.5 Whither Stability?
The content of memories can change. The association structure of the expres-
sion can change. With so much that can change how can an expression possibly
remain stable and persistent?
It was mentioned above that an expression might change slowly. What does
it mean for an expression to change slowly? It means that there is a new dif-
ferentness that is not very different from the previous differentness: that there
are localities of differentness in the expression, that a change within the local-
ity does not drastically change the expression but slightly evolves the expres-
sion. The primitive expression of locality of differentness is mutual exclusivity
of assertion. A theng that mutually exclusively asserts one value at a time
expresses a primitive locality of differentness.

Consider a pure association variable that represents a 1000 differentnesses
as 1000 unique places of association only one of which will assert at a time,
rather like Figure 8.14 with 1000 appreciations instead of 8. The 1000 differ-
entnesses might be 1000 gradations of force for a particular muscle. It is
easy to imagine that some associations might wither, that some associations
might strengthen, and that new associations might arise speculatively. It is
easy to imagine that the appreciation of a particular input might gradually
drift along the gradations of force as the association relationships changed.

One change of differentness among 1000 differentnesses can be a gradual
change.

One can also imagine gradual change in a pure value expression. Consider
a protein gradually changing if differentness in relation to all other proteins
as DNA mutation gradually alters its amino acid structure one amino acid at
a time.

Pure forms of expression can easily express locality of differentness
and gradual drift of local differentness. It is this expression of locality of
differentness from which stability of persistence arises. Of course, a change
may still cause a very nonlocal change of differentness and the expression
may or may not persist. Or a local change may cross some boundary of
stability to the detriment of the expression. There is no primitive impera-
tive of stability. An arrogant bulk is merely a locus that has managed to
persist.

Nonlocal change does not foster stability. Consider an expression
whose content is binary encoded. If a bit fl ips on a 10 bit number changing
it from 512 to 520, what does that mean? If the expression of binary ADD
changes slightly, what does that mean? An encoded number represents
some whole differentness. Nevertheless, the encoding, which might be in any
radix, is arbitrary. Since the encoding is arbitrary, it cannot relate directly to
the whole differentness being represented, and a change of the code cannot
be meaningfully related to the whole differentness. Place-value encoded
differentness provides opportunities for meaningless and disruptive nonlocal
change.


8.5.6 A Greater Search
An association expression was initially characterized as a passive appreciator
of differentness that searched to match a presented input to an internal rep-
resentation of the possible presentations. Since all possible presentations
cannot be internally pre-expressed, this internal search is no longer a suffi cient
end in itself but becomes a component means of a greater search extending
into the pure value expression. If appreciation of differentness cannot be fully
pre-expressed within the expression, then the expression must develop its own
appreciations. The ring of behavior from the output through the pure value
expression to the input provides the ability to search and play within the pure
value expression.

For an association expression encompassed by a pure value expression, its
output behavior is no longer just values asserted at an output boundary.

Output behavior can directly interact with the content of the pure value
expression. The output behavior might change the orientation of the input
boundary in relation to the content of the pure value expression. The output
behavior might change the content of the pure value expression in a way that
immediately or eventually feeds back to the input boundary affecting the
presentation of the input.

The memories in the expression provides the ability to remember the con-
sequences of output behavior in a way that infl uences future behaviors. The
various memories of the expression are an integral part of the search. As well
as forming internal memories of experience, an association expression might
form memories in the pure value expression itself by leaving mementos about
in the pure value expression to be found later or by modifying the pure value
content in some memorable way. It might communicate with other association
expressions by placing things in the pure value content and by receiving things
from the pure value content. With individual mobility, association expressions
might maintain mutual locality and form a persistent locus of loosely coupled
association expressions. The expressions might cooperate to accumulate expe-
rience memory within themselves collectively and within their immediate
vicinity. An association expression is no longer a passive appreciator. It is an
active participant.

8.5.7 The Goal
What is the goal of the greater search? There is no particular goal, no end to
the search, no ultimate answer. It is just an ongoing behavior that is convenient
to speak of as a search. The behavior continues, or it does not. The behavior
abets persistence, or it does not. While an arrogant bulk is judging the differ-
entnesses of its surrounding content, the surrounding content of the pure value
expression is judging the persistence of the bulk. An arrogant bulk behaves
and judges as long as it persists. Persistence begets referent, and persistence
itself is the only ultimate referent.

A NEW FORM OF EXPRESSION 149

TIME AND MEMORY
8.6 TIME AND MEMORY IN PURE VALUE EXPRESSION
While an association expression forms a coherent whole with relationships
among all its parts, a pure value expression does not form a coherent whole.

The content of a pure value expression can support a multitude of value
expressions behaving independently, the only commonality being the common
place of association. While a rhythm may be established by one independent
value expression, there is no structure of relationships for a rhythm to infl u-
ence the pure value expression as a whole. In a pure value expression all
association is either immediate, as with a fully associated pure value expres-
sion, or of indeterminate interval, as with a shaking bag pure value expression.

Neither case provides a basis for a referent interval of time.

The memory of a pure value expression is its content. Because the content
can contain a multitude of independent processes, there is no particular struc-
ture to the content and no particular structure to the memory. A value can be
left in the content of the expression to interact at a later time, but when the
interaction occurs, it may not be clear that the value is from a past or from
how far in the past. Past, present, and future are much murkier in a pure value
expression than in an association expression.

8.7 SUMMARY
The structure of an association expression can serve as a referent of relative
past, present and future for the wavefronts fl owing through it. The succession
of presented or grabbed input wavefronts can establish a rhythm of successive
instances of time. Each successive wavefront has a place in time relative to
the other wavefronts in the succession. Intermediate persistence memories
within an association expression can store wavefronts and associate them with
succeeding or future wavefronts associating differentness through time. Asso-
ciation structures of memories of differing persistence can express the appre-
ciation of patterns of differentness through time.

Appreciation behavior can change in relation to the changing memories
that are integral to the expression. An expression becomes a dynamic appre-
ciator of its dynamic pure value surroundings. Expressions with great stride
of appreciation become referents for expressions with considerably less stride
of appreciation: arrogant bulks: ad hoc self-proclaimed referents for all they
encounter, adrift in the pure value expression, making their way as best they
can.

No new primitive concepts of expression have been introduced. It is still
just associated thengs asserting values that interact according to value trans-
form rules.


Computer Science Reconsidered: The Invocation Model of Process Expression, by Karl M. Fant
Copyright © 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

INCIDENTAL TIME
With memory, expressions can be extended in time, not only for the apprecia-
tion of differentness in time but simply for some convenient variation of
expression. Such extension in time is not an inherent property of the process
being expressed but is incidental to a particular expression of a process that
might be expressed in other ways without extension in time. One reason for
incidental extension in time is to compensate for various limitations of expres-
sivity. Another reason is to provide fl exibility of behavior.

9.1 SEQUENTIALIZATION OF ASSOCIATIONS
The association expression of the full-adder in Figure 9.1 will serve as an
example expression. The minimum extension in time for any expression is a
single behavior. The full-adder can be expressed as two concurrent single
behaviors as seen earlier with the association expression of Figure 7.2. The
example expression extends with multiple behaviors through both space and
time because of the limited value differentiation of the Boolean functions.

Extension in time occurs when there are resources of limited expressivity
that have to be reused over and over. In the case of Figure 9.1 there are only
two values that must be reused multiple times, and there are only simple
association operators that must be used multiple times. The association paths
are the memories extending the expression in time.

The full-adder expression can be further extended in time by increasing
memory capacity. Figure 9.2 shows the expression of Figure 9.1 redrawn with

INCIDENTAL TIME
stateless operators in an ordered sequence with exactly the same association
relationships. The expression is partitioned with clocked pipeline stages indi-
cated by the vertical lines. The horizontal part of each association path is one
or more pipeline stages long. Each pipeline stage is a separate memory
element. The C input path, for example, has ten pipeline stages. Each associa-
tion path in the expression of Figure 9.1 is exactly one memory element. The
