10.3 THE SINGLE-DIGIT NUMBER
A single-digit number represents its entire range of differentness with a
single-digit position. One might think of it as adjusting the radix of the
number to match its range so that a second-digit position is never needed.

If a number represents 50 differentnesses, there are 50 digits. The digits might
be 50 unique symbols or 50 unique places in a network of association
relationships.

Each single-digit number has a unique set of digits that interact by direct
association in a single behavior with digits of other single-digit numbers in
terms of a unique set of value transform rules. Each number is unique, and
each interaction is unique. There is no necessary commonality of structure, or
commonality of digits, or commonality of interaction behavior. There is no
number line, no ordinality, and no cardinality.

Initially this must seem a major shortcoming of the notion of the single-
digit number. There is no foothold of commonality for analysis and com-
parison of single-digit number expressions. But, while commonality has
its use, it also has its cost. Specifi cs can be obscured by commonality, and
many things can be properly understood only in the specifi c. Commonality
can also be very expensive. Combining multitudes of place-value numbers
is not cheap. The specifi city of single-digit numbers provides a directness
of expression and effi ciency of behavior that place-value numbers cannot
provide.

head
wing
wing
feet
branch
Figure 10.1 Coupled rings of the eagle’s expression.


10.3.1 Single-Digit Number Expressions
Because single-digit numbers interact with a single behavior, a single-digit
number expression is a network of directly associated single-digit numbers.

This network of association relationships is the counterpart of the algebraic
expression for place-value numbers.

Logic, as it is used in designing electronic circuits, is a single-digit number
system with a common set of digits and common set of interaction behaviors.

Each logical variable (number) has only two digit values, TRUE or FALSE,
NULL or DATA, represented as a single-digit position. These single digit
numbers are directly combined as a network of directly interacting logical
operators.

Single-digit number expressions can be directly mapped to real world
behaviors. Real world behaviors can also be mapped directly to single digit
number expressions. If real world behaviors are mapped to place-value number
expressions, confusions of commonality arise. Implications of ordinality, car-
dinality, extensibility, and spatial placeness of differentness are introduced.

None of these qualities may have any relevance to the behavior being mapped.

These confusions do not arise with single-digit number expressions. There are
a multitude of real world behaviors that are single-digit number expressions
and very likely not a single one that is a place-value number expression.

Both commonality and specifi city have their appropriate places.

10.3.2 Two Methods of Approximation
With place-value numbers and the projected reference frame the eagle can be
translated to the branch in a single translation calculation. Even though the
calculation is carried out as a single abstract step, it is still calculated as an
enormous quantity of numeric interactions, each of which resolves as an itera-
tive progression of successive approximation. If the landing is carried out as
a sequence of N translations, the enormous quantity of numeric approxima-
tion steps is multiplied by N.

The single-digit number expression of the eagle cannot perform the landing
in an abstract single calculation step. It must calculate the landing in an itera-
tive progression of approximations, each approximation being an iteration of
the full expression.

The eagle landing can be structurally related to the addition of two place-
value numbers as an iterative resolution of successive approximations. The
eagle number, structured through time, is composed of the sequence of vision
fi eld deltas, with each delta being a fi ner approximation of place in the vision
fi eld. The succession of deltas corresponds to the order of digits of the place-
value numbers. Each vision fi eld delta is resolved with a constant expression:
the body of the eagle. Each resolution produces a new delta (the carry) to the
next iteration. This constant expression resolving each vision fi eld delta
corresponds to the constant expression of the digit addition table resolving
THE SINGLE-DIGIT NUMBER 169

POINTS OF VIEW
each digit in turn with a propagating carry value. Both the eagle landing and
two place-value numbers being added resolve as an iterative progression of
approximations, with each approximation expressed in a common format and
resolved with a common behavior.

10.3.3 Two Views of Expression
The projected world frame and the eagle both express the same process of the
eagle landing on the branch by way of symbolic calculation. Each is a very
different expression of differentness and its interplay, but In both cases the
eagle moves identically through space to land on the branch.

The projected world frame provides a generalized accounting that is
remote from the reality of the eagle. It can equally characterize a squirrel’s
landing on the branch or a saw cutting the branch. It embodies an indifferent
generality that precludes an intimate specifi city. While it may seem that the
most encompassing generality will provide the deepest understanding, this
is not always the case. Bounds of representation and nuances of meaning
are lost in the expressivity of the numbers and the generality of their
application.

The eagle expresses the behavior of the eagle and nothing else. There is
nothing common or general about the expression. Another bird might proceed
similarly but not identically. The landing expression of a squirrel might be
quite different.

There is nothing incorrect about a numeric characterization within a pro-
jected reference frame, but it contributes no insight whatever into how a real
eagle goes about landing on the branch. It cannot be directly instantiated and
become an instance of a real eagle landing on a branch. It just saves the
appearances of the process. While this is exactly how an imaginary, but very
real looking, eagle landing on the branch with feathers fl uttering in the wind
would be generated by computer for a movie, the real eagle does not care in
the least how it appears while landing and least of all how its feathers fl utter
in the wind.

The projected world frame is an external observer’s view of differentness.

Its characterizations of process may seem complete and precise but may actu-
ally be unnecessarily complex and superfi cial. A projected reference frame is
an arm’s-length external view that cannot characterize the differentnesses
inherent to the behavior itself. Nature can be observed in terms of projected
reference frames and place-value numbers, but nature itself speaks in terms
of embedded reference frames and single-digit numbers representing direct
interaction among specifi c differentnesses. The place-value number is an inci-
dental encoding method of humans and while projecting it onto nature can be
very useful it does not always unlock her secrets. Table 10.1 compares place-
value numbers and single-digit numbers.

The notion of the single-digit number has allowed a convenient comparison
of an unfamiliar form of expression with the familiar place-value numbers, but

a single-digit number is not a number in any conventional sense of the term.

The single-digit number expression is just another way of talking about pure
differentness expression, such as a pure value expression or the pure associa-
tion expression of the eagle.

10.3.4 The Eagle’s Answer
For mathematics and computer science the goal of a computation or a program
is an answer. At the end of the process of the eagle landing there is not the
appearance of an answer so much as the disappearance of a question. The
eagle is on its perch. The question of how to land on the perch is resolved,
not by supplying an answer but by progressively eliminating the question.

Even if some kind of output that can be characterized as “an answer” is pro-
duced, it does not remain relevant beyond the actual landing. The next landing
problem will be slightly different with a slightly different “answer.”
Nature is about the ongoing interplay of patterns of differentness, not about
numbers and answers. Number is an incidental encoding technique of humans.

The notion of an answer is an artifact of a particular style of human thinking.

THE SINGLE-DIGIT NUMBER 171
Table 10.1 Comparison of place-value numbers and single-digit numbers
Place-Value Numbers
Single-Digit Numbers
Indefi nite range of differentness
Limited range of differentness
Multiple-digit positions
A single-digit position
Each number uses the same set of
Each number may use a different set of
digits
digits
Numbers interact with a sequence of
Numbers interact with a single behavior
digit interactions
Is cardinal and ordinal
Is neither cardinal nor ordinal
Common algorithms for interacting
Each interaction is unique, no common
numbers
algorithms
Too general: wasted expressivity
Just right: no wasted expressivity, no
and computation
wasted computation
Common reference frame
No common referent
Indirect representation of differentness
Direct representation of differentness
Place-value numbers are a general
Single-digit numbers are a specifi c form
form and relate to the global
and relate directly to each other
reference frame
locally
Profl igate with resolution behavior
Parsimonious with resolution behavior
Parsimonious with digit value sets
Profl igate with digit value sets and
