expression.

As molecules become even bigger and more complex, proteins emerge that
express very specifi c value behaviors within a very large range of value dif-
ferentness. Molecules develop an input end, and an output end, and a unit
of association emerges. Units of association can associate directly to form
BIG THENGS—LITTLE THENGS 175

POINTS OF VIEW
association expressions, or they can serve as receptor proteins to associate
pure value expressions through their bounding membranes.

With each stage of composition the components of expression are sub-
sumed by a wholeness of behavior, which is not a simple sum of the compo-
nents. Each stage of composition creates a new domain of differentness and
appreciation behavior. Atoms are not particles and do not behave like parti-
cles. They create a new domain of differentness and appreciation among
themselves. Molecules create another domain of differentness and apprecia-
tion. Complex molecules such as proteins create yet another domain of dif-
ferentness and appreciation.

From the point of view of nature, these persistent structures of association
are just bigger thengs with more complex sets of value transform rules drifting
in the greater pure value expression. The bigger thengs, however, begin taking
themselves somewhat more seriously as an ultimate referent for all they
encounter. Eventually very big thengs arise that call themselves human and
invent things like numbers and arithmetic, and many other referents to project
onto other expressions in their neighborhood.

10.6.2 Composition Strategies
Humans are methodical and orderly. Nature is opportunistic and disorderly.

Humans begin with a precisely defi ned kernel and increase stride of apprecia-
tion by composing precisely defi ned patterns of association through levels of
hierarchical composition, accumulating more and more complex association
encoding in terms of a few values. Nature begins with an enormous chaos of
behavior and increases stride of appreciation by spontaneously composing
persistent loci, new thengs, through levels of hierarchical composition that
assert a greater and greater range of unique values and unique appreciation
behaviors. Humans tend to minimize value differentiation; nature tends to
minimize association differentiation.

10.7 OBSERVER—PARTICIPANT
The points of view of an observer and a participant can be quite different.

Consider a population of free but contained particles.

10.7.1 Behaving Particles
There is no observer and no reference frame. The particles are autonomously
behaving and are entirely on their own. Each particle can sense proximity of
interaction with another particle and knows how to behave in an interaction.

Differentness for a particle is proximate or not proximate and kind of parti-
cle. If proximate, the proximate particles appreciate their differentness by
interacting.


The autonomously behaving particle expression itself is a fully distributed,
autonomously behaving pure value expression. The differentness within the
system is appreciated by the particles themselves. There is no reference frame
nor spatial metric integral to the expression itself. A particle appreciates
nothing about relative place in space or path through space relative to the
other particles. It can only appreciate proximity to kind of particle. It can
appreciate nothing of the extended system of which it is part.

10.7.2 Observed Particles
An observer is a suffi ciently complex expression that can project a reference
frame of suffi cient precision onto another expression being observed and
internalize the observation. Differentness is place in the reference frame and
kind of particle. Process is motion behavior in relation to the reference frame
and particle interactions. An internal representation of an observation is nec-
essarily referential and symbolic. It cannot be an instance of the observed
expression.

In this case, unlike the case of the eagle, there is a very large difference in
stride of appreciation between the observer expression capable of projecting
a reference frame and internalizing the results and the expression of the par-
ticle system. The behavior of the particles is relatively very simple.

10.7.3 Observer and Participant
A complex observer expression is a meta view in relation to a simple observed
expression. It can encompass and appreciate a wholeness of the particle system
that the individual particles or even the system of particles itself cannot appre-
ciate. While the observer characterization within the reference frame may
seem complete and thorough in itself, the experiences and appreciations of
the particles themselves are not captured in this characterization. The observer
might consider the projected reference frame as part of the reality of the par-
ticle system itself, but it is not. The observed participants manage to behave
without the projected reference frame and without any possibility of appreci-
ating anything like an encompassing reference frame, relative place in space
or trajectory through space. An individual particle has no stride of apprecia-
tion: no reference frame. From the point of view of an individual particle it is
absolutely motionless, and nothing ever happens. An electron has enough
stride of appreciation to sense proximity and to interact by, for instance, fl ip-
ping its spin, but it does not have suffi cient stride of appreciation to remember
the previous spin. It can have no appreciation that anything is different.

While observation through a projected reference frame appears to com-
pletely and thoroughly characterize the system of particles, it does not char-
acterize the experience and point of view of the participants. To properly
characterize an observed expression, the points of view of the participants
within the observed expression must also be considered.

OBSERVER—PARTICIPANT 177

POINTS OF VIEW
The observation of the eagle through a projected spatial reference frame
characterizes the behavior of the eagle in terms very specifi c to the observer.

This provides a partial picture of the expression of the eagle, but to completely
understand the eagle, the observing expression must also encompass the eagles
point of view. The notion of single-digit numbers is an attempt to bridge the
numeric projection view of an observer and the pure association expression
of the eagle.

An observer is just another expression, just another participant with its own
inherent limitations of appreciation: an arrogant bulk messing about with
other “observed” expressions. While an observer expression may be able to
observe and thoroughly characterize within itself an expression that is much
simpler than itself, it is not capable of fully appreciating itself or another
expression of comparable complexity. An observed expression thoroughly
characterized within the context of an observer expression that cannot, itself,
be thoroughly characterized is a fundamental quandary, at its most mischie-
vous when observer and observed are commensurable such as humans observ-
ing humans or photons observing photons.

Complex expressions can effectively observe simple expressions, commen-
surable expressions cannot effectively observe each other, and clearly, simple
expressions cannot observe complex expressions. A complex expression observ-
ing simpler expressions is the realm of science. Commensurate expressions
observing each other is the realm of psychology. Simpler expressions observing
more complex expressions is the realm of sociology and philosophy.

At some level of complexity an observing expression might strive to tran-
scend its limitations and glimpse itself and its greater encompassing expres-
sion. The only path to transcendent appreciation is the accumulation and
organization of experience, which might possess a stride of appreciation that
the observing expression itself does not posses. But the inherent limitations
of the observing expression are still a quandary. The enterprise of science is
an attempt to transcend this quandary by accumulating and trying to organize
experience with experiment and theory.

10.8 INVISIBLE BEHAVIORS AND ILLUSORY BEHAVIORS
An observed autonomously behaving expression behaves with an intrinsic
point of view. An observing expression must discover a point of view that most
clearly elucidates the observed expression and its point of view. There may
be limitations of interaction between observer and observed, and there may
be limitations of characterization capacity in the observing expression that
precludes many points of view. There may be behaviors that are only observ-
able and expressible from particular viewpoints and that can be neither
expressed nor observed from other viewpoints.

It may be that any single point of view has illusory behaviors that obscure
and render invisible real behaviors. It may be that any single point of view is

never suffi cient in itself. Illusory behaviors typically occur at the limiting edges
of a point of view. One must avoid the dangerous edges of the fl at earth. One
cannot, in principle, travel to the heavenly moon in its crystalline sphere.

Concurrency is inherently complex and nondeterministic. The illusions of a
point of view obscure behaviors that are consequently invisible to the point
of view.

From a different point of view the illusions disappear and the invisible
becomes visible. One can sail as far as one likes toward the edge of the world
without falling off. One can travel to the moon. Concurrency can be simple
and deterministic.

The illusions are an inherent part of a point of view. From within a point of
view they are just inherent limitations about which nothing can be done. They
can only be transcended from a different point of view. One must step outside
the point of view for a different perspective. If one cannot discover the other
point of view, the illusions can seem very real, inevitable, and unavoidable.

10.8.1 Complementary Chaos
The invocation model consists of two complementary points of view. A pure
value expression can only be observed from the point of view of the behavior
of the values. If one observes it only from the point of view of spatial relation-
ships, it appears to be undifferentiated chaos.

A pure association expression can only be observed in terms of its associa-
tion relationships. Observing the expression in terms of the behavior of the
values without regard to their place in the association structure appears to be
an undifferentiated chaos of identical values incoherently transitioning.

What is invisible, obscured by an illusion of chaos, from one point of view
becomes visible orderliness from the other point of view.

10.8.2 Complementary Order
Value expression and association expression can be considered two quite dif-
ferent views of process expression with a complementary relationship. Neither
is viable in the absence of the other. There must be an expression of associa-
tion in a pure value expression, and there must be an expression of value
transition in a pure association expression. Neither can be observed in terms
of the other, but they cooperate with interweaving expressivity to transcend
their individual limitations and form expressions of indefi nite complexity that
must be considered in terms of both points of view.

10.8.3 Chaotic Flow or Orderly Flow
Consider the skewed wavefronts of Section 7.2.5. If they are viewed in terms
