I've seen in the news it may not be extraterrestrial life, it could even be
interdimensional, some sort of interdimensional being. I try to think
what is an interdimensional being? What does that mean? What would it
look like? How can we look through other dimensions?
Welcome guys, a little different video this week. I had some amazing interview
with Lou Elizondo on Artisan Tony's podcast and also with Alexei Novitsky.
Alexei Novitsky has some amazing theories. Artisan Tony actually put us in
contact together and it seems like our theories both kind of align,
mine on size dimensions that were in a larger organism
and his on were basically frequency relationships and that's how matter is
manifesting. Very interesting, again all theories but I feel like
with theories now we have something to aim at and we can actually make some
some actual scientific experiments. Knowing is half the battle right? Thanks for
being here, go to patreon.com forward slash chrislata if you want to
support the team and get special merchandise coming out.
If you do like this content, smash that like button, subscribe, I release videos
every Friday and I try and read all the comments so let me know what you think
onto the video. I've heard that it could be not just extraterrestrial life but
interdimensional life. What could interdimensional life
look like? How could we experience another dimension?
I've been working with Alexei for the past several months
trying to determine how we could consider different dimensions.
So I have a working theory that Lou knew very well,
it's almost as if he made it up himself, he said it better than
I could have. I had the amazing opportunity to
be on a working roundtable with Lou Elizondo, the man, the legend,
really who started us on the path to disclosure.
He says on the podcast immediately after this one, he ran from
from Artisan Tony's podcast, the one I was on the roundtable with Alexei
Novitsky. Lou ran to that one to Vinny at
Disclosure Team. Amazing YouTube channel, please follow him,
please watch Vinny and Lou actually gives up a lot more
kind of UAP intel or data, if you will, on that podcast.
We're going to make, if you think we've made a splash so far, you ain't seen
nothing yet. There's going to be some announcements this
year, I think, that are going to hopefully resonate.
That's what he said on that podcast, so amazing. Yeah, go check them out, check
them both out. I've watched them several times already.
The working group I did with Lou Elizondo and Artisan Tony's was more
metaphysical and it was really Lou Elizondo asking these
unbelievable questions, just amazing questions and it reminded me of
one of my one of my recent favorite books. Elon Musk's favorite
philosophy book is Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
One of the philosophies in that book is the questions are just
as important, if not more important than the answer. And right now, from my
impression from this working roundtable Lou Elizondo,
is we just don't know even the right questions to ask at this point.
There's just such a difference in our understanding of reality
and the universe and what we're seeing from these UAP events.
It's been going on for many decades. The two main points from this podcast that
really blew my mind was the first one. We've been
thinking about this interdimensional telescope with Alexei,
is how could you actually observe other dimensions? Is it possible
to change your perception? And Alexei believes we can test, at least we can
make tests to test for it. But I asked what would you even mean
if we could observe another dimension? What would it appear? What would it look
like? And so this is the answer that that Lou gave. This is right. You have an X
axis, a Y axis, and a Z axis. Meaning I can go, for example, in late
terms, I can go forward and backwards. I can go left and right and I can go up
and down. And a variation of those allows me to have
any point in a three-dimensional space. A fourth dimension might be, for example,
if you were a human being and you didn't go anywhere, you just got smaller.
You started to withdraw. You started to go inwards, right? You're not going
outwards in any particular direction. You're actually going
in to the universe. That may be a very rudimentary way to explain
of what a fourth dimension could be experienced like. You're not going
forward, back, left, or right or up or down at all. You're actually going inside.
What an amazing response from Lou Elizondo. I've been trying to consider what
another dimension would look like. I do believe it's all based on sizes.
But I think the actual matter that we're seeing is manifested from frequencies
ultimately, right? We never really touch, right? We never really touch.
It's just the little electrons, right? Little forces smaller than we can imagine.
Nothing actually touches. It's really just wavelengths. So he does bring on later,
what about size? How far away are the stars actually? When we look at the ground,
how close actually is? We've been considering interdimensional telescope,
which would be some sort of gyroscopic machine that can maybe electromagnetic
spin so fast, right? So if you have a sphere and you have some sort of noble gas in there,
this is in one of the patents, and you're able to electronically charge it,
electrically charge it, now you can spin it so fast you can build up angular momentum
to certain frequencies, right? Maybe this could cause some sort of effect
into the light state and could change our perception, meaning inside you could
observe other dimensions. I don't know if this could possibly be what we're seeing
because there's no sonic booms. Are the things actually here or are they observing
from another dimension? Maybe there are other ways to interact then we can fully understand.
This is your brain. This is drugs.
This is your brain on drugs. Mind-altering drugs. The idea is they would fry your brain, right?
That was always the idea, is that drugs would actually fry your brain by over-stimulation.
But what they found recently, right, is that the drugs actually decrease your brain activity.
They actually decrease the activity of your brain. An extraordinary set of results emerging
from research on the psychedelic state began in 2012, began with this paper from the Imperial
College London. For the longest time, we assumed that the way psychedelics produced this incredibly
rich and intense hallucinations would be by sort of lighting up your brain like a Christmas tree
to cause these hallucinations because we thought brain activity somehow is or generates experience.
So if you had incredibly rich and intense experiences, then you have to have a lot of
brain activity that correlates with that inner experience. But this study showed precisely
the opposite. Under psilocybin, cerebral blood flow, which correlates with brain metabolism
and therefore brain activity. When I say activity, what I mean is metabolism, the level of metabolism
in different brain areas. What happens to metabolism is that it decreases. The blue areas here
show decreases in brain activity in the psychedelic state compared to placebo.
Notice that there is no increase anywhere. Psychedelics only decrease brain activity and this
result has now been repeated not only for psilocybin, but for LSD, for DMT, a number of other
psychedelics. The results have been confirmed by a number of research groups in different
universities, different countries, different continents, and they are surprisingly
consistent. Psychedelics only reduce brain activity, brain metabolism. Now,
how do we then explain experience? Well, it's at least very uncomfortable, very tricky, very
difficult to explain experience based on the assumptions of mainstream physicalism given
these results. So just as a theory, could the brain be more of a receiver and transmitter
instead of an actual producer of everything that we see? Maybe just is a perception machine
like an avatar that perceives reality. If reality is just perceptions based on manifestation of light
that we happen to be in synchronicity with, so it's just perceptions of frequencies and wavelengths,
maybe there's a way to use some sort of gyroscopic procession to actually perceive
other different universes or just take mind altering substances, but I can't recommend
that definitely until it's safe, but we should definitely be researching it in scientific studies,
for instance. Second point that blew my mind is I explained my dark matter is life basic
theory that we are inside of a much larger organism to Lou, and his answer was just amazing.
What I really learned from him out of this, like I mentioned the Hitchhiker guide to the
galaxy story at the beginning, is his questions, man. His questions are so awesome. So when I explain
my larger than life theory here, watch what his answer is, and it's really a question. Watch what
his next question is. So why is it as humans then we are stuck in these spirals? Why is it that
we collectively as a species tend to self-identify as some specific identity, whether it is
national or religious or organizationally or socially, we tend to group ourselves
into these little herds or packs, if you will, and self-identify if that is what's actually
holding us back from experiencing, you know, the bigger part of the universe. Yeah, why are we
given egos? Well, you mentioned gravity. I think that's kind of the force at a higher dimension.
So my actual theory, Lou, is, you know, we're made of many different cells, right? I already
mentioned kind of trillions of cells. I believe that we're collective, right? I mean, really,
at the end of the day, we are, we identify so this is me, but in reality, it's not me, it's we,
because we are a collective of microorganisms. Exactly. And I think we just stop at us at the
human level, you know, as we go down, you know, you're made up of little organisms, you know,
little cells working together, little teams, you know, they die in your organism,
they're born, more are born every day, they do their little jobs. And so I, you mentioned,
why do we do that, what we do? I think it's actually, we're little stem cells. You know,
if you look at humans, we can, we can be trained, we can be propagandized and we grow into little
groups, you know, so it's like the gravity of our dimension. And we build up the organism.
So then that, that asks the question that we always have in mathematics that the sum can
never be greater than its constituent parts. But is the human being or is sentient life?
Just that, is it that you now reach a critical point, a critical mass of collectives,
organisms of cells, organizationally, where all of a sudden, the we now identifies as a single
organism as a me. And now all of a sudden, I, the collection of all these cells that make
up blue Elizondo, something happens, it reaches this critical mass where all of a sudden it
becomes sentient self aware. And now it is truly a single organism. Is there some sort of connective
tissue, so to speak, you know, obviously proverbially, amongst those smaller living organisms that now
create, you know, a single, a single consciousness? Sentience?
No, that relates to what Chris always likes to say, like, like, every country is an organism,
right? Because the people kind of, that's my point. That's exactly where I was going with. And
the planet is an organism, right? Exactly. And frankly, you can continue going out, as you say,
as a fractal perspective, you know, enough of anything potentially could have its,
could, you know, but I mean, I'm no different than matter, that's in me, the atoms that are in me
are the same atoms that are in the earth, that are same atoms on the moon and everything else.
Is this where some people, and again, I don't know, I'm asking the question hypothetically,
is this where some people have the notion that everything in the universe is connected?
Perhaps is that, is that where they're, they're, they're, they're getting that from?
And that's what he asked there. What is the sentence? Is there a oneness that it goes back into?
Again, metaphysical discussion, but we lead back into can you make an AI sentient?
He asked that question, can we make an artificial intelligence sentient?
And what does it mean to be human? These are the questions he asked.
Those are the questions that they need answers to is what it sounds like.
If you look at countries, I mentioned Russia invading Ukraine. Look at how the decision was
actually made. It's not just one man coming up with the decision. It came through at least
the nation, the nation had to be involved, right? If it was one man making the decision,
it wouldn't matter, but it's one man in that position, right? It was one particular person
who happened to be in that seat, which means he comes from that country that the actual decision
to invade was made at a biological level. I was always growing up wondering like,
if we're in the information age, where is all the information? And I think we're getting to it,
man. We are getting into the information age. I can't imagine a more exciting time to live,
you know, especially if you want to know, I really want to know. And it looks like we are
going to at least learn a lot more than we currently know, which is, which is just amazing to me.
Imagine if we could actually see or observe other dimensions, if we could warp space and gravity.
I mean, that would just be unbelievable. But it sounds like we have a lot of growing up to do.
And some of those questions need to actually take serious consideration. What is gravity?
What is energy? Can an AI be sentient? What is sentience? What does it mean to be human?
Amazing questions. I think for one thing, if you can look at the points, right? If you imagine
YouTube, okay, we're able to answer these questions because we're actually building our own network,
okay? There's nothing in between me and Lou, at least nothing that we know of, right? Nothing
that we know of. We are able to interact, right, our two neurons in this network,
which is now growing and growing. The question is, can we can we write humans into the equation?
You know, we need to be a part of the discussion in the future. We, I think we should figure out
very quickly what it means to actually be human, because pretty soon AI is going to be coming online.
And I think we need to kind of get our stuff together. If it hasn't already come online,
okay, we need to get get our stuff together and figure some of these big questions out
and realize that shooting each other is not going to solve it, doing negative things to the
environment, to the world. It's not going to help us solve this. Thanks so much for your support.
Thanks to all my patrons that support me on patreon.com and through watching on YouTube.
Thank you guys as well. I'm able to do this full time and I am dedicated to it. If you want to
join the team, go to patreon.com forward slash Chris Lado. You can join and be part of the
backstage of support. We'll have some special merch coming for patrons only. But as always,
thanks for being here. Thanks for watching. Have a great week. Peace.
