Lecture 13, The Height of Japanese Power
At the conclusion of our last lecture, the Japanese had just attacked Pearl Harbor.
The United States had been caught by surprise, and the Japanese were on the move not only
against the Americans at Pearl Harbor, but all over Southeast Asia.
In this, our 13th lecture, we're going to examine what I would call the Japanese steam
roller.
You'll recall that Admiral Yamamoto had said that for 100 days, maybe longer, he could
run wild.
If surprise were achieved at Pearl Harbor, the Japanese forces would have an open hand
for two, three, maybe four months.
After that, he would not be willing to say.
And so what I'd like to do in this lecture is to examine the Japanese move across Southeast
Asia to look at the axis at the high point of its power around the globe, and then to
look at Japanese strategic options in the spring of 1942, concluding with the first real
engagement between American and Japanese naval forces in combat, and that would be the Battle
of the Coral Sea, which marks something of a possibly one thought at the time, a turning
point.
You'll recall that on December 7, 1941, the Japanese had struck with devastating effect
the American installation at Pearl Harbor.
Japanese forces also attacked Guam and Wake, 1,100 miles to the east.
Further, the failure of the relief expedition to Wake Island was another blow to American
morale.
American troops were left there to deal with the situation.
Hong Kong had surrendered by Christmas, Malaya and Singapore at its southern tip, the Gibraltar
of Asia, the English had called it, had fallen to the Japanese.
British forces had, under the command of General Arthur Percival, had fought a long campaign
which was disastrous for the British.
The two British ships, the battleship Prince of Wales and the battlecruiser Repulse, were
sunk by aircraft on December 10, and the Japanese achieved at one blow, naval superiority in
Southeast Asia.
On February 15, the British garrison at Singapore surrendered, a humiliating blow to the British
and to Western prestige in Asia.
Singapore was seen, as I said, as the Gibraltar of the East, this absolutely impregnable fortress
of the British.
It was a symbol, not simply a British power, but of the West in Asia.
The Japanese certainly would make a great deal of propaganda, capital out of this, seeing
this as the beginning of a Japanese liberation of Asia from European colonialism.
It is at this point that the Japanese begin to talk quite expansively about a greater
Asia and co-prosperity sphere, Asia for the Asians and so on.
For the British, of course, coming when this does, it's a double whammy in a sense, with
all of the bad news from Europe and now this.
Burma, first attacked on December 10, also was invaded in January, Rangoon fell on March
6.
The Japanese forces arrived to help hold the line south of Mandalay, but the Allies began
a 1,000 mile retreat back into India.
Ceylon was threatened but not attacked, but there was no way to avoid the terrifying truth
for the British, that Great Britain had been pushed out of Southeast Asia and India itself.
The jewel in the crown of the British Empire was threatened.
The other major target, of course, for Japanese forces in December of 1941 had been the Philippines.
American forces there were commanded by General Douglas MacArthur.
MacArthur had been chief of staff of the army from 1930 to 1935.
From 1935 to 1941, he had been an advisor to the Philippine government helping to build
the Philippine Defense Force, and since 1941, earlier in 41, he had gone back on active
service as American commanding general in charge of US forces in the Philippines.
The Philippines would prove as much a debacle as Pearl Harbor in some ways, even more so.
The Japanese were able to destroy American air power at Clark Field despite advanced
radio warning that the Japanese had attacked Pearl Harbor, destroy much of the American
naval installation in Manila, forcing naval units to evacuate to Australia.
General MacArthur's strategy for dealing with the possibility of invasion was one that we'll
see again with Rommel thinking about the German defense of Fortress Europe, which was to halt
the invaders at the beaches, halt them at the beach strategy it was called.
This reversed a long-standing American plan to withdraw to the Bataan Peninsula, which
was flanked by Manila Bay on the west.
MacArthur insisted on engaging the enemy at the coast, and he certainly expected to have
considerable relief reinforcements arriving from Washington.
He underestimated both the strength of his own troops, anticipating that there would
be a quick reinforcement of his forces, I don't know how it was possible to think in
these terms under the circumstances, but at the same time he also drastically underestimated
the quality of Japanese troops that he was going to be confronting, and he overestimated
considerably the numerically strong Allied force in the Philippines, it was largely Filipino,
certainly overestimated their strength at this moment.
The Japanese attack came from the north and south, the Americans fought a fighting retreat
back to Bataan, but with disastrous consequences, it was a logistical nightmare, troops with
low supplies were forced back to Bataan, fell victim to disease, to beginnings of malnutrition,
they couldn't hold out without relief, the situation was going to be desperate, everything
about the defense of the Philippines, and so far as we've given it very much thought,
really did, was based on the idea that there would be a steady flow of reinforcement supplies
and so on from Hawaii. While American and Allied forces were being
soundly beaten, Bataan held out, the American forces held out against tremendous odds at
this point, MacArthur who might very well have been sacked or been in considerable trouble
just as Kimmel and Short had been at Pearl Harbor, became ironically a national hero.
Roosevelt and General Marshall back in the United States even thought about a congressional
medal of honor, there were those in the armed forces who thought that a court marshal might
be more in line with MacArthur's performance, but MacArthur was ordered to escape from the
Philippines to Australia, something that he was not keen on doing, he did in March, vowing
of course, leaving with those famous words, I shall return.
American forces were left under the command of General Wainwright, Bataan fell in April
of 1942, but General Wainwright and the American garrison on the fortified island of Corregidor
would hold out until May 5th, 1942, an astonishing siege which they held up in many respects
seen as the kind of the Alamo in the Second World War. Finally, at the conclusion of course
of the siege of Corregidor came the Bataan death march.
The American garrison would be marched 55 miles to a railhead. Part of this was Japanese
miscalculation, the Japanese had anticipated there being about 25,000 American POW prisoners
of war, there turned out to be 75,000, there wasn't transportation for them, so the Japanese
under this incredibly hot sun began marching the American garrison toward a railhead for
the people. Along the way there were acts of cruelty, of torture, over 7,000 men died
on what came to be known as the Bataan death march, the details of which were kept from
the American public until much later on in the war. 4,000 of the 700 who died were Filipino
soldiers. The Philippines then had fallen to the Japanese, all over Southeast Asia the
Japanese were dominant, and this really does represent the axis at its height. Winter and
spring of 1941-42 seemed to bring one disaster after another. In the Pacific there was Pearl
Harbor, the Philippines, the humiliation of Singapore in the fall of all of Southeast
Asia. By the early spring of 1942 the Japanese dominated all of Southeast Asia and the western
Pacific. There was fear that they would attack west, threatening India, or move against the
United States at Midway and Pearl Harbor again to seize the Hawaiian islands, seeking a
knockout blow that had eluded them at in this first attack on Pearl Harbor. Across the globe
in Europe, Nazi domination of all of Central and Western Europe was utterly secure. The
Germans had obviously just run into a severe setback before Moscow in December of 1941,
and yet I think it would be a mistake to assume, as so many people frequently do, that somehow
not taking Moscow in that winter meant that the German offensive in the east was over,
that somehow the Russians had prevailed. It would be the Germans in the spring of 1942
who would launch another massive offensive on the eastern front. Hitler's new order
would be set in place at this time. On the eastern front the Russian counter offensive
before Moscow would run out of steam by spring the Russians proved to be tremendously adept
at defensive operations early on in the war, but had difficulty with organizing large mass
offensives. Attempted a winter offensive against the Germans in January, February with horrendous
losses for the Red Army. On the seas it was a period known as the second happy time as
German U-boats operated with near impunity off the coast of the United States and in
the Gulf of Mexico it took some time before cities in the east coast began to actually
we had blackouts. Up until this time the Germans, the German U-boats were active up and down
the coast. This was exactly what the German naval forces had talked about and one of the
reasons that they had pressed Hitler to declare war in the United States which he had done
in December 11th. His generals who at this point in December were up to here in trouble
in Russia certainly weren't happy with this news, were in shock that now they had to fight
the Red Army but there was the potential strength of the United States to deal with as well.
But the Navy, the German Navy, Admiral Durnitz in particular, Admiral Rader both had repeatedly
emphasized to Hitler the Americans are already at war with us, they are shipping things to
Britain. If you allow us to strike now we can sink so much American tonnage they will
not be able to be a serious logistical factor for the foreseeable future. So for the German
Navy the declaration of war was exactly what the doctor ordered and in this winter of 1941-42
the German Navy would sink tons upon tons of American shipping. So 42 began, the Germans
with the Axis powers including now Japan on a roll and yet the year would end with stunning
Allied victories on all fronts at Midway and Guadalcanal in the Pacific, at Stalingrad
in the Soviet Union and at El Alamein in North Africa. The war by early 1942 had become
a genuine world war linking Batan to Baghdad, Mandalay to Morocco, it was fought from Leningrad
to Basra, from the snows of Stalingrad to the sweltering jungles of Guadalcanal, fought
in T-34 tanks the height of armored technology and fought by men riding on camels in the
desert. In the Pacific the Japanese were beginning to suffer already that was concerned about
both elation and concern, elation because things had gone beyond, well beyond what the
Japanese had hoped, they had been so successful on all fronts. There were some voices within
the Japanese military that argued well one has to be careful and not suffer from what
they began to call victory disease that is an overconfidence and yet the Japanese had
a number of strategic options in the spring of 1942 that they had to evaluate. In the
full flush of its victories in December, January and February, this 100 days of relentless
triumphs the Japanese had come to dominate all of Southeast Asia, the western Pacific,
everywhere its forces had crushed its enemies on land and on the sea, it seemed to be a
reinforcement of all of those Japanese notions about the quality of their troops of their
equipment and so on. Now the Japanese leadership faced crucial choices and three competing
offensive strategies came to the fore. One would be a thrust into the Indian Ocean to
move west where the Japanese navy would rest control of the sea lanes from Great Britain
and the army might even link up with the Germans in the Middle East. The Japanese would form
a revolution, rebellion in India, anti-British sentiment there on the rise could block the
Suez Canal and would bring a greatly weakened Great Britain to its knees. This was the option
that most frightened the Allies in early 1943. Roosevelt and Churchill realized that there
was little, in fact virtually nothing that could be done to prevent a major Japanese
assault in the Indian Ocean and the possibility of a link up between Nazi Germany forces coming
across North Africa and the Japanese coming up through the Indian Ocean was a nightmare
scenario indeed. Others within the Japanese military however were urging instead a continued
push to the south including either an invasion of Australia or at least the seizure of the
south coast of New Guinea especially Port Moresby and the capture of a number of islands
in the South Pacific such as Fiji and New Caledonia. Such an offensive would have the
purpose served a great purpose for the Japanese of severing communications between the United
States and Australia making it impossible for the Americans to use Australia as a forward
military base for another attack for an attack on the Japanese New Empire.
Finally is another option, some especially in the Imperial Navy and especially Admiral
Yamamoto advocated a strike against the last American outposts in the Pacific. Midway approximately
600 miles west of Oahu would be the first target and then subsequently an invasion of
the Hawaiian Islands. A Japanese push here would force the American Pacific fleet to
come out and fight at a time when it was still weak and reeling from Pearl Harbor. Yamamoto
argued very forcefully in the councils of government that what needed to be done now
was to engage the American fleet, engage the Pacific fleet before it could be rebuilt.
Here one also sees the tension between the army which the Japanese army which was very
much in favor of this push south toward New Guinea and Australia and the Japanese Navy.
These are tensions that would remain part of a problem for the Japanese high cabane
and the Japanese leadership throughout the war. Yamamoto argued that an attack against
the remaining naval positions of the United States especially at Midway and the Hawaiian
Islands would deal a death blow to America's ability to act in the Pacific and probably
force the Americans into some sort of negotiated settlement. What had not been achieved at Pearl
Harbor in other words would now be made good. In fact everything looked ripe for the taking
for the Japanese in early 1942 with both the United States and Great Britain very, very
much on the ropes. With these options being debated within the high military circles in
Japan, no one solution was arrived at. Instead the Japanese sampled one might say from each.
First they toyed with the idea of taking the French colony of Madagascar off the southeast
coast of Africa. The French, in fact the French government, the Vichy government, the collaborationist
government wanted to invite the Japanese to seize the colony so that the British wouldn't
take it. The British beat them to it. British troops landing in May. Those British troops
encountered fierce resistance from the French. This is, I think one sees now the legacy of
that British attack on the French fleet in North Africa in 1940. It took until November.
British troops landed in May. It took until November before Madagascar was finally in
British hands. The Japanese, meanwhile, had dispatched their main carrier force to the
Indian Ocean off Ceylon and only recalled it in April. It was never actually used. They
steamed the fleet out, the main carrier fleet out into the Indian Ocean, threatened the
Middle East, threatened India, but then seemed to not know exactly where to proceed with it.
Also it began to be, it was withdrawn. While considering Yamamoto's plan, thinking about
the possibility of a Japanese assault on the Hawaiian islands, Japanese leaders were jolted
by a very, very dramatic and unpleasant surprise. On April 18, 1942, 16 B-25s, two-engine light
bombers, took off from the aircraft carrier Hornet, commanded by Jimmy Doolittle, and
attacked Tokyo. It was a daring mission. The plates took off 700 miles from Tokyo, flying
these two-engine light bombers off of a carrier deck. It was an extraordinary, an extraordinary
feat, something that I think not only the Japanese didn't think was possible, but I
think most American airmen didn't think was possible either. They took off 700 miles
from Tokyo, bombed the city and a number of other targets along the way. The physical
damage inflicted by the so-called Doolittle raid was inconsequential, but its psychological
impact was profound, profound both in the United States and, of course, in Japan. In
its immediate aftermath, Yamamoto called for the development of plans to invade Hawaii
and Australia, creating what he called a ribbon of defense across the Pacific. If the Americans
could launch an attack against the Japanese home islands in this situation, in the spring
of 1942, when American power was at its absolute low point, what would it be like if the Japanese
allowed the Americans to build up their forces? This, of course, Yamamoto is constantly emphasizing
this in discussions. We must defeat the Americans now. We must defeat the Americans now. The
main objective then was to remove the American military presence in the Pacific, and that
meant an attack on the Hawaiian islands and midway island 600 miles to the west.
The Japanese plan called for attacks in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands in the South
Pacific in order to cut the flow of men and material to Australia. This is a vital link
in the supply lines to Australia, where Douglas MacArthur was building up a significant military
force. The Japanese first thought about putting, seizing the island of Tulagi and did so without
opposition in May, and then began operations in New Guinea. But on May 7th and May 8th,
Japanese naval forces encountered American naval units in the Coral Sea. This was for
the Japanese. This was something of a surprise. The U.S. Navy had begun to use the intercepts.
We were understanding more and more of the Japanese naval codes, so that we had some
indication that the Japanese were moving forces into the Solomon Islands. If they see that
they were able to establish an air base in the Solomon Islands, Tulagi, or one of the
other islands there, then this was going to really imperil this lifeline to Australia.
And so we began to move naval forces there to contest this Japanese action. The Coral
Sea, where these two great naval forces would collide, is a stunningly beautiful body of
water, tranquil, strikingly beautiful, and more used to seeing trading schooners or
Melanesian war canoes than the gray steel of modern warships. Japanese naval forces
encountered the Americans on May 7th, May 8th of 1942. It would be like no other battle
in naval history. For both sides, possessed aircraft carriers. The Battle of the Coral
Sea became the first great naval action between aircraft carriers and revolutionary in what
this meant in one sense for naval operations. It was the first naval battle in which no
ship actually sided one from the other side. It was all done with fighter aircraft carrier
based planes. They would inflict all the damage in the engagement. The Japanese lost
one heavy and one light carrier. The United States, the heavy carrier, the Lexington, and
another severed serious damage to Yorktown. The battle in a tactical sense was pretty
much a draw. Both sides took losses, but at the end the Japanese withdrew without attempting
a landing at Port Moresby. This was extremely important. Without inflicting a devastating
defeat on the Japanese, the strategic goal of blocking the Japanese at this point had
been achieved.
May 6th represented the nadir of the American War in the Pacific. At dawn on that date the
American garrison at Corregidor had surrendered and the agonies of the Bataan Death March had
begun. But the battle of the Coral Sea, as it came to be known on May 7th, May 8th, seemed
like a victory against a foe that until this point had seemed almost invincible. Did it
signal a shift in momentum or a mere detour on Japanese's victory tour of the South Pacific?
The answer to that question would come just one month later at the battle of Midway in
June of 1942.
The Japanese plan was to destroy the US Pacific Fleet, especially the carriers that had escaped
the Japanese at Pearl Harbor. Only when the Pacific Fleet had been eliminated would Japan
be really secure. No more do little raids, no more attacks on the home islands, only
then would the Japanese position in the South Pacific be secure. The plan then was to lure
the US Fleet out of Pearl Harbor by launching an offensive against the island of Midway.
An air fleet of six carriers under Admiral Nagumo, the general who had been in charge
of the attack on Pearl Harbor, would be followed by the main body, an enormous Japanese fleet
that would bear down first on Midway and then on Pearl Harbor and the Hawaiian islands.
Yamamoto's plan called for attacks on Midway and then a major invasion front indeed. Submarines
would alert the air fleet when the US ships had set sail, then the carriers would jump
them and the main body, the Japanese fleet, would then close and finish off the Americans.
Two light carriers and other ships were sent as a diversion to the Aleutians in the North
and a move that Yamamoto thought that the Americans would think, ah, here's the end
run that we've been worried about. The Japanese are going to take this northern route and
then come down the coast from Alaska down the West Coast. This, I think, made a certain
amount of sense at the time when one considers the hysteria that had broken like a massive
wave on the West Coast of the United States after Pearl Harbor, the fear of a Japanese
invasion, sightings of Japanese ships, aircraft and so on.
So this force was to be sent into the Aleutians. The Americans didn't buy this at all. This
was in one sense, I think, Yamamoto being too clever by half. It was, and later he would
say that he thought this sending of this diversionary group to the Aleutians was a symptom of the
victory disease that had inflicted the Japanese high command. Still, even with this diversionary
force headed to the Aleutians, the Japanese possessed enormous superiority in ships and
aircraft. Six aircraft carriers ultimately would be brought to bear by the Japanese in
this big fleet against the Americans, versus three for the United States. It would turn
out to be one more. Two hundred and seventy-two aircraft to one hundred and eighty, two hundred
and seventy-two Japanese planes to about one hundred and eighty American. Not to mention
the battleships, destroyers and cruisers of the accompanying force, the main body. That
would mean one hundred and sixty-two Japanese warships to seventy-six at the disposal of
the United States. Here, however, magic came into play. Not black magic, not a sleight
of hand, but the breaking of the Japanese naval code. Despite the very light radio traffic
which had been ordered by Yamamoto, that radio traffic alerted the United States to his plans.
It allowed the American carriers to leave Pearl and set up station out of Midway, undetected
by Japanese submarines or by Japanese aircraft. Still, this was going to be a desperate battle.
Even if the code had been broken and we were aware of the Japanese battle plan, this was
an enormous Japanese fleet. The stakes could not be higher. If the Japanese succeeded and
even with this intelligence, this was going to be a touching matter. If the Japanese succeeded,
the American position in the Pacific would be untenable indeed. On June 4th, Admiral
Nagumo launched his air attack against the island of Midway. They inflicted terrific
damage on American forces there. All was going very well. The Japanese fleet had maneuvered
into position exactly as it should. The Japanese aircraft carriers dispersed exactly as they
should. The first attack had hit poorly defended American positions at Midway. There was a
sense as the word came back from the attacking planes to the carrier and then flashed by
code to the main body that the attack was going just as indeed it was anticipated that
it would. As his bombers were returning from a second strike, which had been ordered, you
will recall the great mistake. One of the things that Nagumo had been in trouble for
with Pearl Harbor was that there had been this one great launching of the attack and
had not been followed up. Ginda, his air advisor, had pressed for Nagumo to launch a second
attack on Pearl Harbor and he had resisted that temptation. On this day, he would not
make the same mistake. He would launch a second strike on the American positions there.
As his bombers were returning from a second strike against Midway at about 8.45 a.m.,
planes were picked up. Suddenly, the Japanese spotters began to see aircraft and they weren't
simply the returning aircraft from the Japanese fleet, unanticipated aircraft. Those aircraft
would be the flights from the American carriers in the Battle of Midway was about to take
a very unexpected turn.
Thank you very much.
