Lecture 14 Turning the Tide in the Pacific, Midway and Guadalcanal
Hello.
Welcome to the 14th lecture in our series on the history of the Second World War.
We had concluded our last lecture with the Japanese plans for and the launching of their
attack on the American installation at Midway.
It was the plan of Admiral Yamamoto, as usual with the Admiral, a highly complex plan and
a controversial one within the Japanese High Command itself.
Yamamoto's plan and brief to recapitulate was to draw the American fleet out of Pearl Harbor
to engage the Americans at sea, the Americans taking the debate of a Japanese naval assault
on the island of Midway, to engage the Americans and finish off the fleet, a job which had
not been accomplished as planned at the attack on Pearl Harbor.
This Yamamoto believed would drive the Americans out of the war in the Pacific that it would
not be necessary.
This was a debate within the Japanese High Command about whether or not it would be necessary
to actually occupy Midway or the Hawaiian Islands.
This was not part of the plan for the operation at Midway at this time, but something to be
discussed possibly for the future.
The real goal was the destruction of the Pacific fleet at this point and then hopefully a negotiated
settlement with the United States.
Within this lecture we will proceed to talk about this battle at Midway and then another
turning point in the Pacific war, a major one, the first great land battle between Japanese
forces and American forces and that would be the Battle of Guadalcanal.
On June 4th we had stopped with the Japanese admiral, Nagumo, launching an air assault
against the American installation at Midway.
His planes were just returning from that strike and preparing for a second when out of the
blue, American planes were spotted, enemy planes spotted.
They were not supposed to be there.
Yamamoto certainly had believed that the carrier Yorktown had been sunk at the Battle of the
Coral Sea.
He expected at most two aircraft carriers.
Although the planning had been meticulous for this operation, the Japanese submarines
that were supposed to monitor the movements of the American fleet had been slow to take
up their stations.
The assumption on Yamamoto's part and everyone else's, Nagumo's and the others within the
Japanese admiralty, was that the American fleet would venture out of Pearl Harbor only
after the attack on Midway.
It was the attack on Midway that was to draw the American ships out.
Probably the Japanese had dispatched spotter planes to search for any movement of the American
fleet, but by the time those planes actually saw evidence that the Pacific fleet had left
Pearl Harbor, it was hours after the planes were aloft and as we will see, it proved to
be too late.
This first attack on Midway, air attack had been tremendously successful, bringing devastation
to the American position there, and the planes were loading up for a second assault.
Out of the blue, as we said earlier, suddenly appeared a squadron of American planes.
Just where they had come from was not at all obvious.
They made one diving pass after another at the Japanese carriers and were simply shot
out of the sky.
It was for the Japanese almost like target practice.
The American planes were slow, they were vulnerable, they came down in the sort of dive bombing
runs and were literally shot out of the sky.
There were almost no hits.
The Japanese, having been surprised, heaved an enormous sigh of relief as these American
planes were shot down.
The carriers had not really been hit, not taken any significant damage, but the Japanese
fighters that had gone after them had also dropped lower in order to follow the dive
bombers, and then what often is referred to as the miracle of Midway occurred.
The American planes had been launched earlier in the day to find the Japanese carriers.
One group of dive bombers had gotten lost, had wandered around in the skies over the
Pacific, looking for the carriers, had been unable to locate them.
This was a group from the carrier enterprise.
At just this moment, after this first wave of the attack had ended in failure, but had
drawn the Japanese planes were all off down lower, suddenly the group that had gotten lost
suddenly broke into the clear through the clouds and there was the Japanese naval fleet
below them, the carrier fleet below them.
They then began to dive onto the Japanese carriers.
The decks of the Japanese carriers were cluttered at this point with bombs, gasoline and planes
stacked up one after the other, preparing for takeoff.
When the 37 Dauntless Dive Bombers dropped out of the sky and began their attack, it
was the absolute worst possible moment for the Japanese position.
The worst position to be caught in, and within five minutes, three of the four Japanese carriers
were burning and in deep trouble.
These planes did not miss their targets, were not shot out of the sky, and the devastation
now on the Japanese carrier fleet was unspeakable.
The fourth of the Japanese carriers suffered tremendous damage and would be sunk later
on during the course of the day.
It was a catastrophe for the Japanese, an utter catastrophe.
The American Admiral Raymond Spurance had managed his operation with great skill, with
great daring himself.
He had taken on what was a much larger force, counting on the intelligence, magic intercepts,
and then his own pilots to do their job.
It was a remarkable victory when the word was passed back to Yamamoto about this disaster.
He at this point decided, well, maybe the thing to do was simply to try to make the
best of a terrible situation and rush the main force of the fleet forward to encounter
the Americans to go ahead with that part of the operation, but without the air cover,
without the carriers, this would have been very, very dangerous indeed.
He did press forward a bit, but Admiral Spurance wasn't about to take the bait.
Having himself suffered severe damage to one of the carriers, he withdrew.
There would be no follow-up.
The great plan of Admiral Yamamoto had come, not as Pearl Harbor had been to a tactical
victory, but a strategic, not the strategic knockout blow.
Now the situation had been reversed.
At the end of the Battle of Midway, the Japanese fleet had suffered a terrible loss.
The Battle of Midway would shift the naval balance in the Pacific in a single day.
In fact, in a five-minute period, it marked the end of Japan's initiative in the high
seas.
Henceforth, though there would be, the Japanese fleet was still enormously powerful, still
a tremendous threat to the United States and its allies.
Henceforth, the Japanese Navy would be largely on the defensive, would be fighting major
naval engagements, but at this point, the momentum begins to shift and shift in a very
dramatic way, almost exactly in the kind of nightmarish scenario that Yamamoto had himself
predicted.
For the Americans, it was a tremendously uplifting victory.
Pearl Harbor was now secure, the Japanese had lost four heavy carriers, and they had
lost 253 aircraft and their pilots.
It was truly a devastating victory and one in which a numerically much smaller force
had defeated a much larger.
With the Battle of Midway marks a major turning point in the naval war in the South Pacific,
the Battle of Guadalcanal, coming later in 1942, would be a major turning point of strategic
significance fought on land, a battle that would be fought between August of 1942 and
February of 1943.
This battle would mark the first major engagement between American soldiers and Japanese soldiers.
It would have strategic implications.
It would have psychological implications as well as Japanese and American troops encountered
one another at close quarters for the first time.
We had discussed when we were talking about Japanese strategic options, one of the major
options endorsed by the Japanese Army had been to move south into New Guinea and possibly
toward Australia to cut off American access to Australia so that Australia could not be
a forward post for American operations in the Pacific.
Japanese attention had turned to New Guinea, to Port Moresby in particular, the Japanese
wanted airfields, particularly in the Solomon Islands, an obscure chain of islands just
off to the northeast of Australia.
Tulagi had been judged by the Japanese to be unsuitable for the sort of airfield that
they needed, but another island, a larger island in the Solomons, one with the unlikely
name of Guadalcanal, did seem to be to offer the possibilities for a major airbase.
On July 5th, 1942, an American reconnaissance plane reported seeing something unusual.
The Japanese were on Guadalcanal and they were beginning work on what was clearly an
airfield.
For Admiral King, who was following this, the Americans had been anticipating this and
in fact there was a race afoot to see who could establish themselves in the Solomons
first, just looking at the map and this chain of islands, I think when one thinks about
the Pacific Theater of Operations, you're really talking for the United States and
for the Japanese about how does one project power literally across thousands of miles
of ocean.
How does one do this?
We've been talking about these great battles, this great conflict in Europe itself with
the invasion of the Soviet Union by the Germans and this largest military operation in history
with this enormous front that was to go literally from virtually the Baltic down to the Caspian
Sea.
But here we're talking about distance on a scale unmatched in the history of warfare.
How does one actually project power?
How do you bring power to bear on a situation 2,000, 3,000, 4,000 miles away?
Looking at the map, a whole series of islands, chains of islands, islands that I suspect
virtually nobody could have really knew anything about, very much about except military planners
in the interwar years, suddenly now would become key stepping stones, key strategic
positions which had to be taken.
The Japanese understood what these were, so did we and as we began to jockey for position
as to maintain the roots or from our point of view, maintain the roots or to block them
from the Japanese to Australia, the Solomon Islands now become loom very, very large.
Admiral King, looking at the map, was convinced that we had to do everything possible to prevent
the Japanese from establishing this foothold and creating an airfield in the Solomons.
He had already begun plans for an assault on Tulagi, but now with the reports from Guadalcanal
coming in, all preparations had to be speeded up.
An invasion had to take place before the Japanese could complete the airfield.
If the airfield on Guadalcanal became operational, then the situation could become desperate.
The planning then for the attack, it was not an improvisation, but this was done in a much
more speeded up way than had been anticipated.
The attack was set for August 7, 1942.
When the Marines went ashore then, it would begin a six-month-long struggle that comprised
seven major naval engagements, at least ten pitched land battles, skirmishes and air attacks
that seemed never to stop.
When American troops stormed ashore on August 7, 1942, it was the first amphibious assault
since 1898 for American forces.
The battle of Guadalcanal turned into an epic struggle.
Fought alongside the great battles of Stalingrad in the east and the battles in North Africa,
it marked a major turning point in the war.
It was the longest battle in the Pacific conflict, one that would not only have enormous strategic
implications, but one that shaped the nature, the nature of combat and offered a grisly
preview of what war in these islands would be like.
It would be a struggle of such sheer brutality and viciousness that it rivaled the Russo-German
war on the Eastern Front.
A war from the American point of view, a war against an enemy already demonized by coverage
of Japanese atrocities in China, a view of a sort of word of mouth.
The pretend death march did not, as we indicated in an earlier lecture, did not become common
knowledge.
The details of it were certainly repressed by the American government, but things had
come out.
The American troops embarking on that invasion of Guadalcanal were already primed, already
believed that they were going to face an enemy that was vicious, an enemy that had of course
brought on Pearl Harbor, an enemy that was adept in jungle fighting, the Japanese had
been fighting in Southeast Asia and so on.
These were the evil Japanese, the butchers of Nanking, the masters of jungle warfare,
an enemy infamous for atrocities, and American troops would confront this terrifying enemy
in the strange alien environment of steamy jungles all across the South Pacific.
Want to read you a description of that terrain in the Solomons.
The jungle of the Solomons is the type known as Rainforest, indigenous to the larger islands
of that general area of the Pacific, notably New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago.
It is characterized by giant hardwoods which tower well over 100 feet into the sky, with
bowls 6 and 8 feet in diameter, flared out at the base by great buttress roots.
Among and beneath the trees thrives a fantastic tangle of vines, creepers, ferns and brush,
impenetrable even to the eye for more than a few feet.
Exotic birds inhabit its upper regions, the insect world permeates the whole in extraordinary
sizes and varieties, ants whose bite feels like a live cigarette against the flesh,
improbable spiders, wasps 3 inches long, scorpions and centipedes.
The animal kingdom is less numerous, represented by species of rats, some distant relatives
of the possum, lizards ranging in length from 3 inches to 3 feet, a few snakes, mostly
of the constrictor type, and some voracious leeches, peculiar in that they live in trees
and drop onto the unwary passerby from above.
No air stirs here, and the hot humidity is beyond the imagining of anyone who has not
lived in it.
Rot lies everywhere just underneath the exotic lushness.
The ground is porous with decaying vegetation, emitting a sour, unpleasant odor, substantial
looking trees rotten to the core likely to topple over when leaned against, and great
forest giants crash down unpredictably in every windstorm.
Early killed flesh begins to decompose in a few hours, dampness thick and heavy is everywhere,
result of the rains which give the forest its name, unbelievably torrential in season,
never ceasing to altogether for more than a few days at a time, mosquitoes, bears of
malaria and a dozen lesser known fevers inhabit the broad deep swamps which are drained inadequately
by sluggish rivers where dwell giant crocodiles, the most deadly creature of this particular
region.
This dramatic description of the conditions understates the case for the Americans as
well as the Japanese.
These conditions were unprecedented to fight in this.
This is a theme we're going to return to on a number of occasions as we talk about the
war in the Pacific, because we want to talk about why the war in the Pacific seems different.
It is not only a geographically different war from an American point of view, but the war
in the Pacific is fought in a different way than the war in Europe would be fought.
One historian has called it a war without rules as opposed to a war fought in Europe
with rules.
Part of the reason one suspects there is a very, for this, has to do with the nature
of the terrain, this absolutely alien, different, exotic, and I don't mean exotic, interesting
but exotic, threatening, terrifying in many ways, environment contributed to it.
That and the fact that so many of these conflicts in these islands in the South Pacific took
place literally away from civilization.
This is not a sort of culturally value laden sort of observation, but we're talking about
islands where there were very few, maybe a few scattered villages, no towns, no cities,
very little in the way of roads, so that somehow away from civilization, away from anything
that the Japanese would recognize as civilization, away from anything the Americans would recognize,
put onto an island where you were simply there with your enemy, created, helped to create
an environment in which this desperate sort of struggle would take place.
Some of the most ferocious fighting in the entire Second World War would take place on
the Waddle Canal, constant shelling from ships which ran down what was called the slot, the
strip of water between the islands, from aircraft that flew above, from mortars, from snipers,
and so on.
The objective of the 1st Marine Division was to seize the airstrip and hold it.
The airstrip was the key.
In the attempt to take that airstrip and then to manage it, the American troops would come
into conflict with Japanese troops as we saw for the first time, and their experience was
unforgettable.
The enemy, if one reads through, there was a very popular book that was published during
the war called Waddle Canal Diary, published after the battle obviously before the war
was over.
What's striking about it is, is one reads through the discussions between these young
Marines as they prepare to go into battle with the Japanese, is that they're already
primed, they're already primed for a desperate struggle, already thinking that this is an
enemy that will give no quarter.
They I think had not so much had been a victim of American propaganda about this, but a general
worldwide sense of the atrocities of the Japanese that we've talked about that had been covered
by the worldwide media in China, the rape of Man King and so on.
And they were ready, they thought, to deal with the Japanese.
But encountering snipers hidden in the jungle, encountering the usual sorts of combat mortar
fire, artillery fire, heavy artillery assaults on this time, naval gunfire, these things
were terrifying and horrible, but it was another aspect of the way the Japanese fought.
It wasn't just snipers, but we would encounter there the fanatical suicide charges of Japanese
troops, the Banzai charges, and for this made an enormous impression on those Marines who
were present.
And I would like to read you an account of one.
The battle, this is a battle for Bloody Ridge, which was key to defending the airstrip.
There's some proper names here, don't worry about them.
It's the impression of this conflict that I think one wants to come away with.
Edson's Raiders, his troops, American troops, were well placed in their foxholes with machine
gun posts covering the ridge on September 12th, when the first wave of Kabaguchi's troops
came screaming out of the jungle in front of them just after 9 p.m.
In an attack that was timed to coincide with the arrival of supporting fire from the destroyers
on the sound, it was a combined sea and land attack with Japanese naval units standing off
the coast and lobbing shells directly over the ridge and into the jungle beyond in the
general direction of Colonel Edson's outfit.
This was written by William McKinnon, another American soldier who was there.
From his battalion's position covering the river flank of the airfield, he saw the opening
night's battle for what came to be called Bloody Ridge.
The Marines, holding the front line, knew that with the Japanese withdrawal into the
jungle at dawn, the night attack had, quote, been nothing but a prelude.
They had made only a limited counterattack, which merely flushed a few snipers out of
the trees.
As the sun went down that evening, the stirrings of new activity could be heard over the course
of jungle insects and the screech of cockatoos.
He started to move forward because the situation up front was threatening.
McKinnon advanced toward the ridge.
His outfit, which had had no sleep for nearly two days, stumbled groping their way forward
to a new position in the darkness.
The crunch of mortar shells heralded the beginning of that night's assault.
Suddenly the jungle came alive with Japanese yelling obscenities and buns eyes and hurling
firecrackers.
This was a special brand of terrorism, as the Colonel described it.
The sky and the jungle were blazing with fireworks in a hellish bedlam of howls.
Firecrackers, a cheap imitation of machine guns, exploded in front of, in and behind
their position.
Parachute flares that burned brightly for an instant bobbed along, then went out, lighted
the scene intermittently.
From the jungle below came the rhythmic accompaniment of the slapping of gun butts and the chant,
US Marines be dead tomorrow.
US Marines be dead tomorrow.
The chanting became a mad religious rite, which heralded a series of frenzied bonsai
charges through the pouring rain, as the darkness was broken by the flashes of gunfire.
In the eerie green glare of the Japanese flares, for a time Edson's battalion holding
out on the top of Bloody Ridge was cut off until McKinnon's men drove back assaults with
machine guns.
When one wave was mowed down, and I mean mowed down, another one followed it into death.
These, this sort of behavior in combat, the chanting in the darkness of the jungle, followed
by these bonsai charges across the terrain, where their enemies would just be mowed down
with the Japanese soldiers, didn't seem to have any real hope of actually overwhelming
the American position, left the Marines staggered, just completely bewildered, and utterly convinced
that they were fighting an enemy of such fanaticism, that they weren't quite human,
that there was no explanation for this sort of thing, that the attack on the airfield,
which would come another attack on the airstrip the next day after the little scene we've
just described, led once again to the, in the following morning literally of the American
troops going out and finding Japanese bodies stacked up, where they had fallen during the
course of the evening.
It didn't seem to some of the Marines as if the point was to actually, for the Japanese
was actually to take the airstrip at this point, but rather it was the attack itself
that seemed to be of importance.
For American troops, it was to be the beginning of the long agonizing encounter with the Japanese,
the beginning of this epic struggle between American forces in the Pacific and the Japanese.
Not only on land was Guadalcanal important, there were a number of naval battles that
took place off the coast, Savo Island in August, which was a Japanese victory.
The battle of the Central Solomon's Cape Esperance in October fought at night.
The Japanese Navy was very adept at nighttime operations, had really pioneered them.
The naval battle of Guadalcanal itself, November 13th, November 15th, and a number of others.
So many ships were sunk in the close waterways off Guadalcanal that the area was dubbed Iron
Bottom Sound.
Finally, in February, unable to dislodge the Americans or to retake the airfield, the Japanese
affected a very skillful evacuation of the island, and by February 9th, Guadalcanal was
entirely in American hands.
This conflict, and actually taking these two conflicts together, the battle at Midway and
this epic struggle at Guadalcanal, mark a major turning point in the Second World War
in the Pacific.
The victory over the Japanese on Guadalcanal was the first land defeat for Japan in the
war, and the first serious defeat of the Japanese army.
It marks the beginning of certainly not so much a Japanese withdrawal.
Their position is still very strong in the Pacific, and they would fight to defend it
tenaciously over the next months and years.
But just as Midway marked the beginning of a shift in momentum of initiative to the United
States, so too did Guadalcanal.
This then was not, as Churchill said about the situation in Europe, one could also say
about the South Pacific.
This wasn't the beginning of the end, but perhaps the end of the beginning.
