Lecture 15, the War in North Africa.
The year 1942 and the beginning of 1943 mark as we've seen in the Pacific major turning
point in the war. We've talked about the German halt before Moscow. I'd like to turn
our attention in this our 15th lecture to the war in North Africa. It is a complicated
and I think for Americans in particular particularly puzzling theater of operations to understand
especially from 1940 down to Operation Torch in 1942 when the United States enters the
war because of the back and forth nature of the war between the Italians first Germans
and then the British. In this lecture what I would like to do is to talk about Axis strategy,
German and Italian strategy in North Africa. What the Mediterranean theater meant to Mussolini,
to Hitler to pose the question that is often raised when one analyzes German policy during
the war is was the Mediterranean theater an opportunity, the Middle East an opportunity
lost for the Germans, a strategic opportunity that Hitler did not fully appreciate. We want
to examine to the British view of the Middle East and the centrality of the Mediterranean
strategy for Churchill and the British high command. The conflicts that this brought the
British into with the United States their new allies in 1942 and the implications of
Operation Torch and our involvement the Western allies involvement in the Mediterranean.
Hitler's original strategy after the fall of France had been to bring pressure on Britain
from a number of different angles. He had hoped that he would be able to lure Franco
Spain, Vichy France and Italy into a firm alliance which could then put pressure on the
British in the Mediterranean. Hitler himself did not want to commit significant resources
in the Mediterranean he never thought it was a terribly important theater for Germany for
him as we've seen the Soviet Union was the major target and anything that distracted him
from that was was a mistake. But he hoped that some combination of the Spanish the Vichy
French the Italians would be able to put pressure on British colonial possessions the
British position in the Middle East in the Mediterranean. He certainly tried to to craft
some sort of workable strategic alliance with these Mediterranean powers but without success.
Franco was a great source of frustration to Hitler the Nazis had supported Franco during
the Spanish Civil War. Franco certainly talked the game of solidarity with Mussolini and with
Hitler but Hitler made a trip to the Spanish frontier to negotiate with Franco in 1940 and as
Hitler would later say it was like chewing rocks to deal with to deal with Franco. Franco would
agree with everything in principle but then raised so many practical objections that Hitler was
completely frustrated. Franco for example wanted German support for the seizure of Gibraltar. He
wanted French colonies in North Africa, Morocco, Algeria and French West Africa. It was completely
unwilling to enter into this because this would run him afoul of the French whose support he
also wanted with Petain so on. Hitler was reluctant to agree to Spanish designs on French colonies
and the negotiations ended without result. Hitler still hoped to for some sort of cooperation
from the French some sort of German Vichy alliance but the French were not at this point prepared
for any sort of genuine military alliance with Germany. Mussolini certainly was but he was
surprisingly uncooperative when it came to the details and had the unpleasant habit of
springing surprises on his alliance partner something that Hitler reciprocated with far
greater implications but the access, the pact of steel, the Mussolini-Hitler alliance was this
was largely a public relations relationship rather than a strong well-crafted military alliance.
Indeed Mussolini would ultimately draw Hitler into the Mediterranean but not to achieve German
objectives but rather to help Mussolini achieve his in the area. In the end the Germans committed
far more energy in Africa than Hitler ever anticipated but it still would fall short of
strategic decisiveness. Italy's African policy deserves a certain amount of attention here.
Mussolini was determined in 1940 to take advantage of what he perceived to be British weakness. He
believed as did Hitler that Britain was finished so he decided that what he wanted to do was to
conquer both Egypt and Greece. We've talked about the implications of his invasion of Greece.
His Egyptian campaign was launched in 1940. Mussolini was enthusiastic about it, tried to
drum up support domestically for it. His military high command was not at all enthusiastic about
going to war in 1940 against Great Britain. And the British, although the Italians were talking
about invasion, the British caught the Italians by surprise in December of 1940 and disaster would
follow disaster. The British took 40,000 prisoners in one operation in December, in January, and
another they took 45,000 Italian prisoners. Later in the month they encircled Tobruk,
an important port city, and another 30,000 Italians surrendered. 20,000 more followed in February.
Over 130,000 Italians surrendered while Great Britain suffered fewer than 2,000 casualties
in the course of 1940 and into 1941 in their operations against the Italians. This is what
prompted that famous quote that we've already mentioned before of Anthony Eden's about never
has so much been surrendered by so many to so few. At this juncture, with the British on the
offensive against the Italians, what was supposed to be an Italian operation to seize the initiative
in the Mediterranean, of course backfires, the British now unable to move anywhere else,
go on to the offensive themselves, and Hitler now feels that it compelled to draw to enter the fray.
By the end of May, 1941, written control virtually all of Italian East Africa while
reconquering French and British Somaliland. At this point, Hitler decided to intervene.
He dispatched Erwin Rommel in February of 1941 to save the situation, in 42 rather,
to save the situation. He was reluctant to throw significant resources into North Africa,
but the Italian fiasco had to be brought under control. Rommel was sent to Libya in
charge of a small armored force. It was actually one armored division and one mechanized division,
and that force, which was called the Africa Corps, would dramatically change the complexion
of the North African campaign. Rommel had barely arrived. All his troops weren't even yet in place
when he lashed out at the British, forcing them all the way back into Egypt, actually capturing
the British general O'Connor. He was unable to dislodge the British from Tobruk, whose port he
needed for supplies, and so by late May, the offensive had ground to a halt. A deadlock now
existed along the Egyptian frontier, and there was a pause in the hostilities. But even as the
hostilities slowed along that front, the war would spread across the Middle East like a desert
sandstorm. In Iraq, a pro-German coup led to British intervention in April of 1941. The British
sent troops, forced the new pro-German Rashid Ali to flee to Iran, and restored a friendly pro-British
government in Baghdad. Britain also was concerned that the Germans might land troops in Syria,
and so British and free French troops, troops loyal not to Vichy, but to the
government of Charles de Gaulle in London, moved into Syria in June, where they fought against
stiff resistance from French troops loyal to Vichy. By the end of the month, all of the Eastern
Mediterranean was in British hands, but Rommel, with his understaffed and under-equipped Africa Corps,
continued to be a serious concern. The dilemma for German strategy
was that for Hitler, the Mediterranean had always been, it was intended to be a sideshow.
The main preparations being made militarily were for the invasion of the Soviet Union.
He was not interested in North Africa or in the Mediterranean. This is where I think one sees
in Hitler, his limitations, one always thinks about Hitler being this sort of megalomaniac
determined to dominate the world, constantly seeking ways to expand. His policies were certainly
very radical, and the new order that he hoped to achieve in Europe was certainly very radical.
But in the way he deals with the Mediterranean, I think one sees in Hitler a traditional European,
and particularly German statesman. He simply, I think, never fully appreciated the
strategic implications of the Middle East, and was very reluctant to seize the opportunities
presented to him. One of the debates raised frequently by German generals after the war,
thinking back about mistakes from the war, was to pose the question, could Germany have prevailed
if Hitler had been willing to devote the necessary forces to North Africa,
seize the Suez Canal, for example, and take the Middle Eastern oil fields. Part of the whole last
part of the war, Germany would be desperate to find sources of oil, to secure sources of oil.
This would have cut the British off from their links to the empire, made the linkages between
the war in Asia and Europe tenuous at best for the British, and so these were real possible
opportunities. However, while it is quite true that Hitler's perspective, his vision, was continental
and European rather than thinking in larger global terms, or even in this theater of the
Mediterranean close to Europe, there were other problems, I think, that would have made it extremely
difficult for Germany to have asserted itself in the Middle East. One was the very real problem of
logistics. It's doubtful whether the logistical problems there would make it doubtful whether
any sort of German strategy in the Middle East would have been successful. Tripoli, the only
major access port in North Africa, was 1300 miles from Alexandria in Egypt. 1300 miles over twice
the distance from the pre-war Polish border to Moscow, so we're talking an enormous, enormous
distance. Tripoli also had a limited capacity as a port. It couldn't have supported a major effort.
Other ports to the east were also too small, and coastal shipping for both the Italians and
Germans was in short supply. In addition, as one visualizes this combat across North Africa,
there aren't huge flanking movements. This is a war of movement in a very narrow band.
There was a single road that ran along the coast that moved from west to east. There was the Qatar
Depression, which limited much of the movement to this territorial band along close to the coast.
So what you have is, it was very, very difficult to move supplies without those supplies coming
under attack. Finally, British naval and air forces operating from Malta continued to harass
any sort of supply efforts coming from Italy. The problems of supply so hampered the armies,
both Axis armies and Allied armies in 4041, that they operated essentially at almost as
expeditionary forces. This problem of supply of logistics made it extremely difficult to
sustain operations, so that much of the fighting in this theater tended to be back and forth with
the same territory between port cities being taken by the one side, then taken by another,
back and forth as they struggled with the problems of water, oil, spare parts, and ammunition.
So that it was very difficult to sustain the enormous operations that one saw elsewhere.
In 1941-42, then, there would be a major swing of fortune in the Middle East.
It would be the British ability to resupply their forces in Egypt that ultimately would
turn the tide in North Africa in the course of 1942. Rommel had initiated a new round of fighting
in May of 1942 when he unleashed a new offensive. It followed the usual pattern until late in the
month when German troops took Tobruk, the important port city, and flicked in terrible casualties on
the British. In the process, they captured vast quantities of fuel, food, and drinking water.
They also took 35,000 British prisoners. It was a tremendous victory for Rommel.
He renewed the offensive again, and by late June, the Africa Corps had thrust deep into Egypt.
By June 30, German troops had reached El Alamein, only 60 miles west of Alexandria. Victory at this
point seemed within Rommel's grasp, and Hitler rewarded him by promoting him to the position of
Field Marshal. The first battle of El Alamein, the gateway to Alexandria in July, ended with the
British holding firm but unable to push the Germans back, and so the old pattern returned.
Supplies being the key. The Germans simply couldn't sustain the offensive. They couldn't
continue to push. The British at this point began to receive supplies. Supplies began to pour into
Egypt, including American Sherman tanks, which began to arrive in large number for the British forces.
The RAF strengthened its forces, and Churchill decided to shake up his staff after the
embarrassments of the previous month. In mid-August, he relieved his commander in North Africa and
replaced him with General Harold Alexander, who had become a major figure for the British
military during the rest of the course of the war. He was to command the entire theater,
and another equally important, in fact, probably more important appointment that was made at this
time was that General Bernard Montgomery was chosen to lead the British Eighth Army.
Montgomery was the son of an Anglican bishop. Militarily, he was a meticulous planner and a
cautious campaigner. He would be the master of the so-called set piece, never wanting to move until
he had all of his ducks in a row. He was tremendously popular with his troops. The Americans always
thought that he drugged his feet, was too slow, didn't seize the opportunities that were presented
to him. But for British troops, Monty was seen as a great hero because he seemed to care about them.
He didn't move until he had overwhelming superiority and was virtually assured of success.
He was flamboyant. Certainly, the campaign in North Africa would see the emergence of two of the most
flamboyant personalities and titanic egos of the Second World War, leaving Rahm al-Assad.
It would be the emergence of General Patton for the United States and, of course, Montgomery
for the British. Montgomery attacked with overwhelming force in October of 1942 in the
Second Battle of El Alamein on October 23, 1942, when he did. His forces outnumbered Rommel's
230,000 to 80,000. Armor 1500 British tanks, many of them American, to 500 German tanks.
Air superiority and the role of ULTRA, the intelligence intercepts, so that the British were
able to determine when supplies were coming across from Italy. The German convoys were
attacked in the Mediterranean and Montgomery was able to anticipate Rommel's moves.
In the Second Battle of El Alamein in October of 1942, a battle that would mark
an important turning point, the British suffered terrible casualties, losing four times the number
of tanks as the Germans, but Rommel couldn't take even these losses. Hitler, meanwhile, refused
significant reinforcements. Rommel was constantly pressing, we need help, we need help, we need help,
and there was very little help coming from Germany at this time, in part because the
Germans, because of German involvement in the Soviet Union. By November, Rommel was in retreat.
That retreat proved to be a masterpiece, and combined with Montgomery's caution,
allowed the Germans to escape back into Libya. So the question now was, was this going to be
the beginning? Was this really a turning point? Were the British now going to take the initiative
and really drive the Germans out of North Africa? The Americans were now in the war,
what was our role to be, and how would the Germans respond? The American and British
military, we'll talk about this more when we talk about D-Day, the British and the American
military had begun common staff talks, planning. Roosevelt and Churchill were in agreement from
the very outset, even before the American entered into the war. Should we come into the war, we both
agreed that it would be a Europe first strategy. Germany was the greater threat. But having said
this, there were significant differences between the American and the British assessment of the
immediate strategic priorities. American leaders, particularly General Marshall and Secretary
of War Stimson, shared the Russian view, which is that a second front was needed in northern
Europe and needed immediately. There was terrific fear in the Allied camp that the Russians were
going to collapse with a new German offensive again in the spring of 1942. Marshall Stimson,
most of the American commanders involved in common staff talks with the British, advocated a cross
channel invasion as soon as possible, at best in 1942, at worst in the following year.
The British, on the other hand, took a far more cautious approach. At the Arcadia Conference in
December of 1941, the first wartime meeting between Churchill and Roosevelt, Churchill had broached
the possibility of an Allied landing in French North Africa. He was putting forward, putting on
the table with the Americans, a Mediterranean strategy that was in Allied troops into Morocco,
Algeria, and Tunisia. They were then pressed eastward toward Libya, catching the Germans
in a vice. Montgomery and his troops moving from the east, the Americans and British force moving
from the west. Following the Arcadia Conference, the American military grew restive about Churchill's
proposals. Marshall, Stimson, and General Dwight Eisenhower, Chief of the War Department's
Operation Division, all agreed that a North African operation would divert strength away from a
buildup in England that was necessary for the cross channel invasion. The Americans developed
an alternative plan in March of 1942, Operation Roundup. The Allies, the Americans argued,
should begin an immediate buildup of forces in Great Britain for a cross channel invasion
no later than the spring of 1943. In the meantime, they contended a smaller landing in France could
be made during the course of 1942, relieving some of the pressure on the Soviet Union. This would
make Stalin happy. In this operation, this more modest cross channel invasion to come in 42 was
to be codenamed Operation Sledgehammer. Marshall was dispatched to London to convince the British
that this was the proper course of action. And there he encountered terrific resistance.
The British Army Chief of Staff, Alan Brooke, who had been at Dunkirk, the veteran of the first war,
began a policy, one sees this now in these inter-allied relations. The British would always agree,
yes, absolutely, we must have the cross channel invasion. Of course, that's what we're pointing
toward the cross channel invasion. This is the big show. So they would agree in principle.
But then say, well, but let's let's evaluate the situation what's available to us as we as we look
as we look at the situation now. Brooke would say, well, we have there's a shortage of troops.
This was undoubtedly the case at this point, the American army was not mobilized for a big cross
channel invasion at this point. There was a shortage of equipment, particularly landing craft.
This had hurt the Germans. Now we would, Brooke argued, we have to be ready to do this as well.
He never actually made it crystal. Well, he never made it explicit, but it was crystal clear
that there was also a great deal of skepticism among the British high command about the battle
worthiness of American troops. That the Americans were green. There's a lot of enthusiasm coming
from Marshall and the American leadership about closing with the Germans. But the British had
had a lot of experience of dealing with the Germans and none of their encounters had been very pleasant.
All the way through is also I think this is another point that we will certainly talk to
as we talk about the background to Operation Overlord and D-Day. Having suffered such colossal
casualties in the first war, the British commanders, all of whom were the most important, had been
veterans of the first war, did not want to see another bloodbath on that scale.
Also the idea of launching an invasion prematurely, which might lead to failure. The British could
not afford another failure at this point. Churchill felt that very, very keenly. The Americans might
be full of them and vigor about this. Just couldn't chomping at the bit to get into the fray. But for
Britain, another defeat could not be tolerated. In August of 1942, the Allies would launch the
Dieppe raid on the coast across Channel, a small raid, largely with Canadian troops with 6,000
casualties. It was a disaster. And so the British once again could say, well, we're just not, we
don't have this down yet, we're not ready. Brooke had no trouble convincing Churchill,
who then urged Roosevelt to adopt the original plan for an invasion of French North Africa.
Roosevelt was swayed. Marshall was furious by this. The British strategy seemed to smack a
British colonialism defending the Empire. This was something that didn't play very well in the
United States. But Roosevelt abandoned Operation Sledgehammer and insisted on action, nonetheless,
in 1942, and the only reasonable place for that action was in French North Africa.
The result was Operation Torch. It would be the first Allied joint venture. The man chosen to
lead Operation Torch was Dwight Eisenhower. He was a staff officer par excellence. He had
served twice as assistant to MacArthur. His real skills were in planning and organization
and logistics. That recommended him, certainly, to the war plans division where he had served since
1941. But it was as much as important as those skills were. I think it was as much his personal
and political skills that particularly recommended him to Roosevelt and others for this Allied command.
He was a team player, a man capable of subordinating his own ego to the situation.
He was adept at cooperation and he possessed by virtually everybody's description great personal
magnetism. Montgomery, who had more than his share of run-ins with Eisenhower over the course of the
next few years, would describe him in this way. The power that Ike had, quote,
the power of drawing the hearts of men toward him as a magnet attracts bits of metal.
He merely has to smile at you and you trust him at once, close quote.
The plan was for Allied landings at Casa Blanca in Morocco,
Oran and Algiers in Algeria, then to sweep eastward toward Tunisia. By landing so far
to the west, the Allies were out of German airspace. The British argued,
but it would mean a very long campaign. The key to this was how the French would respond.
There were 200,000 French troops in Morocco and Algeria, presumably loyal to the Vichy regime.
The French army and navy were loyal to Vichy. They harbored strong anti-British feelings as a
result of the actions we've described. And so it was decided that it would be best if the United
States, rather than the British, led this operation. There was also a problem with General de Gaulle.
How would one deal with him? There was a good deal of anti-de Gaulle sentiment in the French
military. They saw him as someone who had abandoned ship. He was hardly popular with
the French military. The Allies didn't completely trust him either. They considered him to have
little support in metropolitan France or in French North Africa. And we feared leaks
from de Gaulle's headquarters. Therefore, the Allies passed over to Gaulle and turned to General
Henri Giraud, whom they smuggled out of southern France to be the new hand-picked leader of Free
France. The Allies may have recognized Giraud, but this infuriated de Gaulle. Compromise was
finally worked out between the two of them. The Machiavellian details of this defied description
needless to say that within a matter of months de Gaulle had outmaneuvered his opponent at every
turn and would emerge in full control of the committee that would ultimately dominate French
policy in North Africa. The German response to torch was to pour troops in to Tunisia. I might
say the French did resist the invasion. There were 7,000 French casualties in the Allied invasion
of French North Africa. The Allies, having made a successful landing in November, found themselves
bogged down in Tunisia. There was inter-allied friction. Eisenhower was certainly under a
great deal of pressure. The American troops did not perform with great distinction. In fact,
in the first encounter with the Germans at the Cazarene Pass, the Americans had virtually
collapsed fiasco. There began to be talk about replacing Eisenhower with General Alexander,
who was now in fact placed in charge of field operations. But Eisenhower remained in position,
named a new commander for the United States Army's Second Corps, General George Patton,
and restored morale and discipline within the American forces. By March of 1943,
Great Britain and the United States had amassed great strength
and began the final push toward victory. Rommel was unable to get resupplied. Hitler refused
to the very end to see the potential of the Africa Corps, and too late, too late, began to try to
reinforce it, only after the Allies had already established a dominant position that Hitler
attempted to reverse the situation. The Germans had failed to hold North Africa. Operation
Torch had succeeded. But for the American point of view, and we'll close with this,
with the American, from the American point of view, it wasn't the worst case scenario
that they feared. It was the best case scenario because the very success of Operation Torch
meant that there would be not only no cross channel invasion in 1942, but also they feared
none in 1943 either.
