Lecture 23, the final drive for Japan, Iwo Jima, Okinawa, and the firebombing of Tokyo.
Hello, welcome to our 23rd lecture on the Second World War.
We had stopped in our previous lecture with the American forces just off the shore of
a volcanic slab of rock in the Bonin Islands, the island of Iwo Jima, a name that very few
people would have been able to identify before February of 1945, but has been certainly with
us ever since.
The battle for the Philippines was still very much underway as Marine and Army forces gathered
for the assault on Iwo Jima.
The goal in taking this island was that it would eliminate attacks by Japanese fighters
on American aircraft making their way toward the Japanese home islands.
It would also possibly be a forward base for American aircraft to eliminate Japanese radar
and early warning for American assaults on the Japanese islands.
And finally would be an emergency landing strip for the gigantic B-29s that were now
beginning to take part in these raids.
The assault on Iwo Jima was originally planned for January 2nd, but had been postponed until
February 19th because of the very slow going on Leyte.
The Japanese position on Iwo Jima was very strong indeed.
The garrison there was reinforced during January during the delay, reaching 21,000 troops.
And the Japanese defenses were made even more effective by the terrain.
Mount Suribachi dominated the southern end of the island.
The wider northern end was dominated by a plateau that rose 350 feet and rippled with
a set of rough volcanic ridges.
Mount Suribachi and the northern ridges contained numerous caves reinforced by a network of
pillboxes and bunkers.
These positions housed mortars, huge artillery pieces, and machine guns linked together by
an elaborate system of tunnels, underground barracks, and ammo dumps.
General Tomomichi Kurabayachi did not intend to contest the American landing on the beaches.
He had seen in previous campaigns and believed it had been a mistake for Japanese forces.
Instead, he would have fire directed on those landing zones, but would not have Japanese
forces present close by.
He could bring murderous fire on the beaches, and because of the volcanic ash and a series
of steep volcanic terraces that rose abruptly from the beaches, movement off the landing
zones would be slow, this he realized.
When the Marines came ashore on February 19, 1945, they were pinned down on the exposed
beaches and suffered terrible casualties.
The four days of pounding by American naval guns and aircraft, instead of the ten days
of firing that the Marine commanders had requested, had done a little ultimately to reduce the
Japanese gun positions and artillery and mortar fire would rain down on the Marines.
6,200 men were pinned down on a 3,000-yard strip of sand, two Marines for every yard
along this beach.
It was a slaughterhouse.
As one historian described it, sand hummocks appearing as giant dead anthills moments before
spewed machine gun fire from apertures hardly visible above ground level.
Mortars fell in cascades from hundreds of concealed pits, heavy artillery, and rapid
firing anti-aircraft guns, barrels lowered to rake the beaches, slam shells into the
oncoming landing craft, and support vessels.
Landmines sown like wheat in a field exploded in sickening blasts on the terrace as Marines
stumbled across them.
15-inch coastal defense guns and large mortars rained down from Surabachi's base, slopes,
and crater.
There was no way to dig a foxhole.
As fast as loose volcanic ash was scooped out, the hole filled up again as in a bin
of wheat.
Men burrowed into the sand or pressed against porous rocks or hugged the sides of shell
craters, anything for a shield from the withering enemy fire.
When vehicles and artillery made it ashore, they were immediately mired to the hubs in
the sand, damaged Higgins boats, and larger landing craft quickly filled with water and
made them unmovable.
It was a scene of twisted boats, of burning jeeps, and trucks, and bogged down cannon.
Still, somehow, miraculously, by nightfall, the Marines had made it off the beach, had
fought their way across the island, and had actually cut off Mount Surabachi.
In the days of intense fighting that followed, the Marines would inch their way up the heavily
defended shores, slopes of the volcano.
On February 23rd, a patrol reached the summit and planted a small tattered flag.
Later, elements of a platoon, some 40 men made it to the top, carrying with them a much
larger flag, an 8 foot by 4 foot flag that could be seen well from below.
As the four Marines, as the handful of Marines struggled to raise the flag, AP photographer
Joe Rosenthal snapped what would become the most famous picture of the Second World War.
Of the 40 men of that platoon that had fought their way up the slopes of Surabachi that
day to raise the flag, only four would survive until the end of the battle.
The raising of the flag was a moment of great symbolic value, but the battle for Iwo Jima
had just begun.
Now the Marines face the task of moving onto the northern plateau with its rugged terrain
and intricate fortifications.
The troops pushed forward, yard by yard, against ferocious resistance.
The fighting was intense as the Marines sought to clear the cage using flamethrowers, dynamite.
They fought hand to hand, facing fanatical resistance, including an array of devilish
booby traps, often on bodies, sometimes on prisoners who committed suicide by surrendering,
having their bodies booby trapped and then explode with a handful of Marines around them.
The battle raged on through weeks of indescribable brutality in which every cave, every ditch,
every slope was contested and the casualties mounted.
Finally, with all hope of victory gone, the Japanese would resort to bonsai charges one
after another until in the end, virtually the entire Japanese garrison had perished,
including the commander, Kurabayashi, who committed suicide.
The costs of the battle of Iwo Jima were absolutely staggering.
When the fighting stopped on March 23rd, over 6,821 to be precise Americans were dead, 17,000
wounded.
American losses at Iwo Jima for the first time in the war in the Pacific actually outnumbered
Japanese casualties.
The Japanese, of course, lost virtually their entire force, but the losses were staggering
on both sides.
Three Marine divisions were ground up in the fighting for Iwo Jima.
One third of all the Marines who were killed in the Pacific Theater died on Iwo Jima.
It was an island four and a half miles long, two and a half miles wide.
As the coverage of the battle sunk in, and at this point during the war it's very interesting,
I think part of the reason that we had this remarkable photograph and the coverage of
the battle was that Navy censorship of the combat had relaxed so that there was much
greater coverage.
But Iwo Jima, while it certainly provoked an enormous outpouring of patriotism at home,
it seemed to be the very symbol of devotion to duty, of sacrifice, of fighting under terrible
conditions.
It also created the beginning of a mounting firestorm of concern about an ultimate invasion
of Japan.
As American forces moved closer and closer to the Japanese home islands, the costs of
victory were rising and rising astronomically.
An issue was raised before the fighting at Iwo Jima was even completely over, that in
fact the entire campaign might have been a mistake, that Iwo might have been bypassed.
Given the casualties, had Iwo Jima been worth the cost?
One of the major arguments subsequently made was that B-29s on their way to Japan made
emergency landings at Iwo Jima and were able to land there that about 240 B-29s made it
down in the area in the remaining period of the war, 11 crew members per plane.
If one calculates the casualties, it would seem that the losses might not have been worth
it.
Certainly this was raised at the time, provoking great controversy as I said, and yet no matter
how one evaluated the military value of the island, none could dispute the valor of those
who fought and died there.
The battle yielded the most powerful visual image of the American war effort, and Joe
Rosenthal's stirring photograph and 27 congressional medals of honor, 17 of them posthumous were
awarded for actions on Iwo Jima.
Still there was this lingering doubt, the battle had been a success, an airstrip was
created there that was able to handle the B-29s.
It did in fact give a clear beacon toward the Japanese home islands, but had it been
worth it, had it been worth it.
If a marine historian would later argue an invasion of Japan had indeed been necessary,
those three marine divisions that were chewed up so mercilessly on Iwo Jima would have been
sorely missed indeed.
With Iwo Jima in American hands, there would be one final assault before the ultimate invasion
of Japan, and this was Okinawa, only 350 miles from the southernmost of the nature Japanese
home islands.
This was not a small volcanic atoll or a tiny jungle-choke speck on the map, but was a very
substantial piece of real estate, 76 miles long and at some spots 18 miles wide.
It held excellent airfields and two equally useful anchorages.
It was in short an ideal base for the anticipated final assault on Japan itself.
The Japanese defenses on Okinawa were predictably strong, 120,000 Japanese troops were stationed
on the island, the largest force to confront the Americans in the Pacific.
The southern portion of the island, where the Japanese determined to make their stand,
was dominated by limestone cliffs, which were honeycombed with caves, pillboxes and tunnels.
The Japanese could also bring land-based aircraft to bear, and the greatest concentration of
heavy artillery in the Pacific was also prepared for the invaders.
The Japanese plan was to allow the Americans to land and to hold this heavily fortified
southern portion of the island.
For their part, the Americans assembled the largest invasion force in naval armada in
the Pacific War, 1300 vessels assembled off the shores of Okinawa, including 18 battleships,
200 destroyers and 40 aircraft carriers.
One thinks about this, one thinks about the distance traveled by the United States since
that attack on Pearl Harbor in December of 1941, when less than a half a dozen carriers
were available, now 40 aircraft carriers have been marshaled for the invasion of Okinawa.
In addition, 180,000 Marines and Army troops would be thrown into the fray at one point
during the battle, 250,000 American troops would ultimately participate in the assault
force on Okinawa.
The invasion itself began on Easter Sunday, April 1st, 1945.
All went relatively smoothly for over a week, with little substantial contact.
I think there was a sense that it was almost eerie, that one knew that there was an enormous
Japanese force on Okinawa.
The question was where was it located, when would there be contact made, when would the
Japanese come, would there be some massive Banzai assault, would there be more of the
kamikaze, just exactly how would this play, but instead of there being the climactic battle
that had been anticipated, or the withering fire on the beaches as there had been at Iwo
Jima, instead the Americans came ashore and began to move in search of the Japanese enemy.
Then the force of 180,000 American troops encountered the main Japanese defenses.
Six weeks of desperate combat would follow.
At one point in the final week of May, 12 inches of rain fell, turning the battlefield
into an enormous quagmire of mud.
Finally on May 31st, the Japanese would abandon Shuri, one of Okinawa's two towns in the south
and withdrew to a final line of ridges and cave infested hills.
Another month of gruesome fighting was required before the last Japanese resistance was finally
broken.
The kamikaze assault around the island was particularly terrifying, sinking 34 ships
and damaging 350 others in one last desperate spasm of violence.
The Japanese mounted 10 mass kamikaze attacks of 50 to 300 aircraft.
In these attacks, almost 5,000 American sailors would die.
The battle did not end until June 21st, 1945.
The anticipation was that this, the assault on Okinawa would take four, maybe five weeks,
and it came closer to eight.
And the total by anybody's reckoning was hideous.
7,000 Americans had been killed on land, almost 5,000 at sea, 32,000 Americans wounded
in combat on Okinawa itself, another 4,800 at sea, 20% of all casualties suffered by
the American Navy in all of the Second World War and all theaters were sustained in the
waters off Okinawa.
14% of all marines killed in the Second World War died there.
The Japanese also suffered grievously as well, 1,465 kamikazes of the 120,000 troops, all
but 11,000 were killed.
11,000 Japanese actually would surrender on Okinawa.
It was the largest surrender of Japanese forces ever encountered by the United States.
Most of those surrenders came in the last days of the battle.
For the most part, the Japanese troops fought as they had elsewhere to the absolute bitter
end with General Ushijima and his entire staff committing suicide.
It's also, I think, indicative of the intensity of the combat and the desperate nature of
the battle that the American commander on Okinawa was also killed.
That was the Army General Simon Bolivar Buckner who was killed in action on Iwo Jima.
There was something else that was different rather on Okinawa.
There was something else that was different as well about the fighting on Okinawa, similar
more to the situation in the Philippines than to Iwo Jima or the other major battles in
the Pacific.
And that was, it was a large civilian population on Okinawa.
150,000 Okinawan civilians would die in the fighting that raged across their island, an
enormous number.
Many caught simply between the Japanese forces and the Americans, not knowing which way to
turn.
Many had retreated to caves seeking to get away, only to discover that when the American
troops would approach them, ask them to come out, they were terrified, wouldn't do it.
The Americans didn't know what to do, thought in many cases that these were Japanese troops,
tossed hand grenades in, or flamethrowers.
One saw this over and over again on both sides as the Okinawan civilians now were caught
in the middle of this catastrophic battle.
Both sides would suffer 35% casualties in what seemed at times like a return of World
War I's artillery barrages and frontal assaults.
General MacArthur and others were highly critical of the conduct of the land operation on Okinawa.
General Buckner had sent his troops into frontal assaults, into the teeth of highly
fortified Japanese positions with the resultant terrible casualties.
There was a growing sense of concern, I would say almost frustration at this point in the
war when June of 1945, the war in Europe is over.
American forces are moving closer and closer to the Japanese home islands and in each one
of these assaults it seems as if there is a new horrifying clue or a pre-sentiment of
what is likely to come if this invasion of Japan actually is necessary.
Plans were already underway, the planning underway, the operational plans being laid
for this final assault on Japan, which was to begin at the latest in November of 1945.
Okinawa had fallen, the costs had been horrific and so as the Americans advanced closer and
closer to the home islands, the price of victory had grown and grown and contemplating an assault
on the Japanese home island was neither a popular thing at home nor certainly within
the military itself and yet the Japanese leadership showed absolutely no signs of buckling, no
signs of surrender, it is true and we'll talk about this in a subsequent lecture when we
talk about President Truman's struggles about whether or not to use the atomic bomb.
There were certainly at this point indications that some within the Japanese diplomatic community
within what we might loosely call the civilian element of the Japanese government had been,
was interested in some sort of peace feelers to the United States going through in fact
the Soviet Union.
As the military still called the shots in Japan and there was absolutely no hint whatsoever
at this juncture that the Japanese military was prepared to accept the outcome on the
battlefield and surrender.
What makes this even more incomprehensible in some ways and terrifying in another is
that as these battles, these two great climactic battles in the Pacific, Iwo Jima and Okinawa
were unfolding in such grisly horror.
The great air assault by the United States on the Japanese home islands had begun and
had begun with great fury.
Much as we've seen of this, of the island hopping of the attempts to seize new bases
closer to the home islands had been based on the idea of creating forward jumping off
points for the American air assault on Japan.
The instrument for a massive campaign of high-altitude strategic bombing as it had been
practiced in Europe was to be the new high-tech B-29 bombers with terrific range with the
capability of carrying a much higher bomb load and those B-29s would become available
in early 1944, would be operational from bases in China initially, but because of mechanical
problems in the early models and the meager supplies reaching the 20th Air Force in China,
the B-29s were unable to mount a sustained attack against Japan.
The first raid against the home islands had come on June 14, 1944, when 60 B-29s attacked
the iron and steel complex at Yawata with little damage.
The attacking planes flying at altitudes of 30,000 feet had encountered very strong
winds.
We discovered something over Japan that we really hadn't had much of a sense of at this
point and that was something called the jet stream.
At 30,000 feet, the B-29s attempting to move over the target using the northern bomb site,
using high-tech aiming devices with all of their calculations discovered that if they
flew at 30,000 feet, they zipped across the target area, it threw all their calculations
off and so the bombing had been highly ineffective.
In addition, cloud cover was common over Japan, particularly during the daytime, and Japanese
industry tended to be dispersed.
The early raids from the Marianas in the fall of 1944 were more intense and certainly more
effective but still plagued by these same problems and didn't produce the results that
would be expected.
Then in the early spring of 1945, as the engagements at Iwo Jima and subsequently Okinawa would
be underway, the commanding general Haywood Hansel was replaced as commander of the 21st
Bomber Command by Curtis LeMay, a man who had been a pioneer in the tactics of daylight
strategic bombing in Europe.
LeMay at 39 years of age was the youngest general in the United States Army Air Forces
and he began by initiating a dramatic shift in American bombing strategy.
Since the target areas in Japan were almost always covered by clouds in daytime and had
to be bombed by radar and since the tremendous strength of the jet stream and winds over
Japan made accuracy almost impossible, LeMay decided to scrap the policy of daylight strategic
bombing and move over to nighttime attacks.
There he discovered if one went at night the cloud cover was thinner, anti-aircraft fire
was less accurate, the Japanese possessed very few night fighters so that the planes
could fly at lower altitudes escaping the problems of the jet stream, sometimes as low
as 5,000 feet unheard of in any sort of air operation in Europe.
The shift from daylight strategic bombing to area raids using incendiaries.
Japanese cities with their wood and paper structures were highly vulnerable to this
type of attack and these structures tended to be densely clustered around the decentralized
industrial facilities.
Finally a new type of incendiary had been developed and used in Europe against the Germans napalm
which would spread rivers of fire through the attacked areas.
LeMay ordered his bombers to drop their machine guns in order to carry the heavier loads,
assured them that they would be safe, no one was very convinced about this, bomber crews
thinking if one flies anything lower than 20,000 feet is asking for trouble.
Anyone who had experience in Europe understood this when LeMay started talking about 5,000
to 10,000 feet this seemed absolutely suicidal but LeMay insisted.
Dropping their machine guns in order to carry heavier loads also seemed to be asking for
trouble but despite a good deal of skepticism at this breach in Army Air Force Doctrine
and move from daylight strategic bombing to night time bombing, despite of this resistance
LeMay insisted and on the night of March 10th, 9th to 10th 1945, 334 B-29s appeared in the
black skies over Tokyo.
For over 3 hours the giant bombers rumbled over the city, attacking a mixed area of
private dwellings and factories, turning them into a raging inferno.
A firestorm on a scale similar to that of the RAF's raids on Hamburg and later Dresden,
temperatures in Tokyo reached over 1800 degrees Fahrenheit, literally a firestorm that sucked
the oxygen out of the center of the city.
Howling winds created that were so powerful that it literally sucked some of the planes
out of the sky.
When it was at last over, 16 square miles of Tokyo's built up area was utterly destroyed
and between 80 and 100,000 people had been incinerated.
It was probably the largest number of casualties from any raid during the Second World War.
Within days the 21st Bomber Command launched firebombing raids on Nagoya, Osaka, Kobe
and Yokohama and others would follow.
The raids would continue into the summer of 1945 so that the battles that we've been
talking about of Iwo Jima and of Okinawa were being fought against a backdrop of these
mounting raids against the Japanese home islands.
The departure from Air Force doctrine was based on military considerations.
There's been a good deal of talk since the war about the role that race played in American
thinking about the conduct of combat against the Japanese.
Curtis LeMay, who would make the decision to move over to nighttime raids to area raids
away from the American doctrine of daylight strategic bombing, the notion of pinpoint
bombing that had been pioneered and of which LeMay was an enormous enthusiast.
The decision to move away from this was based not on questions of morality, not on questions
of race, but rather on what was militarily the most effective.
The raids at high altitude over Japan had been a failure.
This was Heywood Hansel's problem, LeMay argued, so that if daylight precision bombing
didn't work over Japan, then one went to the alternative.
Before the war, American strategists had already made studies of the feasibility of bombing
Japan and it was very clear to everyone from the very beginning of the conflict that Japanese
cities were ideal targets for the sort of incendiary bombs that we had used also against
the Germans in Europe.
So I think what added to the enormous sense of frustration and puzzlement bewilderment
on the part of American policymakers as well as American military men as we confronted
this final, the prospect of a final assault on Japan, was here was a nation which had
now suffered one string of catastrophic military defeats after another all the way through
the Central Pacific, all the way through the Southwest Pacific as the Americans moved closer
and closer and closer to Japan.
And now as a backdrop, a series of absolutely horrific raids launched against the Japanese
home islands.
The war in the spring of 1945 was brought home to Japan.
The bombing of Germany had been going on since 1940.
A half a million German civilians would be killed by Allied bombing.
The Japanese would come close to that figure in just through the spring and summer of 1945
and yet as the pressure mounted, there still seemed to be no indication that Japan was
about to buckle.
No sense that the military had come to its senses.
Indeed, there seemed to be a growing conviction on the part of American policymakers and military
men that the Japanese High Command was perfectly prepared to go down literally in flames, taking
every last man, woman and child in Japan along with them.
The planning for the invasion of Japan had begun already before the fighting on Okinawa
had been brought to a conclusion.
The tentative jump off date was set for November, Okinawa as well as the Philippines were to
be forward staging areas for the assault on the southernmost Japanese island.
Marshall, a man not given to exaggeration or hyperbole, estimated at this point that
an invasion of Japan would cost the United States a million casualties.
This was the prospect that confronted American policymakers as summer began to wane in 1945.
