Lecture 28, The Race for Berlin.
In the spring of 1945, the war in Europe was reaching its final climax.
In this lecture, we're going to examine the thrust of the Russians on the eastern front
from the aftermath of Stalingrad down to the final climatic battle in Berlin.
We'll examine Western strategy, the controversy over Eisenhower's decision not to press on
to Berlin, the role of Yalta, the political decisions involved in this, and then take
stock of the final fall of Hitler's Third Reich.
We had stopped our discussion of the war on the eastern front with the German defeat
at Stalingrad.
It had been an enormous catastrophic loss for the Wehrmacht, and it did represent the
final offensive thrust of German power in Eastern Europe.
After Stalingrad, after the fall of Stalingrad in the early spring of 1943, there would
be no new major German offensive on the eastern front.
There would be a number of what might be called tactical offenses, but nothing in the
way of a major offensive along the lines of Operation Barbarossa, obviously, in the summer
of 1941, or the renewed German offensive toward the Caucasus in the summer of 1942.
Instead, for the first time in the war, it would be the Red Army that would now begin
to be able to mount a sustained series of offenses aimed at breaking German power in
Russia itself, driving the Germans from the soil of the Soviet Union, and then pursuing
the Germans back inside the frontiers of the Third Reich.
The beginning of that Soviet rollback of the German position would begin in the summer
of 1943 in what was the Battle of Kursk in July of that year.
The Red Army had at last marshaled its forces, preparing not so much to counterpunch a German
offensive, but was now planning a major armored assault aimed at the German positions.
The Germans too, at this point, were also planning a minor tactical assault on a Russian salient.
What one had with the Battle of Kursk is two forces both planning an offensive that rushed
literally into one another.
It would become the largest armored battle in history.
At the high point of the battle, 3,000 tanks were employed on the field.
There had been nothing like it, there has been nothing like it since.
Both sides suffered grievous losses, but at this point in the war, the Soviet Union, whose
factories were producing on a scale that was not quite that of the United States, but still
remarkable production figures, the Soviets could afford to accept those losses the Germans
could not.
The Battle of Kursk in July of 1943 marked the end really of the German ability to launch
Panzer offensives.
After this, the Panzer forces of the Wehrmacht really never recovered and would be largely
used for defensive purposes.
In November, Kiev in the Ukraine was retaken by Russian forces, and by the end of that
month the Soviets had reached the pre-war border of eastern Poland, so the Russian offensive
from the summer continues to move across this great line in the east.
It would be the summer of 1944, just as the Allies were beginning there to launch the
great offensive Operation Overlord in Normandy.
The Soviets were also preparing a major offensive in the east.
The two things were to correspond, to put enormous pressure on the Germans, to stretch
them as much as possible.
The summer offensive, which would be aimed at Army Group Center, the German Army Group
Center, began in June.
It was an even greater defeat for the Germans than the Battle of Stalingrad had been.
The Russian offensive in June destroyed 25 divisions of the Wehrmacht, with a total
of 350,000 German casualties and prisoners of war.
It was an absolutely devastating blow.
In some respects, it's hard to imagine how the Germans, that Army Group Center, almost
like a beacon aiming directly into the heart of Germany, with the collapse of Army Group
Center, it's almost hard to see why it wasn't the Soviets couldn't simply continue to move
in this juggernaut sort of fashion into Germany itself.
But the Russians began to encounter some of the problems that the Germans had a year before
and two years before, and that is, as they began to move west, they began to out-distance
their own supply lines.
They were now fighting over terrain that the Germans had used, had devastated, and now
their supply lines were going to be stretched to the maximum.
It would be difficult to maintain this sort of momentum.
Nonetheless, the pressure was clearly on.
It is also at this point in the summer of 1944 that real tensions within the German high
command, between the high command and Hitler in particular, make themselves felt.
In July of 1944, on July 20th, Klaus von Staufenberg, a Colonel in the German Army, badly
wounded in North Africa, in Rommel's Africa Corps, would place a bomb, just a few feet
from Hitler at Hitler's briefing room in Rostenburg in East Prussia, the Wolf's Lair, it was called.
Hitler spent more and more of his time, less in Berlin, rarely back at his residence down
in Berchtesgaden of pre-war years, more and more time at his field post in Rostenburg,
it was called the Wolf's Lair.
Staufenberg placed a bomb, less than six feet from where Hitler was standing at an enormous
Okon table, and an elaborate plot had been hatched within elements of the German Army,
called Operation Valkura.
Staufenberg was to place the bomb, kill Hitler, make it back to Berlin, and then a code word
would be issued to the German high command all over Europe, so that even those generals
who were not involved in the plot would hearing this code word think, ah, something's happened
now, this was a plan to deal with the question of the probability or the prospect of some
sort of sabotage or the assassination of Hitler, even those who were not involved in the actual
plan would hear the code word, assume that something had happened, and then take action.
The bomb went off, Staufenberg had been placed the bomb down, escaped from the room, ordinarily
the briefing would have been held in Hitler's underground bunker, concrete, reinforced and
so on, but on this day it was held in a small wooden annex, Staufenberg could have excused
himself after placing the bomb, walked out of the building, made his way toward a plane
that was going to take him out, talked his way past the first guard, past the second,
at that point the wooden structure where Hitler was holding the briefing blew sky high, Staufenberg
assumed that Hitler and everyone in the room was killed, miraculously Hitler survived.
We don't know for certain, but it seems, in trying to reconstruct it, it seems apparent
that one of the people sitting beside Staufenberg had kicked the briefcase holding the bomb,
it was uncomfortable and must have taken and placed it on the outside of a huge, open table
leg, so that when the bomb went off, the main thrust of the blast went down one side of
the table, killed two people there, severely wounded others, Hitler had his pants blown
off, his eardrum perforated, but survived.
Nonetheless, after the 20th of July, Hitler never regained full trust in his military,
was always wary that there would be another plot, that the army, he'd always felt that
these old Prussian traditions, it was called Fun Staufenberg and Aristocrat, that the army
couldn't be trusted and on the eastern front, this was particularly the case, there was
a great deal of tension as the Russians began to press relentlessly from the east, and of
course then with Operation Overlord, a real sense that Hitler was moving into a kind of
never never land where he was beginning to move divisions that didn't exist, many of
his closest military advisors would find themselves fired or removed from positions
of authority.
This was the situation then in August of 1944, as the Russian troops approached the city
of Warsaw.
There were logistical problems of the nature that we've just described, the Russians were
at the end of their supply lines, but in August of 1944, the Polish underground, the so-called
Polish Home Army staged an uprising in Warsaw.
The Polish Home Army was loyal to the so-called London Poles, the Polish government in exile
that had very strong western attachments.
The Soviets, on the other hand, had recognized their own representatives, the so-called Polish
Committee of National Liberation, which they would set up themselves later in the city
of Lublin.
When the Red Army, just as the Warsaw Uprising broke out by the Polish Home Army aimed at
defeating the Germans, the Soviets stopped.
They stopped, east of Warsaw did not give aid to the Polish Home Army, and the Warsaw
Uprising was brutally crushed by the Germans.
It was a foretaste of what we would come to know as the Cold War, already a sense that
the Russians were working on a political agenda that was not shared by the western allies.
The failure to support the Warsaw Uprising to help lift the siege around Warsaw of the
Germans was seen by the western allies as a very suspicious act on the part of the Soviets.
The Red Army offensive would continue in the fall of 1944.
In September, units of the Red Army would push into Finland.
Romania, Bulgaria, Slovakia, and Hungary would all now begin to desert their alliance.
They were satellite states of the Grossdeutsche Reich, and now would begin to desert the Axis
as the Red Army approached.
Hitler's eastern European empire was collapsing.
In the Baltic states, Hitler issued an order saying that no German troops should retreat
one inch, they should hold, they should hold, they should hold, so that even as Guderian
and others were urging Hitler to withdraw the troops, pull the troops back.
Let's have defensible lines here to keep the Russians out of Germany.
There was a growing sense of doom and foreboding, not only among the German high command, but
certainly among German civilians, that these years of brutal repression, brutal actions
in the Soviet Union were now going to be repaid and repaid in spades by the Russians as they
approached Germany.
Guderian and others urged Hitler to pull the troops back, pull them out of the Baltics,
so that there can be a defensive line to hold.
Hitler refused to do it, and over a dozen divisions would be left dangling up in the Baltics,
literally cut off from Germany and played no role in this final act of the Third Reich.
The drive through Poland would begin in January of 1945.
The Russians, to give one some sense of just exactly what sort of military force the Soviets
now were able to marshal.
As they began to launch the offensive in Poland in January of 1945, just as the Allies in
the West were finally breaking the, blunting the German offensive in the West, the Soviets
marshaled a million and a half troops for this offensive into Poland.
3,300 tanks, 10,000 aircraft, 28,000 artillery pieces of varying sizes.
Against this force, the Germans had available 600,000 men, 700 tanks, 1,300 planes.
They were in a desperate position that there was simply no remedy.
One of the things that the Army had hoped to achieve with the assassination of Hitler
in this coup d'état in July of 1944, was to make a separate peace with the West,
but hold in the East, hold in the East, hoping that they could split the Alliance
and keep somehow the Bolsheviks, keep the Red Army out of Germany.
This was clearly not going to happen.
Warsaw was finally seized and by February 1945, Russian spearheads were 60 miles from Berlin.
In front of this advancing tidal wave of the Red Army, a flood of German refugees now filled the roads.
German civilians from the Eastern provinces, from Western Poland,
Germans who had been resettled in the annexed parts of Poland now all took to the roads in sheer panic.
It was difficult for the Wehrmacht in some cases to maintain military positions
because of this flood of civilians who were moving West.
If one reads through the National Socialist Newspapers from these last few months of the war,
there is, of course, there's no bad news ever given in the Nazi press,
but over and over again around the periphery, one has this awful sense of German civilians in full panicked flight from the Russians.
The Russians are coming, the Russians are coming, really was the great fear of the German population at this point.
Fanatical resistance was going to be necessary and, of course, it was clear to the German intelligence people
that the Red Army now was simply unstoppable, absolutely unstoppable.
Meanwhile in the West, as the Russians began to close in on Berlin,
the Western Allies had finally shaken themselves free of the aftermath of the Battle of the Bulge.
The Ardennes offensive of the Germans had been blunted,
and now Eisenhower was able to plan the advance into Germany itself.
The plan was for a three-pronged advance to clear the Rhineland.
The British and the Canadians would strike southward toward the Ruhr,
Bradley would drive toward Cologne and Bonn,
and then pivot south to link up with Patton's third army moving along the north bank of the Mosul.
Farther south, Patch's seventh army would make contact with Patton near the city of Koblenz.
The plan went well, but the British and Canadians moved very slowly.
They didn't reach the Rhine until February 21st.
There was bitter resistance on the part of the Germans that flooded fields,
did everything they could to thwart the advance.
It was Montgomery's understanding that his troops in the north were going to be given the top priority,
although he had accepted Eisenhower's overall strategy of a broad-based push into Germany.
It was an understanding that Montgomery had the priority to cross the Rhine,
and that once the Rhine was breached, this was really going to be the breakthrough point.
Cologne fell to the American First Army on March 5th,
and as American troops entered this city, this great city on the Rhine,
it was a picture of sheer devastation.
As American and British troops got into Germany and saw firsthand on the ground
the devastation brought by the Allied Air Forces, they were astonished.
Instead of cities, cities that they had seen on the map,
cities that some of them might have even seen photographs of from the pre-war years,
shells of buildings.
Cologne in particular, there's, as many of you must know,
an enormous cathedral in Cologne, a huge cathedral.
In 1945, as American troops entered the city, the cathedral was still standing.
It had certainly been damaged, but it was still there.
Remarkable, since right beside it was the main Cologne railroad station,
which was completely devastated.
The cathedral was virtually the only structure left standing and intact in the center of Cologne.
The full devastation of Germany, of Germany's cities, would now be witnessed firsthand.
Fifteen miles south of Cologne, elements of the First Army,
probing, probing along the mountainous area there,
came across an astonishing sight.
There, at a small town called Remagen, they saw a bridge, a bridge across the Rhine.
It was a sight that no Allied soldier had ever seen,
because the Germans had blown all of the bridges across the Rhine.
And here, where it was not supposed to be, was an intact structure going across the river.
On March 7th, 1945, the troops stormed the bridge and quickly established a bridgehead.
Within 24 hours, 8,000 men were across the river.
It was an astonishing, it was an astonishing achievement,
also astonishing because they weren't supposed to cross the Rhine.
In America, this was not the plan, but there was the bridge, they crossed it.
The bridge itself, to say that 8,000 troops got across it in 24 hours is important,
because shortly after it, the bridge collapsed.
The Germans had been sending frogmen down the river, trying to bomb it, trying to shell it.
They had mined the bridge, set off the charges, it didn't go.
And so these 8,000 troops get across the river at this moment.
Hitler was so furious that the bridge had not been destroyed, he fired Rundstedt.
I think this was the third time that Rundstedt had been fired by Hitler for one thing or another.
The third army would then secure a foothold on the east bank of the Rhine southwest of Frankfurt on March 22nd.
And only then, on March 23rd, did Montgomery launch the attack that was to have been the main ally defensive in the west across the Rhine.
The Rhine, if one has never seen the Rhine, it is certainly a big, big river and it is a fast moving river,
and especially in the spring.
So when that bridge at Remagen went, a pontoon bridge was set up across the river.
It was that by itself was an extraordinary engineering achievement.
It was a major defensive position and now it had been breached.
By March 25th, 1945, all organized resistance west of the Rhine had ceased.
Now Hitler paid the price for his decision to fight west of the river.
Rundstedt had told him withdraw across the river, make the river the barrier,
but those German troops that were west of the Rhine were now trapped and the allies were able to inflict huge casualties.
In March and into early April, 290,000 prisoners of war would be taken by the allies in this position.
By March 27th, all seven western allied armies were across the river in Germany's position in the west was now utterly hopeless.
Now the allies faced another strategic decision.
Could Allied forces reach Berlin?
Now what was shaping up in the spring of 1945, if not among the political leaders,
among the military men looking at this situation, now it seemed as if the west was engaged in a race for Berlin.
Who was going to get to Berlin?
Could the western allies reach Berlin?
Certainly looking at this northern German plane, it seemed to beckon.
It was ideal terrain for rapid tank movement.
The Ruhr was the next obvious objective, the one that Eisenhower had singled out.
The Ruhr would be encircled on April 1st, and after two weeks of fighting, the Ruhr pocket collapsed.
325,000 Germans surrendered.
At this point, at this point, there was absolutely no point for the war to go on.
The war was lost, but the National Socialist Government refused to surrender.
Simpson's American 9th Army reached the Elba River on April 11th, and on April 13th established a bridgehead on the eastern bank.
He was 50 miles from Berlin.
Eisenhower, Simpson at this point, anticipated orders, giving him the go-ahead to make a dash for Berlin.
Eisenhower issued orders for him to halt.
Why was this? This would become one of the most controversial decisions of the war.
In fact, I think it is probably less controversial than it should be.
For one thing, Simpson, although it is true that he was only 50 miles from Berlin, his position was greatly overextended.
He was short of supplies. He had 50,000 troops available to him to attack the city of Berlin.
Eisenhower and the Germans were preparing a last-ditch major defensive effort for the capital city.
Hitler had gone to Berlin on January 16th and would not leave the city.
The Soviets on April 16th were poised at the Oder River ready for a great jump across the river in the final assault on the capital city.
And also in February of 1945, Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin at Yalta had agreed on zones of occupation for a defeated Germany.
Berlin laid deep within the Soviet zone.
Eisenhower, evaluating this situation, realized that, well, it might be possible.
It might be that would be a dangerous attempt for this relatively small and undersupplied force to make a dash for Berlin.
But having reached the city, the Germans lose, the Americans were simply going to have to turn this territory back over to the Russians for the Russian occupation zone.
He decided to wait. Eisenhower also, at this point, we didn't know where Hitler was.
Eisenhower and the West in general had been really hoodwinked, taken in by a German plan to construct what was called the Alpine Redoubt.
The intelligence sources had been getting information that the Germans were funneling elite troops, supplies, and so on down to the area around Berchtesgaden.
That this was where Hitler was, and that Hitler was going to conduct a last-ditch defense in the Alps that might go on for months, months and months.
Instead of sending troops on a dash for Berlin, for territory that he was going to have to give back to the Russians, Eisenhower sent the main thrust of the American offensive at this point into the south, into Bavaria,
with Patton headed toward the check front here and then south into Bavaria itself.
Meanwhile, the Russians were prepared for the assault on Berlin. On the 16th of April, 1945, the Soviets launched their long-awaited offensive.
They were not overextended. It was the largest military force the Russians had been able to marshal in the entire Second World War.
When they began the artillery barrage, the rocket barrage, the Stalin organs they call in this rocket launchers that fired off rockets with this incredible whooshing sound,
the barrage that the Russians set off on April 16th was so thunderous, so enormous that in the eastern suburbs of Berlin, 60 miles away,
one could see the eastern horizon lit up and one could feel the tremors of the earth that far away, so intense was the barrage.
The Russians pushed ahead toward Berlin, reaching the suburbs on April 22nd, and then in a great pincer movement, Russian troops linked up west of the city on April 25th.
They began fighting within the city, block by block, house by house. By April 28th, they were less than a mile from Hitler's Reich Chancellery, where Hitler was, in the bunker,
from the Reichstag building close by as well. On April 30th, with the Russians literally a block away, Adolf Hitler committed suicide in the bunker in Berlin.
If one thinks about the cost of the seizure of Berlin for the Russians, between April 16th and May 8th, 1945, in this last battle for Berlin,
the Soviets lost 304,887 troops, killed, wounded, or missing. More casualties than suffered by the United States and the European theater in the war.
This was something that Eisenhower understood. It was the biggest battle. The battle for Berlin was won by the Russians at enormous costs,
and this was against an understaffed, underarmed German defensive position with teenagers, elderly men left to fight.
The losses suffered by the Red Army in the battle for Berlin were the largest suffered by the Red Army in the entire Second World War.
To have suffered those casualties, coming from the West, and then to have turned that territory over to the Soviets, according to the Ulta agreement,
would have been a very difficult thing indeed for Eisenhower and for the West.
When Hitler committed suicide in the bunker on April 30th, 1945, he wrote out or dictated a last political testament.
Unregenerate to the last, he closed his political life with one final blast of hatred at those people against whom his entire political career had been directed.
It is not true, he wrote, that I or anyone else in Germany wanted war in 1939.
It was desired and provoked exclusively by those international statesmen who were either of Jewish ancestry or who worked for Jewish interests.
Centuries may pass, but out of the ruins of our cities and cultural monuments, hatred will again arise against that people who are ultimately responsible for our misery, international jewelry, and its accomplices.
Within days after Hitler's suicide, an attempt to continue the Third Reich, to pass the leadership on, failed, the Third Reich unraveled without Hitler.
And finally, on May 8th, 1945, the E-Day was declared in the West, May 9th, 1945 by the Russians.
The war in Europe had finally come to a close. The great evil of national socialism had been defeated, but at absolutely staggering costs.
For the Germans, 1,800,000 military dead, 1,200,000 missing, 500,000 civilians killed, 4 million evacuees in this great wave of people moving to the West escaping the Russians, 4 million of them simply vanished.
No one knows what happened to them.
The Russians, of course, had suffered unbelievably. 11 million military casualties, 2.5 million Russian prisoners of war would die in German captivity, 7 million Russian civilians not counting those murdered in the Holocaust.
10% of the population of the Soviet Union had perished by the time the Germans surrendered in May of 1945.
Hitler's death in the bunker, the link-up of American and Russian troops, finally brought the war in Europe to a close.
But the war in Europe did not bring the Second World War to a close. That final chapter would have to be written all the way across the globe in the South Pacific and in Asia.
