Lecture 30, The Costs of War
Hello.
Welcome to our final lecture in this series on the Second World War.
In this concluding segment, we want to turn our attention to the historical consequences
of the Second World War, to talk about its political implications, the long-term economic
implications of the war, and also to talk about the human costs of this greatest of all conflicts
in human history, to examine the epoch of the Second World War, which is really only
now, 50 years after the guns fell silent, coming to a close.
We began our examination of the Second World War by pointing out that the war fundamentally
altered life in the 20th century on this planet.
The balance of power in international politics was dramatically changed by the course of
the Second World War.
It marked the emergence of the United States and the Soviet Union as superpowers.
The United States before 1939 obviously had been a major power, certainly a major economic
power, but had not yet, despite American intervention in the First World War, had not yet emerged
as a major player in the international scene.
That obviously would change with the powerful events of 1941 to 1945.
The Soviet Union would emerge from the Second World War with its ghastly casualties, the
terrific devastation of the war in the Soviet Union as the other great superpower.
The political conflicts between the United States and the Soviet Union, between the Soviet
Union and the West, that began to emerge in the final year of the conflict, would of course
cast their shadow over the subsequent 50 years of history.
The Cold War was, of course, born out of the Second World War.
The war with its great devastation of Europe, Europe at the end of the war, found its cities,
major cities destroyed, its populations displaced, economic turmoil.
There was great concern that Europe itself might be convulsed by political revolution
and more conflict.
And yet the division of Europe, which would certainly follow in the Cold War, would finally
be ended, and ended only, actually, in this decade of the 1990s.
The period of the Second World War we tend to think of as beginning in 1939 with the German
invasion of Poland.
But in fact, this epoch of the Second World War, I think in larger historical terms, is
really going to be seen as beginning in 1914.
I think that these two great conflicts of this century, the Great War, as the First
World War was called in the Second, are ultimately going to be seen, despite some differences
in motivation and certainly differences in the nature of regimes involved, as one great
war of the 20th century, total war in which the resources, human, economic, psychological
were mobilized for conflict.
It would intensify demands for a greater interventionist state in domestic affairs.
The millions of returning veterans everywhere would demand of their government something
more than simple benign neglect, having made great sacrifices.
One sees in Europe, certainly, to a lesser degree in the United States, but certainly
in Europe, really the emergence of the modern welfare state in which the domestic populations
of France, of Germany, of Italy, of Great Britain, all would demand of their states
some sort of support and repayment in a way for the great sacrifices made during the course
of the Second World War.
The nature of the state itself after the Second World War would be ultimately different.
Also, if one thinks about the human costs of the Second World War, 55 million people
would perish across the globe in this conflict, nor no corner of the globe would be left untouched.
We talked in our last lecture about the casualties in Germany, a million 800,000 military dead,
a million plus missing, 500,000 civilian dead, 4 million who simply vanished in a trek from
Eastern Europe to the West.
In Great Britain, 390,000 fatalities, in France, 810,000, the United States, 259,000, Japan
would lose 1,800,000, Poland, 4.5 million, over 4 million of whom were civilians.
The Soviet Union, with the most dramatic of all, of course, as we've seen, 11 million
military casualties, deaths, 2.5 million who died in German captivity, 7 million civilians
22 million altogether, a tenth of the entire population of the Soviet Union, death on a
scale never before imagined, and, of course, the 6 million who would perish in the Holocaust.
These numbers are staggering, impossible, I think, to comprehend.
And yet, those human costs, I think, are things we must struggle to understand, must come to
terms with.
The numbers themselves, in many ways, leave us blank, they're too big, too staggering.
Individual stories, I think, bring the meaning of this war much closer to home.
And so, as we conclude this series of lectures on the war, I'd like to tell a story, an individual
story, a story that begins in the final days of the Second World War, and I think captures
both the devastation, bravery, and heartbreak of the war.
In the final days of the war in Europe, American and Soviet troops were linking up on the Elba.
The Allies had overrun almost all of Germany.
The Russians had reached the very suburbs of Berlin.
The Third Reich was in its death throes.
On April 21, 1945, at just after 10.30 in the morning, a formation of 137 American heavy
bombers, giant B-24 liberators, took off on its way to a target deep inside Nazi Germany.
Only three days before, the Allied High Command had declared the strategic air war in Europe
to be over.
There simply were no more strategic targets left for the heavy bombers.
There would still be air attacks, certainly, but those attacks would be carried out by
dive bombers and by small, lightweight, attacked aircraft.
Still one last mission had been ordered.
General Eisenhower was convinced that Hitler was preparing one last ditch stand in the Bavarian
Alps and was funneling men and materiel into this alpine redoubt.
Although the target for the bombers on this day was a railroad bridge in the vicinity of
Salzburg, considered to be a key transportation link that was to be destroyed, but the weather
had been terrible all morning.
Low clouds and fog hung over the bases in England and over the continent, the situation
deteriorated.
Banks of leaden cloud like mammoth slabs of concrete stretched out in every direction.
The weather ship flying in advance of the formation in all of these formations, big
bombing raids, it would be a weather ship that would fly out in front of the main body
of the formation to check weather conditions at the target.
The primary was to be bombed in this instance visually.
This weather ship flying in advance of the formation sent back a steady stream of directions
leading the formation on a meandering course through the cloud banks.
Like explorers crawling through the murky crevices of a cave, the formation twisted
and turned as the ships climbed and dropped, swung to the left and right, seeking a gap
in the mountainous clouds.
Buffeted by strong winds and pockets of turbulence, the formation formed and reformed, swinging
at last to the southwest toward the IP.
Maintaining a tight formation was out of the question.
According to the briefed course was impossible.
Then just past 10.30, the weather ship reached Salzburg to discover a towering weather front.
Solid cloud, thunderstorm and rime ice from 15,000 to 20,000 feet.
The weather ship advised abandoning the mission.
The command pilot riding in the lead aircraft, who was in charge of the mission, it was his
decision to make ultimately, turn back, proceed on to the target, proceed to the secondary.
The secondary target on this day was also a target in the Salzburg area, so the command
pilot felt that he could not move to the secondary.
Also because American troops were moving through the area, moving into the southeast
towards Salzburg, finding a target of opportunity, which would have ordinarily been another alternative,
was also ruled out.
The command pilot reluctantly agreed to abort the mission and return to base in England.
He gave a signal for a turn to the right.
But such a course, navigators and pilots throughout the formation realized was a mistake.
It would lead them directly over the city of Regensburg, one of the most frequently bombed
and heavily defended cities in Germany.
It was the home of a Messerschmitt factory that had been bombed in the first major American
raid deep into Germany in August of 1943.
The command pilot insisted, despite protests from various navigators throughout the formation,
and high above Regensburg, the giant formation began a sweeping turn to the west.
On this day, April 21st, 1945, luck was with the formation.
It might have been a disaster.
But on this day, only one flat battery was still operating in the city, and it cut loose
with only two salvos.
A bomb group used to seeing a sky filled with deadly black puffs of smoke saw only eight,
nine of these sooty bursts in the sky around them.
Anti-aircraft fire that morning was later described to be meager, but it was accurate.
On plane, the lead ship of the third squadron, appropriately enough named the black cat,
was not lucky that morning.
At 10.32 a.m., an 88-millimeter shell ripped through the left wing of the plane between
the number one and number two engine.
Instantly a plume of red-orange flame shot back, and then in seconds the wing folded,
and the plane flipped over onto its back and began a long lopsided spiral into the clouds below.
Throughout the formation, men strained to see parachutes to see if anybody got out.
Just a few weeks later, on May 8th, 1945, in a small town in Tennessee, Callie Goodner
was waiting for her husband to return home from work.
When across the street, the Western Union truck pulled up.
It was a dreaded sight, one that anyone living at home through the war recognized with great terror.
The Western Union boy crossed the trolley tracks and approached the front porch.
He handed her a telegram.
It was from the War Department.
She opened the telegram on May 8th with cars blaring, their horns blaring, bells chiming
throughout the town.
It was V.E.
Day in Europe.
The war was over.
The radio broadcasts from London were already talking about celebrations in London, chanting
crowds of happy civilians in the capital of Great Britain.
And with her hands trembling, she opened the telegram.
It read, the Secretary of War desires me to express his deep regret that your son, technical
Sergeant Goodner Howard G., has been missing in action in Germany since 21 April.
If further details or information are received, you will be promptly notified.
Within a matter of hours, Callie Goodner was in touch with families in St. Louis, in New
York, in Peoria, Illinois.
The crew, the families of the crew of the black cat who would remain somewhat in touch
throughout the last part of 1944 and into 1945.
Have you heard anything?
Have you received a telegram?
Rushing to her bedside table where she kept letters from her son, she tore open the last
letter that she had received from him and looked at the date.
The date was April 21st, 1945.
Howard had written the letter.
In it he said that the war was winding down, the Russians were approaching Berlin, but
he had to get to bed and get this war over with, but he sure wished he was at home in
Tennessee in the springtime.
It didn't look like he would make it this spring, but the letter was from April 21st.
How she thought could it be possible that he was missing on April 21st when she had
a letter?
That evening, phone calls began coming in from New Jersey, from Chicago, from various
places where families of the crew also reported that they too had received a missing inaction
telegram.
In the following weeks, one by one, the 11 member crew of the black cats families would
receive a second telegram confirming that their son or husband were not missing in action
but in fact had been killed in action over Regensburg on April 21, 1945.
It was a typical bomber crew.
It could have been a typical outfit, a squad in the infantry, part of a ship's detachment,
from any branch of service.
They're from all over the country, Jewish, Catholic, Southern Baptist.
The youngest, a young Armenian from Brooklyn was 18.
One of the waste gunners was 17 actually when he enlisted.
His forged the papers, got into the Army Air Corps, and was 18 when the plane went down.
There were two married men on the crew, the old man of the crew, a waste gunner from Peoria,
Illinois, was 29.
They called him Pops.
He had two children.
One by one, the families received the second telegram, but not the goodners.
No telegram arrived, and days passed, and days passed.
Could it be?
Then the second word began filtering in, parachutes had been seen coming out of the plane.
The whole crew might not have gone down, and then a remarkable phone call from Brooklyn.
The tail gunner was alive.
He'd been liberated from an American, from a German prisoner of war camp just outside
of Munich.
He was alive, and so was the bombardier.
Two of the crew members were others still alive.
What about Howard?
Was he alive?
There'd been no second telegram.
Members of the 466th bomb group began returning to the United States in this period on their
way to, for redeployment in the Pacific in the preparation for the invasion of Japan.
The families interviewed, called, wrote, or were contacted by other members of this bomb
group, desperately trying to find out details, information about what had happened on this
mission on April 21st.
Some people said there were two shoots, three shoots, four shoots had been seen coming out
of the black cat as it spiraled into the clouds over Regensburg.
Then on June 24th, the second telegram was received at the Goodner household.
Callie, her hands shaking, received the telegram, and ripped it open.
She read only as far as the first line.
It began, the Secretary of War desires me to express his deepest regret.
It too confirmed that her son, Howard Goodner, 21 years old, had been killed over Regensburg.
Resigned in despondent, her husband, Ernest, in November of 1945, now the war over, the
veterans returning, triumphant, appealed to the Adjutant General in Washington for information,
posing the same question that had tormented all of the families of the black cat since
May.
We've had very little information from your office in regards to how my son met his death,
or where he has buried the letter read.
We've talked to several members of the 466th bomb group who were on the mission and they've
offered different, they have differed on the number of shoots that we have seen, they
saw coming from the ship.
According to records that you sent me, Howard was killed in action over Regensburg, Germany
on 21 April 1945.
Could you tell me whether my son was found in the ship or did he parachute out?
I would also like to know what means were used to identify him.
The family was tortured with the idea that somehow he had escaped, was wandering around
somewhere in the chaotic state of occupied Europe at this point.
In a final plea he added, I know you have thousands of letters like this and that your
office is a very busy place, but please try and understand my position as a parent and
that I want to know every detail regarding my son for the sacrifice that he made for
our country.
I feel sure his country will give me all the details that we have on my beloved son.
The War Department was unable to provide those details and the family is all the members
of this crew and the families of servicemen all across the United States would now suffer
from the lack of information.
There would be no more news from the War Department, only in 1948 the return of his body from Europe.
If any war can be described as just or successful, the Second World War would be a prime candidate.
It was the good war with hard won victories over the barbarism of Nazi Germany and the
aggressive militarism of Imperial Japan.
But to Cali Goodner, whose son Howard perished over Regensburg on what proved to be the last
Allied bombing raid in Europe.
It was the last American bomber lost over Europe in one of the war's bitterest ironies
for her and for the family.
Triumph over Hitler was a cold consolation for the loss she had suffered.
For almost half a century after her son's death, she could not believe that he was never
coming home.
For Vincent O'Brien, the war ended and his struggle with its meaning began on the day
after Christmas 1944, when his son's personal effects arrived home in a small box.
Opening the parcel, he found a neatly folded dress uniform, a few dog-eared photographs
and a small paper bag containing a jeweler's ring, the silver wings of a navigator, a wrist
watch, a pair of sunglasses and three coins.
I sat staring at the box in which these things had come, he wrote.
It was such a small box to hold all the laughter, tears, all the hope and apprehension which
had been packed into it.
So much gaiety and tenderness, so much virile beauty.
It was hard to believe that it had all vanished, leaving only a little heap of clothes and
a torn paper bag.
It was incredible that of high adventure in a far land, nothing was left but a three
pence and a watch that had stopped ticking.
That scene of quiet anguish was repeated in hundreds of thousands, indeed millions of
homes throughout the United States, England, Germany, the Soviet Union, Japan, all across
the world convulsed by war.
After all these years, its memory lingers like a wound that will never heal.
The Second World War, which consumed 55 million lives, means remembering not only the extraordinary
acts of unparalleled heroism, bravery, self-sacrifice, devotion to duty that would be the hallmark
of that war, but the grief, anxiety and heartbreak in which it was shrouded.
We must in short preserve and remember not only the remarkable triumph and valor of those
traumatic years, but also the colossal human tragedy that lurks in the cold and unforgiving
heart of every war, no matter how just.
On the 50th anniversary of the Black Cat's demise on April 21st, 1995, the families of
the crew of the Black Cat convened in a village just outside of Regensburg where the plane
had come down.
Remarkably the villagers there had constructed a cross and a small plaque for the crew of
the Black Cat.
And as the families of that crew gathered with about 150 German villagers, many of whom
had been children or young adults and watched that awful scene of the plane cartwheeling
out of the sky on April 21st, 1945, we gathered to mark the end of the war and the epoch that
it dominated.
And as we did, the memory of that crew is for all the losses of war, spoke out to us
across the decades, reminding us that in war there are no winners and that even in victory
there is heartbreak.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
