Hello again.
So far, we've seen some of the ancient Near Eastern roots of thinking about evil in the
West. But along with the Babylonian and Akkadian myths that we saw earlier, were the myths,
tragedians, poets, and thinkers of ancient Greece, all of whom who have shaped our thinking
about evil, particularly through the concept of tragedy. So now, in this lecture, I want
to turn to Greece.
As we'll now see, a dualistic language of good and evil, such as the Babylonian myth
the Enuma Elish presumes, is not the inevitable shape that a culture's moral imagination
has to take. We know this because in Greece, an entirely different picture emerges, what
you can call an anarchic polytheism, that is, belief in many gods without a single organizing
moral order that the gods are all part of dominates their moral imagination, the moral
imagination of classical Greece. And it is at the basis of Greek tragedy as well.
Now here, as in the ancient Near East, there are many gods, but the gods are more like
characters in a long-running drama series like Dallas or Dynasty, or choose what you
will, the OC. The struggles between them are not fundamentally inflamed by a struggle
between good and evil. Good and evil are terms that really seem to apply more fundamentally
to humans in Greece. Instead, the Greek gods, in a certain way, exist in a weird way beyond
good and evil, indulging in cruelty as evil as they take a front at it, and in neither
case does it seem that their judgment or actions are beholden to any ultimately moral framework.
For all their power, that is, the gods are somehow, in themselves, completely unaccountable.
Because of that, at times, the Greek poets and playwrights suggest that they are in some
important way, trivial. This sort of ties together what was suggested
separately in the Enuma Elysium and in Gilgamesh, namely that humans suffer, but it is the gods'
doings that make humans suffer. There is something divinely governed beneath the structures often
of human tragedies, this view says. Sincere actions can lead to tragic conflicts, sometimes
between goods, ends, or aims of people's action that are essentially incompatible, sorts
of things that philosophers call incommensurable goods. That is, goods that you cannot have
at the same time. I would love to be a professional baseball player and I would love to be a professor,
but unless I am a professor, say, of sports management, it's going to be very hard for
me to dedicate my life in the right way to becoming a professional baseball player in
the same time that I've got to become a professional academic. They are two life paths that you
cannot pursue in the same single life. Those are incompatible paths in that way. For the
Greek tragedians, there were times in life when humans had to confront choices between
sets of goods or choices, tragic conflicts we could call them, between rival sets of
evils and sometimes out of sheer, tragic providence, the fate's decree that something must happen
to bring the mighty down. Now, more disturbing still than the tragedians' worldview, though,
is the suggestion of Thucydides, an Athenian historian and also a soldier. For whereas
the tragedians suggest that evil is due to some mysterious but divinely ordained necessity,
Thucydides suggests that evil may be due entirely and simply and even more terrifyingly to sheer
luck and chance. Understanding the differences between the views of the tragedians, Sophocles,
Aeschylus and Thucydides will help us see two vividly different pictures of whence evil
and suffering come in this world. Let's start with tragedy. For the Greeks, tragic drama
became a crucial structure for thinking about their lives in a long-standing historical
development, took place over several centuries. In the tragedies, the Greeks reflected upon
evil, fate and luck in human affairs in plays such as Oedipus Rex and the women of Trachas,
the Bacchai, there's a series of these plays. It's important to know that when we think
of a Greek tragedy, we think of going to the theater maybe in an evening and watching
a play. These plays were not meant to be those sorts of things. They were not entertainments
as we think of them. The plays were part of a yearly religious ritual in Athens, the Dionysia,
honoring the god Dionysius, the god of revelry and fertility where wine and babies come together.
This festival took place over five days every spring, somewhat like Mardi Gras in New Orleans,
but with a more serious religious tone. The Athenians used these plays as serious venues
to reflect on the political, religious and ethical situation of their community, and
the plays that survive reflect that quite well. Now it's interesting to note, tragic,
you could say, to note that the plays we have are a very, very small fragment of what was
written. Sophocles wrote, we know, a hundred and twenty-three plays, but only seven have
survived to our day. It's as if all we knew of Shakespeare was a bit of Romeo and Juliet,
some of the history plays, and maybe Macbeth. We heard he wrote plays with titles such as
Hamlet or King Lear or Much Ado About Nothing or Othello, but nothing of those plays managed
to make it to our day. That's how much of the Greeks has been lost to us.
Now, let's take a look at one very famous play to figure out what tragedy means in thinking
about evil. Let's look at Oedipus Rex, Oedipus the King, right? Perhaps one of the most popular
plays for people to think about over the past twenty-five hundred years. Now the plot of
the play is fairly complicated, but bear with me. Oedipus is King of Thebes, Jocasta his
queen, and Thebes has begun to suffer from a terrible plague, a sign everyone thinks
of divine wrath. Oedipus is determined to find out why the plague has been sent, and
he discovers, through his investigations, that it is due to the religious pollution caused
by the fact that the previous king, Laos, was murdered, but his killer never caught
and punished. Oedipus then undertakes the hunt for the murderer. There was a series
of inquiries, the truth emerges. It was Oedipus who killed Laos on the road to Thebes in a
dispute in which the two sides did not know one another's identities.
Furthermore, and more horrifying still, Oedipus is the unknown son of Laos, the king he killed,
and of Laos' queen, who is Oedipus' mother, Jocasta, who is now Oedipus' wife. Laos and
Jocasta had been told by an oracle that their son would kill his father and commit incest
with his mother, and so when he was born they gave him to a shepherd to kill, but the shepherd
instead took pity and gave him to a Corinthian who raised him as his own son. Jocasta, the
truth fully known at last, a truth she never knew, is so overcome by shame that she hangs
herself. Oedipus blinds himself by plunging her gold hairpins into his eyes and begs for
exile from Thebes. The play ends ambiguously with the chorus chanting the famous maxim
ascribed to the Greek legislator Solon that no one should be called happy until they are dead.
Now the range of meanings, the role of fate, chance, and luck in this play speak powerfully
of the terrible paradoxes of fate and responsibility that Greek tragedy was so good at communicating.
One of the most traumatic things about the play is the way that Oedipus himself is the
vehicle for his own self-destruction. As he himself puts it, at one point, it was Apollo
friends, Apollo who brought this deepest bitterness, all my sorrows, to fulfillment. But the hand
that struck me down was none but my own. Oedipus both recognizes his responsibility,
but sees a fate as guiding things, a fate whose providential command is discernible in events,
although never predictable. And so in a way, Oedipus begins to think of himself as someone who has
been humbled by the gods for an arrogance he did not quite see. Sometimes though, the plays seem
to locate responsibility more directly in the gods themselves to the point where humans seem to
become angry at the gods or the cosmos for their misfortunes. At the end of Sophocles' play,
The Women of Trachas, we have a remarkable moment where this happens. Now in this play,
let's not worry so much about the plot, but what happens is that a father who is about to
help his son get married, Hercules, the father is Hercules, the father who's about to help his son
get married, is accidentally killed by the poisoning of his wife. His wife accidentally
poisons him. At the end of the play, Helus, the son of Hercules, orders his father's acid-burned
body taken off stage as his father rides in pain, as his father is begged to be killed, to be burned
alive, because he has been killed by the gift from his wife. She thought she was giving him a love
potion to keep him in love with her, but in fact, she was unknowingly giving him a cloak drenched in
acid, which of course burned away his skin as soon as it was exposed to sunlight. And when she
discovers this, she commits suicide out of horror and shame at what she's done. And as Hercules is
being taken up and carried away from the stage, Helus turns to the chorus, the female chorus,
and he says to them, Let the gods, their ruthlessness, their cruelty, be remembered.
They take us to be their children and call themselves father, and yet they will see such
suffering. No one knows the future, but the present is hard. The present is shame for them,
and for him who bears the victimhood, the present is pain, cruel fate.
Women, he now says, speaking directly to the chorus, come inside now.
You have seen many things, terrible and strange, and there is nothing here that is not Zeus.
There is nothing here that is not Zeus. Imagine a Christian or a Jew standing at the end of the
Second World War and saying that everything that had happened was, in some sense, God's will
being accomplished. That would be an enormously astonishing, and for Orthodox believers, blasphemous
thing to say. But it was said in a Greek play, in a religious festival, precisely because
it was a question that the Greeks were asking themselves. If we believe that the gods do govern
fate, doesn't that make them, in some sense, responsible? What should we think about that?
It's a troubling idea, but it's not incoherent, and it plays a powerful role in Greek tragedy,
and in much other Greek thinking.
But it's not the only point of view. The idea that fate has many strange twists and turns,
and can turn strength against the strong and bring the mighty down,
became very pointed in the experience of the calamitous Peloponnesian War, captured in the
historian Thucydides' book On That Conflict, a book which, by the way, is named the Peloponnesian
War. Useful that. The basic story of the war is simple. It was a war between Athens and her allies
and Sparta and her allies, and it lasted almost 30 years. It lasted from 431 to 404. Thucydides'
book doesn't cover the whole war because it was written while the war was being fought,
but it covers enough of it. The war was devastating. It enabled the spread of plagues, starvation,
ruined the Greek world's economies, ruined a number of cities, and ended with the Spartans in
charge of a kind of petty tyranny over much of Greece, supported by the Persians, who for the last
hundred years, the Greeks had allied themselves together in trying to keep out of Greece.
So effectively, what this war between the Greeks did was destroy them all so much that the Persians
finally were able to get control. It effectively ended the Golden Age of Greece. Imagine if the
Cold War had turned hot. That's what this was like for Greece. Now, Thucydides' account,
though it's incomplete, nonetheless bears all the marks of a work attempting to see in history
a tragedy, though with some differences. Just as searching as any tragedy could be about the
nature and significance of human wickedness, Thucydides took his own particular take on that wickedness.
Thucydides writes in certain ways against a previous historian who it's important to understand
something of in order to understand Thucydides, much as it's important, I suggested, to understand
the Enuma Elish to fully understand what's going on in the book of Genesis. Thucydides is arguing
Thucydides is arguing with the Greek historian Herodotus, who was of a previous generation,
and wrote actually about the Persian Wars, the wars that the Greeks managed to win to keep the
Persians out. Herodotus saw history and culture as kinds of natural forces that shaped people's
characters in certain ways, so that where you were from determined your historical behavior,
your political forms in all sorts of ways. Herodotus thought of himself as a naturalist
in a certain sense. Thucydides does not think that way. He sees people's decisions not as determined
by their natural environment or their cultural context, cultural presuppositions, but importantly
pressured, shaped by the political pressures of the moment. Thucydides, and this is the important
thing, believes in the accidental nature of things. He does not believe in determinism.
Now along with this, he's completely convinced that history always repeats itself,
that the fundamental conditions of human interaction, the mix of motives and modes of
apprehension that together make up human nature, these don't change for him. This is why, as he
says at the very beginning of his book, Thucydides writes his book to offer lessons for people who
will be in the same situation as he was at some point in the future. Now what's interesting about
this is that Thucydides' book, even today, is taught at the Naval Academy, at West Point,
at all the senior military staff colleges, and especially at the Army War College,
where they teach it to mid-level military officers. And a number of people have drawn
connections between the story of an empire gained by bravery being turned into something that becomes
oppressive to some people. Many military officers read this book now and they think, wow, this has
lots to say to us and our world today. Thucydides may or may not be directly applicable to that,
but one thing about his work that strikes me as very pertinent, and that is that
when he talks about the idea of
a state's motivations or a people's motivations, he identifies one important theme that remains
pertinent for us today. Namely, the human psyche in war is slowly deformed by the pressure of constant
fear. Indeed, the war itself, he thought, is caused by misunderstanding and especially fear.
After the Persian wars, Athens grew increasingly powerful,
eventually gaining hegemony over most of the rest of Greece.
The Spartans feared for their own independence and the growing tension between Athens' hegemony
and Spartans' fear led eventually to the war.
Once the war is started, like all wars, it takes on a life of its own and it begins to master the
competence. Both sides expected a quick victory, but neither gets it. Both bear with the war, however,
hoping it will exhaust the other side before it exhausts their own. Neither considers the moral
costs of the war, the damage and deformation it will do to their souls, though Thucydides himself
does. And in some ways, this is the greatest moment of his work.
The classic case of this is the famous story, famous among a fairly narrow set of relatively
nerdy individuals like myself, the famous story of the Melian Dialogue at the end of Book Five
of the Peloponnesian War. Now, Melos was, and is, you can visit it today, a tiny island
of no strategic importance in the middle of the Aegean Sea. It's a neutral in the war.
A military group of Athenians come to it and meet with the leaders of Melos in private.
They ask to have control of the island and for the Melians to ally themselves with Athens.
Here's the Athenian's view. Why this should happen. If we don't take control of your island and city,
others will see our not doing so as a sign of our weakness. Indeed, if you simply declare
yourselves neutral between us and Sparta, others will say, well, the Athenians couldn't get them
on their side, so they must be weaker than we thought. Therefore, we should try to resist the
Athenians more. So because we don't want that, because we want to forestall that possibility,
you must become our allies, though you don't really want to be and we don't really need you to be.
The Melians facing this see that they cannot appeal to the Athenian sense of justice. The
Athenians are clearly far beyond that. So they appeal instead to setting a good example. They
say to the Athenians, don't mistreat us because, after all, what goes around comes around and if
you mistreat us, so it will be done in turn to you. The Athenians reply, that's our belief too,
but there's no way to avoid this fate. No number of good examples will teach humans out of this kind
of deep pessimism about human behavior. The key for us, the Athenians, that is, is that might
outweighs right. God is not fundamentally the arbiter of justice, but rather,
God is the pattern of power applied, a very curious phrase that Thucydides uses.
God seems to be the structure of power that actually is imposed in the world.
Force, they say, is its own law and the law famously, the Athenians say to the Melians,
the law is what the strong impose and what the weak must acquiesce to.
After the report, after Thucydides' report of this dialogue, he very quickly tells the story
of what happened. The Melians refuse the Athenians offer. The Athenians besiege the Melians and
eventually take the city. When they do, they massacre all the men and take the women and the
children off to slavery. Eventually, several years later, they replace all those people
on the island with a colony of Athenians.
After this event in Thucydides' story, things begin to go really bad for the Athenians and
they suffer a string of disastrous defeats and eventually lose the war. Thucydides' book doesn't
record the end of the war, though he clearly foresees that a calamity is heading in Athens' way.
But he does something very important. Other people who wrote about the war
read the Athenians' defeat as in some sense morally deserved by what they had done during the war.
Thucydides does not. In no way does he suggest that their defeat is because of their cruelty
to the Melians. Rather, it is that as they predicted, the wheel of fate and chance is turning
around. And now cruelty will be done to them, not as payback, but as the inevitable chaos
and randomness of life. Is evil or cruelty wholly a matter of circumstance and accident?
The Athenians in civilian life would never have imagined that one day they would effectively
exterminate an entire island's population. Not because of any strategic importance,
but only because of the fear of what other people would think if they didn't do it.
And yet that's just what they did. Thucydides doesn't read this as revealing some dark stain in
the Athenian soul or revealing some sort of absolute brutality at the heart of all humans
that's finally unleashed in situations of war. That's not his point. His point is that people
in certain contexts will behave in certain ways. Character has little to do with it.
But the necessity of context seems, over time, to outweigh the noble sentiments of moral character.
In a way, this is the grimest sort of fatalism. This is the fatalism you might see in a foot soldier
in a war who sees only random death and persistent soul-drubbing cruelty. Those who are best are
rendered more vulnerable by their virtues or put in more danger by their courage,
and so they die or are maimed more quickly in combat. In war, it is the cowardly and the cunning
who stand the best chance of surviving. Thucydides himself knew this because he was
a general in the Peloponnesian War. Fight he fought in various engagements and finally was
exiled from Athens for his inability finally to lift a siege of a crucial outpost before the
outpost surrendered. Thucydides, in telling the story of that event, doesn't make it a large part
of the war. He makes it a very passing mention in his book and he talks about himself in the third
person. Thucydides the Athenian was sent out to do this. He traveled as quickly as he could,
it was winter and cold, but his ships did not get there in time and after that he was exiled.
It's an astonishing revelation that if you don't look for it in the book, you won't realize it's
there because the book is so clearly not the kind of book that politicians or generals today write,
which is mostly about justifying themselves. Thucydides was actually interested in trying to
tell the story of this war. For him, for the Greek tragedians, the key here when it comes to thinking
about evil is that there is no simple or straightforward moral order. All of our moral actions are subject
to dramatic reversal and deformation and there are no guarantees that the human's moral sincerity
will not in fact turn out to be destructive, perhaps even self-destructive. Furthermore,
Thucydides, I think, introduces into Western consciousness the idea of the accident, the
possibility that is that evil and suffering whenever they happen may well have no cause at all, at
least no cause that we can recognize as an intentional purposeful act, whether of a human
being or of some callous divinity off in some paradise somewhere. Thucydides and the Greek
tragedians are only two of the voices that the Greek world offers us. In our next lecture,
we'll look at a rival view to both of them in Greek thought, that of the philosophers,
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, who came after the tragedians and Thucydides,
and those inspired by these philosophers who argue that the myths and the tragedies
significantly misunderstood the nature of our situation and the nature of our cosmos.
