Welcome back.
One major strand of the Hebrew Bible, the one we looked at in our last lecture, talks
about evil as fundamentally a rebellion against God and God's good order.
There's another strand, one that talks about evil and suffering in disquietingly different
terms, as things perhaps will directly by God in the sovereign darkness of God's mysterious
governance of human life.
This strand of the Bible raises questions about the nature of God's governance of human
life and about the mystery of God's dispensing of both good and evil to humanity.
All this raises the question of humanity's proper response to a God who acts in such
mysterious ways, and it raises the question of how that response in turn shapes human
beings in their overall life.
The figures that we'll treat of here are considered very wise and faithful figures
in the Bible.
But as Job says in his book, where shall wisdom be found?
Is it, as the book of Proverbs says, true that fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom?
Is that the right way to think about these traditions?
Is this dimension of the Bible attempting to tell us that in order to properly inhabit
a world governed by a good God, a certain kind of humility and perhaps even a certain kind
of fearfulness is required?
To look at this question more fully and to begin to think about how the Bible may be
trying to answer it, I want to look at a series of stories in the Hebrew Bible.
Christians will also call the Old Testament.
A series of stories are very important to this tradition, but in a different way also
constitute a sort of minority report about what's going on in the tradition's message
about God and about the people Israel and God's governance of history.
I want to look especially at the stories of Abraham, of Job, and then think about how
the prophets used those stories to think about the meaning of history and the purpose of
God's plans for humanity in their own time.
The upshot of this story is that indeed there is something in what Proverbs says that a
fearful reverence before this God is probably the wisest course to take, but also only a
course taken by the wise.
So let's begin with Abraham and the covenant.
This language of covenant is very important and it will behoove us to spend just a little
bit of time thinking about what makes a covenant and why it is so important in this tradition.
While they were proto-covenants, kind of early preliminary covenants of a sort, made with
Adam and Eve and then with Noah, in fact the covenant in this tradition is made between
God and Abram, that's Abraham's first name, Abram, Abram as a condition of this covenant,
one of its formulations anyway, changes his name to Abraham, which is the father of many
nations.
Abraham's identity that is, his very name, is given to him in accepting the covenant.
Now a covenant is not a contract, very different.
Most basically it's not because it is open-ended, it doesn't completely define the boundaries
of the ethical relationship that it creates.
Like a marriage, which is often talked about as a covenant, a covenant talks about sharing
in a journey for better or worse.
It is powerfully committing for both sides, perhaps more powerfully committing than a
contract precisely because of its open-endedness, but it is disquietingly uncertain about where
this will go, again much like a marriage.
With a contract you know what you're getting into, you buy a car, you're able to return
it under certain conditions, with a covenant not so much.
The meaning of the covenant, the meaning of what it binds together, emerges only over
and through the history of the relationship itself, a covenant that is, is an act of faith
and hope.
Now as for Abraham, and Abraham's covenant with God, the covenant he affirms gives him
his life.
Insofar as it is a good covenant, it means he accepts and affirms the life it gives him,
which he seems to do.
But that life is not without its darkness either.
And Abraham exemplifies a certain faithfulness precisely because he seems to live into that
covenant in ways that are unpredictable, and he responds to God's surprises in that covenant
in ways that are unpredictable as well.
His story has multiple moments, and here I just want to focus on three.
First the story of Sodom and Gomorrah, right?
This is a story about judgment and justice.
God wants to destroy these towns because they are so full of sinners.
And he tells Abraham this, hey, I'm going to go and flatten these towns.
Abraham begs God to let the innocent be spared.
And he asks God again and again, shall not the judge of all the earth do right?
And indeed, God allows the innocent, Lot and his family, to be spared.
This is a really crucial moment.
God and Abraham are revealed to be not just in a covenant of power, but in an importantly
ethical covenant.
God has revealed in this behavior that God can be appealed to as a force for justice.
This is a very important thing.
Abraham now understands this God, not just to be a good God for him, but also a good
God for the cosmos.
But then God goes and does something new.
He asks Abraham to kill his son.
Now this is the famous Akedah, the binding, the sacrifice of Isaac, probably of the three
Abrahamic faiths.
This event is the one that both binds them all together and also torments each one of
them individually, precisely because of the many confusing dimensions of this story.
Right now in my world, in religious studies, we like to talk about the Abrahamic faiths,
all three of them, Judaism, Christianity, Islam.
We talk about them as the children of Abraham.
This is the big phrase.
I like the phrase.
It's a nice phrase.
But what we don't notice a lot, and what would be important to notice if we were to
continue with this, is that God tells Abraham to kill his child.
So what does that mean?
Consider some of the details of this story.
God asks Abraham to sacrifice Isaac.
And not just Isaac.
He says, Isaac, your son, your only son, whom you love.
Those are formulaic statements on God's part, but they are also packing into what Abraham
is being asked to do, a certain density of drama that suggests that God knows what he's
asking Abraham to do.
To sacrifice Isaac means effectively to leave his family behind.
Just as God had first asked Abraham to leave behind his family in Chaldea, where Abraham
came from, and just as God asked Abraham to leave behind his name and his identity and
become Abraham.
Indeed, because God had established the covenant with Abraham through Isaac and not through
Ishmael, Abraham's other son, who he has shunned at this point, the call to sacrifice
Isaac, means that Abraham is being asked to sacrifice not just his name, after all, Abraham
is glossed as meaning the father of many nations, but in some important way, to sacrifice his
own identity.
To sacrifice Isaac is to sacrifice himself.
Now Abraham seems willing to obey this, but of course God's messenger stops him before
the sacrifice is made, the angel of God.
The angel of course in Greek is the word angelos, which just means messenger, right?
So the messenger of God stops Abraham here.
Now scholars read this story as, at its base, a rejection of the practice of child sacrifice,
which was widespread in the ancient Near East, but I think that is too shallow a reading.
It seems deeper than that.
The lesson seems to be, this God is far more foreign to our notions of right and wrong
than we at first took this God to be.
Sometimes this God will act in ways that may seem intended to destroy us.
And we can have no complaint about this, it seems, because everything we are, our name,
our identity, our children, our family, everything is from this God.
God possesses us all.
In some ways, before we possess ourselves.
And our response to these moments, when God does a terrible thing, will reveal how we
understand the covenant.
Indeed, recall that just before the Achaedda, just before the incident of the near sacrifice
of Isaac, what happens is the story of Sodom and Gomorrah.
So it's precisely this ethical covenant that's been established that now is right after
this, challenged in the event of the request to sacrifice Isaac.
And in fact, it is in the threat of Sodom and Gomorrah, right after that, that Abraham
learns that he will have a son, that God will grant him a son, whom he will name Isaac.
So this is a very dense moment here.
After the events of the near sacrifice, the Achaedda, Abraham does not return to his
first wife, and Isaac's mother, Sarah, at her encampment at Hebron.
He goes on instead to his second wife, Ketura's encampment at Bershiba.
Perhaps that's understandable.
Abraham and Sarah are not reported to speak again.
However, our Abraham and Isaac.
After this, Abraham's life rapidly moves towards its end.
First, he secures a wife for Isaac, in the story of his servant and Rachel at the well,
thus securing the future of his family.
Then Sarah dies, and he secures a burial place for her in the cave of Magdala near Mamrah.
Then Abraham himself dies.
The division that had happened between his two sons, Isaac and Ishmael, is apparently
resolved now, at least provisionally, when they bury Abraham in the same cave where Abraham
buried Sarah, thus in a way bringing the two brothers together and returning husband and
wife together.
Now people wonder about the silence of Abraham in the face of the Achaedda, in the face of
God's command.
There's no reported argument between him and Isaac, nor between him and Sarah, nor
really between Abraham and God.
Abraham doesn't suggest any resentment of God's command.
There's also, there's something almost inhuman, something maybe superhuman.
No, I think inhuman is better about this silence.
There's something enormously profound that is present in Abraham, but that Abraham seems
to know he cannot communicate.
That is, he has some wisdom about this life and God's expectations for us in this life
that precisely because he can't share it, the rest of us can perceive it in that silence.
What can we learn of this?
One way to think more about this is to see a situation where words are used, plenty of
words in fact, but to very little effect, and that is the story of the book of Job.
Now the warning of Abraham's life that God's ways are not our own is made much more explicit
still in the book of Job.
Now the book of Job is an interesting book because the proportion of action to dialogue
is almost as skewed as it is in a kind of very strange art film.
Very little happens in the book, but a lot of words are said.
I don't know, maybe it's like Congress or something.
But here's the basic story, Satan returns to God's court.
Satan in the book of Job is seen as an angel who was used at times by God for certain activities.
And he tells God, I have been up and down and to and fro upon the earth.
And God says, well did you see my wonderful servant Job who's fantastic?
And Satan said, of course I saw him.
But there's no way in the world Job would be so nice if you made him suffer.
And God says, you are crazy, go and try.
And so Satan goes down and inflicts a series of sufferings on Job.
That's the prompting of the book.
Job then sits basically having lost his children, having lost his industry, his wealth, his home.
He sits and is silent and then his friends come and try to console him.
And then after their consolations fail, after he refuses their consolations, he is told
by his friends and his wife to curse God and die.
He refuses, but he still complains to God.
And finally, out of the whirlwind, God speaks to Job and tells him effectively, my ways
are not your ways.
You cannot know.
And it is better just to accept what has happened.
Interestingly, the story of Job, the figure of Job, seems outside of the major narrative
of the people Israel in the Hebrew Bible.
He's not a descendant of Abraham anyway.
Some ancient rabbis thought Job was a literary figment, actually, right?
So, 1500, 1800 years ago, certain scholars were saying, this is clearly a literary device
that we have in our scriptures here.
What a pretty remarkable thing for people 1800 years ago to say.
But others thought that Job was a wise man whom the pharaohs would consult.
But all the book of Job itself says of him is that he was a man in the land of Uz, who
was blameless, upright, fearing God, and turning away from evil.
That's Job chapter one, verse one.
There's something important about Job here, something about the universality of his condition.
He is not marked out as a member of the people Israel.
He's simply a human.
And what's interesting about the book in general is that in some important ways, it
seems to be a story about why you shouldn't try to solve evil, why you shouldn't try
to investigate why these things happen to you.
It's not that there aren't important questions to ask.
Some of the questions you might want to ask are, consider the relationship between God
and Satan.
I mean, if Satan is doing God's work, then is God letting evil happen, or is God actively
doing it?
If God merely lets it happen, anyway, isn't that the same as if God did it directly, since
God is the ruler of the universe entirely?
Questions like this raise a larger philosophical puzzle about what Job is about, that the role
of the comforters, the figure of the comforters, actually bring up as well.
The comforters who come to help Job, it's not clear whether they're there to help Job
or rather help themselves.
They play a huge role in the story, and what they are trying to do, in a sense, is find
some explanation for Job's suffering.
In a way, what the comforters are doing is standing in the role of the readers themselves
of the book of Job, because the readers are almost certain to want to offer some kind
of explanation for why this has happened to Job, and so what the comforters do is give
the readers a voice in the book, and what they're trying to do is find some way to bring
the apparent irrationality of the punishment into the realm of the intelligible, perhaps
even the justifiable.
In any event, they think more indurable.
So much of the book of Job is consumed by their words, and Job's reply to them, and
so much so that people sometimes actually ignore those words.
They think that they're just getting in the way, they're clouding the action of the book
of Job, because they think that nothing happens there.
That's just people talking.
That's not very important.
We have to go back to the action, right?
Job is, the Bible is an action movie, so you have to see where the action is going on.
Not so.
The action is happening in those words.
In some important way, it is precisely Job's rhetorical duels with the comforters that
are the most important part of the book of Job.
For those duels establish Job's faithfulness, his refusal to accept glib, fake explanations.
And in this, the book of Job, in my experience, maybe in yours, actually speaks to a pretty
common experience that people can have.
If bad things happen to you, if you lose a loved one, a parent or God forbid, a child
or just a loved one, a spouse, a lot of people feel an enormous pressure when they talk to
you to find some consolation that will actively remove the pain and the loss and the suffering
you feel.
I know I feel that pressure myself when I'm encountering people in the midst of enormous
suffering.
Sometimes that can be useful, but a lot of times it seems to me, and I think I'm backed
up by the book of Job here, which is, you know, not a bad backup, sometimes those attempts
at consolation are much more about making the consoler feel comfortable in the situation.
The person devastated is devastated.
There's no quick fix for them.
They have no answers, they're going to have to go on with their life, and over time find
a way of living.
But there's no quick trick that can make things better for them.
The book of Job is in important ways the first time in the Bible where the human pre-election
to offer words where no words are going to be useful is brought to the surface and examined
and found wanting in important ways.
So is Job a useful story, one that has wisdom we can pass on, or is the story of Job's
suffering only helpful to those who have already suffered, as Abraham has?
One of the great puzzles of a lot of these texts, let me just stop for a second and say
this, one of the great puzzles of a lot of these texts, I sort of said this with Aristotle's
ethics in an earlier lecture, is that it's not clear that the people who most need to
hear them, to hear the lessons they want to convey, are able to actually apprehend them.
It might only be after the experiences have happened that you can finally understand what
the text was trying to communicate to you in the first place.
And if we think of Job as a wisdom text, perhaps it is saying that real wisdom, at least some
forms of it, some of the most important forms, may only be acquired through intimate first
personal experience, particularly in terms of suffering, that there is no easy way to
learn of reality except through suffering it.
And maybe that suggests, as I suggested with the knowledge of good and evil, that some
forms of wisdom carry with them the question of whether the very wisdom we get is worth
the cost we pay to get it.
The stories of Abraham and Job serve as puzzles and goads for the rest of the tradition in
two distinct ways. First of all, they disturb the faithful's confidence that God's plans
for humanity are wholly intelligible and entirely in agreement with our own wishes and aims.
They insist that believers recognize a terrible mysteriousness in God's providential governance
of the world. Secondly, they put to us the question of how such a recognition might be
achieved by us short of the trials put upon Abraham or the terrible sufferings inflicted
upon Job.
Is there a way to gain the wisdom of faith, to feel the fear of the Lord that these texts
insist is the beginning of wisdom, without suffering the actual pain that these figures
encounter?
Again, as we've seen before and we'll see again, the question here is more general
than that for us. Can armchair theoretical reflection get us useful knowledge about suffering
and evil? Or, as with the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil that Adam
and Eve tasted, does such knowledge always and only come at the cost of real pain?
These are the questions that the prophets of ancient Israel struggle with. The prophetic
tradition is one of deepening self-awareness over the course of the prophets' lives and
over the course of the series of prophets about the power of God's governance over history
and God's perpetual doing of a new thing in history.
Now, even though the prophets are compiled in the scriptures and thus seem to be on the
same plane with Abraham or the book of Job and all this stuff, in a certain way they
are ancient Israel's philosophers. They are the ones who offer a second order reflection
on their faith. They are the first theologians, as it were, the first to take the deposit
of faith and to try to figure out, with that deposit, what is God doing now?
The basic question they ask, again and again, is why do bad things happen to the good people
Israel?
Well, they say, this people are not so good for starters. They have abandoned the covenant.
They have also ultimately violated God's law in many ways.
Prophets like Amos will say this. Amos, of course, is famous for preaching repentance
and allowing demanding that justice roll down in a mighty stream.
So Amos thought quite clearly that, in fact, the problem that the people Israel were facing
was not due to some fundamental mysteriousness in God's providence. The rules were very clear
and they were simply not following the rules.
By the time of the prophet Jeremiah, things had gotten more complicated. There was clearly
a way in which history was being seen now as what is called theophanic, that is, revealing
of God's will. A theophany is a showing of God, theophany.
History is a medium whereby, just as we can in the scriptures, Jeremiah seems to be saying,
we can read about what God is doing and interpret those events to show us how God stands, vis-a-vis
us right now. And unless we do better, Jeremiah says to the people Israel, we will continue
to be punished by God.
Irrespective of whether or not the people Israel did any better, sufferings continued
to come their way. And so by what we call second Isaiah by the second prophet in the
book of Isaiah, a new and perhaps profounder kind of wisdom is being preached by the prophets.
It deepens Jeremiah's interpretation in seeing history itself as theologically rich, but
now it sees history in a kind of eschatological and messianic way. And what I mean by those
terms is somewhat technical, but I can explain it pretty easily. To talk about history as
eschatological means to read history from a coming end of history.
Second Isaiah is famous for prophesying deliverance for the people Israel as a light unto the
nations, revealing through the salvation of Israel that all of the world will be redeemed.
So second Isaiah has a profoundly optimistic picture of Israel, but it is also profoundly
somber about what happens in the meantime. There's a kind of sovereignty to God that
puts God in a way beyond good and evil here. As second Isaiah says, this is chapter 45
of the book of Isaiah, I form light and create darkness. I make wheel and create war. I am
the Lord who does all these things. Now this sets up the question of how to be present
in the world before God, even though you don't know how God will act towards you. That's
behind a lot of Isaiah's prophecy here. How knowing we have this hope coming out, how
should we behave now? As with Abraham and Job, Isaiah says we can have no clear and certain
knowledge. We can only know that the obedience called for before the apotheosis of the people
Israel, before its revelation and sanctification of all the nations. The obedience called for
will not necessarily be easy, but that keeping faith with the covenant is close to the center
of who we are in our very identity. The prophets then end with a terrible and off-filled humanity.
That is who we should be, and that is why the fear of the Lord, the prophets affirm, is
indeed the beginning of wisdom. Following the example of Abraham, inspired by the story
of Job, a fearful reverence before this God is probably the wisest course to take, but
also only a course taken by the wise. The prophets thus are really not so much predictors
of the future as reflectors on the past, historians who tell their people where they
have come from in order better to see where they are going. Their basic question is not
what will happen as much as, what is God doing now?
Let me conclude here a bit. So far we've seen the cosmic battle of the Anuma Elish, the
Greek tragedians, the historian Thucydides, philosophers Plato and Aristotle, and now
the Hebrew Bible. Much separates all these, but they share some interesting things in
common. The differences should be pretty visible, right? Whether or not you see the cosmos as
a battlefield, whether or not you see humans as rebelling against a unitary God, how these
things work, the differences are widespread. The differences are widespread.
For Plato and Aristotle, for example, humans are dependent on the context in which they
develop in important ways. And now with the Bible, humans are dependent upon but in revolt
against a good God. The range of views is pretty broad, but one thing seems common that's
worth noting. In all these approaches, the vulnerability of humans to terrible suffering
is pretty clear. That, I think, should strike us. For we don't today have that sense of
vulnerability. We're pretty unique in that. Historically, in most of the world, apart from
really the current first world today, suffering and death are pretty common. It wasn't that
long ago that even the children of wealthy parents died with some regularity. In July of
1924, Calvin Coolidge Jr. died in the White House, where his father was president. Imagine
the child of an American president dying today. And yet at that time it was sad, but not
unbearable. What we see, in other words, is one important fact that separates us from all
these accounts, our relative invulnerability compared to them as regards suffering. We'll
think more about that later. With all these texts, we see something of the breadth of the
religious inheritance of ancient Israel, an inheritance passed into both rabbinic Judaism
and into the Christian churches, though transformed in different ways by both of them. We turn
to the Christian New Testament. Next.
