Welcome back.
From the stories of the Hebrew Bible, we now turn to a set of texts that presented themselves
as essentially in continuity with those earlier texts.
In some ways they were and are, but in other ways they suggest a significant break with
those earlier works, or at least certain construals of those earlier works.
We've seen some big themes, dualism vs monotheism, providence or fate vs accident, evil as mundane
or thisworldly vs evil as theological or otherworldly.
We've looked at two large wellsprings of Western thought about evil, namely the ancient
Near Eastern world, both Babylonian and then the early texts of the Hebrew Bible, and the
world of classical Greece.
Now with this lecture, we'll see the first body of literature in which those two worlds
begin to commingle.
There are two ways that evil is addressed in Christian scriptures, first in the demonic
representation of evil in some of the more apocalyptic dimensions of the Christian scriptures
culminating in the book of Revelation, and then secondly in the development of the earliest
moments of what comes later to be known as the doctrine of original sin, particularly
in the letters of Paul.
The first is reflected from older traditions.
The other is a distinctly Christian development, it seems to me, based on an important re-reading
of the Adam and Eve story in light of the early Christian community's experience of
Jesus Christ.
Now much of the time, early Christian communities are presented as pacifist quietists, small
groups of gentle people living in the corners and in the nooks and crannies of the Roman
Empire wanting to live out their deeply interior faith as far as possible from the centers
of power and the ways of violence in the Roman Empire, kind of weak marginal people crouching
in the shadows as the legionnaires and the muscular people of Rome walk by.
Certainly the Christians of the first couple hundred years after Christ were pretty marginal
and weak groups in the Roman Empire, although they were getting stronger after about a hundred
or so CE.
But the received picture misses an important dimension of their thought, which will come
to be very important as the tradition develops.
For far from being wholly pacifistic, early Christians saw themselves really as bit players
in a cosmic struggle that dwarfs our capacity to imagine it, a cosmic struggle between God
and maybe Christ on the one hand and the principalities and powers commanded by Satan
on the other.
And this cosmic battlefield metaphor is clearly derived from earlier ancient Near Eastern traditions
and it emerges in a context of first century Palestine, which was itself suffused with
apocalyptic imagery and expectations.
Many people in the Palestine of the first century of the common era were in fact expecting
the end of the world or a coming Messiah.
But the Christian account is in some ways complicated, in some ways rendered distinct
and unique because of the way it reads that struggle through ancient Israel's vision
of the unquestioned, though sometimes hidden sovereignty of the one God.
Now the cosmic war motif that I'm talking about here is really visible, especially in
the Gospels, has a little bit in Paul's letters and then comes to full fruition in some ways
in the book of Revelation.
Let's talk about those in turn.
Early Christians clearly imagine the cosmos to be a battlefield.
They talk about evil as real all the time.
These texts always do.
In Paul, you have Paul talking about the principalities and powers that's in his letter to the Ephesians.
The idea that Satan seems to be behind the forces of the principalities and powers at
work in this world.
Furthermore, the tradition seems to think that evil has quite clearly declared war against
God and the forces of goodness.
Indeed, evil just is this declaration of war.
And here Christianity is developing the rebellion motif we saw in the Hebrew Bible, but now
applies it not just to humans, but to angelic powers, certainly in the past few centuries
before the Christian New Testament emerges, ancient Jewish thinking had developed a more
of a notion of rebellious angels or spiritual powers that walked the earth in some complicated,
hidden way against the power of God.
There was this notion of rebellious angels or demons that was in the air that the ancient
Christians breathed.
But they really took it in a new and more systematic and rigorous way, really making
that much more serious.
Now the gospel texts especially, while they differ in many ways, seem to have a strong
sense of the demonic powers as a vivid presence in the world.
It's not always apparent that they're represented as part of a Satan-centered conspiracy.
The powers are diverse and multifarious and they don't seem to be working in concert in
any important way.
But the presence of a struggle with demonic powers that humans are in some sense caught
up in, even though the main competence is God against the demonic powers, Satan in some
texts, Lucifer in others, this motif is a repeated presence throughout these texts.
D demonic spirits are perpetually present in and throughout the gospels.
Just think about some of the examples.
At the beginning of his mission in the Gospel of Mark, Jesus is tempted by Satan in the
desert.
At different times in the gospels, Jesus seems alert to the presence of, as he puts it in
Matthew, the devil and his angels.
And many of Jesus's miracles, especially exorcisms, are reported to have come at the
expense of bad spirits, the gathering swine in Mark, the swine who run off the cliff.
In Luke, after Jesus has sent out his disciples for their first apostolic missions, they return
and he says to them, I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.
And throughout the gospels, there is a coming final battle with these evil spirits that
seems to lurk behind a lot of the stories in the gospels.
And finally, of course, John reports, in the Gospel of John, John reports that in Gethsemane,
that is the garden where Jesus is finally arrested by the authorities and in some way
his worldly mission comes to its fruition.
Jesus' plans in that garden are represented as climaxing in his triumph over the Prince
of this world.
He says in John chapter 12, now is the judgment of the world, now shall the Prince of this
world be cast out.
In fact, it's quite clear that the gospels think that Jesus knew that this struggle
with Satan was inevitable.
After all, the Gospel of Luke says quite early on that Jesus set his face to go to Jerusalem.
That's an interesting and powerful metaphor.
At a certain point, it became inevitable to Jesus, and he was determined to move inexorably
towards a final confrontation and battle with the Satanic powers.
That Jesus seems to have known, this is what Luke suggests, Jesus seems to have known that
this confrontation would result in his own death.
That text, one of the most interesting and theologically rich texts actually in the entirety
of the Christian New Testament, Jesus set his face to go to Jerusalem.
And for the past, well, let's say 1900 years anyway, Christian theologians in thinking
about the degree to which Jesus understood the mission he was engaged in have thought
centrally through that text.
What does it mean to set your face to go to Jerusalem?
In all these ways, then, the presence of demonic powers engaged in struggle with God and God's
angels and with Jesus, Jesus' disciples and all humanity is a powerful theme in the gospels.
And it's also powerful in Paul.
Paul understood the churches to be caught in a struggle between God and Satan, with
the outcome decided already in some important way, perhaps by Paul, perhaps before Paul,
by the cross and the resurrection.
As Romans says at one point, the God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet.
This is important.
Let me stop here for a second and say this.
That this temptation, no, this tendency to think about the Christian message in terms
of what Christian theologians talk about as a motif of already and not yet plays itself
out both positively in terms of the redemption of humanity or the salvation of the world
from evil.
In Jesus' life, death and resurrection, Christians believe, the world is already saved, though
it has not yet come to its full salvation.
So there's still some tension between the current state of being slowly redeemed, which
is painful, and the final consummation of that redemption.
That's a positive way.
This theme works itself out, but it works itself out negatively too, because in principle,
the crucifixion and resurrection of Christ theologians after Paul, and I think it's fair
to call Paul the first theologian like this, Paul and those after him believe that the
crucifixion and resurrection of Christ, in principle, defeats Satan, defeats the powers
of evil and darkness, but those powers are still real, and they are still vivid, and
a foot and a loose in the world that we live in, and so even though in principle they have
been defeated, in fact they still walk up and down and to and fro upon the earth as Satan
did in the book of Job.
And that's Paul's sense there.
In some important way the battle is over, but in another way we're still involved in
a kind of mop up operation of evil, and evil can fight back, and it does fight back, even
though its back has been broken, nonetheless it has the ability to punch back hard.
Because of this, the faithful must equip themselves spiritually for this struggle, and Paul uses
a remarkable range of military metaphors for this process of equipping.
Consider the central passage of this sort.
This is in Ephesians, this is Ephesians 6, 10 through 18.
Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might.
Now listen to the armament and weapon metaphors here.
Put on the whole armor of God that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the
devil, for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the
authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual
forces of evil in the heavenly places.
Therefore take up the whole armor of God that you may be able to withstand in the evil
day and having done all to stand firm.
Stand therefore, check this out, check out this list of metaphors, having fastened on
the belt of truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness, and as shoes
for your feet, having put on the readiness given by the gospel of peace, the gospel
of peace.
In the middle of these military metaphors, the gospel of peace pops up.
In all circumstances, take up the shield of faith with which you can extinguish all the
flaming darts of the evil one.
Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, praying
always in the spirit, with all prayer and supplication.
Sometimes we look at the Bible and we miss the forest for the trees, it's so familiar
to us, we don't actually see what's right there on its surface.
And Paul is quite clear in this, quite clear in this passage that there's a struggle Christians
have to engage in.
But we, in thinking about this text, whether we're Christians or not, we seem to miss that,
we seem to not notice that.
Paul did, and the communities that Paul wrote to did.
And they saw the life of the disciples of Christ as an ongoing struggle, not against
humans fundamentally, but against supernatural powers.
Now in Revelation, this theme is even more pronounced.
Revelation, of course, is probably the most famous of the apocalyptic texts of early Christianity.
Although attention to it in our world seems to have been by and large abandoned by many
churches today.
It's rare that you would go into a Christian church, many Christian churches I would say,
and actually read as one of the scripture readings on a Sunday, an excerpt of the book
of revelations, right, be a really fun reading on a Christmas morning or something like that.
That could be kind of fun, you shake things up a little bit.
But what's interesting is that the book of revelation, which is a pretty big text, I
mean physically it's quite large, and it's a very important text over the history of
Christian thought, somehow in the last, I don't know, century or so, lots of Christian
churches have just simply ignored.
Like it's an unpleasant, smelly, aggressive relative who shows up to family gatherings
but no one wants to talk to.
This is a big mistake.
This is a shame because in fact the embarrassment of Christians to talk about this text for
fear of being associated with more apocalyptic tendencies in their culture makes them especially
susceptible to ignoring a crucial dimension of Christian message here.
Too much of the time Christians are ignoring this crucial dimension of their religious
heritage.
And it misshapes the story they tell and the story they understand about their faith in
important ways.
Two different ways it misshapes that story.
Let me pause here for a second and say this.
The first way it misshapes the story is that it ignores the fact that in popular culture
today the book of revelations is still incredibly powerful up until the Harry Potter series
of novels the most best selling collection of fictional novels, the best selling collection
of novels in the history of I think American publishing, possibly world publishing, was
the left behind series.
Now whatever your views about the left behind series, the fact that very few churches even
tried to think about what those books were telling people about the meaning of Christianity
is an astonishing failure on the part of the churches.
That's one thing, right?
Even if the churches don't want to think about the book of revelation and the apocalyptic
message it might contain, nonetheless they will be the ones who are in some sense going
to be accountable for dealing with people coming into these churches and trying to think about
what these texts mean for them.
That's one thing.
The second thing is by ignoring the book of revelation, Christians are it seems to me
trying to avoid a certain complicated historic prophetic interpretation of history that relates
them in complicated ways to the faith of Judaism and also to a richer understanding of the
texts of the Old Testament which Christians ought to be attending to as importantly as
they do the New Testament.
I'll say more about that as we go on in this course but one of the big problems it seems
to me is precisely that Christians have pre-selected, Christians today maybe let's say in the West
have pre-selected a body of scriptures which for them tell a certain story of Christianity
but it renders it hard for them to see that story as in as rich continuity with the Jewish
faith as it should be.
Now, let's look at the book of revelation very concretely.
It's an apocalyptic text.
Now by apocalyptic I mean something quite technical but worth your knowing.
An apocalyptic text is a text that talks about the last things and speaks of the end of the
world and seeks to offer its readers a skeleton key to decipher the signs of the times.
Certainly a lot of revelation is about that but this raises a deep question about the
point of the book.
Is the book of revelation really just a kind of skeleton key to the end of the world?
Is it really just to help people look out for the end of the cosmos?
Is it a kind of eschatological meteorology guide to determine the theological weather?
Was it also and maybe more basically about teaching them how to live in this world in
the end times?
That's what I think it was doing.
And here's one of the greatest challenges to the continued use of the book of revelation
by churches today and perhaps this might be a major reason why many Christians today find
this part of their scriptural heritage so hard to understand because they can't see
this text as anything more than a collection of predictions of the end of the world.
But I think it's actually more than that.
It's about the present world, whatever its prophecies about the world to come.
To see this, note how the theme of combat just as it did in Paul and in the Gospels
pervades this text, especially crystallized around the metaphor of combat with the dragon.
The combat between the dragon, an embodied force of evil, and a good God.
Examples of this are not hard to come by.
Consider that at certain points the imperial beast of Satan is represented and there is
a war between Satan and the angels as well.
But the most dramatic example of this motif in Revelation is probably the war between
the archangel Michael and the angels on one side and the dragon and his angels on the other.
Now war arose in heaven, Michael and his angels fighting against the dragon and the dragon
and his angels fought.
But they were defeated and there was no longer any place for them in heaven and the great
dragon was thrown down that ancient serpent who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver
of the whole world.
He was thrown down to the earth and his angels were thrown down with him.
Clearly, the dragon here turns out to have a long history both in later thinking about
evil, both as itself, that terror people had of mythological demons and also as an interesting
metaphor because from the earliest reception of the book of Revelation, the other meaning
of the dragon, people understood it to be the Roman Empire.
Just as I said in the lecture on the Tower of Babel, human organizations that are in
some sense separate from God in both the Jewish and the Christian scriptures take on a kind
of patina of illegitimacy and theological disrespect fairly early on.
Christianity was significantly marked by being formed in a period where it was radically
outside of the structures of worldly power and in important ways those structures were
arrayed against it.
Both in Palestine and in the larger Mediterranean world, Christians did not have friends in
high places and this has, I think, shaped the way Christians have thought about evil
and thought about worldly power in profound and potentially very long-lasting ways.
So I'll just leave that out there, we'll talk about that more.
But all this story of the dragon still asks us a question.
How does this cosmic struggle map onto our experience here in this life?
What does it mean that, and again, the book of Revelation is very clear about this, humans
witness this struggle in heaven.
Humans are not the ones fighting, right?
We're not taking up weapons against these angels, that's the archangel Michael and the
good angels are doing that.
We're kind of innocent bystanders.
We're villagers where two air forces are fighting high above us in the sky.
What do we do here?
Here the other dimension of the New Testament's heritage about evil becomes important and
that is the idea of original sin.
After all, along with this cosmic apocalypticism, the other great theme on evil in the Christian
New Testament is the beginning, just the beginning of the development of the Christian doctrine
of original sin, particularly in Paul's letters.
Now the development of this doctrine is a very interesting thing and I want to propose
to you that in fact it gets its start not in a direct apprehension of people's nastiness,
it actually gets its start in adorning Christian apprehension of the significance of the goodness
of Jesus Christ.
It was precisely the combination of the early Christian's apprehension that Jesus Christ
was in some really, really significant way a theological revelation of God.
However that gets worked out in the later tradition in terms of talking about Christ as one of
the three persons of God, the earliest Christians clearly had a sense that Jesus Christ, not
just Jesus' message but Jesus' person, is in some important way theologically revelatory.
And this means that for Jesus to be as good as Christians thought he was, the world must
be pretty bad, right?
For Jesus to be as powerful as they experienced Jesus' being, Jesus needs to be that powerful
because the enemies arrayed against Jesus are that strong.
So this means that Christians by backing into it sort of depicted the human condition
more darkly than others of their time and they represented the power of evil more dramatically
perhaps than others did in their time.
Now this sense of spiritual combat that they had already, we talk about this with revelations,
made evil more cosmic as apocalypticism makes evil more palpably and determinately part
of creation itself.
That is, evil begins to be both more profound and more intimate at the same time.
The profundity of course is captured in that notion of the dragon.
The intimacy gets captured in the notion of original sin.
The magnitude of God's activity that Christians perceived in Jesus' life, death and resurrection
demanded a powerful opponent over whom to triumph.
And that opponent had to be the force of evil insinuating its way, snaking its way through
human history.
And Saint Paul in his letters looked back through the history of evil and found in the
story of Adam and Eve the beginnings of that evil.
Now as I said, at its time, speaking archaeologically, the story of Adam and Eve is not about the
origins of evil, it's about the first time that evil happens, right?
But Paul doesn't see it that way.
Paul sees the story of Adam and Eve as talking about the beach head of evil in creation.
It is a cosmic calamity for Paul.
It is not simply the first instance of a failure which had always been possible.
It is rather a new thing and a real and radical introduction of some new substance of malice
and new power into the world that had not been there before.
Now there will be more to say about this and the complicated relationship this sets up
between Judaism and Christianity later.
It's true that these two traditions share a lot of the same texts.
But what's interesting is that they don't ... I don't want to say this.
They're kind of like two traditions who are separated by a common scripture.
In looking at the texts as they do, both sides see very different things in the same exact
passages.
And this is an important thing to take away from now because we'll come back to this.
When we think about the Christian conceptions of evil following on in Irenaeus and Augustine
and others, when we think about the Jewish conceptions of evil, thinking about rabbinic
understandings of evil, thinking about Jewish responses to the Shoah, the holocaust in the
20th century.
We will find that their understandings of evil root themselves in the same texts, but
in very different ways, and that's going to be very important for us.
But for now, when it comes to the Christian account, we can say that the development of
this Christian conception of evil includes a dramatic depiction of sin and a representation
of evil as powerful, active, and seeking humanity's downfall.
It is profoundly this picture of evil, ironically perhaps.
It is profoundly tied up with the radical hopefulness, even optimism in Christian faith
as the early Christians experienced it, of God's saving work in defeating the devil
and sending Jesus to save all of humanity and create a new covenant with all of humanity.
This is the consequence in some ways, in fact it's the material, the cause as well,
of the parting of the ways between Judaism and Christianity.
But it is more consequence than cause.
This is a large and dramatic break that we will come back to later.
In fact, in just a few lectures we'll talk about rabbinic Judaism and we'll see it then
as well.
Now nonetheless, despite all I've said, neither the Book of Revelation nor the New Testament
Corpus as a whole expresses any complete and total hostility towards the world or any
absolute desire to flee from it.
It's the cosmos's current structure that is the problem, not the fact of our existence
in it.
And this is important.
Unlike the Hebrew Bible and unlike, say, Greek views of the Tragedians, for example,
the notion of original sin doesn't, in fact, say this, the notion of original sin doesn't
mean that nature itself is evil.
It's that we have appropriated our natures in a way that makes them evil.
The aim of Revelation and of the New Testament as a whole is to teach patience and endurance
in a time of trial for the churches.
The sense of a cosmic struggle is inescapable here, but note that in the Book of Revelation
the dualism that is set up between good and evil is temporary and provisional.
At the end of the Book of Revelation the New Jerusalem, the New Kingdom of God, comes
down to earth from heaven, right?
Humans are not raptured from heaven, from earth up to heaven.
God's kingdom comes to earth.
Furthermore, the idea of the resurrection of the body, which is a very early Christian
metaphor, early Christian belief, is very important here.
Christ and everyone will one day be resurrected in the flesh.
This is not a matter of escaping the flesh, that is, but of properly inhabiting it.
Now, next, we're going to turn to how this view gets worked out in complicated and diverse
ways in the thinking of some major Christian theologians, especially Irenaeus and Augustine.
