Hello again.
So far, with the exception of Plato and Aristotle, we've mostly looked in this lecture series
at approaches to understanding and thinking about and responding to evil that are less
directly theoretical, more concrete, more literary, more mythological, more scriptural.
With this lecture, we're going to move into a series of attempts by thinkers to offer
a distinct interpretation, each of them offering their own account, more or less, of what
the meaning of evil is, where it comes from, and what humans can do about it.
Christian theology in particular has a tradition of attempting to offer what have come to be
known as theodicies, theories of evil, accounts of evil that make it intelligible, make it
understandable, how we can affirm the existence of a good, all-powerful God in the face of
the reality of evil.
Now this word theodicies, let me say something about this for a second here.
This word theodicy actually is not invented early on in the tradition, the word itself
comes very late, it comes with Gottfried Leibniz in the late 17th century, we'll look at him
and his work later, but from the coining of the term by Leibniz, people began to see that
much earlier in the tradition of, especially Christian thought, a lot of thinkers had been
generating things that looked roughly like theodicies, and in fact, in the history of
Christian thought, there have been several distinct, you could call them, families of
such theodicies, lots of versions of basic prototypes of certain kinds of theodicies,
two in particular have been very, very powerful, the Augustinian tradition of theodicy, thinking
about evil, and the Irenaean tradition of theodicy.
Now in this lecture, we're going to look at the Irenaean theory, the Irenaean theodicy,
in the next lecture, we'll look at the Augustinian.
Why is it that Christian theology in particular has generated this kind of intellectual practice?
Christian theology is relatively unique, not just in the West, not just in comparison to
Islamic or Jewish thought on evil, in fact, it's pretty unique all around the world.
There's not a lot of direct and serious philosophical thought in Buddhist thinking, in Hindu thinking,
in Shinto or Confucian thinking, about the nature and origin of evil.
They're thinking about it in all those traditions, it really is, but nonetheless, none of them
seem to have the same fixation on returning to the problem of evil, for none of them that
is the problem of evil is quite as problematic as it is for Christians.
I think there's two reasons for this, in the basic Christian narrative that it's worth
our while keeping in mind.
First of all, Christians like Jews, basically because they come out of the tree of Jewish
tradition here, Christians like Jews say God is wholly in charge of the world.
The world is cosmically under God's sovereign control.
That's one thing that Christians really affirm with Jews and actually with many other traditions,
many other traditions affirm a basic moral order to the cosmos.
But what makes Christians distinct from Jews and other people, and in some ways unique,
and we'll see Nietzsche complains about this a lot at some point in the future, one of
our future lectures, what makes Christians distinct is that they say that the world is
really much, much worse than we might initially think it is.
That is, the world that we live in is really far more profoundly sunk in evil than our
ordinary experience of the world suggests that it might be.
Now that's an anomalous thing to say.
Let me stop and pause on this for a second too, because one of the things you'll hear
a Christian saying is that famously, Reinhold Niebuhr, someone we'll talk about later, said
that the doctrine of original sin is the only empirically confirmable doctrine in Christian
thought.
In other words, it's the only doctrine among the many things Christians are supposed to
believe about the unity of God, the trinity of God, the godliness of Jesus, as the Son
of God, the various things that Christians are supposed to believe.
The one thing Niebuhr said that everyone can basically see by looking around them is that
humans are really screwed up.
Well, actually, and I love Reinhold Niebuhr, really, there's a much more complicated story
here.
In fact, it seems Christians really cultivate a certain perception of sinfulness and evil
and corruption in the world, and they need to do that.
Why?
Again, I think it goes back to what I was saying about the New Testament in the last
lecture.
What's going on in this text is that as the experience of Christ is processed by the early
Christian community, the growing recognition of the magnitude of Christ's saving work is
so powerful that it actually requires us to revisit our assessment of the corruption
of the world, and in doing that, it allows us to rethink and deepen our sense of the
sinfulness of the world as we see it.
Among the most important of the thinkers, the earliest thinkers, in fact, in some important
ways the earliest thinker, to really begin to systematize Christian thinking about good
and evil and, in fact, the whole Christian narrative is the great early Greek-speaking
and Greek-writing Christian theologian Irenaeus of Lyon, Lyon in France.
Irenaeus offered a remarkable and profoundly influential discussion of the nature of evil,
and the ultimate vindication of God's goodness in the last judgment.
But, as I said, Irenaeus was a Greek-speaker who lived in Lyon in Rome in France.
That's an interesting story, and he does have an interesting story.
In fact, he was born in Smyrna on the Aegean coast of Turkey, the city is now known as
Izmir in Turkey, into a Christian family, probably between 120 and 140 AD, roughly speaking,
when he was died, and he died, he was not martyred, he died, which is relatively unusual
for a bishop of his time, as Bishop of Lyon around 200 AD.
We roughly know his dates, he's certainly an historical figure, and he seems to have
heard and seen Polycarp, a disciple of John the Evangelist, before Polycarp was martyred.
Irenaeus is understood as a link in the chain to the apostolic era, that is, he saw someone
and heard someone who was one of the disciples of John the Evangelist, which is a pretty
impressive thing.
That's a pretty high street cred for a theologian, right?
He's the earliest recorded witness we have to the canonicity of the four gospels, that
is, to the idea that the four gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and only those four
gospels that the Christian churches in the East and in the West now recognize as canonical,
are in fact the four canonical, the four authoritative tellings of the life, death, and resurrection
of Jesus.
As he published his writings, they were immediately recognized to be foundational to the Christian
faith and used throughout the Mediterranean world and even into the East, because at this
point, actually, much of Christianity in Irenaeus' time was East of the Mediterranean in the
Palestinian coastal areas, Syria, Jordan, Iraq, even into Iran, there were early Christians
in India.
It's only after the Islamic eruption of the 7th and 8th centuries that you get Christianity
moving more westward.
But anyway, Irenaeus is generally thought to be the first truly great church father,
the first great patristic, that's the term for him.
His greatest work is called the Against Heresies, and it's a really, it's the first really
vast and ambitious Christian theological account of the universe and God and the human's place
in the universe before God.
And in all sorts of ways, it has set the terms of later Christians speculative theology far
more profoundly than it is easy for any of us to realize.
It would have been possible, for example, for someone not well-versed in philosophy,
not as able to speak philosophically and abstractly as Irenaeus was, to have first explained and
given an account of Christianity.
And in that case, the future of Christian thinking would probably have been very, very
different.
He's also important because as part of this first attempt to articulate the logic of Christianity
in a systematic way, it's an attempt that is proposed at the title of his book, Suggests,
Against.
There was an opponent he was worried about.
And the opponent is a shadow of Christianity, of Orthodox Christianity, of what becomes
known, let's say, as Orthodox Christianity.
And that shadow is Gnosticism.
Now, Gnosticism deserves its own lecture series, and it's an enormously complicated and powerful
system of thought in its own way.
For the perspective of these lectures, let me just say very briefly a couple of things
about it.
Gnosticism was, in important ways, a kind of pseudo-philosophical movement, a very popular
movement especially among elites in the ancient Mediterranean, late antique Mediterranean world.
And it argued in important ways that materiality, the materiality of the world, is the source
of evil and that humans, in their true essence, are actually inner spirits that need to be
unlocked from their cages of flesh and allowed to escape.
Now, this is an interesting account, right?
Gnosticism then seems to suggest a couple different important things.
First of all, it seems to suggest that the true human essence is an innocent speck of
purity inside a cage of flesh, right?
So the materiality that surrounds us, that is, evil, is in some ways hurting us.
Humans, the true essence of humans, is not to be a wicked person or an evil doer, but
in some sense to be victims.
Secondly, it suggests the solution to this problem is, in fact, to escape materiality,
to get out of the world.
And certain radical Gnostics, in fact, simply became what were called enlightened people
and starved themselves to death, right?
Irenaeus was, if not the earliest, one of the earliest and certainly the most profound
of the earliest Christians to argue that Gnosticism was, in fact, a profoundly mistaken way of
being a human.
And as the first and second centuries moved on and Christianity became more of a live
option for people in the Mediterranean, the Gnostics began to say, our interpretation
of Christianity is the right one.
Christianity is actually a kind of Gnosticism.
Now the Gnostics could do that only on one important condition.
And the condition was that Christianity had to be understood as not a continuation of
the Jewish story, but as a radical renunciation of it in several different ways.
First of all, because the God of Genesis clearly says that creation is good.
So the Gnostics had to say, that was not a real God.
That was, in fact, Satan masquerading as a God.
Secondly, the Gnostics have to say that Jesus did not, in fact, die, suffer and die on the
cross.
Jesus, in some sense, faked his own death, right?
The Gnostics were the first kind of conspirator theorists, right?
They were the first and second century versions of JFK conspiracy theorists and stuff like
that.
Jesus wasn't really killed up there.
He faked it.
Well, for someone like Irenaeus, the threat of the Gnostics is profound in several different
ways.
First of all, it's profound in how it threatens the Christian's vision of how they should
live in the world.
Secondly, it threatens the Christian's vision of who their ancestors were and who their
rivals are in this world now.
Irenaeus and the mainstream of Orthodox theology in the Christian world basically said, we
are part of the story of the people Israel, right?
We may offer a new version of that story, and Irenaeus can be fairly accused of a bit
of supercessionism, right?
Of saying that the Christians are the proper inheritors of God's favor because the Jews
have rejected Jesus.
That's what's called supercessionism, and Irenaeus seems to be an example of that, at
least an early example.
But that's not his main point.
He says that sort of thing because it seems to me anyway, and to other scholars now, he's
more fundamentally phylo-Judaic.
That is, he's more fundamentally trying to identify himself and his tradition with the
history of the people Israel, and thus allow that what the Christians call the Old Testament
is in fact an authentic story of God's dealings with humanity.
Now remembering that the Gnostics had actually said that the entirety of what the Christians
call the Old Testament, the entirety of the Hebrew Bible, the Torah, was not in fact a
divinely inspired text, but a demonically inspired text.
Imagine what would have happened if in fact Gnosticism had become the Orthodox version
of Christianity, right?
The bloodiness of that picture, the ugliness of the anti-Semitism, would be astonishing.
Now Irenaeus in general posited a picture of evil as an inevitable and necessary component
of the development of the human race.
He explains this in fact by offering one of the first theological interpretations of scripture
by telling the story of humanity as the story of Jonah in the belly of the whale as an allegory
for the human fall.
Just as Jonah had to be swallowed by the whale, so must humanity succumb to sin, fall into
sin, and receive its punishment, namely suffering and death.
Then God will raise the dead, and having passed through this evil journey, humanity will have
learned by experience what evil truly is, how horrible it is, and how mercifully and
blessedly God has acted in redeeming humanity from it.
To be blessed, that is, Irenaeus suggests one must know what it is to be damned.
As Dante will suggest later, you've got to go through hell to get to heaven.
Now more theoretically Irenaeus' picture is relatively simple.
First of all, in Eden Adam and Eve were not fully mature creatures.
God initially created them as immature childlike in their innocence.
The human needs over time to grow and mature, and not only over their individual lives but
over the course of human history, in order to become fit for the destiny that God intends,
which is union with the divine, communion with God, and growth into the perfect likeness
of God.
This is a matter in complicated ways of transforming our desires from immediate material desires
for base natural ends to a desire for genuine union and communion with God.
Now that transformation may sound like Irenaeus is giving something to the Gnostics, but he's
not actually.
He's saying that we would eat, we would feast in paradise, but it would be spiritual pleasures
that are central to our lives.
Now what happens is that humanity's rebellion against God and dissent into sin and evil
turn out to be crucial, so to speak, essential for the fulfillment of this destiny.
We learn what it means to be transformed by experiencing the pains we inflict upon ourselves,
by trying to be sated, by trying to be happy, holy with the goods of this world.
That's what Adam and Eve effectively did.
They thought they were not wrong in thinking they could be like God, but they thought they
could be like God simply by eating material things.
That was their mistake.
Now it's important to notice that Irenaeus is really the first thinker, at least in the
Christian tradition, to offer an account of evil that divides evil into two groups.
This will be really important for us as this tradition goes forward and moves into a more
philosophical vernacular as well.
There's natural evil, those evils that are caused by nature, by accidents of nature,
bloodslides, earthquakes, plagues, things like that.
And then there's distinctly moral evil, evils caused by intentional human will.
Even if that intentional human will is manifest in some accidental way.
A person who is trained in their driving to be talking on the cell phone all the time
and accidentally hits someone because of that bad habituation and is talking on the cell
phone has done a morally evil thing.
It's not a pure accident, right?
They had to discipline themselves in certain ways to not care about being so attentive
to the road.
Those of us who drive on highways know about these dangers very much.
The experience of moral evil is in some ways the centerpiece of what we take to be human
malice.
It's what humans cause one another through their freely willed actions, whether directly
through their freely willed actions or indirectly through habituation in certain ways.
Malice, jealousy, hatred, partiality, pride, these sorts of dispositions and the behaviors
that spring from them are moral evil.
Irenaeus wants to say that the moral evils we fall into after the fall hurt us as much
as those people that we hurt.
And in doing that, they slowly cause us to realize the suffering world that we are under.
And eventually, he thinks, we will freely choose to turn to God and find our end in
the divine.
God will not compel us in this.
God will simply continue to offer us salvation and the deeper we get into despair, the more
attractive the offer of redemption will come to seem to us.
Despite the fact that we do our damnedest, literally, to condemn ourselves to hell, Irenaeus
strongly insinuates we will nonetheless finally find God's mercy so powerfully attractive
as to be impossible to resist.
Now, Adam needs sin, then, lay in their attempt to grasp more than they were ready for in
Eden.
Sin really of impatience, but it was foreseeable, because after all, youth is impatient, age
and wisdom are patient.
It's only after you have hurt yourself by being impatient that you learn the wisdom
of patience.
By experiencing life outside of God's plan, humanity then comes to grow and appreciate
what God has in store for it.
One torn I talked about this as something like the rebellious teenager theory of evil.
And it's not clear, but certainly in some sense Irenaeus had had enough experience
with children.
It's not clear if he had children of his own, but he had enough experience of children
to know what was going on in their rebellions.
On this account, the world is a veil of soul-making.
Natural evil has a purpose in this picture.
It trains us to feel compassion and to help one another.
And the death that is part of natural evil, the death that is part of our mortality in
this fallen world, is a good thing because it ends the suffering and puts us to sleep
so that we can be resurrected by God.
This is a powerful, powerful vision, but there are two things about it that need more reflection.
First, consider the deepest insight I think this account has.
I said it before, to be blessed, one must know what it is to be damned.
Is that true?
I don't know if it's true.
I think it harkens back to a very old pattern we've seen already in Job and others that
suggests that suffering is in some important way core experience that teaches us the kind
of wisdom which enables us to be in the right position, to be redeemed by God in this tradition.
But is that true?
I don't know.
It can sound like a bad consolation to some people, especially in certain situations where
suffering may be just too great for them, right?
This account, which seems to begin with Job, can very quickly move into being one of Job's
consolers again, right?
You could imagine Irenaeus sort of saying to Job, well, you're on the way to learning
all the good things that God has in store for you by suffering in this way.
I don't think Job would like that.
And that touches on the second challenge.
Consider one deep question, this account, struggle to answer.
Is it trivialize the reality of evil and suffering?
Or force all evil and suffering to seem like it's ultimately for our good?
Is this true to our experience of evil?
What about those who suffer horrendous evil without, at least in this life, seeming to
have a chance to learn from it?
Some kinds of natural evil may, in fact, teach us not to care about the world in problematic
ways.
We've all known people who, in the midst of horrible life-ending illnesses, have become
more gentle, more loving, more susceptible of receiving kindness and able to give it.
Many of us have been fortunate to know those people.
But first of all, that's a very fortunate experience for the people who are dying in
that way and for us who are there around them.
And there's no way we can say that they ought to be that way or that they need to be that
way or that if they're suffering, they should be that way.
That's not, it seems, fair to me at all.
That's a gratuitous and a gracious response by people in situations of extreme evil.
But we can't say that that's, in some sense, the standard response of people in extreme
evil.
Lots of people suffer horribly and die without becoming intrinsically better people from that
suffering, at least as far as we can tell.
And also, lots of people suffer horribly and die without being able to develop into the
kind of people who are like that.
Irenaeus, it seems to me, never went into a child's cancer ward, never thought much
about the difficulties of infant suffering in this situation.
Furthermore, alongside all this, some kinds of evil seem wholly out of proportion to any
kind of lesson they could communicate to us, any kind of moral upbuilding that they could
enable for us.
The classic example of this in the 20th century has been, of course, the Holocaust.
Can you imagine how an Irenaean theodicy would account for such gratuitous suffering
as 12 million people, a majority of them very aged or very young, those 12 million people
dying in death camps?
How is that improving their lives in any fundamental way?
How can we say, with any kind of straight faith, any kind of straight gaze into the
eyes of the damned, the dead, that that could be a good thing for them?
Well, let's conclude for now.
Well, Irenaeus' overall thought had really foundational import for all of Christendom,
both Latin and Greek Christianities.
His thought about evil has not seemed to have a very powerful influence in Western Christianity.
Pretty soon after Irenaeus was alive, only about 200 years later, Augustine's work began
to eclipse his vision, really quite dramatically.
And for most of the history of Western Christianity, most people in thinking about evil have been
by and large Augustinians.
But Irenaeus' thought was not forgotten.
It lay in wait between the covers of books for more than 1600 years.
Some people found it and formulated ideas from it once in a while, but then it emerged
again in modified and powerful form in the thought of Hegel and Marx.
And indeed, even today, insofar as we ourselves think about our history as progressive, as
a school in which we can experiment with certain efforts and see what works and what doesn't,
a school that teaches us lessons that we can permanently learn.
In short, insofar as we can learn from our mistakes and take tutelage from our suffering
and thus be grateful for the wounds we have suffered, we are in a distant way heirs of
Irenaeus.
But fully seeing those connections is a task that we will take on many, many lectures from
now.
Right now, what I want to do is turn to that other great ancient Christian thinker on evil,
one of enormous power and influence as well, Saint Augustine.
