Welcome back.
From Augustine now, we're turning to a profoundly different, though not entirely unrelated,
alternative view about evil.
The mainstream view, in fact, in the Jewish traditions over the past almost two millennia,
and that is the view of rabbinic Judaism.
Now, rabbinic Judaism is that form of Jewish faith and practice that arose after the fall
of Jerusalem in the first century, and the diaspora, or the scattering of Jews, across
the Mediterranean and Near East in the following couple hundred years.
It really flourishes from the third century of the common era.
That's effectively the era of the composition of the Talmud.
The Talmud is the body of literature that comments upon the Torah and Jewish religious
law in general, and from the third century of the common era to effectively the 20th
century.
In some ways, it's still flourishing today.
This tradition takes the Talmud, that body of commentary on Jewish law, to be a text
of mere scriptural authority for interpreting the Torah.
Indeed, the Talmud is the textual fixing in this tradition of the oral law in composition
with to the written law of the Torah.
Now the rabbis were the community's teachers and ministers, scholars who knew the Torah
and knew the debates surrounding the Torah in the Talmud so well that they were effectively
walking repositories of the tradition.
They understood the height of their religious duty to be the study of Torah and Talmud,
the enormously complicated set of argumentative commentaries that previous rabbis had created
in order to understand how to live faithfully as Jews in this very complicated world.
Rabbinic Judaism offers a powerful but subtly nuanced picture of evil in holy mundane, fairly
everyday terms.
One that resists the overly dramatic, perhaps even melodramatic, cosmic drama of sin and
redemption found in Christianity, book of Revelation, Irenaeus, Augustine.
Now in the wake of the Shoah or Holocaust, there's been a huge wave of Jewish rethinking
of the faith.
But in fact, there have been analogies, events of similar existential crisis in Judaism at
different moments in Jewish history.
One of them is the famous Babylonian captivity where the remnants of Israel or a large part
of them were exiled to Babylon in the 6th century BCE.
Rabbinic Judaism emerges out of another one of these, the destruction of the temple in
Jerusalem and the diaspora, and this was a revolution in Jewish thinking on a scale
with the effect that the Shoah has had, the Holocaust has had, and is having.
In the diaspora, the Jews effectively lost the promised land, and they lost the central
ritual place of worshiping God, namely the temple in Jerusalem, and they did not return
to Israel as a people, they did not return to the land for almost 2,000 years.
So a new kind of religion had to be built out of the rubble in the ashes of the old.
And that's what the rabbis really centrally did.
Now in terms of evil in particular, the rabbis explored a series of alternative moral psychologies
of human malice, but much of their discussion, and it really became the canonical view, centered
around the evil and the good impulses in the human heart.
The evil impulse was called the Yetzar Ha Ra, and the good impulse is called the Yetzar
Ha Tov.
Adam and Eve ate of the tree of the knowledge of Tov and Ra, good and evil.
The rabbis saw God creating in humans two different and rival sources of energy, inclinations
or impulses.
This is where this word Yetzar comes from.
In fact, for the rabbis, who as I suggested were very textually minded scholars, they're
really committed to finding the evidence of what they want, what they want to see, what
they are arguing for, in the texts of Scripture especially.
The condition of the human, as driven by these two impulses, is signified, in fact, in the
Scriptures themselves.
In Genesis 2.7, the Bible states that God formed the human, Vayetzar is the word.
The spelling of this word is unusual, because it uses two yods, the Y sound in Vayetzar.
There's also a doubled consonant as well in Levavecha, in Deuteronomy, where it says
you shall love your heart, as in you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart.
So the two yods suggest a dualism in the self, and the idea that the whole heart, which
suggests that there's more than one piece of the heart, as well as the doubling of the
consonants in that word, both suggested to the rabbis, or they used that as evidence for
the idea that humans are caught in a contest between two competing energies.
Now, let me stop for a second and think about this, because this is already beginning to
be an interestingly different way of thinking about good and evil than the Christian accounts
we've just been looking at.
This account seems to me, rooted in the idea that the behavior of good or evil is anchored
in basic impulses in the human, which are there basically from creation.
Again, consider this in light of the large Christian context in which many of these Jews
are now living.
In these narratives, the Christian narratives, evil is seen as a kind of unnatural calamity.
And again, that's related to the Christian's conceptions of Christ as so, so good.
For Christ to have been so good, something must have been pretty bad for Christ to remedy
it.
The Jewish conception of these two impulses suggests an entirely different picture of
how the human is organized and what sort of motives and what sort of struggles go on inside
the human.
The Yatr HaTov, the good impulse, is something like what we would call conscience.
It's an inner sense that alerts you when you are considering violating God's law.
It warns you.
And it really develops, the rabbis think, around age 12 or 13 when the young Jewish boy, or
today we would also say girl, first begins to become an adult at a boy's bar mitzvah,
a girl's bat mitzvah, for example.
When the child first begins the struggle with God's word in Torah and the observance of
the commandments, that for the rabbis is the true mark of a maturing Jew.
In contrast to the Yatr HaTov, the Yatr HaRah, what we're translating here as the
evil impulse, is a far more murky concept.
It does not really get introduced when you're 12 or 13.
It's part of the human's created nature, innate in the human from the womb.
Genesis, for example, says the Yatr of the human heart is ra from youth.
The impulse of the human heart is bad from youth.
That's Genesis 821.
But this impulse is not demonic.
It's not an utterly unnatural violation of creation, expressing some sort of anarchic
hostility to God's creation.
It seems rooted, rather, in a kind of self-interest, in a protectiveness of the infant, of the
young child, an expression of the idea that creatures will naturally take special interest
in their own well-being.
On the rabbi's note, though, that this is a kind of paranoid kind of self-interest.
They say that the young child or the infant sees the world as a threatening place, a dangerous
place.
And, you know, I mean, honestly, if you think about how small children react when their
parents introduce them to you, often they'll hide behind their parents' legs or something
like that.
In other words, the rabbis have a great deal of empirical evidence they can point to here.
Children are terrified of strangers, sometimes, and they're scared of the bigger world.
This seems accurate to how children behave in the world, at least part of the time.
It's also a psychologically acute assessment of how a great deal of human aggression is
related to perceptions of danger.
Even today, psychologists who sometimes can seem to be specializing in reinventing the
wheel will tell us that if you feel fearful, you are more prone to lash out violently against
those around you.
So fear turns out to be one of the most powerful motivations towards aggression and wickedness.
Now, some hear an allusion to the Yetzar Harah, the evil impulse in the command to have no
other gods in Exodus, in the commandments.
That is, there's a tacit recognition, some rabbis think, that the Yetzar Harah, this
evil impulse, is a personified agency of a sort.
But nonetheless, none of the rabbis suggested that this was actually any sort of rival to
God.
That would make it more like the satan, the shatan of the pre-Genesis ancient Near East,
and again, appeal to a kind of combat myth or metaphysical dualism.
But that's not the aim.
Again, the rabbis and the Jewish tradition in general is always shadowed by that resistance
to those ancient Near Eastern combat myths.
But now we're also beginning to see that Jewish thought is silently influenced, silently
inflected by a desire to distinguish itself also from Christian thinking.
So even as it resists a kind of metaphysical dualism of the combat myth, this Jewish tradition
is going to begin to try to figure out ways to resist an overdramatization of evil as
well.
And here's one way, because it turns out that this evil impulse, the Yetzar Harah, sometimes
we should call it a bad impulse, is actually not so bad after all.
In some dimensions, the Yetzar Harah is the impulse in the human that enables humans to
build a house, to marry, to have children, to engage in business.
The evil impulse, in some ways, seems to be at times the source of self-interest, even
self-interest properly construed.
It's a part of life, that is.
It actually supports life.
It enables life.
But it can be excessively partial and caught up in self-interest and greed.
That's the danger of the Yetzar Harah.
Not its bare existence, but when it comes to overmaster you.
In the same way, you can imagine this playing out in the story of Canon Abel.
When God says, Sin is crouching at your door.
It seeks to master you, but you must master it.
What the rabbis read that as for the Yetzar Harah is precisely the struggle not to eliminate
the Yetzar Harah, not to send it off like Cain, a restless wanderer, but rather to make
it a fruitful part of your ordinary life.
The classical rabbinic understandings of these categories still profoundly influence this
Jewish thought about evil today.
The implications of this psychology for the rabbis' understanding of the human makes the
human less caught in a kind of vast metaphysical melodrama, a la Christianity, and more a matter
of handling the everyday temptations that we encounter all around us.
This focus on everyday temptations is really important.
It's not simply a momentary thing about evil in the Jewish tradition.
Some critics of Judaism will argue that Judaism is in some ways too focused on the mundane
commandments to do one thing or another.
One of the most interesting contemporary Jewish thinkers, Arthur Waskau, has made this argument
that in a way these critics are complaining that Judaism is a religion of pots and pans.
I think that there's a deep insight being communicated in this, especially the rabbinic
traditions, focus on the minutiae of life, the small things around life, simple decency
rather than moral heroism.
The rabbis' resistance to more theologically radical pictures of evil, like the Christian
Satan, for example, and their similar resistance to depictions of the history of human evil
in terms of calamities like the Christian notion of the fall, makes evil an intrinsic
part of human's natural makeup in a certain sense.
But that's a good thing.
The rabbis, that is, make evil not supernatural but really derived from our natural created
being.
That is, in some important way, evil is something that happens to us because of the impulses
of ourselves.
And if that's the case, then we are, in important ways, able to handle those impulses.
We can learn to deal with them.
Now that's not to say that in this account evil must be understood in reductively human
and naturalistic terms.
There's no necessary dimension of this that says that evil is not a big thing at all.
But unlike many popular Christian accounts where the devil is a really powerful presence
seducing and captivating humans, in this account evil's origins are to be sought in
the exercise of the human will, not as an external force over mastering my human will.
I can't blame anybody else if I go to the bad.
If I go to the bad, I only have myself to look at in the mirror.
I look at myself in the mirror and I say, I am that man.
This does not trivialize evil at all, however, because when left uncounted by other parts
of our nature, the evil impulse, the rabbis think, will lead us astray and cause great
damage.
Back to Cain and Abel, it seeks to master you, so you must master it.
The rabbis recognize this impulse as powerful.
It's a life force, but it can warp us in ways that are very against our life, destructive
of our life and destructive of others' lives.
But its power is in insignificant ways related to its initial appearance as small.
It moves in subtle ways.
As the Talmud puts it, at first the evil impulse is called a waferer, then it is called a guest,
and finally it is called master.
This goes back to the idea, the rabbis' idea, that in some important way you need to focus
on the minutiae of life, the smaller, minor things, the things that don't look very dramatic.
Those are the moments where you can actually resist evil successfully.
By the time you are standing outside your neighbor's house with a gun in your hand,
at that moment you are in some ways, if you're deciding at that moment whether or not to
go in and shoot them, already evil is too far in your house, too far in your life.
It has moved from waferer to guest to now master.
You want to stop it at the waferer stage.
Evil then on this account is not so much an abstract philosophical problem as it is a
practical challenge confronting those afflicted by it.
Evil is something we meet in our hearts and in our lives every day.
We meet it on the roads when we're driving to work and someone cuts us off.
We meet it on the roads when we're driving to work and we think about cutting someone
else off.
Evil should be faced as a challenge whose successful overcoming on a daily basis will
strengthen and deepen the person in their wisdom and their faith.
The conviction the rabbis had and that governed this whole picture is that evil was in this
sense a challenge and a gift sent by God to mature humans in certain ways, not entirely
unlike Irenaeus.
This is part of a larger understanding of the nature of Jewish suffering that the rabbis
held to.
Evil would serve as a challenge to people, but it would not overwhelm the people Israel.
In particular, the Jewish people would suffer repeated persecutions.
The rabbis at the time that they were writing knew that persecutions had been in the people
Israel's past and they would certainly be in the people Israel's future.
But they thought such persecutions would never become so extreme as to threaten that people's
existence.
Now, in seeing all this, we are really seeing one rich and profound challenge to an over-Christianized
conception of evil in light of sin.
Even secular people today, it seems to me, have a very thoroughly Christian conception
of evil in sin, but they don't need to.
There are other accounts out there that are viable and plausible.
And there are interestingly non-Christian, non-religious ways of conceiving of evil,
ways that make evil less melodramatic and more ordinary in a way parallel to the rabbinic
account as well.
But this rabbinic tradition offers a very sober religious view of malice.
It's, again, profoundly non-dramatic.
It doesn't play into any attempt on our part to overdramatize the struggles we have, which
would in a certain way maybe reinforce our own egotism, this tradition might think.
Oh, my struggles against evil are so magnificently vast, I am part of a cosmic war.
The rabbis are like, no, you're trying to grow up, okay?
That's what you're trying to do, deal with that.
Secondly, evil, even though it is not dramatic, is a powerful reality.
It's a mundane reality, it's a worldly reality.
There's no Satan of any kind of vast metaphysical density here, but nonetheless, there's a realism
about how evil can, over time, come to shape and grip and warp someone's inner soul in
a powerful way.
Indeed, this is so different from many Christian notions of evil that some Jewish scholars
think it's inappropriate to call this a picture of evil at all.
These thinkers argue that rabbinic Judaism doesn't have a picture of evil, it just has
a picture of badness.
The category of evil itself, they say, already rhetorically gives the game away to Christianity.
Instead, you should think about the ra, the yetzer hara, as an impulse to badness, not
an impulse to evil.
Now, this tradition emphasizes human responsibility and struggle, and especially struggle in living
according to the halakah, to Jewish law, in order to govern your behavior so that you
don't slip out of your control.
But you are responsible for this.
You are responsible for you, no one else.
On this halakik view, suffering, then, is kept within human dimensions.
Jewish law teaches, the rabbis believe, that suffering and evil is a human issue, a challenge
that humans are set, and that humans must struggle to overcome.
Again, this is in contrast to Christianity, where suffering always threatens to overwhelm
a creature's capacities to resist it.
Suffering always threatens to become, that is, a theological problem, a divine reality.
From a rabbinic Jewish perspective, evil in Christianity always threatens to become melodrama,
and it always seems to want to escape individual responsibility.
Not I, but Christ in me is the one who's doing all this, right?
Great Judaism thinks that's a very large-scale way of evading the real moral challenges that
we face.
Admittedly they say, not all evil may thus be understandable, sometimes psychopaths happen.
But in general, the shape of human evil is such, the rabbis thought that it can be confronted
through the practices of halakah and the behavior of traditional Jewish religious practice.
But this account is not without its own problems, especially it seems for Jews living today,
after the holocaust, the shoah.
The problem here is simply put, is this picture of evil too mundane and too ordinary to handle
the shoah?
Ironically the shoah may seem to be something, the holocaust, the shoah is what the traditional
Jewish sense of the holocaust is, shoah means catastrophe.
The shoah, the holocaust, may seem to be something that retains any account of evil that is not
vastly dramatic.
How could it be otherwise, how could an account of evil that is not enormously dramatic and
satanic, not, how could that account capture the evil of the shoah?
The evil for the rabbis is about greed, jealousy, envy.
This is a happy and relatively small scale picture of evil.
It's a picture of evil based on a context of nasty, brutal people, but not really continuous
we think, with the evil that was experienced in the holocaust, in the shoah.
That kind of evil seems completely out of proportion to the character of the moral challenges
that an ordinary person in an ordinary town in the 8th century, somewhere in Mesopotamia,
somewhere in Palestine, somewhere in North Africa, any of the diasporic Jewish communities,
many of them would have faced a challenge, but not the challenge of the kind of industrialized
slaughter represented by the holocaust, the shoah.
When that happened, it seemed to many people that traditional Jewish understandings of
evil were really quite radically challenged.
Here it seemed that the old agreement with God, the longest standing covenant between
God and God's people had fallen apart, and that the persecution of the Jews had reached
beyond traditional pogroms, traditional massacres, to become metaphysically eliminationist in
character.
Somehow, God had let it happen that a people, the Germans, got it in their minds completely
to annihilate the entire ethos, the entire people of Israel.
Post holocaust Jewish thought, post shoah Jewish thought, has struggled mightily with
this challenge, and the struggle that shows no signs of ceasing anytime soon.
Indeed, you can say that the attempt to understand the meaning of the shoah has been one of the
most powerful inducements to Jewish thought since 1945, but we'll see that, we'll talk
about that in several later lectures in this course.
For now, in thinking about this rabbinic understanding of evil, I hope we've seen that it stands
in a distinct place, again shadowed by these ancient Near Eastern combat myths, now also
shadowed by the developing very dramatic and metaphysical Christian conceptions of evil,
but bearing within itself a certain level of psychological and moral acuity and self-knowledge
about the challenges and the quality of the difficulties that meet ordinary humans in
their ordinary life every day.
Next, I want to turn to another different account, the Islamic account of the fall of
Satan and the character of Satan as the epitome of evil, and we will find some interesting
views there as well.
