Hello again.
The spiritual crisis of the Reformation, the intellectual crisis of the Renaissance, the
political crisis of the early modern rise of the centralized military industrial state
all lead to a general sense of crisis by the end of the 17th century.
There's a general sense of the inadequacy of received forms in learning, in politics, in
society, in values and faith, the rise of a new individualism.
All these things are happening and together they come to provoke what we come to know as the
Enlightenment. Our lecture today is about how a series of Enlightenment thinkers thought
about the problem of evil.
In the setting of the Enlightenment, holdovers that are in some important way from before
the Enlightenment, especially say churches and monarchies, are hostile to innovation, almost
inevitably seeing the new movements around them as a threat. So there will be a structural
tension built in to the Enlightenment's own thinking of a hostility to traditional forms
of thinking because the Enlightenment sees those traditional forms of thinking as in
some important way associated with those pre-Enlightenment social structures.
Now, it's important right away to say that the Enlightenment is not one thing. There are
several different Enlightenments. Historians now today talk about three or four. For our purposes,
that's not that important. What's important though is that there are several themes or
research agendas, lines of thinking in the Enlightenment that are all about evil and that
all stand in some pretty profound tension with each other. For our purposes, most basic here
is a tension between Enlightenment founded on the idea of turning all of human knowledge into
a form of knowledge which is modeled on that of the natural sciences,
an Enlightenment of the sciences versus an Enlightenment that is more humanistic and
potentially skeptical of the prospects for that scientific transformation of all knowledge.
Most centrally, however, beyond that, beyond those tensions though, the Enlightenment itself
is in a certain way an argument and much of that argument centered around the problem of evil.
How should we understand evil? What is it? Is it a natural thing? Is it a socially constructed
thing? Is it related to certain social conditions? Is it something that wells up in people unless
they are properly trained? Is it something that wells up in people when they are improperly trained?
How should we respond to evil? Should we adjust our societies? Should we rethink the way that we
teach people about the past? Is there nothing we can do? These are profound and abiding questions
for the Enlightenment. Now in general, when confronted with the many difficulties it took
itself to confront, the Enlightenment innovated by suggesting that humans should now attempt,
at last, now in our full maturity to address by our own reason and our own human effort
what we had earlier taken on faith and accepted with resignation, namely that evil could be
comprehended and would eventually be conquered. Instead of believing that evil was an ultimate
mystery and that it would always be with us, the Enlightenment demanded of people that they
try to understand the roots of evil, that's kind of the scientific dimension of the Enlightenment,
and that they try in some way to come to terms with and defeat it, to fix the world,
to stop the suffering in the world. Now there are, of course, lots of different ways of going
about this. For our purposes I want to focus on three crucial moments, three big steps or debates
in the Enlightenment, the first one between Pierre Bale and Guthrie Leibniz, the second between
Voltaire and Rousseau, and the third, a kind of amalgamation of some dimensions of all of those
other debates, that is the Scottish Enlightenment's most famous thinker David Hume and his views about
evil. First let me talk, though, about the prospects for reason and the hope of what reason would
provide for the Enlightenment itself. Much modern thought about evil can be traced back to certain
provocations. In thinking about the proper scope of reason's applicability to struggling with the
problem of evil, probably the provocation that strikes us most profoundly is this first debate,
a debate about the proper ambition of the human intellect, a debate carried out centrally in the
work of Pierre Bale and Guthrie Leibniz. Now these are two very different people and they have very
interestingly different biographies. Bale was a persecuted Calvinist, a religious minority from
France. He had fled from France to live in the capital of tolerance, Holland. Leibniz is the
son of a university professor who became a cosmopolitan diplomat, used to dealing with complicated
international issues through deliberation and reason, talking to the authorities of any number
of different religious beliefs or political affiliations. These two people come from very
different worlds and they offer different account, different understandings of what it means to be
enlightened. Now Bale offered a series of profound and troubling arguments about evil.
Now most famous of his many works was a book that was known as the Historical and Critical
Dictionary, a massive text which was in fact a dictionary offering definitions of a number of
important words, but the dictionary itself, the definitions themselves were loaded with
philosophical arguments in interesting ways. Now Bale was what we would call a fideist,
that is he's someone who is skeptical about reasons, powers to determine most things and
relies on faith in Latin fides, really for his most important convictions. Bale thought that
people's deepest religious convictions and other convictions were effectively immune from
rational assessment and critique and that debate and philosophical analysis are particularly
pointless when it comes to religious belief because people's choices are simply too individually
colored, too idiosyncratic, judgment calls wherein subjective, perspective, personal history,
sheer individual taste combine to make it impossible to bring people's views out onto
the surface and figure out ways of deciding which are the best and which are the worst.
Because of Bale's skepticism about reasons, power to do this, because of Bale's fideism,
that is, while he was a pessimist about reason, he was interestingly a stout defender of religious
toleration. He thought that people should be allowed to have their own beliefs.
But in terms of philosophy, he thought that philosophy had a far smaller scope, a far
narrower compass than many of the more optimistic rationalists of his time thought. He famously
argued in the dictionary that evil is a problem that reduces all philosophy to hopelessness
and in defining the word Manichaeanism, that's the view remember that Augustine disputed,
the view that proclaimed a metaphysical dualism, rival and antithetical substances of good and
evil in the basic fabric of the cosmos, he argued that Manichaeanism was the most straightforward
philosophical account of evil, considered without appeal to Christian revelation and his
fly suggestion in his definition of the Manichaean view, is that a Manichaean view,
quote, would be rather difficult to refute if it were maintained by pagan philosophers
skilled in disputing. This provocation served as a goad to much later modern rationalist
metaphysics. To those who thought that the world was clearly morally ordered,
both traditional scholastic say and more optimistic renaissance humanists,
Bale's suggestion is a direct challenge to show how the world is clearly morally ordered,
how it's not more obviously caught between rival good and evil metaphysical sources,
rival good and evil gods. And to all speculatively interested or philosophically inclined thinkers,
Bale is offering an indirect challenge as well to show the legitimacy and fruitfulness
of abstract philosophical speculation itself. Among all the people who were provoked by Bale,
almost certainly the most far-seeing and insightful, the most acute philosophical mind
of his age, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Leibniz, who lived a little, he overlapped with Bale a bit,
he lived from 1646 to 1716, was a brilliant polymath. He was an epoch-making mathematician
and rival actually to Newton. Both Newton and Leibniz separately invented the mathematical
structures we know as calculus today. And a philosopher who as a philosopher knew no rival,
though he published very little in his life. Leibniz's most famous work is in fact called
The Theodicy. It was published in 1710 and it's the first use of that word in any language because,
in fact, Leibniz invents the word. Theodicy means the justice of God and the book is an extended
defense of abstract philosophizing about evil that does not presume any of the assumptions that
Christian faith allows believers to work from without demonstrating them. The Theodicy is defense
of the idea that the world that we inhabit can be seen to be, can be proved to be,
the work of a just and perfectly good God, a perfectly good God who creates only the best.
Now, the crucial thing for Leibniz here in showing this, and you could have a whole lecture series
just on this book, it's an incredible book, is that God is constrained by nothing but logical
possibility. So God does the best God can within the constraints of creation.
God wills, Leibniz says, antecedently the good and consequently the best. That means that before
God begins creating, God intends the pure good in its most simple form. But then once God's creation
gets underway, all God can do is do the best possible with the substances, the matter at hand,
within the constraints of logic. This means that our world is, in some important way,
the best of all possible worlds. That is, it has Leibniz thinks the minimal possible evil
for the maximal possible good. That's a very complicated mathematical formulation there.
What he's actually trying to say is that Leibniz thinks God has chosen to create a world with
free beings who were able to sin and probably would sin because freedom, even if it was infected
and defected by sin, defected by sin, I meant that, even if freedom is defected by sin, made
defective, it is still a better thing considered on its own than if we had no freedom in the world
at all. If the world were entirely a matter of rocks, plants, and animals that were really
responding to sensible stimuli and were not actually free. Even with sin, a world with freedom
is better than a world that does not have any freedom and also lacks sin. That's Leibniz's argument.
The poet Alexander Pope, an English poet, offers one vivid Leibnizian picture of how
enlightenment optimism at its most lively could depict this picture. Perhaps also it's
enlightenment optimism at its most self-satisfied. In his essay on man, which is actually a poem
entitled The Essay on Man, Pope writes, all nature is but art unknown to thee,
divine governance, art unknown to thee, all chance, direction, which thou canst not see,
all discord, harmony, not understood, all partial evil, universal good, and in spite
of pride and erring reasons spite, one truth is clear, whatever is is right.
Whatever is is right. Pope's picture of the world offers a powerful argument
that the problem of evil is often simply a matter of flawed perspective, either the
perspective of the observer who fails to see the larger context that explains the necessity and
possibly ultimate goodness of an evil, thus making of a partial evil a universal good in
Pope's terms, or the perspective of an actor who fails to see that the apparent reasonableness
of their wickedness is only reasonable from a flawed and partial perspective.
Now, all of this suggests that in fact, again, here we're touching on the basis
of two rival approaches to the Enlightenment. One is quite skeptical of theoretical approaches
and wants to emphasize the empirical facts of the matter. This is Baal. Reason can't access
ultimate reality, and so it's best for us to leave B. In some ways, this is like Machiavelli,
might be like Hobbes, definitely like Montaigne, and it anticipates some later strands of modern
thought, perhaps especially some forms of romanticism, culminating maybe in Nietzsche,
on the incomunicability of individual experience. The other, and this is Leibniz's view,
is more rationalist. It's more confident of the power of the human mind to make clear the structure
of reality, even when such intellect seems at a remarkable distance from our everyday perceptions
of reality. Much of this theory is not so much known by direct knowledge of reality,
by immediate acquaintance, as it is by a form of knowledge or conviction that the theory, as it were,
backs into, sort of, by derivation or implication or deduction of other aspects of the theory.
In the same way that where we see smoke rising in a forest, we anticipate that there is fire
at the basis of that pillar of smoke, a lot of the thinking of a thinker like Leibniz
is not a matter of simply pointing and seeing in the world about where reality is,
but rather saying that if reality is this way, we have to deduce that standing behind it is this
other fact about reality. We'll see this kind of reasoning come up very powerfully in the
thought of the philosopher Emmanuel Kant in a later lecture. But let me move on here
from the Leibniz-Bael debate, which really kind of set the term for the question of the
limits of reason, especially when dealing with evil, to a kind of second iteration,
a second version of that debate, carried on almost a century later between Voltaire and Rousseau.
Now, some thinkers had been raising, outside of Bael's own work, fundamental questions about the
scope of reason's capacity to establish a clear and questioned moral order in the universe.
Some of these thinkers thought that the world should not be as confidently displayed as Pope's
poetry suggested it could be. They were skeptical of the optimism and the hopefulness about
reason that some thinkers had. And they began to worry more and more as the 18th century went on
that, in fact, something important had been missed. The crucial event of this whole era
really shapes the entire thinking of the Enlightenment in ways that it's hard for us to see.
Again, in the same way that ancient Near Eastern mythological traditions shadow
the Hebrew Bible's understandings of good and evil, the Enlightenment's understanding of evil
is shadowed by this event that affects everything that comes after it. And that event is the Lisbon
earthquake of November 1st, 1755. In a recent book, a philosopher Susan Neiman says that what
Auschwitz is to the 20th century, Lisbon was to the 18th. It is the epitome of the problem of evil.
Now, interestingly, Lisbon, of course, is the epitome of the problem not of moral evil, not of
an evil caused by obviously human hands, but of natural evil, a problem caused by nature itself.
What happened on the morning of November 1st, 1755, is that there was a very big earthquake in
Lisbon. It was devastating. It ruined buildings and started fires. But 40 minutes later,
things got far, far worse. The Bay of Lisbon emptied out and a tsunami rolled in and washed away
the rubble, the burning fires, and a large number of the people. 85% of the buildings were destroyed
or heavily damaged, and about 40 or 50,000 people, the capital city of, of the capital city of Portugal,
Lisbon, simply disappeared, washed out to sea. After this, Portugal, which had been declining
as a power, but still had significant power, especially overseas, was never a power in Europe
again. This event made philosophers across the continent extremely curious to think about how
an ordered world could make sense of an event like the Lisbon earthquake. François-Marie Arouet,
who became known as Voltaire, criticized the optimistic theodices of liveness and
pope and those who came after them from the basis of the reality of the Lisbon earthquake.
After the earthquake, in essays and poems, he argued that justifications of these sorts of events
are inevitably, uselessly theoretical. That is, they are empty of a helpful meaning. They distract
us from fundamental philosophical implications, asking the question of, well, we can imagine that
somehow a god could create a world where a decent moral order would allow horrific events like this
to happen, but why not ask more basic questions about what kind of god is more obviously in
charge of a world where this happens, or is a god more obviously in charge of the world where this
happens? Secondly, these theoretical questions distract us from the practical obligations
the reality of evil presents to us. It's quite possible to see someone being mugged on the side
of the road and say, now, what kind of world is it where someone can get mugged on the side of the
road? But they're lying there. You should go help them. That's Voltaire's point. To ask theoretical
questions when confronted with practical evil is a profound misconstrual of your own, not only
moral, but intellectual obligations. And this vision of Voltaire's is especially explored in
his brilliant book, Candide, a novel, which offers a wonderful story of a man who has many
misfortunes that happen to him. But then at the end of the novel, he finally says,
in the end, we all have to retreat back to our own lives and cultivate our own gardens.
So in some sense, he's lost his hopefulness about the intellectual ambitions of his youth,
and he's come to see that it's much happier to live a quiet and happy life in your own garden.
Voltaire's hostility to the Odyssey seems to emerge from his overall skepticism about
intellectual efforts, theory, abstract reasoning, per se. His suspicion there is that it's simply
not grounded in reality. It was skeptical about, say, traditional thinking too. Traditional Catholic
theology was not on Voltaire's top 10 list of things to be reading. But he didn't take it as
seriously as he did the thinking of his enlightenment colleagues who were more optimistic about reason.
Now, in response to Voltaire, others such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau took the problems presented
by history and reflected on human evil in a slightly less angry way than Voltaire did.
Consider Rousseau's recoil from Voltaire's critique of optimistic theodicies. Effectively,
he thinks Voltaire is just making fun of these theodicies. He says in a letter to Voltaire
that your critique of them offers no positive contribution, it only offers scorn. There's
something he suggests profoundly misanthropic and anti-intellectual to Voltaire's hostility
to the intellectual effort of theodicy here. Secondly, Rousseau says Voltaire's rejection
of theoretical questions about evil is also cruel. There's something important that evil presents to
us, not just on the practical level. There's something important it presents to us on the
intellectual level. Even children who want to know why their parents are suffering from an illness,
they don't necessarily only have practical questions about how to help their parents.
They're also able to ask very abstract questions. What does it mean that mommy or daddy is sick
like this? What does it mean about the world I'm living in? They may not be able to put it in
those words, Rousseau says, but everybody, no matter how young, is an incipient philosopher
and can ask these questions. Now, Rousseau is described here foreshadows the work of Immanuel
Kant, to whom we will turn in a future lecture as well. Much as Leibniz's first construction of
this theodicy did, Rousseau is modifying the inspiration here to say, you may not like some
formulation of the intellectual effort, but to suggest that you simply have to turn off your
brain on these issues is a profoundly anti-human thing to do, Voltaire. Thirdly, Rousseau suggests,
and here again, he is, in important ways, pre-shadowing Kant, foreshadowing Kant.
Rousseau suggests that optimism itself, the tendency humans have to look for signs of hope,
is a fact about the human condition that must be acknowledged and has to be a philosophically
significant fact. Now, Rousseau is no naive traditionalist. He was no more fond of the
Roman Catholic hierarchy in France than Voltaire was, but he values the evidence of the past
enough to suspect that the traditional insistence on the world as a morally ordered place gets at
something deep, some deep intuition and conviction that humans have. It's an intuition that we have
perhaps historically mis-expressed in various ways over the course of human history, to be sure,
Rousseau says. We have many flawed and faulty dogmas. This conviction we have has become
formulated in many different ways over the course of human history. But if you look at all these
religions and all these philosophies again and again, we see behind their dogmas some
intuition of the moral order of the universe. That intuition is what we cannot simply jettison,
as you, Monsieur Voltaire, would have us do.
Rousseau thinks humans are hopeful and intelligent, meaning-seeking creatures.
Our optimism is inexpungable from our being, and our interest in philosophically respectable
justifications for that optimism is a permanent fact about us. It's not one that merits scorn.
The optimism itself suggests that in the face of evil, we can well rely on a kind of
supra-rational hope as a mode of response to it. We may not be able rationally to formulate that hope,
but nonetheless, we can never attempt to suffocate that light, extinguish that candle of hope.
Now Rousseau thinks that it's also the case that a lot of human evil itself comes out of
the misuse of human free will and the misappropriation of this optimism we have,
an optimism perhaps that's more locally identified with our own self-interest in some way.
But more mercifully than some of his antecedents, Rousseau did not think that this perversion
that was pervasive in human free will was in any traditional way related to a doctrine of original
sin was not a willful misuse, he thought. It was rather the result of the unintended consequences
of free decisions taken in response to actions early on in our lives. For him,
the source of evil comes out of the same energies that are the wellspring of human hope.
And even as that hope always springs again anew into our hearts, we are going to have
to confront its perpetual struggle with our misappropriation of that hope and our misappropriation
of that freedom in our evil actions. But you cannot deny the hope by recognizing the evil actions
alone. Now after, well in some ways in conversation with both Voltaire Andrewsot, David Hume,
working out of Edinburgh, though he knew Paris, he knew the French world quite well,
differs from both of them, but shares similar concerns with both about optimism. And in a way
offers a kind of synthesis of these various views. Philosophically, of course, Hume is known as a
skeptic and a kind of a naturalist, someone who wants to understand human motivation and human
thinking as different dimensions of the human as a natural animal. And it offers, his work offers
the most powerful restatement of the problem of evil as that problem presents itself to religious
belief. He well understood the words of Epicurus and he quotes them in his famous dialogues concerning
natural religion. Very well, he says, is God willing to prevent evil but not able? Then is he impotent?
Is God evil but not willing? Then is he malevolent? Is he both able and willing?
Whence then is evil? Hume had a way with pithy statements and that is probably one of his
most pithy and most wonderful statements. Effectively, he's saying, if God wants to help us
with evil but can't, then God is not fully as powerful as we think he is. If God can help us
with evil but doesn't want to, then God is not as good as we thought he is. And those are our
options unless you can think of the third one. And Hume says, I can't think of the third one.
For Hume, that is, theory may lead us in unpleasant directions if we use it too far.
But actually, he thinks the real problem is using theory where we really shouldn't
because in this, he's a little bit like Baal, Pierre Baal. Theory gets us nowhere in understanding
the place of evil for rational religion. The fact of evil suggests the cosmos is indifference
towards humanity and evil offers evidence to support some forms of Manichaeanism. But Hume
is no phideist like Baal was. He wants to be a mild skeptic, someone dubious of pretty much
every religious account because the evidence that we can garner from our observations of the world
will inevitably be insufficient to support any account over almost any other account.
The world is simply too open to offer much in the way of clarity about religious beliefs.
But part of the evidence that Hume reads in the world is Rousseauian in nature.
Humans do want there to be order, and we do want to care for one another. We are naturally moral,
naturally hopeful. Evil and suffering exist for Hume, of course, but so does goodness and decency.
Because of that, Hume's skepticism extends even to atheism. He thinks even atheism is
significantly undersupported by the evidence of our lives. We're left instead with a kind of
bemused uncertainty about how to formulate our theoretical beliefs at least to the level of
specificity that many of us have thought that we needed to formulate them to.
But for Hume, and here he's a bit like Montaigne, this is not a bad thing. We ought to be less
concerned with our abstract beliefs and more with helping those in need and living for our lives
a happy and flourishing life. Now, in general, in all of these debates and for all these thinkers,
there are two large themes about thinking about evil that will come up again and again
that have been formulated here in some way or other. One is a debate about the question of
the more abstract versus the more concrete modes of thinking about evil. The second is the question
of the metaphysical plausibility of the dualism of evil and good, or if you don't want to frame it
that way, the more general question of the proper understanding of the proportions of good and evil
in the cosmos. Optimists of a certain sort thought that the world was largely good, but
then events like Lisbon raised the question for some people. In the next lecture, we will see that
the work of Immanuel Kant offers his own innovative attempt to bring all these tensions to a resolution
in a single philosophical system.
