Welcome back.
From Higgle, now we're moving quite resolutely from out of the realm of pure ideas and into
the realm of quite palpable historical consequences.
Following the young Hegelians who came immediately after Hegel and as part of their crew of
arguers and debaters, Marx came to understand Hegel's work as offering a new philosophical
vision for the shape of understanding the world and also guiding human action within
it.
Starting especially in the work of a young Hegelian named Ludwig Feuerbach, Marx came
to see or believe, he saw, that religion was nothing but alienated human longing.
But that doesn't mean that Marx didn't appreciate its power, far from it.
He thought religion had been the most powerful reality in human history, precisely because
it had been the consequential and structure of the way that humans thought about the problem
of evil.
But as history moved on, things were changing in Marx's own time and history was changing
precisely because humans were, and here Marx is an Hegelian, coming to self-conscious awareness
of their own power and their own capacities to change the world and themselves.
This is the motivating point behind Marx's famous claim that up till now, all the philosophers
have done is interpret the world.
The point, however, is to change it.
This is different from Hegel's cunning of reason, which implies a kind of superhuman
force working out its own self-meaning in and through human history.
This is an idea that Marx could not but see as expressing human self-alienation.
Rather for Marx, the crucial fact about history and its processes is that it is the working
out of the species being of humanity, the yet unknown human nature whose dialectical self-unfolding
is driving history itself.
The important difference between Hegel and Marx, then, is that for Hegel, history is fundamentally
a story told about somebody else.
It's about God coming to maturation and self-realization.
For Marx, it is about the self-realization of humanity.
In a way, this is a throwback to the Enlightenment's optimism of the will.
The idea that in the end, sheer human effort is the one thing that will save us.
But it's also the fact that force, the human will, is in fact powerful enough to do this
salvation, and not just hypothetically powerful enough, but in fact inevitably powerful enough.
More so even than Hegel, Marx thought he understood in fairly concrete specificity how human history
would come to its culmination over the next century or so, and what the end of history
would in fact look like.
Now Marx is often read as somehow a twentieth century Russian thinker who accidentally lived
in the nineteenth century.
But in fact, he was a genuinely nineteenth century German thinker who spent much of his
adult life actually in exile in London.
And he himself felt the pain of the social evils his work talked about and his work struggled
so fiercely and so profoundly to overcome.
The details of his life are relatively simple.
He was born in 1818 in Trier in the German Rhineland states, the Palatinate states, and
he dies in 1883 in London.
He and his wife, Jenny, had seven children, but only three lived to adulthood.
One died at age eight, two died aged one year old, and one died two days old before he even
had a name.
Experiences like that would give you a taste for the evils of early industrial life society,
particularly when you think that Marx himself was known as a very loving and warm and generous
person, especially to his family.
It's not often we know the family histories of great philosophers.
Many of them have been effectively celibate.
But with Marx at least, we have a story of someone whose very family bears the cost of
his own struggles to understand what was going on in his day.
Now much of his income, actually, in his life came from two sources.
One was his ally and very dear friend Friedrich Engels, who had a certain amount of money from
his industrialized family, his wealthy family of industrialists themselves working mostly
in the British Midlands.
He also, Marx also, was a very good and successful journalist.
He wrote a number of reports about the U.S. Civil War for U.K. newspapers.
He never went to the U.S., he was in England, but he nonetheless was one of the most important
journalists of the 1850s and 60s and 70s, and he made a good deal of money that way.
Now, Karl Marx is not a theoretical innovator in thinking about evil, rather he's an exemplary
figure for a certain centrally practical response.
He was a Galian in imagining that the revolution of the problem of evil is one fundamental
dimension of the goal of human history, one crucial aspect of what history intends to be.
But as we saw, he differs from Hegel in some very important ways, most immediately and
pretty importantly.
His unlike Hegel's view was a materialist understanding of the human.
Now, people talk about materialism all the time nowadays.
Hegel, Marx, means something very central by it.
He means that not ideas, but material circumstances, determine human thought and action.
That is to say, ideas come from material conditions, from a cultural location, not the other way
around.
It was, after all, the printing press, Marx pointed out, that enabled the spread of Martin
Luther's ideas and their fertilization of minds all across Europe.
Now, this is not a flat-footed claim that no one can think beyond their material conditions
or that everyone is constrained by their immediate surroundings to only be able to think thoughts
that are only acceptable to those people in those surroundings.
It's nothing that naive.
Besides, there's no properly speaking beyond in any of these settings.
There's no way of talking about a boundary around a culture or a particular class status
or something like that.
This is not meant to be, that is, a constraining doctrine, but simply a statement of how thinking
is never totally free-floating from our material conditions, the facts of the way we live our
lives.
Without the right material conditions, Marx believed, people can't think the new thoughts
that revolutionize those very material conditions themselves.
A thinker like Isaac Newton needed a certain background, needed a certain culture of education,
and needed a certain amount of wealth in order to acquire the education that enabled him to
generate the thoughts that led to, first of all, calculus, and then to the Principia,
his model of, his mathematical modeling of the physical basis of reality.
And then that model of the physical basis of reality had to be transformed into a structure
that other people could understand and appreciate, and then it had to be published, and there
had to be people capable of understanding and reading it.
And all those things are not just ideas, those are material realities.
It's quite possible for people to have great thoughts, but not have ways to express them,
or have people who could receive them.
Our thoughts are not totally unconstrained.
They're shaped, formed, by what we have been taught, by what we can imagine, and by what
others can receive from us.
Even technical geniuses, like Leonardo da Vinci or Thomas Edison, can only imagine what
they can imagine and what they did imagine, because certain conditions were in place for
them to do so.
And most of us can't imagine nearly as far away from our material realities as they did.
More specifically, though, more precisely than this general issue about materialism, Marx
is the founder, or the greatest formulator, we could say, of an approach to evil that
we must directly confront, the idea that evil, both what we name evil and whatever wickedness
as we do, is due to social conditions and material inequalities.
Against Hegel, Marx insisted that evil is due to these inequalities, these social conditions,
and therefore it is contingent, not necessary.
And it would be overcome within history, not at its end.
This is really important for Marx, whereas Hegel offers a kind of metaphysical consolation
to all the people in history that eventually history will make itself clear and everything
will be seen to be for the best.
Marx says, that's not true.
What matters, though, is that evil can be fixed now.
Certain forms of evil may be necessary in the development of capital across stages, sociologically
and economically, but that doesn't mean that the development of capital is itself, in some
sense, intrinsically requiring evil facts as part of its justification.
Now what is evil for Marx?
It's a structure of unequal social relations where some are able to gather wealth, what
he'll call capital, from others' labor and to reinvest that wealth in ways that make
those inequalities ever greater.
And Marx doesn't think this is a new thing.
He thinks this is going back thousands of years.
When everyone was in a tribe on land, there wasn't that much capital, there wasn't that
much wealth that people had.
Some people had maybe more seashells than others.
Some people had different roles where people would give them corn or something so that
they would perform certain rights for the people who gave them the corn.
But nonetheless, people were roughly equal in terms of the amount of wealth they had.
But over time, and especially once you get industrialism, enormous concentrations of
wealth occur.
And this wealth, when it is so concentrated, creates its own rationale for how the world
should be run.
Naturally, those who have it, who have the wealth, learn to enjoy its comforts, become
accustomed to them, and wish to keep them, and grow to demand to keep them.
They grow concerned that others don't have these comforts, and they want to keep others
away.
Disparities in wealth, that is, lead to, are related to disparities in power, and far
more than the causality moves in the other direction, far more, that is, than disparities
in power lead to disparities in wealth.
Material wealth, for Marx, is a social force and a social reality more fundamental than
political power itself, right?
So for Marx, political power actually is secondary to economic wealth.
Political power, in fact, is nothing more than a device for securing those who have
wealth to keep wealth, and ensuring that those who don't have wealth can't take it
from those who do.
It's not necessary that those who don't have wealth can't get it.
They just can't get it from the people who have it already, right, which is going to
be kind of hard.
How do they get wealth otherwise?
Some social turbulence is possible, but realistically, Marx thought, effectively, those people who
have wealth are those who are likely to get more wealth in the future.
Now, these inequalities, inequalities of wealth, basic material inequalities, lead to differences
in all sorts of realms of human life, differences in education, in the cultivating of capabilities,
in developing your skills, your gifts, your calling, differences in mortality rates, differences
in overall life health, differences in comfort.
They lead to all the differences of quality of life and cultural mode that lead people,
Marx thought, to do wicked things or not to do wicked things.
Now, note here an interesting thing.
We've been talking about evil, but ethics hasn't come in here at all.
Ethics wasn't necessarily someone who disagreed with people who thought that this practice
was immoral.
He did think it was pretty immoral.
He did think it was pretty a shocking thing that some people had all this wealth and they
wouldn't share it with other people.
But he did think that talking about it as immoral was not as fully powerful a way of
talking about it as simply pointing out the bare material facts.
He thought that understanding those facts, understanding the underlying structures of
the logic of history, what he thought was the logic of history, he thought that would
be a more powerful motivator for effecting change than preaching to people in any way.
Furthermore, he was never really much of a normative thinker, that is, he wasn't directly
or immediately interested in telling people what they should do.
A little bit like Hegel, he was interested in understanding what had happened, what was
going to happen in history.
Not to guide the dynamics, not to ride them in any way, for he thought that the dynamics
of historical change were pretty much unstoppable.
But in order to slightly and subtly shape them, shift their course moderately and best endure
their process through our lives.
But evil here is not simply just a consequence of material inequalities.
As such a consequence, evil also is, Marx firmly believed.
Strictly speaking, almost all of evil is, a sheer accident.
Were we in a social order of total equality, where each was given all they needed to cultivate
themselves, and each gave back to the whole the fruits of their self-cultivation, which
is what socialism is for Marx, no such evil would be real.
Now this, by the way, this is really important.
Marx's understanding of socialism, something just to pause on for a second here.
It's not really socialism in the way that we've come to understand it.
You can't blame Marx for what came to be understood as socialism, say, in the East
Bloc of the communist nations governed by the Soviet Union for the most of the second half
of the 20th century, say.
For Marx, socialism, or what he thought of as true communism, is about self-cultivation
and expression, and about the real joys we have in how our action lies and the delight
in our action lies entirely in the cultivation and the exercise of our talents, not in the
products of our talents.
In our experience of socialism, right, in Eastern Europe, in the Soviet Union especially
perhaps, workers had everything taken away from them that they made by the state.
This is in an important way, not socialism.
This is a complete monopoly of control by the state government.
Now you may think that that's a distinction without a difference, but Marx didn't.
He didn't believe that true socialism would take away from people the things they cared
about, but rather that the things they didn't care about would be the things the state would
take away.
Things that they would be instead considering not as objects to be held close to their chest
as possessive, but things that they understood essentially as means of sharing.
Consider the difference between someone who cooks for a living and someone who cooks for
friends or for the sheer pleasure of cooking itself.
When you cook for friends or pleasure, you would be scandalized if your friends left
money for you.
That's not the point.
Marx thought that one day, money would never be the point of all of our labors.
People would simply love to do the work they found themselves able to do, and delight in
the exercise of their talents in doing that work.
The product of the work then would not be where people found their value or their identity.
It would be merely in the exercise of their skills.
You see, Marx wasn't really interested in a revolution on the social order.
He was interested in a real revolution of human expectations and longings.
He wanted us to get beyond the idea that what we actually are looking for in the world are
more goodies and come to see ourselves as most fundamentally creatures who find a certain
joy in the exercise of a certain set of gifts and skills that we have.
If we did that, Marx thought, we would no longer be as grasping as we are about material
objects.
Now, all of this is just an aside to his notion of evil here.
Coming back to this again, he wants to say that changes in social conditions and material
inequalities can alter or even do away with most evil.
If we get the social system right, if we get the structures right, evil will go away.
If you get society organized in the right way, the transformations of human behavior that
will enable us to exercise our skills in certain ways and delight in their exercise, those
individual anthropological changes, those dispositional changes in the self, those will
happen if we just get the social system right.
Yeah, there will be accidents of nature.
There will be earthquakes, landslides, bad weather, tornadoes, maybe even a certain range
of people who are insane, pathological, right, a kind of crime of nature in a way, and perhaps
even a minimal level of carelessness and common human thoughtlessness.
But the really big evils of human life, Marx thinks, such as young people work to death
in factories or mines, plutocrats throwing away enough food from their feasts to feed
the hungry mouths for months, mouths that slump unfed outside their doors, murder and
killing within and between nations, criminality in the lower classes, alcoholism, drug abuse,
sex slavery, all these would go away because their basic cause, he thought, the disparity
of wealth and thus the existence of a painful gap between the haves and the have-nots, that
would go away as well.
Now note here, it's important to see that when Marx talks about a revolution, he's
not talking about a philosophical revolution.
He's thinking of a revolution in terms of the practical disappearance of the concrete
evil itself, not in terms of the disappearance of the cognitive problem of evil, the intellectual
problem of evil.
The crucial fact he thinks is that real concrete suffering is what must ultimately go away.
The intellectual puzzle of evil is for Marx only a puzzle that grips us to the extent
that we at least tacitly acknowledge that we cannot ourselves come to solve the practical
problem.
This goes back to his claim about Feuerbach that philosophers have up until now interpreted
the world, but the point is to change it.
We can interpret evil as much as we want, Marx thought.
The crucial thing is that small children stop dying.
Now this means that he thinks that evil will not be an important theoretical problem for
people if the concrete problems go away.
That is, that the concrete problems matter more than anything else.
By any means necessary, that's going to be a really crucial phrase as we go on, because
it turns out that if your main goal is the removal of these concrete evils, a vision
of this sort can undergird an ethic of really quite brutal consequentialism.
Once you're convinced you know the remedy for suffering in evil, you can justify a great
deal in doing what you must to ensure that in fact suffering in evil do go away, or even
are simply substantially reduced.
As the very, very well known and remarkably gifted German communist writer Bertolt Brecht
said, erst kommt der Fressen, dann kommt die Moral.
First comes food, then morality, then we'll worry about morality, right?
In other words, give people enough to eat, then talk to them about right and wrong.
Morality is in some important way contingent upon decency, and to get to decency, anything
is necessary.
This means that, paradoxically, for Marxists, if not for Marx, but for Marxists, it may
well be the case that the most ethical people ultimately are those who are least apparently
ethical now, and those people who are caught up in adhering to ethics in the present, those
who are caught up in believing in the proper possession of property, and how it's improper
for a poor person to take something that a rich person has.
For Marxists, that kind of ethics may in fact be, in the long run, in the ultimate aim
of ethics, itself immoral.
It may be the case that it is people who look immoral now, who turn out, on a Marxist view,
to be properly moral in the distance.
Brecht himself, the writer Bertolt Brecht, had a great line about this in a poem called
To Those Who Are Born After.
He said, we who wish to lay the foundations of peace and friendliness, we could never be
friendly ourselves.
A lot is packed into that phrase, we could never be friendly ourselves.
If you think about the history of, say, Marxist ideology in the 20th century, to call it unfriendly
is probably an understatement.
But in any event, this is how Marxism, which meant to remedy evil, became, ironically perhaps,
one of the most powerful ideologies for doing evil that the world has ever known.
Now, it's not entirely fair to blame Marx for all the things done by those who said
they followed him, in the same way that it's of course not entirely fair to blame Jesus
for all the things done by those who said they followed him.
Nonetheless, it's an interesting fact that some of the most frankly moralistic visions
of life, even if they don't admit that they are moralistic, are often the most quickly
and dangerously corrupted.
Marx himself, in this way, raises two very large and fundamental questions for our class.
One theoretical, one practical.
The theoretical question goes back to the debate between Rousseau and Voltaire.
Does the approach that Marx offers, an approach again that focuses ruthlessly on the practical
solution to the practical problem of evil, does this solution, does it offer enough respect,
does it give enough respect to theoretical questions about evil that humans might have?
Doesn't the sheer phenomenon of evil itself stand in need of being accounted for?
Is there no theoretical worry here that will trouble people?
Is a purely materialist resolution of all these problems adequate to meet any intellectual
puzzle that people will have?
I actually don't think so.
I think that this is a failure of Marx's not only political anthropology, but in a way
his philosophical anthropology.
This is my view now, so this is not Marx.
I actually think that any attempt to offer an account of the problem of evil that fails
to talk about why evil happened in the first place and offer an adequate account for why
that is, ultimately adequate account for why that is, seems to suggest that our capacity
to wonder and be puzzled is far less immediately part of who we are than I think it is.
In fact, I think our capacity to wonder abstractly about things is very central to who we are.
That's one problem with this view.
The second problem with the theory lies in its understanding of history, and again this
is a theoretical question about whether or not you need a theoretical resolution to the
problem of evil.
Marx's understanding of the problem of evil means that at any moment when there is suffering
in the world, we will understand ultimately that suffering to have been justified, Allah
it was with Hegel, only because that later event that is caused by the suffering is much
better than it would have been absent the suffering.
In other words, every moment in history doesn't have its own integrity.
Its meaning, its ultimate significance is only part of a larger story.
We can't know the meaning of any moment until the later moment.
On another, in another way, the moment of history that we are going through at this time is
never something that is fully clear to us now, and we can't actually know what it really
means yet because history as a whole is an organic unity.
That's one view of history.
That's Marx's view.
That's Hegel's view.
Each moment of history is not possessing its own integrity.
It requires a certain attention to the overall scope to see what it really means.
The other view, which is a different one and I think one that is at least more plausible
initially, is the idea that each moment of history is in some important way possessive
of its own integrity, its own autonomy.
Each moment of history were it to be subsumed or consumed into the totality of the whole
would possess its own integrity that would resist and protest that consummation, that
consumption.
Each moment of history that is in this rival view to Marx and Hegel has a kind of moral
sense which is determinant in itself.
If you believe in the second account of history, at a moment the evils or the goods that happen
in that moment bear their own significance and their own meaning within themselves.
If you believe in that view, no matter what the justification of it is down the road, somehow
the suffering of that moment still stands out as demanding some kind of answer.
There must be some account of why that had to happen.
If there is no account of why it had to happen, why there was a necessity to it's happening,
that's fine.
But tell us then that there is no necessary justification for us.
Tell us then that that moment of suffering has as its own meaning the real suffering
of the people within it and that in some sense that suffering matters not just in that moment
but eternally as the ultimate eternal meaning of that moment of suffering.
In a way I'm gesturing at the idea that there might be different meanings of God here.
Remember Hegel at least insists that God becomes identical with the world spirit working itself
out.
Marx obviously doesn't have a sense of God in that way but Marx nonetheless thinks there's
nothing outside of history.
The picture I'm offering you is a picture where each moment is individually seen by
a God outside of time, outside of history in eternity who sees each moment in its integrity
and sees it as an integral moment.
Now that's all the theoretical debate, theoretical questions around Marx.
The practical questions are more immediate and direct.
Just obviously is it viable to say that evil can be solved in the way that Marx suggests
it can?
The history of Marxism after Marx does not give us a great deal of confidence that Marxism
became on the whole a device for ameliorating human suffering to say the least.
If anything as I said before I'd say the consequentialism had justified provoked in
people a kind of amplified level of cruelty and aggravated the suffering of the human
race at least for a century or so after Marx's own death.
Ironically, it may be that a materialist like Marx offers a solution accentuating the felt
need for a theoretical explanation of evil.
That is to say, a thoroughgoing materialism may make the need for an idealist explanation
of evil almost intolerably strong because the more rigorously the materialist explanation
is worked out, the more its absence feels felt in the world that we experience them
offering us.
Now interestingly in Marx's own time, in some of the work he himself did as a journalist
as I suggested, there was in fact a problem of evil, a theodicy problem being practically
worked out, the problem of American slavery climaxing in the struggles around the American
Civil War.
In our next lecture I want to turn to the story of that evil and how that evil was dealt
with by two American thinkers who tried to give an account of what it was, where it came
from, and what might happen to it that speaks well beyond the confines of that one particular
historical event.
