Hello again, in this lecture I want to talk about perhaps the greatest philosophical novelist
of all time, Fjodor Dostoevsky. Dostoevsky's works are enormous and vast and incredibly
dense with plots and subplots and characters and philosophical arguments. And so you'll
almost certainly have imagined reading Dostoevsky, but I'm not sure that you have read Dostoevsky.
If you haven't, as with so many other things, I strongly urge you to do so as soon as you
stop finishing as soon as you finish this lecture. Dostoevsky's works repeatedly struggle with what
happens to humans when they operate outside of the restraining realities of vivid and organic
religious belief in conditions of a rapidly modernizing society, such as was the case in his
world, the world of 19th century Russia. His own experience of life imitated a great deal of his
novels and in fact his own life is worthy of its own novelization. He was born into a complicated
family as all really rich, complicated and dense noble Russian families were in 1821. His father
was a violent alcoholic, though Dostoevsky and his father seemed eventually to come to a good
relationship. His mother died when he was 16 and his father died when he was 18. He fell in love
with literature and fell into a circle of liberal intelligentsia, young Turks in Russia who were
thinking about how to engage in Western thinking and bring it into the Russian culture in the most
powerful and useful way possible. In that circle, though, he became involved with some people who
were on the outs with the secret police in Tsarist Russia and he was arrested and sentenced to death.
Astonishingly, and imagine this happening to you, he was actually in a cell
and led out with a number of other people to stand before a ditch facing a firing squad
where his sentence was proclaimed and he believed, sincerely, that the firing squad was about to shoot
and then his sentence was commuted to four years of exile in Siberia and he was led away to exile.
Whenever I think about that, I just can't get over the thought of standing at something in his
something in his mid-twenties and imagining that he's about to die and then suddenly hearing that
his life was going to go on. Clearly, that would make almost anybody, psychologically, a more
complicated figure than they had been. It did that to Dostoevsky. Prison in Siberia was very hard,
incredibly brutal, but it served to shape his views profoundly and over time, in and out of prison,
in prison first and then out afterwards, the experience is also in his life, especially
addiction to alcohol and gambling gave him intimate acquaintance with obsessive, compulsive,
and addictive behaviors that he associated, identified, really, with sin. Over the course
of his life, he became increasingly a slavophile, someone who believed that the destiny of Russia
was to come back to its own organic roots and find in those roots the salvation of the whole world
against the dangerous depredations of the acidic suspicions of Western European modernity.
And he had a profound religious experience, which made his always nominal and more than nominal in
many ways, commitment to Russian orthodoxy, the absolute center of his life. The rest of his
life was tumultuous, several marriages, one wife's death, again, alcoholism, gambling, addiction,
a final remarriage, and flourishing in his last decade, but his mental worldview was pretty much
set by the 1860s. He died in 1881. Throughout his working life, he was obsessed with the challenge
of the intellectual currents coming from the West, and especially with those intellectual
movements that attacked traditional morality and religion. Dostoevsky himself felt the powerful
pull of these currents. He was drawn to them as a young man, but he found himself finally
unsatisfied by them, and indeed led astray by them, led down dangerous paths.
His famous line in the Brothers Karamazov, if there is no God, then everything is permitted,
is meant to be a summary of the thoughts he often explored.
And in this way, we can in fact see him as a little bit like Nietzsche, though drawing
the opposite conclusions from Nietzsche. Both saw the new ideas of their time as powerfully
revolutionary, and refiguring everything, shaping the way society and the human should
understand themselves in completely revolutionary ways. But whereas Nietzsche thought these ideas
were good and exciting and should be furthered and we should progress with them, Dostoevsky felt
that the ideas were nightmares that would lead to a new age of barbarism and inhumanity,
and that the most important thing he could do was identify their full meaning, diagnose their
pathologies, and warn his countrymen to stay as far away from them as they could.
To understand this, it will help for a minute just to get a grip on the category of nihilism
that is pervasive in a lot of Dostoevsky's work, and also in some of other thinkers' work as well.
Nietzsche will see Albert Camus talk about this as well.
Nihilism is the belief that in some sense there is no moral structure, and not just no moral
structure, but in some ways no absolute framework to the cosmos, that the cosmos is in some important
way, a morally and perhaps in other ways, up to us, all a matter of our will. The world is what we
make of it. The thing for Dostoevsky about nihilism is it's an enormously seductive idea,
and it's an enormously empowering idea, but he also thinks ultimately it doesn't work with the
psychology of humans to finally believe in nihilism. The terror for Dostoevsky is not that people can
say they believe this. The terror is what they do when they're in the grip of this belief.
You don't have to take their belief literally, he thinks, to take it seriously. Whether they express
it properly or not, they are in the grip of a powerful idea that has terrible and deleterious
effects, both on them and on those around them. Now I want to talk about two great works he wrote.
One, sometimes called the possessed or the devils, properly really entitled demons,
and the other in English called crime and punishment. Together these two books offer a
powerful set of challenges to where evil is going as Dostoevsky worries about it as the 19th century
lurches to its close. Now let me talk about the possessed or demons first. In this work,
in this work, in demons, Dostoevsky struggles to argue, try to figure out a way of saying,
that the desire of revolutionary modernists in Russia and elsewhere to improve society
founders on their failure, their own fundamental failure to understand the nature of evil. They
fail to understand this in their own natures, in the nature of how evil manifests itself and warping
their collaboration, their allegiance with other revolutionaries, and also more basically
their failure to understand how evil is the problem that they are themselves trying to confront
and overcome. This book has a really interesting publication history actually, and its career
in Russian is worth mentioning. It gets published in 1873, and it's hailed as a great novel right
away. And for the next 30 or 40 years, lots of Russian readers tend to it, talk about it, discuss
it. Very, very popular and powerful novel. But with the Russian Revolution, of course, it
effectively disappears because lots of people in the authority structure of the Soviet Union
thought of demons as basically an indictment of communism and of the revolutionaries that led
to communism. There were some dissidents in the Soviet world who, actual bureaucrats who
disagreed with this, not just dissidents, but bureaucrats within the Soviet system who disagreed
with this and tried to find ways of publishing this work of Dostoevsky's. But effectively,
it was completely forgotten in Russia. And then in perestroika, and then in the 1990s,
it became widely available again and wildly popular in Russia. And now again, the Russians
lauded as a great novel. Though now, of course, they think, maybe we should have called it,
boy, what could we have been thinking, right? Because it seems so prophetic to many Russians
about the course of their own country in the 20th century.
Now, interestingly, as a background for this novel, understand that in Eastern Orthodoxy,
Eastern Orthodox Christianity, and especially in Russia, there's not a lot of direct theoretical
attention given to Satan, given to the devil in the theologies. Rather, what you have instead
is attention to the multiplicity of devils in the plural, local house demons, forest devils,
gypsies, spirits of the swamp, that sort of thing. Dostoevsky uses this tradition,
which is a theological tradition, but also a folk tradition, to identify name and kind of describe
the anarchic, squabbling nature of evil, at least as it's manifest in this group of revolutionaries.
It's incoherent, both in the individual, in making their actions not really intelligible,
least of all, most of all not to themselves, and in the group, in making their cooperation
in any real way impossible. In fact, evil corrupts groups in such a way that they end
up being always at war with themselves. Again, Dostoevsky here is in some important ways
a little like Milton. The problem with the rebels is that they're not able to be taken,
we can't really properly take them with complete seriousness, but their actions have
profoundly deadly consequences. And in this, Dostoevsky is sketching a character,
a distinctively modern character whose figure we will see come up again and again,
the figure of the human whose consequences, whose impact on reality are out of all proportion
with their own pathetic ludicrous reality. That in some sense, there's a tension between
the smallness of the figure and the magnitude of the evil that they are able to produce.
Whereas in goodness, when we see someone do a great deed, we're normally able to identify that
person as truly a remarkable person in some sense. But with evil, it doesn't seem to work that way,
at least in modernity. Much of the greatest of the evils of modernity, Dostoevsky is one of the
first people to suggest this. Much of the magnitude of those evils is caused by people who are really
in themselves, kind of pipsqueaks. And we'll see this especially with Hannah Arendt in her
discussion of Adolf Eichmann, but understand it's operative even in someone like Dostoevsky,
at least at the imaginative level. Now, another thing, don't worry, we will get to the demons,
but another thing to know before we begin is that the very genre of the novel, this is a totally
Dostoevsky and classically Russian thing to do, but Dostoevsky thinks the very genre of the novel
itself is a product of Western secularity. The novel, right, as an imaginary story, an imaginary
creation by a human author of a kind of vivid human world. Dostoevsky finds that enormously
theologically problematic. It's potentially, latently, a rival to God's creation. Any novel
is, and so potentially a novel is intrinsically corruptive. So in demons, as in all of his novels,
he is anxious that the novel not seem too realistic. In this, Dostoevsky is in profound
tension with his comrade Tolstoy. Tolstoy was the classic exemplar of the person who writes
the great realistic novel. Dostoevsky, for theological reasons, is quite worried that the
category of the novel seduces the author of the novel and the readers into a God's eye perspective,
which is deeply troubling to him. So one interesting thing about Dostoevsky is he's always worried
about the very genre he's writing in, that somehow it might itself be a demonic genre.
Now the story of demons is relatively simple, as 19th century Russian novels go.
Peter Verkovinsky is a wealthy, young, and idealistic revolutionary. Very good with words,
articulate, lucid, coming from right-thinking, forward-thinking, intellectual parents,
liberal parents. And Verkovinsky gathers a conspiracy of like-minded young revolutionaries
about him. He convinces them that the conspiracy into which he lures them is in fact part of a
much larger trans-Russian conspiracy, maybe an international conspiracy. But in fact the conspiracy
goes no further than Verkovinsky himself. It effectively is kind of like a bridge club
of secret revolutionaries. He brings into this group one by whom he is himself seduced,
the most inspiring and most seductive of all the revolutionaries, Nikolay Stavrogin.
Now Stavrogin is a deeply charismatic figure, often an observer on the margins of events,
not able to really be invested or engaged in anything, and profoundly misanthropic,
someone who doesn't have a lot of fondness for humans, but also someone who is deeply tortured
by his misanthropy, by his hatred of others. And he does some truly horrible things in the novel,
including eventually at one point paying someone to kill his mentally retarded wife, Maria.
He manages to convince someone else to kill them, to kill her, and manages to pay them,
without in some sense really coming to grips with what he had done, his full role in this.
Dostoevsky is fantastic at representing this kind of evil that happens when we kind of
back into a wickedness that we don't ever really fully acknowledge to ourselves is going on.
Now, to solidify this group's identity, to confirm everybody in the private
club of the revolutionaries, Verkovesky kills a former conspirator, someone who was in the group,
but who left, whose name is Ivan Shatov, who he left behind radicalism for Russian orthodoxy.
And after he's killed him, Verkovesky lets everyone else in the group in on the secret.
Right? He's basically killing this guy to bond everybody in the group together.
He's instrumentalizing his life for the abstract cause of the group.
But the truth of the murder becomes known. The conspiracy collapses at once. Most of the
conspirators are arrested by the police. Stavrogan, Nikolai Stavrogan in the end,
is deeply aware of all of his sins, including his complicity with this futile and folly-laden
group of pseudo-revolutionaries. And in the end, he commits suicide in despair of his guilt,
at his complicity in the murder of Shatov, and in the murder himself of his own wife,
and in the whole worldview that surrounds both of these things.
Now, as in so much of Dostoevsky, the moral of this novel, such as it is,
doesn't emerge neatly at the end of the book. Ironically, it emerges almost in the middle,
in the build-up to the murder of Ivan Shatov. What finally causes the break between Shatov
and the revolutionaries is that he offers a more morally supple and vivid picture of reality,
one where morality matters, and where humans are caught in sin. The revolutionaries don't.
For the revolutionaries caught up in the currents of 19th century science and rationalism and
philosophical extremism, nihilism again, they want to say that effectively things happen,
but that responsibility can't be pinned on anybody. No one is properly to blame, they want to say.
All we have to do is create a new world that is in some sense far superior to this. We don't have
to worry about the ethical consequences of our actions because they'll be justified by the
end point we achieve. Remember Marx here. The problem is that a figure such as Shatov,
who is coming to appreciate the theological and cultural heritage of Russian orthodoxy,
realizes that it's not true that no one is to blame. He says famously in a confrontation
with Verkovesky, we are all to blame. Effectively, everybody is guilty. And that distinction between
those who believe that no one is to blame and we are all to blame is for Dostoevsky,
the most fundamental and powerful distinction that drives the history as he sees it of the
19th century. Now in demons, Dostoevsky is offering us three important lessons. First of all,
he's offering us a powerful account of the nature of evil in modernity. Effectively,
it's couched primarily in political terms. Politically, it's a structure of revolution
against the social order, but more deeply than that, he thinks. It's psychologically about
revolting against the conditions of human existence in general. The failure of modernity
in the face of this evil is second lesson. The modern world, the coming into existing
modern world simply does not want to acknowledge the reality of this evil. And it doesn't even
want to acknowledge what's more disturbing for Dostoevsky, the modern world's tacit or active
complicity with it. Verkovesky, remember, comes from a good, a right thinking family, a liberal
family, tolerant, welcoming people who are open to new ideas, but their openness to these new
ideas for Dostoevsky leads their son into the most grotesque and wicked nihilism imaginable.
And third, as a response to this corruption, Dostoevsky proposes that the tradition of radical
orthodoxy is probably the one thing that will save, at least Russia, and perhaps beyond Russia,
all of us. The traditional cultural and religious values, and especially the drama of sin and
redemption, the idea of a universal corruption as the first insight, psychologically, politically,
morally, that would found a wise and healthy human life is for Dostoevsky essential to going
forward in our context. Now, to turn from demons to Dostoevsky's probably much more famous and
certainly more widely recognized as a great novel, crime and punishment,
is to turn from a powerful novel of political psychology to a powerful novel of psychology
in general, and in fact a powerful novelistic portrayal of what it says it is about, at least
in English, a crime and then the inner and also a little bit of the outer punishment that the crime
entails. Now, whereas the demons was really about a collectivity of people and how they all kind of
collectively led each other to hell, crime and punishment really focuses on one person,
Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov. Raskolnikov is a word, there are a few words in the,
even in the English language, which in the 20th century and now in the 21st have come to have
a certain kind of density of meaning and if you hear someone talk about someone else as a real
Raskolnikov, they're actually not saying a very nice thing about them. Raskolnikov is a poor
failed student in St. Petersburg, a kind of graduate student dropout, right?
And he lives a kind of marginal life in a dingy little room dealing with low lives,
trying to figure out what to do with his life now, now that he's realized that the university
is not for him. In the course of his experience of the city, he comes across a quite nasty woman
who's a moneylender and a pawnbroker, quite mirtholous and actually clearly who has a lot
of money in her rooms and Raskolnikov decides that he will kill her, take her money and perhaps,
sometimes he seems to think this, sometimes he doesn't, the psychology of Raskolnikov is
deliciously realistically unclear on this. He will use the money perhaps to offer some good
kindnesses, some charities, some good deeds to people in the city. So one day, he sneaks into
her room and he kills her with an axe. And just as he is trying to get away, just as he is trying
to sneak out, the pawnbroker's half-sister, Lisaveta shows up, completely innocent, an innocent
bystander, but in order to finish his crime and make sure he gets away spot free, Raskolnikov must
kill her too, and he does. After this, he's completely discombobulated, terrified, and he
flees with only a few small things in his hands and a small purse, leaving most of the wealth
left behind. But he manages to get away entirely undetected, and unless he confesses the crime,
Dostoevsky sets it up, unless he confesses the crime, no one will ever know. So in that sense,
the crime is a success. But Raskolnikov is traumatized by it. The event of killing was
much worse than he thought, and the consequences for his soul are far more drastic than he could
have imagined. He wanders the city in a feverish day. He ends up giving what little money he has
left away to the family of a friend who was a drunkard but has now died. He finds him dead.
He finds him, I think he's hit. He sees him killed in the streets by a cart. The daughter of the
family, a young woman named Sonia, has turned to prostitution to help her family survive. Again,
think of Marx, think of how brutal the 19th century was, where to help a family live,
a daughter had to turn to prostitution. Raskolnikov and Sonia form a bond, and they talk,
and Raskolnikov tells her of his crimes and the torment in his soul because of his crimes.
Sonia urges him to confess. After a suitably Russian period of tormented uncertainty and plot twist,
Raskolnikov agrees, he confesses, and he is sent to Siberia for punishment,
with Sonia following along to help him. Now, this is a novel of incredible density and incredible
richness. What's interesting about the book, a lot is interesting, but what's interesting for us
is the representation of Raskolnikov's motives throughout the book. Why did he do this?
Why did he think going into someone else's rooms, killing her with an axe,
would ever be a good idea? What could possibly have motivated that?
He seems to have done it because he could, and because he imagined that by doing it,
he would be invulnerable to moral guilt or self-condemnation. He would show himself
that he was invulnerable in this way. That is, he seems to have convinced himself
that by killing someone else with an axe, he would demonstrate to himself that he is the
kind of great sold person he thinks he is. As a student, he had written a thesis entitled
On Crime, and in the thesis he suggested that, in fact, there was no such thing as evil,
and he compares himself in several places in the book. He compares himself to Napoleon,
admiring Napoleon's sense of ego and will, his strength of purpose, and suggesting that he
himself has the ability to make good come of this immense evil by doing good with the cash.
But he turns out to be wrong. The murder is botched by the arrival of Lisaveta,
and he himself is traumatized by these events to such a degree that he flees the scene without
taking the money, and afterwards he can't bear himself until he finally confesses to Sonia.
So Raskolnikov turns out to be quite different than what he thought he was.
Quite different than the story that he was telling himself, a story of 19th-century
liberal western nihilism, and how that story he was trying to tell himself was one he wanted to
live into. But as Dostoevsky points out, he failed to be able to live into that story. And again,
go back to that idea that a novel is a theologically troubling thing for Dostoevsky.
Just as Raskolnikov is trying to tell a story about himself, he's trying to be a novelist.
Dostoevsky himself suggests the problem with Raskolnikov is precisely that he's
trying to usurp God's role. He's trying to tell his story instead of having the story that God
gives him be his story. Indeed, the title of the novel, Crime and Punishment in English,
is actually something that sounds like it focuses more on the punishment.
The official punishment. But in fact, in Russian, the title is much more like transgressing the limits
and what happens after. The punishment of the novel itself focuses on Raskolnikov's own inner
punishment, not the formal punishment, not the official judiciary punishment. That's actually
mostly in an afterward, in an afterthought in the novel. What really the novel's about is, first of
all, Raskolnikov's psyching himself up to do this deed and the enormous stories he tells himself
about how he can do this, and then his inner punishment after he's done it. It's mostly a
drama that is of Raskolnikov's own soul, absent the official judicial structure.
Now, both in what it says in itself and as exemplary of a distinct approach to evil,
in the modern world, Dostoevsky's vision is a powerful harbinger of the cataclysms that began in
the 20th century and that remain with us today. As I've said, it's possible to compare Dostoevsky
to many of our earlier authors, maybe especially Milton. But Milton and Dostoevsky do differ
dramatically on one thing. Where Dostoevsky sees the problem of evil to lie in any active rebellion
against an established order, the act of rebellion itself is in some ways for Dostoevsky evil. Milton,
as we saw him, makes distinctions. For him, rulers who become tyrants and it's very easy for a ruler
to become a tyrant, those rulers warrant their own overthrow. In those cases, rebellion is not
evil at all. Indeed, acquiescence and tyranny, whether Satan's lordship or the king's, is itself
evil. For Dostoevsky, in contrast, acquiescence in a powerful authority above you is merely one
other way that you are observing the place in society that God has put you in.
Now, for a long time, the argument in literature was about who was the greater novelist, the
greater representer of reality and prose form. Tolstoy, with his vivid empiricism, or Dostoevsky,
with his profound philosophical symbolism and discussions. And that's a vital debate,
still in Russian literature, Tolstoy or Dostoevsky. But for our purposes, a similar question can be
asked about who was the greatest novelist of evil. And here, there are also two really rival
imaginative models, Dostoevsky and Joseph Conrad. You're either for one or the other.
In the next lecture, we're going to turn to Conrad and assess the case made for his view
as the most profound novelistic representation of evil in the modern world.
