Welcome back.
This lecture I want to talk about the novels of Joseph Conrad as a complement to the thought
of Dostoevsky and also in some ways an important rival and an alternative picture of how modernity
can think about evil.
For his long back into my childhood, as I can remember, my father never slept well.
He was restless, most nights crying out or shuddering in his sleep.
Sometimes he was more vulnerable when he was asleep than when he was awake.
Every all, my mother especially, got used to the idea that we might be woken up in the
night by a cry of fear or anguish that would not wake him.
It was just what living with my dad involved.
Everyone in the family knew what was going on.
He had been an infantryman in the Korean War and like so many veterans, he had never really
stopped being an infantryman, even though that fact was only obvious when he was asleep.
It was then in the dreams that his experiences came back to him.
My father went to war and part of him never came back.
I think this is true for very, very many veterans of very, very many modern wars.
The experience of modern war is so extreme, the relentlessness of fear, the intensity of
combat, the savagery of what combat meant, the sort of things that a machine gun bullet
or an artillery shell can do to a human body.
All these phenomena are common in combat and soldiers quickly acclimatize themselves to
them.
But once they are so acclimatized to these extreme experiences in war, afterwards many
of them cannot get back to the condition they were in before.
The gap between their experience of war and the experience of modern life without war
is so vast and so apparently unbridgeable that there seems no way to move smoothly from
one to the other.
And so many veterans never do, simply developing a new mode of living when they come back to
the world from the war, burying their experiences and the selves they became in the war deeper
than they bury their uniforms and their medals.
I vaguely knew all of this as a child and some in co-eight way it was there in my experience.
But it was only when I read Joseph Conrad that I realized explicitly what had been going
on in my life was actually part of a larger problem faced by all that live in the modern
world but know the modern world for what it is, namely far more contingent, far more complex,
and far darker than the rest of us can realize.
This lecture is dedicated to making sense of Conrad's vision of the fate of those who
have known evil in the modern world and making sense of Conrad's question, the troubling thought
he puts in our minds that those who know this evil who have experienced these traumas may
stand in some fundamentally estranged way from our experience, from our lives, and from
the world that we inhabit so that the lessons they have gained and the wisdom they have
acquired is completely incomunicable, untranslatable to those who might learn something from it.
Conrad as we'll see experienced this in his own life and it was one of the perpetual themes
of his writing. The idea that one person's experience, however desperately urgently needing
to be communicated to others, may not in fact be amenable to that communication.
Now unlike Dostoevsky who really roots evil in human rebellion against God in a very
theological frame, Conrad really has a quite radically secular vision of evil. People just
seem to fall into evil or be lured into it for reasons that are in some ways present
to themselves, their reasons that are not demonic or theological but they are in some
sense all too human, a horrific self-aggrandizement at the cost of those around one.
In the case of Mr. Kurtz, perhaps an utterly banal instrumentalization of all those around
you, in the case of the secret agent, another figure in Conrad will read about.
In either case, Conrad is fighting a darkening apprehension of destructiveness as offering
the appearance of authenticity to those seduced by it. In that way he's much like Dostoevsky.
Dostoevsky and Conrad are both interested in the idea that extreme situations can seem
to make people more real in the modern world than the ordinary experience of our modern
world allows them to be. In Dostoevsky's case, the nihilist rebels are the ones who are in
some ways the most real people they think. In Conrad's case, it may be people who are
anarchists, terrorists, perhaps extreme exploiters of the Congo, but extremity is in some sense
for some people a virtue for Conrad and he thinks that this is a really devastating problem.
Now, the background of Conrad, again, like Dostoevsky in some ways almost makes a better
novel than Conrad's own novels. Joseph Conrad was born a pole and died an Englishman. In
fact, died an Englishman who had just refused an offer of knighthood from the prime minister.
His writings were hard earned by a life lived largely as a merchant sailor for almost 20
years. He lived that career from 1874 when he was 17 to 1894. In 1889, he was the captain
of a riverboat that went up the Congo and he caught a dangerous fever and almost died
on the trip. But the overall event, not just the fever, but the overall event changed him
dramatically. He said in later years that before the Congo, I was a mere animal, unthinking
in what he was doing. It was in seeing the savagery of what Europe, in the form of Belgium,
was doing in the Congo the kind of horrifying exploitation of human beings and complete senseless
destruction of nature that made Conrad wake up to his reflective humanity and begin to
wonder why in fact humans are like this. He'd always been writing, but he began writing
more seriously and over the next few years, after 1889, he began to take more seriously
the idea of a career as a writer. In 1894, he leaves the sea behind for good. He will
go on boats, but he won't be working on them anymore. His work as a writer took a long
while to find an audience. But by 1910 or so, he was beginning to make enough on his writing
to live comfortably from then until the end of his life in 1924. He grew in fame over
the next 14 years, but was always seen as somehow outside, outside the traditional canon of
English literature, somehow not entirely proper, not entirely polite. And even now, perhaps
he still is. His works are more often read not by literary theorists, but by journalists
and political writers, spies and special, special envoys of the government. Find his
work and the way that it involves both large geopolitical forces and actual vivid human
characters to be enormously enriching. Now Conrad wrote several incredible books in order
to think about the character of evil and modernity. By and large, those books are still importantly
unread. The one we read most is Heart of Darkness. But I got to tell you that even today, in
my classes when I try to teach Heart of Darkness, the students will watch a movie like Apocalypse
Now and think that effectively they've seen the movie version of the book and try to convince
me that that's adequate to understanding what Conrad is doing. That's just not true.
You really ought to read Heart of Darkness. The novel itself, the novella, is well worth
your attention. In it, he asks two basic questions. First, whether the modern mind has the capacity
to confront evil. And second, whether the modern mind can communicate that experience
to others. We understand the first question. We see that the Heart of Darkness is really
about whether or not we can encounter the Heart of Darkness. But it's hard for us to
see that the whole extra layer of the story, the story of Marlow's attempt to communicate
the experience he had, is just as important to Conrad. So I want to play that up here.
Because basically the plot of the story is very simple. It's a boat trip. But be careful.
Don't be sent up the river by the linearity of the story. It's not just the story of a
boat trip. It's the story of someone on a boat attempting and failing to tell the story
of another boat trip. Conrad, that is, uses some very complicated techniques, both in
its style and structure and the imagery of the book, in order to communicate a very complicated
moral vision. The book is effectively Marlow, Charlie Marlow, who's a repeating figure in
Conrad's novels. Effectively, it's a story that Marlow tells of his own experiences in
the past, in Central Africa. But he's telling it to a bunch of his friends on the Nellie,
on a yacht in the Thames. And he's trying to tell them about an experience that seems
completely unconnected from the experience that they are having at that moment. Though
Conrad adroitly notes they are playing dominoes made of ivory, almost certainly from Africa.
Now, in thinking about the complexity of this story, you have to understand that when Conrad
talks about the heart of darkness, he's trying to say that it's not a place where there
are uncivilized people, but where people are able to be uncivilized in a far more brutal
way than the people who are supposedly the natives or the primitives there. And the problem
for Marlow that the book is about is the problem of his encounter with the heart of darkness
in the figure Kurtz, a figure who is monstrously unintelligible and yet enormously evocative.
And the problem of the novel is precisely Marlow's attempt to try to figure out how
to understand Kurtz. Because we all know the most famous line in the heart of darkness,
we all know the famous quote, the horror, the horror, Kurtz's famous last words. But
one thing you've never probably realized is that no one in the book, not even Marlow,
knows what that means. In some ways it's a perfect epitome of Conrad's point in heart
of darkness. Everyone in the world, everyone in the western world anyway, knows that Joseph
Conrad wrote a book called Heart of Darkness and in that book, a character named Colonel
Kurtz or Mr. Kurtz, sorry, Mr. Kurtz says the horror, the horror. But no one actually
realizes that that phrase is completely unintelligible to everybody, the people who hear it and all
the rest of us. Consider Marlow's greatest moment of self-reflection on this, thinking
back on when coming back out of the Congo after trying to encounter Mr. Kurtz. He almost
died of some fever and he compares his experience of almost dying with Kurtz's. This is a long
passage but let me read it to you and think about the torment Marlow is communicating in
here about what's going on in trying to understand what happened to Mr. Kurtz and also what happened
to Marlow in trying to understand Mr. Kurtz.
I was within a hair's breadth of the last opportunity for pronouncement and I found
with humiliation that probably I would have nothing to say. Unlike Kurtz who had something
to say, this is the reason, Conrad goes on, Marlow goes on, this is the reason why I affirm
that Kurtz was a remarkable man. He had something to say. He said it, since I peeped over the
edge myself, I understand better the meaning of his stare that could not see the flame
of the candle, the candle on the table beside him, but was wide enough to embrace the whole
universe, piercing enough to penetrate all the hearts that beat in the darkness. He had
summed up, he had judged, the horror. He was a remarkable man. Think about Marlow, he
keeps coming back to this phrase, the horror, he keeps repeating it. Kurtz is a remarkable
man, but he keeps clearly being befuddled by this phrase. He knows it means something
but he doesn't know what. After all, and this is his attempt at trying to figure out what
it means, after all, this was the expression of some sort of belief. It had candor, it
had conviction, it had a vibrating note of revolt in its whisper, it had the appalling
face of a glinted truth, the strange commingling of desire and hate. And it is not my own
extremity, I remember best. No, it is his extremity that I seem to have lived through.
True, he had made the last stride, he had stepped over the edge while I had been permitted
to draw back my hesitating foot. Marlow is kind of stuck with a kind of survivor guilt
here, isn't he? There's something about Kurtz that's overwhelming for Marlow, but again,
he's completely unintelligible too. Now Marlow will try to make sense of this, he says, perhaps
in this is the whole difference, perhaps all the wisdom and all truth and all sincerity
are just compressed into that inappreciable moment of time in which we step over the threshold
of the invisible. Perhaps. I like to think my summing up would not have been a word of
careless contempt, better his cry, much better. It was an affirmation, a moral victory paid
for by innumerable defeats, by abominable terrors, by abominable satisfactions. See he's Marlow
still trying to figure out what it was that Kurtz meant by this phrase, but he's convinced
as he says, but it was a victory. That is why I have remained loyal to Kurtz to the
last and even beyond when a long time after, and here he's telling us a story he's about
to tell again, after I heard once more, not his own voice, but the echo of his magnificent
eloquence thrown to me from a soul as translusively pure as a cliff of crystal. For Marlow, there's
a purity, a sincerity, a terrible sincerity in Kurtz. He's a person who can see. Marlow's
vision is clouded, but he knows enough to know that Kurtz's final judgment is one that is
in some important way not appropriate for everyone to hear and especially not for Kurtz's
intended, what a great title that is, his fiance to hear. At the end of the story that Marlow
is telling in Heart of Darkness as they're there on the yacht, the Nellie and the Thames,
he tells how after his journey up the Congo to find Kurtz and the attempt to bring him
back, on which voyage back Kurtz dies, he gets back to Europe, he gets back to Belgium
and he goes to see the intended. And Marlow tells the story of how he met her and he failed
to tell her the true words that Kurtz had said as he lay dying on the boat in the jungle.
In a way, the story itself turns out to be about Marlow's failure to tell the story to
the intended at the earlier time, when it would have been appropriate in some sense for her
to hear. Now, there's a complexity here because it's clear that it's Marlow's failure in his
own eyes, but Conrad makes it possible for us to judge differently. Perhaps in fact Marlow
told the truth, but the intended could not properly understand it. To understand what I
mean, think about the story itself. The basic story of the Heart of Darkness is a going into
the interior and a return to civilization, but Marlow never really returns from the interior.
He returns, but in a way, as a failed Odysseus, someone who cannot really return. He cannot
go home again. Consider how haunted Marlow is in the story by voice, by language. Kurtz, Marlow
says at one point, presented himself as a voice. And Kurtz's most famous act, of course, is speaking
the horror, the horror. Marlow is, throughout this novel, very suspicious of words, untrustworthy
about their ability to tell us the truth. But he knows how much we need them in order to see our
world a right, especially how much those of us who are unlike him who have not seen the world
outside of civilization, the world off of the Thames, how much they need words to understand,
but also how deeply they cannot understand. Marlow, that is, comes to see that his very
attempt to tell the story that he's trying to tell is vexed by his own incapacity to speak it.
And also, his audience's incapacity really to hear it. Though the horror is the most famous
line that Conrad ever wrote, one of the most famous lines of literature in general, there's
no way of understanding it, no way of knowing the horror. Because, Conrad suggests, like Marlow's
listeners on the boat, we are so distanced from the sources of that experience that we cannot
comprehend Kurtz's cry. The experience itself is far beyond our experience of the world, our
ordinary, normal, civilized, decent 9-to-5 experience of the day, the world. It is connected,
this cry is connected in no real living way to the world we inhabit. That's not to say
that we're totally disconnected from those realities. Like I said, the people on the boat
are playing with dominoes made in Africa. Conrad's book contains a powerful, if subtle critique
of the way that we live like parasites off the animal suffering and the sweat of others.
Marlow's experience of the natives in recent decades has been accused of being terribly racist
and imperialist, but in fact he's as far from colonialist as it would be possible to be
for a 19th century European. He suggests to his friends there on the Thames that the disquieting
thing about being around the natives was not their distance from him or their strangeness
to him, but their essential similarity. The suspicion, he says, of their not being inhuman.
The suspicion of they and I sharing a common bond.
But Conrad's book is not really ultimately interested in rubbing our noses at our guilty
complicity with criminal brutality. As it is in making us confront our inability in our
civilized world to say anything in response to that brutality. Because our lives in modern
civilizations are lived at a comfortably numbing distance from those realities. Hence we remain
blissfully ignorant of them.
Marlow's problem then of someone who has seen the extreme comes back to the center of civilization
in some sense and tries to tell people about what the edge is like, about what the heart
of darkness is like, is a problem that many people, war veterans, death camp survivors,
extreme survivors of trauma, many people have faced in our world and find it hard to figure
out how to communicate to us what they were trying, what they went through, what they had
to endure.
When Kurtz says the horror, he obviously names something. But what? And what are we to say
about it? We want there to be a clear distinction between good and evil in the story. Somehow
somewhere we want Kurtz to have gone wrong and kicked off the earth, kicked away the
constraints of human nature. One of the reasons Conrad's work is so powerful to us is that
it directly contests the claim. It challenges our belief in the easy distinction of good
and evil. Conrad in a way is a good student of Nietzsche. He suggests that Kurtz is in
some important way beyond good and evil. He's looking at the deep source as it were of both
of our poles of moral experience. The thought that Conrad through Marlow is trying to place
in our minds is simply that Kurtz may well have seen more deeply than the rest of us about
the reality of our world. Marlow has had some echo of that, but he finds it impossible for
us to communicate. He finds it impossible to communicate that to us.
But there's a real question as to Marlow's status, the final ability of him to tell this
truth in the book. Because maybe he can tell it, but we can't hear it. In the final scene,
the interview with Kurtz is intended again. The final scene of the story he tells, he
thinks he has walked out by lying to her about what Kurtz said. You know why? Because he
says the last thing that Kurtz said, the last words Kurtz spoke, were your name.
Marlow reads that as a lie. But what if, in fact, Conrad is playing a very nasty joke on all of us
intended here in civilization? What if, in fact, despite what Marlow thinks he's saying,
Conrad is making him say that the intended's true name, in fact, is the horror?
What if, in fact, which is the really disquieting thought of the Heart of Darkness,
what Marlow discovered is that the brutality that is marked out at the edge of civilization
actually is no more brutal than the brutality that lies at the center of civilization?
Now, the question of the apprehensibility of evil, framed by Heart of Darkness, is carried
further by Conrad's later and astoundingly prescient novel, The Secret Agent. This is
one of the most amazing and underread books of the 20th century. It's really, perhaps,
I think the most vivid depiction of the logic of suicide terrorism that we have in our world.
And if more people in geopolitics read this book, it would be a more interesting world
and possibly a safer one we lived in. The plot story is relatively simple.
There is a Mr. Verloch who runs a grocery in London, and he is ordered, in fact, by his masters,
who are spies disguised as diplomats in a foreign embassy in London, that in order to provoke the
English into arresting that foreign powers dissident exile anarchists who have made London
their favorite home for exile, Mr. Verloch, who is, after all, the secret agent of this
foreign power, who is never really named in the book, but it's clear that it's Russia.
Mr. Verloch must undertake an act of terrorism so grotesque as to compel the English to respond
by basically rolling up all of the exile networks in their capital, right?
Because now those exile networks have apparently, so the English will be led to believe the
foreign power hopes, these exile networks have apparently started bombing things in London.
So Verloch's target to provoke this backlash will be a sign of global civilization, the Greenwich
Observatory, right? That is the central navigational point for understanding the spatiality of the world.
All longitude stretches out from Greenwich and also all the effective hour time zones.
Verloch undertakes the mission, but accidentally, in the process of doing so, kills Stevie, his
mentally handicapped brother-in-law. Stevie wanted to spend more time with Verloch, especially
on this day, and Verloch's wife prevailed upon him to take her brother on a special trip.
So Verloch took Stevie with him to bomb the Greenwich Observatory, and at one point he
gave Stevie the bucket containing the bomb, which he was supposed to place by a tree.
And Stevie was walking over there, and he tripped and fell, and the bomb blew up.
Now, in The Secret Agent then, we move from evil represented as at least apparently something
encountered at the edge of apparent civilization in the heart of darkness, right?
To evil as at the heart of civilization itself, in London.
The question here is whether the desire to destroy civilization as something wrong and
sterile does not exist as a cancer at the heart of civilization itself.
Perhaps, the disquieting thought is being offered, perhaps the whole division between
uncivilized and civilized, if we map it onto the division between good and evil, is simply
illusory. Perhaps, in fact, the idea of civilization itself needs to be rethought.
Perhaps, it gives us only a more subtle version of cruelty and evil.
We weren't really able to believe these stories when Conrad told them to us.
We still believed that advanced civilization had progressed, had gotten over the cruelties
and brutalities of the past, that it had been set anew on a solid, enduring foundation of
intelligence, truth, decency and beauty. Development was going to happen everywhere.
War was not supposed to be a part of our world. War was not supposed to be a part of the
20th century. So, in a way, the 20th century was a long, slow process of learning again
and again and again. The lesson that Conrad, at the end of the 19th century, tried to teach
us before it was too late. And that lesson, one formulation of that lesson is.
We may be able, for the moment, to outsource our darkness, to shunt it off to some far
away corner of the world, whether the Congo or Iraq or the Amazon or the east end of
the world, for distance is not merely geographic. But it remains our darkness. And when we
finally find it out there, we will see that it, in fact, has been with us in here, unacknowledged,
all along. Now, in the next lecture, we're going to turn to someone who actually has
some interestingly overlapping, parallel theoretical ideas to Conrad and Dostoyevsky,
someone whose thinking on evil has often been, representatives, quite terrifying. And I think
actually for very good reason. And that is the psychoanalyst, Sigmund Freud.
