Welcome back. In this lecture I want to talk about the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud and
talk about his overall picture of the tensions and complexities that go into the psyche and
that sometimes can cause us to act in evil ways and then also to identify and focus a
bit on a particular theme in his thought, the theme of the death drive, which is particularly
pertinent for our topic. After Joseph Conrad's work, people began to realize that Western
civilization wasn't entirely on a stable foundation. The first bit of evidence that a lot of people
had that this might be the case is World War I. World War I, of course, is, up until that point,
arguably the most devastating war in human history, devastating both in terms of absolute
numbers of people killed, but also in terms of its political chaos that it created and that ensued
in its wake. In many ways, World War II is really only a follow-up, a second part, a second act of
World War I. But in any case, as the 20th century goes on, the history of the era gets darker and
darker. And in this time, the work of thinkers like Conrad became more and more appreciated
and over any other influence, perhaps. In advanced intellectual circles, the thought of
Sigmund Freud was most powerful. Now, Freud is born in 1856 in the Austro-Hungarian Empire and he dies
in exile from Nazi Austria in the beginning days of World War II, 1939. He was raised in a strict
but serious family that emphasized education above almost all other things. He himself took
a medical degree at the University of Vienna and was planning on studying neurology, nerve and brain
science, but then psychology drew him to its charms instead. Over the 1880s and 1890s, he began
himself to seek clients and developed his famous so-called talking cure. That is, a method of
dealing with people with certain psychological maladies that posited that people want to talk
out their anxieties. And that doing so by rendering them articulate, by bringing them into language,
this activity will release the energies misbottled in their emotions, in their conflicts, and in
their inner lives. In all of this, Freud had to not only invent this method, but then create
really a language to talk about it in. And he did create that language using ordinary German terms,
which in English actually have been interestingly mangled by people who want it to give a more
scientific veneer to what Freud was talking about. So the word that in English is translated as
id is actually in German, s, that is it. And where the English translations of Freud will often say
ego in German, Freud wrote ich, I. So in fact, Freud in German sounds like an ordinary person,
not talking about very esoteric or kind of mysterious categories, the id, the ego, the
super ego, but the id, the eye, the over eye, things like that. Anyway, over time, as this
language and the picture of the method that Freud developed began to spread around Europe,
he developed disciples and dissidents as well. He grew famous and became a very well known
intellectual and cultural figure in Central Europe and beyond. But he finally had to flee
from the Nazis in 1938 because he was Jewish and his thought was considered a degenerate form of
Jewish science. Now, Freud's dismissal of traditional notions of good and evil and his urging of a
different view on his audience sounds a lot like Nietzsche. And there are definite overlaps,
but there are some really important differences. And so it's worth getting a picture of Freud out
there before we think about comparing him to other people like Nietzsche. His picture really
builds on an assessment of the human and of human civilization as the site of an endless war between
rival principles of love and death. First of all, we desire love. We desire union with others
for causes greater than ourselves. This love can be a sexual love, but it can be familial,
it can be love of a baseball team, it can be any number of things. The point is that
humans long to feel identified with others in a cause and in a group that is in some sense
larger than ourselves. Along with that, he came to posit this thing that we'll come to here as
the death drive. The death drive is a force in the human psyche which seeks the annihilation of
the other and of self and of being itself out of some sort of sheer impulse towards annihilation.
The basic question Freud thought asks overall is about the strange ill fit between ourselves as
individuals and our role, our overall role in human culture and society. The tension between
these two, the ill fit between us as individuals and the realities of our roles in societies,
has inadvertently generated systems of morality that we use to describe and to some degree
control this ill fit, right? So that morality is in a certain sense the same sort of thing
that Freud's psychoanalysis is meant to be. Freud's approach is meant to occupy as it were
the same philosophical space as ethical reflection. Indeed, it's meant in important ways to supplant
such ethics as an account of our real status, an account that uses physiological and natural
analysis instead of using what Freud saw as artificial moral concepts to understand our situation.
So Freud's account is in some important way from the beginning meant to be not so much
beyond good and evil, although it might be, but to stand beside good and evil and maybe even
beneath good and evil as not just a compliment to these other moral accounts, but as a kind of
more adequate alternative picture of both our desires for human affiliation and for civilization
and the various discontents that civilization produces in us. Now this is Freud's final vision
of the human, one that was reached with effort and suffering after World War One,
where he saw that his own thinking had to go as one of the, the title of one of his most important
books put it, Beyond the Pleasure Principle. Through the rise of Nazism in the 1920s and 1930s that
would eventually drive him into exile, he saw dark forces rising across Europe that were moving
in waves that were destructive, informed that his own earlier theory did not understand.
And so our final step in this lecture will be to look at how Freud's depiction of how he came to
believe in a picture of the human that involves the death drive, what he took that picture to mean
to imply about us, and why this vision offered him, he thought, the most powerful and illuminating
depiction of the struggle for life of the human species, one that illuminates what can be illuminated
and one that also leaves what cannot be understood properly in darkness.
To begin with though, let's start with the basic Freudian picture and what we call the
Pleasure Principle. That was the most basic discovery Freud understood himself to have had.
The Pleasure Principle he thinks is the idea that people want happiness, yet as he said,
the program of the Pleasure Principle is at loggerheads with the whole world.
Now the Pleasure Principle is simply our desire to be happy, to feel pleasure,
we're creatures for Freud who by and large pursue our own individual happiness.
Why does he think it's at loggerheads with the whole world?
Well, most basically because happiness is something we feel by contrast with normalcy.
We don't normally feel happy, it's an extreme moment when we feel happy, it's abnormal for
us to feel more pleasant than usual, that's what happiness is, that difference in the meter there,
where we go into the red zone a little bit.
Unhappiness, on the other hand, is something we not only feel when things make us unhappy,
we can actually feel unhappy by merely anticipating being unhappy later.
That is, and think again of Machiavelli or Hobbes here,
fear for Freud affects us more deeply than hopeful anticipation does.
Fear makes us presently unhappy, while hopeful anticipation definitely does not always make
us presently happy. Indeed, at times the impatience we feel at anticipation may make us unhappy now.
In response to this problem, Freud thinks, humans have tried to moderate our desire for
happiness to control it, to channel it in various ways, through individual asceticism,
people who pray a lot, people who study a lot, of course people who work out a lot
are also ascetics as well, they're disciplining their bodies in certain ways,
through joining communities, wallowing in lower pleasures, like college boys who drink beer all
weekend because they have nothing better to do, or sublimating our longings in higher desires,
so that they come and find themselves partially expressed and partially satisfied in the reading
of books, or perhaps the attending of or listening to lectures.
But none of these practices of managing the pleasure principle, managing our insatiable
desire for happiness, work perfectly. There is no solution. Happiness must be achieved,
Freud thinks, but it cannot be. There's no golden rule, he says, that applies to everybody.
Everyone must seek it on their own. So our desire for happiness, satisfaction,
and the freedom that comes with that can only be met to a degree, that is, we can only be
somewhat happy, and only at the cost of repressing, and or what he calls sublimating,
that is, transforming into some other kind of thing, are absolutely insatiable desire for happiness.
Civilization, then, arises from our need of protection and our desire for happiness,
what he calls, Eros and Annaka, love and necessity in Greek.
Civilization is rooted in our social and political necessities, but it also has a more
properly physiological basis in our drive towards sexual and suprasexual union with others.
This drive Freud names Eros, the principle of love, and this pulls us towards one another,
towards community. Much of psychoanalysis, because of this, focuses on where that drive goes wrong,
focuses on what you can call the archaeology of the libido, uncovering how our desires are,
in buried or other covert ways, obstructing our functioning as humans. It means to be,
in this important way, psychoanalysis means to be a healing science, something that helps us at
least manage our longing for happiness. But Freud is very sober about the prospects for this kind
of healing. Almost all the time, adults cannot expect for him to radically change their behavior.
Because the dispositions that we have are too deeply habituated in us to be really
significantly reformable. The best we can typically hope for is to manage our various pathologies.
And inevitably, a lot of the evil in the world comes out of the pathologies of the resentments
we feel about the frustrations of our libido. But this management that Freud offers
is promised that he will help us cope with our crises. This management is, he thinks,
the only real solution we have, even an ethical system, will only also be able to manage
our frustrated libido. It will not be able to solve its problem.
But the problem here is that these very energies are themselves quite destructive.
Love itself creates resistance and resentment against civilization. Why is that?
Again, because civilization restricts sexual life precisely as it expands the cultural unit,
stable sexual lives are crucial for social stability and order, Freud thought, right?
Monogamy is the price humans pay to become civilized. Monogamy is the price you pay for
Costco and Best Buy. And that's why, in some important way, that trade-off generates resentments,
generates, as in the title of one of his most famous books, discontents civilization and its
discontents. There is a weird tension between us, as I said, an ill fit between ourselves as humans
and our role in human culture and society. This ill fit creates these discontents,
which express themselves both in our own self-destructive behavior and perhaps in
behavior-destructive of others. Now, were this the extent of the human condition's
challenges, our lives would be difficult enough. But over the course of his career,
Freud grew increasingly convinced that this was not, in fact, all. That, in fact, along with our
understandable resentments at the curtailing and channeling of our libidos, another, deeper,
and altogether, more mysterious force was at work in us. A force that actively and intentionally
sought not just our own destruction, but the destruction of the entire world. And that is
what Freud called the death drive. Now, contemporary psychoanalysis, and actually
contemporary psychology when it attempts to Freud, really typically dismisses the death drive as
mere metaphysics, as something Freud came up with that was unscientific and melodramatic.
And certainly there's a lot of melodrama in the picture of the death drive that he offers.
But the idea does have one advantage, and I think it was an advantage Freud was very conscious of,
and that is that it brings vividly into view the potential of human nature to be remarkably cruel.
Freud's account of evil, if we think of it as in terms of the death drive, is not so much an
account of evil as a form of principled resistance to any such account. A refusal, that is, to accept
any form of what Freud sees as consolation, be it religious, moral, philosophical, romantic,
even psychoanalytic, in lieu of the actual reality of the absurd presence of a destructive force
in the psyche. In other words, Freud wants to say, by naming the death drive,
we are doing the least consoling thing possible. We are identifying this huge problem at the heart
of our being that we will never be able to solve. That's not to mythologize anything,
that's precisely to strip away mythology, and come face to face with this dark beating heart
of destructiveness that wills us nothing but nil. Now the death drive is disconsoleing in this way,
just because it is so clearly out of our power to manage, even in psychoanalytic terms. In a way,
we are at the death drive's mercy, susceptible to it at all times. That's clearly not a comforting
thought, but it's the thought that Freud had. Now, he came to see that he had to postulate the
existence of the death drive really by kind of backing into it. He didn't actually think
he could see it positively working. This is a very interesting story of how someone who effectively
had a sober but in some sense confident picture of the human person, who comes to see that that
confident picture has been in some important way shattered by the evidence of a more destructive
force working in the human. Now, Freud began the journey towards discovering the death drive,
as he describes it, discovering the death drive, by insisting that, again, hunger and love, necessity
and love are what move the world. But he decides eventually that those categories, those principles
of motivation, are not adequate. There must, he thinks, be another contrary instinct seeking to
break those units down, break those drives and those people down, and bring them back to a more
fundamental state of pure potentiality, right? He says in the Civilization and the Discontents,
as well as eros, there must be an instinct of death, something driving against love.
Freud thinks that this destructiveness is, in fact, not just outwardly oriented, not just
about outward aggression. In fact, it's rooted in a silent but still present instinct, he thinks,
that humans, like all of nature, possess. The death drive, he says, works in silence
and is met always and only intertwined with the love drive by warping that love drive.
Now, pause here for a second, because this is really interesting. In a way, Freud has begun to be,
he starts his vision as a kind of naturalist account of evil. Remember the three big families
of evil we talked about. The first was the kind of Augustinian, where evil is folly,
completely irrational. The second is the kind of naturalist picture of evil,
where evil is somehow part of our nature, part of our organic makeup. And then the third is a
developmental maturation account of evil. In a way, Freud begins with the natural account and
the maturation account. But already, we're beginning to see him positing something like,
because he thinks of the evidences of history, positing something like a necessary pure irrational
force. What's interesting is when he says that it has to be always intertwined with the love drive,
that it works only by warping the love drive in this way, never positively exists on its own.
This sounds a lot like Augustin talking about how evil is always the perversion of the good,
always the corruption of the good, never its own substantial presence, but always a reducing
of something good that is really there. Now, just I wanted to mention that, but back to the main
story. Freud recognizes there's a worry that he could be accused of a kind of a deep pessimism
and an appeal to a destructiveness in nature as a way of covering over a failure of his theory.
But he thinks, in fact, that that's merely, again, an evasion strategy. He thinks he actually
can say that the death drive is actually functioning. People who say it's not, who want to dismiss it,
or blame him for it, are trying to kill the messenger. He thinks that's not appropriate.
It's part of the death drive silence, in fact, that pointing at it is the only thing we can do.
It can't be explained at all. And that surely includes the drive's strange silence in its
operations. Evil seems to include, that is, in its presence, the abolition of any explanation
at all. It just is. Or, in fact, it just isn't. So Freud's notion of the death drive does seem
like a sin, the way Augustine talks about it in that way, as both are finally mysteriously
inexplicable. Now, why is it that the aggression instinct, and not just enough,
Freud, the aggression instinct is manifest in all of nature? Why is it that the aggression
instinct is inevitable, or primal? Again, to my mind, this is another question,
another version of the same question that a lot of his critics ask. Why do you believe this?
Why is this so? Why do you think it's true? While this is not, in fact, a trick question,
I think answering it is very difficult. I don't know of any truly convincing answers myself,
which do not provoke further questions. So try, but keep in mind that you should always see if
you can ask if this is a satisfactory answer or if it just raises more questions for you.
But the combination of these two drives, the love and the death drive, meeting the human soul
and the psyche, and it is the need of civilization to suppress the aggression instinct, the death
drive, which leads to the enormous sublimation of that instinct, which in turn results, Freud thinks,
in the heavy burden of guilt felt by all people, right? Famously, Freud said that everyone believes
that at some point in the past, all the sons got together to kill the father. And so all men
everywhere always feel guilty about killing the primordial father. And he said, even if this is
not historically true, it's psychoanalytically true, right? What he means here, the best thing we can
hope he means is that the resentments caused by the desire to repress and sublimate the destructive
energies that each one of us has in our souls, this suppression of this drive causes enormous
tensions in our soul. The discontents of civilization are rooted then in our inability,
one way or another, to escape our instinctual aggressiveness and urgings towards destruction.
Civilization exacerbates the pressures of the death drive by forcing us also to sublimate
the love drive by forcing us to channel it in certain ways, redirecting this energy then
into the same pool of aggressive energy we have that we're not allowed to express. Now,
this is a pretty kind of maybe obscure psychoanalytic picture, but basically what Freud is trying to
give you is a picture of a human who was born with a desire to smash things and a desire to
hug things. And the desire to smash things is completely unacceptable, unacceptable in
civilization. So we teach the little human not to do that, but the human still has that desire.
We've just not allowed the human to express the desire. Then we tell the little human,
don't hug just anything, only hug a few things that you're allowed to hug. So a lot of the
energy of the little human, I'm not saying a child here, I'm just saying little human,
a lot of the energy of that little human that would have gone into hugging all sorts of things
is also not allowed to be expressed. Inevitably, this little human is going to throw some sort
of massive temper tantrum. Effectively, that's what Freud is talking about. He's saying that the
death drive is a kind of ontological temper tantrum, a desire simply to lash out and destroy
things out of frustration at not being able to destroy things when we want to.
Now, all of this climaxes in a visionary moment in Freud's description of the death drive,
in his wonderful book, Civilization and His Discontents. Let me read you this passage,
because it is, I think, one of the most powerful and illuminating passages for thinking about the
character of the psychoanalytic picture of evil in our world. And now, I think, Freud says, the
meaning of the evolution of civilization, this is large pray for Freud, right, the meaning of the
evolution of civilization is no longer obscure to us. Civilization must present, it must present,
the struggle between arrows and death, between the instinct of life and the instinct of destruction,
as it works itself out in the human species, right? The civilization is the struggle of those two
instincts trying to figure out how they can relate and how they interact. This struggle, the struggle
between these two, between love and death, life and death, is what all life essentially consists of,
and the evolution of civilization may therefore be simply described as the struggle for life
of the human species. And now, wait for it, this is the moment where he actually
ruthlessly dismisses traditional morality, religious or philosophical.
And it is this battle of the giants that our nursemaids try to appease with their lullaby
about heaven. This battle of the giants, this struggle, this conflict between these Titanic
drives in our souls, in each soul of each human being. Of course, Freud says, it's insane to think
that any traditional morality would make sense of this in any healthy or useful way,
because any traditional morality is just going to say, the evil that people do is just a matter
of their individual wickedness, he thinks, or it's a matter of some sort of generic human
corruption, right? Some inheritance of original sin. Freud says, no, it's not petty human wickedness,
it's not inherited sin. These are powerful natural drives that, of necessity, civilization
can't handle, so it has to repress them. But over time, those drives come out anyway.
Destruction, annihilation, murder are ever with humans. Why? Freud thinks,
because that's just the kind of creatures we are. Maybe all of life, all of the cosmos is like that.
We want love, but sometimes we also want death. Now that's an astonishing moral view.
It's one that I think hasn't been appreciated fully for the pessimism it offers. Furthermore,
and from a theoretical perspective, it's a view that Freud articulates very clearly how he came
to it. He didn't come to it by observing the death drive in any kind of direct observation. Instead,
he postulates its existence by noticing the warping of people's behavior in ways that the love drive
cannot make sense of. An interesting methodological moment, it seems to me, in the history of thinking
about destructiveness, malice, and evil. Now, this is pessimistic, but there is some hope.
Freud suggests that Eros has ultimately or can ultimately have the upper hand on the death drive,
and it can learn to master its urgings, if only at least for a time. But Freud warns
that humans now have gained control over the forces of nature. He says, quote,
to such an extent that with their help, they would have no difficulty in exterminating one
another to the last man. In other words, in the modern world, we actually begin to be
so powerful in our destructiveness that it may in fact be the case that we can annihilate ourselves.
And so the death drive now reaches the possibility of its full consummation.
One of Freud's interesting, errant, intellectual descendants of a sort, the French philosopher
Michel Foucault famously said, the human for millennia was what it had been for Aristotle,
a natural creature whose politics have to be figured out. But in the modern world, Foucault said,
the human becomes a political creature whose politics put its natural existence into danger.
And I think in that, Foucault is simply developing Freud's ideas.
Now, Freud's attempt here to understand and offer some guidance for the reality of evil and wickedness
suggests something that we could call hope, but it's got to be far less than what we can call
confidence. But it is some kind of hope, some reason to get up in the morning and struggle with
the death drive. Now, again, think about Freud. He's interestingly straddling all three of our
large families of thinking about evil. In a way, he's most basically a thinker who thinks about
evil as a natural structure. But he has a notion of evil as something that's intrinsic to development
across time of the individual, maybe of the species. And that we've seen with the death drive,
there's a dimension of Freud's thought that seems to inject a kind of dimension of evil as folly,
as the privation of being in goodness, the perversion of good action that we saw most rigorously
and profoundly worked out in a thinker like Augustine. Whether or not these three strands of
Freud's thinking on evil can be put together in a proper way, I don't know. But I don't think you
have to worry about Freud as a systematic thinker. That's a good task. But he's a far more interesting
thinker for me anyway, if you think about him as suggestive and evocative. I think that in fact,
in that way, Freud's work may offer one of the most profound reservoirs for thinking about evil
that we have yet come across. All right. Well, before,
now we're going to go into those thinkers who, unlike Freud, survived World War II
and had to live with its consequences after. Freud offers possibly to bleak a picture of
evil as a natural force, perhaps. He has a hard time understanding the full complexities of the
relationship between human desires for justice and human proclivities towards individual moral
evil. Others may help us see that dimension of malice better and we'll begin to turn to them
and to thinking after the calamity of the Second World War.
