Welcome back.
In this lecture, I want to look at three major Protestant theologians whose thought about
evil was profoundly influenced by but also in some important ways profoundly shaped the
reception of other people's thinking about World War II and the implications of World
War II for thinking about the place of evil in the Christian narrative.
The World War II did not only challenge non-theological thinkers and philosophers like Camus, if anything,
these challenges to traditional religions was even more profound and the thinkers in
those traditions did respond in profoundly creative and innovative ways.
We'll see that in the next several lectures.
The 20th century Protestant thought on evil has been rich and diverse.
In this lecture, I want to look at three particular versions of thinking about how to relate evil
to Christian understandings of grace, for that's a big problem for all of them, how
that is to relate a serious assessment of evil, especially in the wake of the Second World
War, to the good news of the Christian gospel, which seems to undermine the seriousness with
which we ought to understand evil itself.
The basic problem any Christian, especially Protestant thinker, faces in thinking about
evil is pretty simple.
If evil is something we can know and proclaim now as the gospel demands for Protestant Christians
is finally overcome by God, how can we take it seriously as a challenge we have to confront
today?
And if the message of that good news really seemed plausible to us after all the evil
we have confronted in the world in the past century or so, especially for these thinkers
after all the evil that has just occurred in the Second World War.
Now this general field of uneasiness for Christian theology can be rendered more specific in
two concrete questions.
One is a challenge that pretty secular or even anti-theological thinkers like Marx,
Nietzsche, Freud, maybe Conrad, maybe Camus can ask, and that is can Christianity ever
really take evil seriously enough?
That is, for thinkers like these, a lot of Christian theology does not really confront
the wholly abyssal character of evil, the terrible bottomlessness of evil, the way it
seems not to be framed by a good universe or a good God.
The Christian gospel to these thinkers can seem simply to pour an oversweet syrup of
how God is good and Jesus loves you all over the real, jagged, broken glass ugliness of
our world.
The gospel to thinkers like this, these anti-theological or rigorously secular thinkers, can seem desperately
optimistic, over-optimistic as if it's trying to overcompensate for the challenge of evil.
The second kind of specific question to keep in mind as we're going through these guys
is a more precise challenge, the challenge of the 20th century itself.
Can Christianity take our age as evil seriously enough?
Do the theologians of the age themselves manage to show how Christianity can grapple
with the problems our world faced in that bloody century?
Now, here we'll see the three thinkers we look at answering this question in quite
different ways.
And in interesting ways, they answer it because they work out of slightly different starting
points to think about evil.
Paul Tillich, as we'll see, starts to think about evil through thinking about the experience
of aesthetic encounter, of encountering something and realizing there's more there than you
initially thought.
Karl Barth thinks about evil in light of God's salvific action to save the world and
redeem the world, and in some ways thinks about evil in terms of God's providential
sovereignty over the whole world.
Really evil's a part of that story for Barth.
And then Reinhold Niebuhr really thinks about evil as a kind of anthropological puzzle
that has bearing on our experience of things in the world, our aesthetic experience of
beauty and things like that, has a bearing on God's plan for the world, but it's really
fundamentally a human phenomenon that we need to think about in human terms.
So let me begin with Paul Tillich.
Now, Tillich is a German Lutheran theologian who is trained in classical German style but
who moves in surprising ways as a theologian once he reaches maturity.
He was in World War I a chaplain in the Imperial German Army, very academic chaplain, but nonetheless
a chaplain still, and as effectively a 30-year-old, he survived the World War I battle of Verdun,
which was a charnel house, a battle in which roughly about a million Frenchmen and Germans
were killed in a few square miles of mud over the course of about nine months.
He came back to Berlin after the war, and he began to be a very important theological
and philosophical voice in the interwar years in Germany, but his opposition to the Nazis
drove him out of Germany, where he fled from which he fled to the US, and he taught basically
from the 30s until his death in 1965 in the United States.
He wrote a number of very important works, was a very influential thinker, both for academics
and for the general public in the mid-part of our century.
But for our purposes, the powerful essay he wrote on the demonic as a phenomenon of moral
and religious life is really where we're going to look.
This essay explores what he thinks of as the experienced positivity of evil.
The positivity there, I mean the reality, the reality, the real presence of evil.
The demonic is Tillich's way of talking about this positivity while he roots it in the fundamental
facts of reality itself.
So evil here for Tillich is not an accident introduced by the human fall in any way.
In some important way, it's an intrinsic part of creation as such.
It's a little bit like the combat myth really.
He wants to capture the experienced reality and presence and genuineness of evil that
the combat myth captures so well, but he doesn't want to go all the way with that myth, right?
He doesn't want to suggest that there's actually a demonic opposition to a divine God that
is a rival to that God.
That's not his point.
His point is that the demonic is in some ways our recognition that reality itself has this
dimension of overflowing that troubles and threatens us in powerful ways.
The demonic is for Tillich a perversion of creativity itself.
That is, it's a way in which the creativity that is the world's basic principle in some
way can, in fact, go wrong in threatening and terrifying ways.
Sin, then, for Tillich is not just a sloth or a lassitude or despair or falling back
into weakness or anything like that.
It's a real, active, dynamic, earnest energy.
Evil is not simply an absence of good, it's not simply ignorance.
It has its own positive giveness, and the demonic exists as the most potent form of
that giveness of evil as a tension between creative and destructive powers at the base
of reality itself, right?
So Tillich is German, he's trained in philosophy and theology, so he's going to go very abstract
on you, and we've got to just expect that, you know, have the right medicine, strap in
the right way in the chair, and just get used to it.
What he does with this notion is really interesting, so just follow me here for a second.
All reality for Tillich has form.
Things manifest themselves to us, they give themselves to us in certain forms.
This has the form of a tie, right?
Before it's cut and shaped into the fabric of a tie, the tie looks just like a piece
of fabric on a table or something, but it's given the form of a tie.
The demonic appears when the forms of reality, each of them individually or one of them in
particular, is consumed, a form is consumed by what Tillich calls the transcendent depth
of reality.
That is, when the forms in which we understand reality, whereby we, through which we understand
reality, reveal themselves to be unable fully to contain the reality that they capture and
deliver to us.
We see the object, but the object suddenly seems far more than just an object, more profound
than that, something far more deep than the thing itself is that we had here to for grasped
it as being.
Let me give you an example, that's not a tie.
So we sit on chairs all the time, but sometimes if you're in a store or maybe better if you
go to a woodworking shop, a place where there's carpenters working, and you see a chair that's
just been finished, nicely sanded down, beautiful wood chair, maybe it's stained, so smooth,
and it's just sitting there waiting to be delivered to some customer or something.
Sometimes you see more than an object to sit on.
You see a beautiful thing, like Quaker chairs are just lovely things, if you've ever seen
a Quaker chair, a handmade wooden chair, it's beautiful.
It's a thing that's not just beautiful because of human artifice, but it's made of wood from
a tree that was living, a transformation of one thing into another reality.
You see all the ways that nature and sunlight, water, brute muscle, delicate surgical craft
all went into making this beautiful chair, and how so much more than just a chair this
actually is.
I mean sometimes when I see a piece of beautiful wood furniture like that, it genuinely can
look like it should be a piece of art, not a utilitarian device, just for my butt, right?
And Tillick wants to say that in seeing all that, in apprehending it, not so much grasping
it, but grasping how the chair is in some sense ungraspable as merely a chair, how much
more it is than that.
In seeing all that, we begin to experience a vertigo about reality, and about all the
ordinary ways we rely on reality, not to surprise us, to veil its full presence from us, so as
not to overwhelm us with its bare there-ness.
It's that capacity of reality to overwhelm us, which for Tillick is evidence of the demonic.
I can well remember one time when I was 15 or 16, and I was walking outside in a field,
on a crisp New England day, and I for some reason had to take off my glasses to wash
them down, to rub them down, and I, as I took them down, I looked up again and I realized
that I wasn't seeing just within the frame of my glasses, I was seeing the parts of my
vision that I normally, my mind just didn't pay attention to, and suddenly the world
appeared far faster than it had ever appeared before to me, or at least recently, since
I had glasses, and I remember being overwhelmed by the width of the world in some way.
That's sort of what Tillick is talking about, but not just the width of the world, the depth
of the world, the idea that beneath everything there is still more.
The thing about the demonic is that experience is given to us in the demonic as kind of threatening
of our ordinary life.
The demonic here is especially visible or experienced anyway in human personality, which
can remain recognizably itself, yet be possessed by a power beyond itself.
People talk about actors being possessed when they're doing things, or people talk about
sports players, athletes being possessed by the game in some sense.
The demonic here is a version of this kind of possession, it's experienced from the inside
as a realization that I am far more than just the ordinary me I take myself for most of
the time.
Just as the chair speaks of depths of reality, beyond an object suitable for merely sitting
on, so much more do I contain depths of reality beyond what I ordinarily access of myself.
I am in some important way far greater than me, not the terrifying thought or it can be,
not just if you're playing soccer or something or football, but also if in some important
way you discover that you have an ability to move crowds of people, or to convince students
in your class of certain things, or to take control of a meeting and control the way that
people understand what's going on in the meeting so that your will is done there.
These accounts of the demonic offer a theological picture of evil that acknowledges evil's reality
for Tillich, but offers no immediate promise that humanity can triumph over it.
For Tillich, the demonic is both sub-personal and yet in genuinely engaging of the personal,
genuinely something that you do, it's both you and not you.
In a way, as I said, there's a way that the demonic is kind of structurally identical
to the state of grace, to the state that the ancient Greeks actually called the daimonic,
that is the state of being possessed by a daimon or a spirit.
Here what Tillich is trying to get at is the phenomenology of both being possessed or of
seeing something that is itself and more than itself at the same time, of seeing a thing
possessed. The aim is really just to express this experience of being recognizably one
thing, but also so much more than that.
Now for Tillich, if this is the demonic, this experience of not so much me going away, but
the trapped door at the psychic base of me opening up to reveal the abyssal depths beneath
me. If that is the experience of the demonic, for Tillich, grace is in some way, the response
to evil is in some important way, the reconciliation of the healing of this abyssal character that
we've discovered in our existence. It changes our visage of this, our experience of this
bottomlessness from one of terror and threat to one of comfort and assurance. It challenges
us to see that what we thought of as terrifying is actually not terrifying, but in fact a
comfort that we are connected in profound ways to the infinite and ever tumultuous, ever
burbling ground or foundations of our own being.
Tillich famously, grace, teaches that each person is accepted by this ground, that our
experience of ourselves as I is but one manifestation of this larger force of being, manifest in
all things, and that as such we're part of this greater cosmos, a great drama of being.
This hopefully helps us understand ourselves, not as needing to justify ourselves or prove
our existence as real, a temptation that Tillich sees as lying at the base of our susceptibility
to act out of our experience of the demonic in sin. This experience of our bottomlessness
always threatens us, and so we lash out in certain ways to convince ourselves we are
one thing rather than another. This is the terrible prompting of evil for Tillich. Instead,
what grace gives us, the ability to do in some sense, is see not that we are bottomless,
not that there's nothing below us, but that we are just the top of this larger structure
of being that goes on beneath us infinitely. As Tillich's greatest theological sermon said,
you have to come to see that you are accepted. This is Tillich's great line, you are accepted.
So Tillich offers a picture of evil as substantial, as the appropriation of the self of its bottomlessness
in a fearful way, but it's an appropriation that's positive. It's not a good thing. It's
not positive in that way, but it's a genuine presence, not simply an absence. Now, mostly
he does this in order to capture the experience of being possessed by positive power that
he sees as part of what demonic reality is. Two things to remember here. First of all,
remember that Tillich was a Lutheran theologian. For him as with Luther, the experience of
evil is something that the devil seduces you into, does not compel you to do. There's
a way that being possessed here gets at the genuinely you character of the evil act,
though the way that you are the one doing it, while also getting at the experience of
this evil as something alien to your true being. It's one thing about Tillich. The other
thing to remember is, this is a guy who lived through infantry combat in the first world
war. And there almost certainly were instances in assaulting a trench liner, something like
that, where he probably felt or definitely saw people engaged in a kind of possession
of themselves, which struck him as profoundly demonic. Never forget the history of these
people. Tillich is not talking in merely abstract ways, although he is very much an abstract
German professor in his own relatively odd way, but we don't need to get into that.
He's talking about experiences that were very close to him. He's not just making this
stuff up. Okay. Now to move from Tillich to Bart is really to change registers of thinking
theologically. Tillich is a philosopher, a profoundly existential thinker, a brooding
thinker in some ways. Bart is a Swiss Calvinist theologian whose first reflex is always to
move very strictly to thinking about God, to thinking about theology. Bart is wonderful
in terms of exploring how to think about the negativity of evil if Tillich is useful for
thinking about the positivity of evil. Bart is Swiss Calvinist theologian. He was born
in 1886, roughly Tillich's time. He died in 1969, almost exactly contemporaneous with
Tillich. Some consider Bart the greatest theologian since John Calvin, full stop, Catholic, Protestant,
Eastern Orthodox, what have you. I'm actually among those who do. He worked a bit after
World War II in Germany. He was a professor in Germany, but when the Nazis came to power,
he was a profound opponent of them. And so he was kicked out of Germany and he went back
to Switzerland where he taught at the University of Basel for the rest of his life. He was
one of the earliest opponents of the Nazis, actually, among religious folk, but almost
entirely for theological reasons. Before he became a professor of theology, he was also
a pastor with definite socialist leanings. He's famous for saying that pastors need
to do theology with the Bible in one hand and the newspaper in the other. Now, when
it comes to evil, Bart is a really strange character and a lot of Bart's scholarship
is still struggling to figure out what to do with his understanding of evil. He described
evil in sin as grounded in quote, the nothing, unquote, that God has refused explicitly to
create. That's very strange and his vision of the nothing is profoundly obscure. People
are still trying to figure out what exactly he means. In German, the nothing, das nichtige
ist. This is not simply God turning away from a kind of, in metaphorical terms, God turning
away from an abyss of emptiness towards the creation that God will do. It's more that
God, it's not like the backside of God in that way. It's more like this is something
that God explicitly says no to in some important way. The nothing is something in excess then
of human wrongdoing. The nothing is what God has said no to in order to say yes to
creation. It is a genuine threat to everything that exists and it undergirds sin. But more
than sin, it is far more frightening than anything we can conjure up. The nothing is
in some sense a possible non creation that God might have created had God been different
than the God we think God, than we believe and confess God to be, if I can say that.
In other words, God actively says no to the nothing, precisely in, positively creating
the something that is creation and creating the something that is creation as a gift to
humanity of endless love in God. That's Bart's idea of what creation is. Creation is a theater
in which the drama of God's affirmation of and love for humanity will play out. That's
the positive story for Bart. You've always got to keep that positive story front and
center. God's great plan for humanity and the world. But he also says as a kind of appendix
to that plan, you have God saying no to Das Nichtige and also God allowing a few tendrils
of Das Nichtige to enter into reality. God allows a few tendrils of nothingness, of the
nothing, to poke their heads into reality just so that we know something of what we are
not facing, something of what God has chosen not to do.
So, Bart suggests, unlike Tillich, that the primary fact about evil is its fundamental
irreality. In this way, he's kind of like Augustine, although there are big differences.
He retains a Kantian sense of sin's inexplicability, its mysteriousness, but he radicalizes this
inexplicability into more than a psychological problem. It becomes a problem for the cosmos,
not just for our understanding. It's part of the mystery of God that evil exists at
all. Bart is in some ways here going back to and echoing that line of biblical thinking
from the book of Job forward, that in some sense evil is related in some complicated
way to the providence of God. And because of that, because evil is in some complicated
way related to the providence of God, only the providence of God itself will be evil's
final solution. Evil is so bad, Bart thinks, that only a truly extreme action on God's
part, in Christ, in the second person of the Trinity, in the Son of God, is that which
can guarantee the overcoming of evil and the gracious election of humankind.
A note here, this is interesting. For Bart, God's decision for humanity's election precedes
the fall. Remember Calvin, remember Calvin's superlapsarian double predestination, that
is, humans are in some sense for Calvin predestined to heaven or hell before the fall God has
planned everything out in God's absolute sovereignty. Bart also is a Calvinist, but
he's a far more hopeful Calvinist than Calvin ever was. He actually thinks that all of humanity
is predestined to bliss and salvation from before the fall. But, and that's the way
that Bart retains his notion of God's sovereignty, but also tries to understand evil, as not something
humans do irrespective of or independently of or in rivalry to God, but as part of God's
whole drama of creation. God creates evil for humans to fall into in some sense, but
then will save them from that. But even though evil is bad, and thus nichtige
really terrible, Bart affirms that God is greater than it by far, so he tries to emphasize
the profundity of evil only within the context of the greater, though admittedly harder to
immediately perceive from time to time, profundity of God's love for and support of the world.
The point for Bart then is just that evil is only defeated, and defeatable by God, and
in fact is used by God to demonstrate God's utterly gratuitous, absolutely immeasurable
love for humanity. Evil, that is, turns out to be God's fall guy.
Now our third theologian is Reinhold Niebuhr, a thinker who in important ways learned immensely
from both Tilly and Bart, but also in interesting ways is both splitting the difference between
them, but also offering a third way altogether. Now Niebuhr is a very, very famous American
congregationalist theologian. He lived from 1892 to 1972. Again, pretty contemporaneous
with both Bart and Tilly. He was enormously influential in the middle third of the 20th
century. With his brother H. Richard Niebuhr, he's really the only American theologian who
can stand in comparison with Tilly and Bart since Jonathan Edwards from the 18th century.
And Niebuhr is without a doubt the most famous theological voice on evil in the 20th century.
He offered an interpretation of traditional Christian visions of sin, one that reformulates
that vision, the wisdom of that vision, in a language suitable for modern people, people
who are skeptical of the literal historicity of the biblical narratives, dubious of the
idea that there ever was an historical Adam and Eve, and scientifically literate in ways
that make them doubt a lot of previous theological and religious teaching. He was so convincing
in his reformulations of the doctrine of sin, for example, that there actually grew up a
group of people called atheists for Niebuhr, people who didn't believe in God, but agreed
with his assessment of the human condition as trapped in sin. Niebuhr famously said
that original sin is the one Christian doctrine that is empirically verifiable. If we look
around in the world, we see that people are just not good. And he said, this is interesting
because it tells us that we can actually learn something about the human condition from this
doctrine itself, irrespective of whether or not we buy into all of Christian theology,
he thought. So why does sin exist? Niebuhr wonders. He says, sin presupposes itself.
It's intrinsic to the human condition as we find it in the world. And yet, it is clearly
not something that is the way humans should be. Yet, when we try to inquire as to its
origins, we find that it is always already there before us in any moment of psychological
excavation. We look back down inside ourselves for some moment of innocence. We can never
find it. For Niebuhr, that gets at this kind of originality of original sin. There's no
way to be a human in this situation where sin is not involved. Now, sin is not necessary
for humans, Niebuhr thinks. But it is, in our current created condition, an inevitable
consequence of our condition. And normally, Niebuhr thinks sin is typically pride. It's
an attempt to over-assert our will over reality because we deny our creativeness, our finitude,
our smallness, our materiality. And imagine that we are essentially will, pure spirit,
kind of something that is unbound by the material finitudes of our reality. Conversely, sin
could also be, that's the main theme for Niebuhr of sin. Sin is primarily for him pride, the
assertion of the self. But it doesn't have to be that. It can also be a form of what
he calls sensuality, a way of only living in our finitude, in our material bodies, without
reference to our transcendent hopes and our transcendent longings. Either way, the basic
story of sin is the same. Humans are created as finite and yet free, natural and yet also
transcending nature. We recognize our hybrid constitution and are made profoundly anxious
by it. We don't like being both matter and spirit. And it is that anxiety that inevitably
arises in our situation, that in turn, that anxiety induces us in one way or the other
to be either wholly fleshly and find our whole happiness in material goods, whether that's
libertinism or Marxism, or to try to escape that material condition altogether and find
our whole happiness in the ascetic escape from the self, denial of the flesh and denial
of finitude itself, as in some forms of religious extremism, some strands of technological utopianism,
and neighbor thought, some kinds of democratic utopianism as well.
Whether we sin via sensuality or pride, we are attempting most fundamentally to escape
this hybrid condition, this condition of being in the tension of both matter and spirit,
of being here and yet being able not to be here. And it is precisely that effort to escape,
which is in some sense inescapable to our world, to our condition, that is in fact sin.
Now grace for neighbor is the merciful power and knowledge that lets people go forward
in responsible moral action, even as they know that such action inevitably stems from
sinful persons, sinful characters. Grace is the energy, he thinks, that allows us to go
forward in our lives in fear and trembling, knowing our judgment is to come as sinners,
but knowing also that God has reservoirs of mercy meant to overcome our sin and heal
our broken souls. In other words, the recognition of sin could be paralyzing neighbor things,
but it's not supposed to be, and God will not let us get off the hook, he thinks, by
recognizing and being paralyzed in our sin, like Jean-Baptiste Clamont, Camus' character
was.
Sin here is then very clearly a phenomenon of anthropology, a picture of the human. It
relates first and foremost to our desire to escape our condition. Unlike Pascal and possibly
like Kant as well, sin here is in some sense a kind of always a temptation to escape.
It's not as focused on the role of God in resolving this problem. For neighbor then,
evil, sin, these are anthropological categories first and foremost, part of our created makeup.
Not a function of God's creative will, as in Bart, but more a function of the human
creation in some sense like Tillich, but not quite as natural, inevitable and metaphysically
necessary, cosmically necessary as in Tillich. Instead, there's still an insistence on the
accidental nature of evil for neighbor, or at least an insistence on evil's accidental
nature even as he struggles to explain that.
Let me try to wrap this in here. This is a series of views on thinking about evil that
have provided and continue to shape the way that many people, not only pros and Christians,
think and talk about evil today. In seeing this, we see a fairly broad range of ways
to think about evil within the context of Christianity, a way related to Luther's insistence
that the devil works from within you, in the case of Tillich, a way related to Calvin's
doctrine of divine predestination and divine sovereignty, as in Bart, and then Niebuhr's
attempt to develop a picture of sin that seems fundamentally an anthropological doctrine
less related to doctrines of God. Next, we're going to turn to another major religious force
shaping the way people talk about evil, and that is Roman Catholic thought on evil in
the 20th century.
