Hello again.
In this lecture I want to talk about the Roman Catholic Church's efforts in the 20th century
to think about the problem of evil and focus especially on one very prominent thinker in
the tradition, Hans Urs von Palthusar, and also focus on how a series of papal documents,
statements by the Pope and cyclicals and things like that, have thought about exploiting
the language of evil and the idea of objectively evil acts to talk about how to think about
public life in the world today in a pluralistic context.
Now the Roman Catholic Church has emphasized more explicitly than the many Protestant churches
the need to retain a rich communion with the whole history of the tradition.
But even in this church there have been interesting and powerful efforts to innovate by reaching
back in the tradition in surprising ways to uncover new resources to help people confront
new challenges.
One important way of doing that is found in the theological reflections on hell by the
great Swiss Catholic theologian Hans Urs von Palthusar, and another way is the way
that recent papal teachings have mobilized the category of objectively evil acts in
the social encyclicals.
Let me start with von Palthusar first.
von Palthusar was born in 1905 and he died only in 1988, so perhaps the greatest and
most acute, most thoughtful, and most far-seeing Roman Catholic theologian of the 20th century,
probably in the last several centuries, most historically learned, most theologically wide
ranging, and generally recognized as a titan across the Christian world today and even
beyond.
And his eulogy for him, Cardinal Josef Ratzinger, now of course Pope Benedict the 16th, called
him the most cultured man in Europe.
He was an enormously spiritual person.
Initially he was a follower of, sorry, initially he was a Jesuit, but then he left the order
to follow as a quasi-disciple, a controversial, very, very serious Catholic mystic, a woman
named Adrienne von Speer.
Von Palthusar's theological work, he thought, was coupled with his own work in understanding
and figuring out how she was a continuation of the very tradition of mystical teachings
that he had found vital in the Roman Catholic tradition, stretching all the way back to
the first and second centuries.
His innovative thinking, and his approach to thinking theologically, not just on evil
in hell, but also on the aesthetics of evil and God's response to it, are in fact not
only really profound and exciting for some people, but served as quite controversial
and tumultuous topics in his life, and they sometimes drew very disapproving looks from
the Magisterium, from the teaching authorities of the Roman Catholic Church.
And what's so audacious about what Von Palthusar says?
Well, he says most basically that all Christians ought to pray that all humans may be saved
and that all Christians ought to hope that all humans will be saved.
And it is the universalism of that account, the idea that everyone will be saved, that
troubled the Magisterium, that troubled the authorities of the Roman Catholic Church,
at least some of them, clearly not the current Pope, who thought of Von Palthusar as a teacher
and a mentor in important ways.
But in opposition to the resistance he felt from the Magisterium, here's how Von Palthusar
argued his case.
God clearly loves all humanity.
We know this, Von Palthusar says.
We know this from Scripture, from the experience of the Church, from our own experience, what
have you.
And God wishes to save everyone from their own sin.
Jesus Christ's saving mission to the world is a mission for all humanity.
No one is intended to be excluded from it.
Von Palthusar thinks that salvation, Jesus' mission to the earth, is not an end zone
touchdown dance, where some are never meant to be part of the winning team.
Jesus is not walking around the earth saving part of the people and saying to the others,
haha, you're not part of this team.
That's not what Jesus is doing.
That would be a troubling notion of what God is about.
Because everyone needs God's efforts.
Why would God only select some to get those, rather than everyone?
That's Von Palthusar's basic idea there.
But at the same time, God freely chooses to affirm human freedom, human autonomy, especially
the human's responsibility to accept salvation.
Just because it encompasses the whole human, the whole human has to participate in salvation
for it to be genuine salvation.
It can't be something imposed on humans, for Von Palthusar.
The human will has to be engaged as well, and the human will can only be engaged if
it will be engaged.
It can't be forced by an external force.
This is what is captured in Scripture's continual insistence for Von Palthusar, that humanity
must make God's will for them, their own will for themselves.
That is, they must affirm that their salvation is what they wish for.
If they do not, they are destined to hell.
Which for Von Palthusar, and he explores the tradition of mystical reflection and experience
in the church, and also in his work, thinks about how people have imagined what hell would
be like.
So Dante, people like St. John of the Cross, people like that, he thinks that hell is ultimately
utter separation from God, a devastating thought for him.
Right, so far, so good.
That's pretty much a standard exposition of salvation and damnation.
God wants to save everybody, but God respects people's freedom, and those who do not finally
exercise that freedom go to hell.
But Von Palthusar goes somewhere new next.
He says that we do not know, and we cannot actually know, whether anyone has actually
fully and finally rejected God.
Even Judas, in Christian tradition, the one person who the tradition has been most confident
in saying wasn't hell, the person who it seems to be the case that Jesus says in Scripture
it would be better for him never to have been born.
Even Judas, Von Palthusar says, may have had a final moment of repentance while he was
hanging himself.
Von Palthusar notes that Scripture doesn't say it.
His point is not that we know this, his point is that we can't know what happened.
Because of this lack of knowledge on our part, and this is the key thing for him, for Von
Palthusar, while we must acknowledge the real possibility of hell for all people, especially
for ourselves, because we know ourselves best of all.
We are obligated, he thinks, by our faith and by our own hope for our salvation to hope
that all may be saved.
Now Palthusar is not a believer in a sort of final reconciliation of all things that
developed heretically for the Christian churches out of the teachings of Irenaeus.
He's not saying that everything finally will be brought together against those things'
own will in some important way.
He's not proclaiming this in any confidence, he's saying it as a mode of hope, as a way
of living hopefully in the world.
We don't know, he says, but we may hope that all may be saved, and we should pray for it.
He notes that scriptural passages, at least in the New Testament, that pertain to judgment
and damnation are divided up, or easily divided up, into two groups.
One series of passages speaks of individuals being condemned to eternal torment, the damned
are those who have in fact rejected Christ, and they'll be cast into the outer darkness
or the eternal fire.
We all have heard those texts, but there's a second set of texts as well, one that often
doesn't go as well-noticed from Palthusar things.
These texts express God's desire and ability to save all mankind.
For example, in John, as Jesus is anticipating his own suffering and death, he proclaims,
now is the judgment of this world, when I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all
men to myself.
From Palthusar, that's a really crucial idea, right?
All will come to Jesus, and Paul says in Romans, God has consigned all men to disobedience,
that he, God, may have mercy upon all.
This is important.
Palthusar does not want to suggest that we should ignore the clear biblical themes of
divine justice and God's righteous punishment of evildoers in order to affirm a more chipper
view that takes damnation to be incompatible with God's nature as love, as groovy or something
like that.
That's not from Palthusar's point.
That would be insufferably shallow instead, and this is very, very important, he wants
to inhabit the tension between these two bodies of scriptural claims and hope without presuming
to know that in fact the claims that God will draw all to God's self are in fact theologically
inframing the other claims about the potential for the lake of fire and hell.
Now this is a theological and especially triune understanding of God and salvation, the depth
of God's love for humanity, the radicality of humanity's sin, its inexplicable self-alienation
from God.
These things are only truly known through appreciating the efforts and the process whereby God reveals
that love, God's love, and in turn reveals, in revealing that love, reveals the depth
of human sin.
Sin would have to be terrifically bad and God would have to be immeasurably loving for
God to come down to earth, undergo a human death on the cross, descend into hell, all
in order to overcome humanity's estrangement from God.
And for Van Balthasar, that in fact is what happened.
Our condition is far more dire than we realize, but God's love is far greater than we could
ever imagine.
Furthermore, the nature of God's action here is really interesting too.
God loves the world so much that God accepts the punishment due to humanity for our sin.
This is Van Balthasar's basic Christian theology.
God takes the place of the human, of each of us.
But and again here, Van Balthasar is a bit more radical than many.
This also means that even sinners in their sinning, even in the depth of their sinning
all the way down into hell, will find Jesus Christ as the one who freely took their rejection
upon his own head, following with them, accompanying them all the way down to the lowest depths
of despair.
Even at the bottom, they still find Christ with them, and they will take his hand and
walk out of hell with him, if only they will.
I mean, recall the images of Dante here.
Remember that after Christ, the gates of hell and the inferno had been busted open, and
that the problem of the inmates was precisely that they didn't really want to leave.
They kept trying to make excuses for themselves.
Excuses that really only convinced themselves, no one else.
Van Balthasar knows his Dante very well, uses him thoroughly, and disagrees with the poet
only in how Van Balthasar simply thinks that at the bottom of despair, at the abyssal base
of all hopelessness, there is still reason to hope that the presence of Christ will finally
be too seductive to resist, and so everyone finally will accept Christ's help.
The God who judges, and who will judge, also accompanies the condemned all the way to the
seat of judgment, and would stand in their stead to receive that judgment, if only the
condemned will let him.
It's thus a responsibility incumbent upon everyone who properly thinks through the meaning
of the Christian God's gift of salvation to humanity to understand that this God's
action is so powerful and so radical as to make salvation quite possible for every person.
And indeed, Van Balthasar thinks, it's incumbent upon us to hope that this God is as good as
we think.
For if not, then we can have no confidence whatsoever that we ourselves are among the
elect as we are commanded to have that confidence.
Again, Van Balthasar does a lovely jujitsu here, because the problem of hell is by and
large not a problem about why are we going to hell.
The problem of hell for us is always a problem about why is anyone else going to hell.
There are polls of Americans that frequently are taken about belief in heaven, belief in
hell, and these sorts of things.
Lots of people believe in heaven, the most significant number of people, not many, but
still 20, 30% say they believe in hell, but like 1 or 2% of the people believe they're
going there.
A lot of traditional Christian theology would have reversed those proportions.
Most people are likely to go to hell.
That's the idea of a lot of traditional Christian theology, basically because most of us really
suck.
Just to be honest, that's where Christianity comes out on that one.
But Van Balthasar, in thinking about the nature of evil, turns the question of the mystery
of evil into a larger evangelical opportunity, an opportunity he takes to sketch once again
for all Christians the overall shape of their lives, lives lived, as he puts it, out of
and into hope.
The crucial thing about evil for Van Balthasar is that we understand that evil is an attempt
to resist God's love, but we can have hope that every being who is attempting to resist
that love will one day give in, having realized that that resistance is ultimately futile.
So that's one way that evil has been a major provocation in Roman Catholic theology in
the last century or so.
It really has served as a huge goad for the recovery through Van Balthasar of the historical
tradition of Christian theology and also a major rethinking of certain moments in the
Christian message that other Catholic theologians continue to explore even today.
But recently, another use of the language of evil has appeared in Roman Catholic church
discourse.
This is the language of intrinsic or objective evil, a language originally developed in moral
theology but now applied to large-scale public matters.
This trend really started in the 1990s via papal encyclicals, particularly those of John
Paul II, especially encyclicals like the Evangelium Vite, the Gospel of Life, and very taught
to splendor, the splendor of truth.
John Paul was deeply concerned that the moral bearings, the moral moorings of culture were
getting loosened in the late modern age, and he worried that people were finding it increasingly
easy to leave their traditional moral convictions behind in the era of enormous power, enormous
technological power that we have now entered.
Because the human will can do so much more than we used to be able to do, the limits
on what humans ought to be able to do seem increasingly to be ones that we bump up against.
And so lots of people, lots of scientists, ordinary people, politicians, leaders all
seem to want to explore doing things that maybe we used to think weren't so good.
This is JP2's John Paul II's concern.
So he begins in the 80s and 90s to develop a language to identify this temptation and
resist it by saying that some things are just intrinsically evil and can never be done.
Now, this language, this language of objectively moral, objective moral evil, objectively evil
acts, depends on a certain understanding of human acts.
One that makes the human capacity to act a very distinctive and important characteristic
of human beings.
In some important way, the human capacity to act is perhaps the most distinctive thing
about humans.
Lower animals behave, lower animals do things, but they don't really act.
Only humans act because to understand what a human is doing when she or he is acting,
you have to comprehend what is going on in their heads, what they understand themselves
to be doing.
Eating a special holiday feast is a different thing than a dog eating out of its dish.
And to deny the difference, even though both are forms of nutrition, will inevitably impair
our understanding of what goes on in the feast.
Now, this is a profoundly anti-reductionist understanding of human behavior.
One that emphasizes the unique status of human beings among all the creatures of the
earth, but precisely because the stories humans tell themselves about what they are doing
and why they are doing it, those stories turn out to be intrinsic to the nature of the actions
that they are performing.
This is an enormously philosophically complicated point, so let me just say one more thing
about it, because it's both intrinsically interesting in itself and wonderful to think
about and also really important for this.
On this understanding of an act, if you were to film me with a video camera doing something,
right, if there was like a nature channel show or something that was filming humans,
it wouldn't be able to understand what the humans were doing in the same way that that
same nature channel camera were at filming a pack of lions would be able pretty well
to describe what they were doing without accessing those lion's thoughts.
But if you turn the camera on a bunch of humans to know what they're doing, it matters enormously
to figure out what they're doing inside their heads.
If you film me and two other people in a coffee shop sitting there drinking coffee and working
on our computers or reading books or whatever, one of us, let's say me, is checking my email
and reading an article and writing some notes on the article on my computer, so I'm working
in my role as a professor.
Another of us is thinking about the enormous fight that she or he just had with their spouse
and brooding over this and wondering whether this is the end of the relationship.
The third of us is waiting anxiously to meet their mother who was just coming back from
a troubling hospital stay, a troubling hospital procedure, and the mother will be able to
tell them when they meet whether or not she in fact has cancer.
Now all three of us might be sitting at the same darn table in the coffee shop, and we
all three might be doing what look like the same things.
One of us is reading a paper, one of us is simply drinking the coffee and looking around,
one of us is typing away on a computer.
But the three acts are very different what we're doing when we're sitting there in the
coffee shop.
One of us is waiting for our mother, one of us is brooding over a fight, and one of us
is kind of mundanely working on our job stuff.
The difference in what goes on in our heads makes those acts very different.
But if you see three lions lounging under a tree, what you're seeing are three lions
lounging under a tree, full stop.
That's this tradition's argument anyway.
Now on this tradition's account, acts are evil either because of the circumstances surrounding
them, such as the naming of a person as a Jew when you're surrounded by Nazis looking for
a Jew versus the naming of a person as a Jew when someone asks you who is interested in
dating them, was that person a Jew because my parents would like it if I also married
within my own faith?
You're like, oh sure, that's a Jewish guy, yeah, whatever.
You can say those sorts of things in one context to a woman who's nervous about whether or
not this is a guy who her parents will approve of, or to a bunch of Nazis.
And so in the second case, the circumstances surrounding the act, the telling that yes,
this guy's at you, make that act intrinsically evil.
Or along with the circumstances around the act, an act can be made evil because of the
intention of the actor when you steal a book from a bookstore, right?
Or because an act is objectively evil, that's the third thing, right?
So circumstances, the intention of the agent, or because an act is simply objectively evil.
And that third one is the one we want to focus on here.
An act is objectively evil in one of two ways.
First of all, in its object, in what it objectively is, that is, what's defined as the proximate
end or the goal of a deliberate decision, right?
The most immediate thing that the action is trying to do.
For example, consider the badness of abortion in the Roman Catholic Church.
End is an evil because the overt proximate aim of the act, that is, the aim that is most
immediately intended, directly intended, by the doer, is in fact the ending of the fetus'
life.
Any number of other things can go on, but if the fetus' life ends, the procedure has
been accomplished and is successful, and if it does not end, the procedure has failed,
right?
Since the Roman Catholic Church understands the fetus to be a human person, that's why
the Roman Catholic Church thinks abortion is an intrinsically evil act because it's
killing a human being.
That's one way, right?
Because of the proximate end.
The second way in which something can be an intrinsically evil act is in how its badness
is wholly independent from the subjective attitude of the actor, the motive with which
the agent believes him or herself to be undertaking it, and this is crucial too.
If you are trying intentionally to kill somebody because you're afraid of what they might do
in the future, right?
If you can go back and kill Hitler as a young boy, that in that moment, right, even though
what you want to do is not, in fact, just kill a young boy, you want to stop, say, the
Shoah, the Holocaust, you want to stop World War II.
You're thinking, I'm doing this to stop World War II.
But in fact, what's in your mind is not that important.
What is really important is the objective act you're doing, and that is taking the life
of a small child.
Now the church has said that an objectively evil act is incapable, this is technical
church language, incapable of being ordered to God because it, and this is going to quote,
radically contradicts the good of the person made in God's image, radically again, at
its root it contradicts the good of the person, regardless of intention, regardless of consequence,
that is, some acts the tradition says are simply intrinsically evil.
Now the basic principle behind this notion of objectively evil acts is a pretty old
and long standing one, the scriptural warrant for it.
You may never say in this tradition, let us do evil so that good may come of it.
In other words, you cannot do, in the Roman Catholic tradition anyway, a necessary evil.
There's no such thing as a necessary evil.
The language of an objectively evil act, thus, is an attempt to identify an increasingly
powerful temptation for some moderns, at least as the authorities of the Roman Catholic Church,
identify this temptation as increasingly powerful.
I think it's pretty fair to say that many of us feel this temptation more maybe than
people the century before did, or something like that.
That's not that controversial, I think.
But the language has a real attention grabbing character, and it focuses attention in a certain
important way.
To call something objectively evil really stimulates the conscience, that is, it's a surprising
term to hear in public discourse anyway, and it immediately calls our attention to something
about the term that we might have passed over.
If someone says, I don't like that, we say, well, you know, that's okay, that's your view.
If someone says, that's bad, we're like, well, I mean, I can understand that's your opinion.
But if someone says, that's objectively evil, we're going to spend more time thinking about
it, I think.
Right?
So the church was thinking about this, and they said, well, this is a useful way of talking
about it because it'll bring into view more thoroughly how important this issue is for
us.
Also, it makes us begin to consider this object in a more explicitly and overtly moral register
to say something's bad is not as strong as saying it's evil, right?
This goes back even to Nietzsche.
Nietzsche would be rolling over in his grave at the language of the objectively evil act.
But note, and this is interesting, the language of objectively evil doesn't actually speak
to the magnitude of the evil.
The catechism of the Roman Catholic Church identifies both masturbation and homosexual
acts as intrinsically evil acts.
But the church doesn't weigh both as equally evil, nor is intrinsic evil a matter always
to be legislated according to the church.
Civil law is not designed to ensure moral perfection to eliminate every objective evil
out there.
That would be far more invasive and probably demand too large and vast of a governing power
for the church.
Rather, civil law on the understanding of the Roman Catholic Church is meant to secure
the relative well-functioning character of a social order, right?
That's what it does.
Again, it's worth noting here also that this language is a relatively recent importation
into Roman Catholic social thought from Roman Catholic moral theology.
In other words, and this is important, the language develops in moral theology in thinking
about how to counsel individuals in guiding their moral lives.
But it has been taken from that into the realm of social thought, into how the church speaks
to society as a whole, both to its faithful and to all of goodwill, including the pluralistic
community it inhabits, about what the church's view is on certain things that the society
is considering.
This language is not something that's actually visible much in the encyclical tradition
really much before the 1980s.
There's one paragraph actually in Humanae Vite, the 1968 encyclical that forbids birth
control for Roman Catholics, but really that's about it.
Before John Paul, there really wasn't much language of intrinsic evil or objectively
evil acts.
But nonetheless, it seems an important part of the public discourse of the Roman Catholic
Church now and I think arguably probably into the future, so it's going to be an important
part of the way people think about evil in coming decades.
So let me wrap this up a bit here.
The two different uses of the language of evil that we've been looking at in the Roman
Catholic Church show something of the power of the language and the range of temptations
and the dangers to which it may be susceptible.
On the one hand, Fumpaltasar is rigorous attempts to explore the way that God triumphs over
evil by enduring it, by suffering it in our stead, and by showing us how evil is overcome
in the theological realm.
It generates a spirituality of hope and a practice of charity that is powerful and mobilizing,
yet it's one that comes under theological and also non-theological complaint, because
people can worry that it doesn't take evil seriously enough, either on theological grounds
by dismissing, this was some Roman Catholic authorities' worries, dismissing too quickly
the possibility of hell, and also on non-theological grounds by offering an apparently, or to critics
apparently anyway, purely otherworldly response to evil.
On the other hand, the Magisterians attempt to develop and apply the language of objectively
evil acts seems to identify and focus attention on a collection of acts the church finds profoundly
troubling and the need of explicit opposition, so it's a usefully mobilizing language.
But on the other hand, some within and without the church have worried that this language
may be too immediately demonizing of people, and it may obscure the way that the moral experience
of people is not ever as clean or as clear as this language suggests it should be, and
so it suggests or implies a false clarity that may be more misleading than mobilizing.
Now I want to turn to another religious tradition, which has its own traumas with evil to confront,
especially about the reality of evil in the 20th century, the Jewish tradition, and its
confrontation with the catastrophe that befell the people Israel at the heart of the modern
world and in the middle of the modern age.
