Hello again.
In this lecture, I want to talk about a series of Eastern European poets and some intellectuals
as well in the way that they think about evil as a complement to what we've been talking
about more theoretically with the work of Hannah Arendt and other philosophers and theologians.
Now if the master genre of literary thinking about evil in the century or so leading up
to World War II was the novel, think about figures like Dostoevsky or Konrad, even a
post-war figure like Camus who has in some ways more to do with pre-war conceptions of how to
think about evil. After World War II, the genre of the novel seems to be harder to sustain as a
theoretical device, a generic device to think about evil in. Novels capture large narrative forms
and they offer large kind of epic scopes for thinking about evil. A novel can make sense of a
large social scene in that way. But since World War II, novels have seen not as successful in
capturing the human experience of evil. Instead, other genres, memoir, essay, and especially the
genre of lyric poetry, have seen more potent and offered more profound explorations of evil.
But such genres as these face two fundamental problems that really complicate their success.
One is an aesthetic problem, an aesthetic challenge, and one is a kind of more generic
challenge about whether or not we can hear the truth they need to convey. Let me say something
about both. First, aesthetically, all poetry is haunted after World War II with the thought that
it is somehow quite radically, not just inadequate, but actually improper to be writing poetry
in the wake of these events. As the German thinker Theodor Adorno put it, a Marxist who had
fled Nazi Germany, it may seem to us that to write a poem after Auschwitz is barbaric,
that's his famous line, to write poetry after Auschwitz is barbaric. It's translated different
ways. And since World War II, in fact, there seems increasingly less and less confidence among
many artists and intellectuals in general that beauty is something to be sought, that it's
anything more than an escape from reality, a consolation for the true ugliness of reality.
You may think I'm making too much of a few intellectuals, but I don't think I am.
There are, in fact, powerful forces at work in our intellectual culture, urging everybody to
generate a kind of sheer, ironic distance from all potential sources of inspiration in the world.
And among those sources of inspiration, beauty is high on the list. Given that poetry is so
much about beauty, poetry especially feels this challenge in profound ways. Secondly,
there's a second problem about the problem of representation itself. We saw some of this in
Conrad. How can you actually tell the truth about what has happened? It seems at time that the
realities can dwarf the human's imagination, its capacities to represent what has happened,
to comprehend the full magnitude of it. And in some ways here, irony is not the enemy,
irony may be in some ways the ally. Consider the case of Primo Levi. He's a brilliant Italian chemist
and after the war, a thinker and writer who was also a survivor of Auschwitz.
He was the very first sentence of his memoir of survival from Auschwitz. In the American edition,
it was translated as survival in Auschwitz, which sounds like a how-to guide, but in the original
Italian and then in England, when it was translated into English in England, it was, if this be a
man, because that's his question, is this human nature. This is the very first sentence.
It was my good fortune to be deported to Auschwitz only in 1944. That is, after the German government
had decided owing to the growing scarcity of labor to lengthen the average lifespan of the
prisoner's destined for elimination. It conceded noticeable improvements in the camp routine
and temporarily suspended killings at the whim of individuals.
Think about that sentence. Think about how it starts out. Unbelievable. It was my good fortune
to be deported to Auschwitz in 1944. I mean, imagine the kind of irony of a sentence like that,
and then step back from it and imagine even more shockingly that Levi in the rest of the
sentence unpacks how it's not ironic, how it's not sarcastic, how in fact the reality
goes beyond irony, because it was literally his good fortune that he was only sent to Auschwitz
in 1944. When you see that, when you appreciate the magnitude of the irony in reality in a
situation like that, you realize that irony is not only an optional source for thinking.
It has to be concretely employed, because reality is ironic already for us.
So this tension between suspicion of beauty and an endorsement of irony, and yet irony's
corrosive effects on real beauty, this is a tension that all these artists, these poets,
and these thinkers have to struggle with. In this lecture, I want to look at three
poets in particular who try to think about what it means to experience evil in the 20th century
and then what it means to try to resist it. First of all, Paul Céline, a survivor of the Shoah.
Secondly, Czechslaw Mihoš, and thirdly, Zbigniew Herbert. Mihoš and Herbert are both
Polish poets who were in the Polish resistance, though they did never end up in death camps.
Let's start with Céline. Céline lived from 1920 to 1970, and he was a Romanian Jew who was picked up
and sent to the death camps. He survived the Shoah, though his parents, who he deeply loved,
did not. Eventually, after the war, he moved to Paris, where he lived growing increasingly
known for his poetry, and yet, over time, his post-war life, his survival of the death camps,
became unendurable to him, and in 1970, he killed himself. Now, as we saw,
there is this famous line to write poetry after Auschwitz is audacious enough, is barbaric,
some people say. But what about writing poetry about Auschwitz? What about writing poetry about
the death camps directly? And what about writing that poetry about the death camps in German?
That's running straight into the wind. But that's just what Céline does, and he makes his case well.
The deep point of poetry is getting at the deep truth of things, and if the deep truth is of evil
and suffering, and is of evil and suffering in the voice of those who caused the evil and suffering,
as well as those who suffered it, even if the irony is too great for human minds to bear,
and Céline excelled at offering a language in which irony could become too great for the human
mind to bear. Still, he thought, it must be spoken. Perhaps the most powerful, but still
under-recognized, under-attended to poetic representation of the Shoah, of the Holocaust,
is Céline's own poem, Todesfuge, or Deathfuge, which recounts one person's experience of the
Holocaust, if you can call it that, although there's never an I in the poem, it's always a we.
This poem is unbelievably powerful, and I would encourage everyone to try to read it. It's
no more than a page or so, but it's visionary in its summary of the experience of the Holocaust.
A couple of elements in the poem are especially important both for thinking about poetry and
for thinking about Céline's approach to poetry. First of all, the poem starts with a couple very,
very strange lines. Black milk of daybreak, we drink it at evening, we drink it at midday and
morning, we drink it at night. The collapse of the sequential character of human experience in the
death camps is brought right to the fore there, right? First of all, bracketing the question of
what the black milk of daybreak is, we drink this milk at evening and then at midday and then at
morning and then we drink it at night. For the inmates of these camps, as for the damned in Dante,
there is no time anymore. There's no narrative structure to anything, just the endless,
deadly, cyclical round of every day, and eventually even the pieces of those days break apart.
Remember, this is a fugue. It's a death fugue. A fugue is a musical piece that repeats itself
cyclically in complicated ways before coming together in a resolution at the end. His fugue
breaks apart at the end. As the poem comes to whatever conclusion it can manage, these words
keep repeating, but the final stanza itself is composed almost entirely of fragments of earlier
lines of the poem, but now enjammed together in ways that bear an ominousness, but seem to resist
communicating any coherent message. In a way, Selana's suggesting, the experience of the camp is
outside of time, it's outside of history, and the collapse of narrative structure that the poem
represents, the poem gives to you if you try to read it, it's not only beyond time in a way,
but by being beyond time, by being beyond temporal structure, by being beyond storytelling,
it's beyond sense making, it's beyond logic, and here as well. A fantastic story from Primo
Levy's, if this be a man, can be quite pertinent. Levy at one point is early in his time in Auschwitz
is doing something and he sees some guards, I think, hurting somebody else for what seems
no reason to him, and he wonders what's going on, and he asks them, Varum, why? Why is this happening?
And the guard turns to him and strikes him very hard, and knocks Levy down, and the guard says,
here is kind Varum, here there is no why. In other words, here you don't get to ask these
questions of why. For you there is no reason for anything. Everything that happens happens
because of course it's far beyond your understanding. Do not attempt to understand.
That phrase, here is kind Varum, here is no why.
Captures a certain kind of dimension of the death camps in a way that for Levy and for those who
survived them is essential to their experience, if not, if we can't use the word meaning.
Secondly, about Ceylon's poem. In a complicated way, the inmates of the camp are implicated
in the instruments of their own destruction, just because the poem itself is in German.
Famously this poem says, one of its lines repeated several times is,
Der Tod ist ein Meister aus Deutschland. That is, death is a master from Germany.
And in the poem the only named character is named Margarita and Schulemit. It's a non-Jewish name
and then a Jewish name, a hybrid of German and Jew. The idea here seems to be that part of the
trauma of this evil is that it is so deeply intimate to the inmates own ordinary experience.
There was some way that for Ceylon it mattered very much that his poetry was written in German
about the experience of what happened to a people who were German, but also not German,
not allowed to be German, who were going to be exterminated precisely because of their difference
from what their exterminator saw as true Germanness. Ceylon that is wants to think about how it is
possible to go on being who you were before the death camps if you were a German Jew,
if you were from a family that spoke German, how it is possible to go on in some continuity
from what happened before to what happens afterwards. The analogy here is famously at the end of
Ellie Wiesel's night. At the end of night Wiesel for the first time in years he survived
outfits. For the first time in years he looks at himself in the mirror and he sees a figure there
that bears no resemblance to any understanding of himself and that's the way that night ends if you
have ever read the memoir Night. He says, I looked into the eyes of someone entirely different from
me, entirely strange to me and that moment is intentional for Wiesel in the same way that Ceylon's
use of German is intentional. How do you connect who you are, who you thought you are with who you
have become, what has happened to you, what kind of continuity is available to people after these
events? But the profound question Ceylon's use of German itself as a poetic language asks that
question. But there's a terrible stubborn you know one can't say insistence but a quiet pulse
in Ceylon's writings, a pulse of something almost too weak to be called a minority report or a
minor theme but a faint quavering sense of hope even if the hope is in some sense superhuman.
Now to move from Ceylon to Czechoslovak Miłosz is to move from someone who suffered from the Nazis
as an inmate to someone who suffered from the Nazis as a subject and then also as a resistor
in the Polish army. Miłosz was born in 1911 and he only died in 2004. He was actually a secret
resistor during the war and then after the war he was initially the cultural attaché
for the new communist government, the new communist Polish government in their Paris embassy. But
as the government became more and more under the thumb of the Soviet Union he became less and
less enamored of it. He defects in 1951 and in 1953 he publishes his book The Captive Mind,
one of the great moral works of the 20th century of intellectual free thought in the 20th century
against his friends, his fellow intellectuals romance with communism and with communist ideology
before the Second World War and then after the Second World War.
He befriended Camus in Paris and became a kind of marginal figure on the French scene precisely
because he was an anti-communist when most of the French intellectuals with Camus as an exception,
a few others were not anti-communist. Camus and the others were anti-communist but the others
were mostly communist. He ended up emigrating to the US in 1960. He taught at the University of
California in Berkeley from 61 to 98 when he retired and went back to Poland and he won the
Nobel Prize for Literature. In contrast to Céline, Miwos's poetic voice developed before World War
II and so was not forged in the crucible of that event but it was profoundly shaped by it. But he
never thought in all of his poetry even to the end that it was impossible to ask direct questions
about reality using plain and straightforward language. In a way he always believed in language's
power who's troubled in this belief but he believed in its power not so much to represent reality
as a whole but rather to call our attention to facts and truths we would rather not recognize
or at least rather not admit to ourselves that we know. In poems like A Poem for the End of the
World or A Poor Christian Looks at the Ghetto, a poem he wrote about the Warsaw Ghetto in Warsaw
in 1942 I believe in the middle of World War II. In those poems he speaks with a profound
directness although with philosophical depth about what's going on in front of his eyes.
He retained a complicated combative disputatious faith in the Roman Catholicism of the youth
though he was always tempted by darker interpretations of reality than mainstream
Roman Catholicism allowed. If von Balthasar is an optimistic Roman Catholic thinker,
Miwosz insofar as he is a Roman Catholic thinker is in some ways the opposite.
But nonetheless in the end he found in the image of the crucified Christ in God dying on the cross
a powerful image through which to meditate on the mysteries of human providence suffering
and iniquity in this world. One poem in particular he wrote called A Poem for the
End of the Century written in 1991. It's always for me anyway stuck with me as
speaking of these themes with special clarity and intensity. As he says at the beginning of
this poem he writes it in a time of triumph when sin had vanished. Those of us who remember
the immediate post Cold War years there was a sense you know the famous book about the end of
history there was a sense that somehow maybe things might be getting better now maybe a certain kind
of dramatic evil could not come back and haunt us again. Miwosz finds though that he is troubled
by the idea that evil has been vanquished. He thinks that that belief is naive but he suggests
also that his belief is shameful he says shameful in this situation but that he's compelled to
think these thoughts and speak them at least in the poem by his own memories of suffering and death
not just the sufferings and death of those he knew personally in his life
though he knew both suffering and death and was well acquainted with those who experienced both
but also with the suffering and death of Jesus Christ a figure for Miwosz who was both temporal
and eternal suggesting both that the events of the 20th century were events of that century but
also spoke to something more profound something more perennial. He says that at the heart of
everything perhaps is a reality and I'm quoting the poem here of pain and also guilt
given that he says can we really believe that evil has been forever overcome
remember his old friendship with Camus he ends the poem interestingly by saying that his concerns
his thoughts the dark brooding that he undertakes is not for people and he says the world now
after the end of the Cold War is genuinely blessed goodness is good in itself even if
not everyone can share in it he seems to be saying even if some people's experience
makes it impossible for them to appreciate it even if the people whose own experiences of evil
suffering and horror are the experiences that make it possible for other people to have the
blessedness and the happiness they have their experiences of suffering and evil cannot be
considered to count against the blessings and the joy of the people who experience the fruits of
their suffering for Miwosh that is innocence is real and it's a good thing but innocence and
experience coexist in the world and there is no way it seems at least this poem suggests no way
for experience to help innocence learn what it doesn't know all it can do is wait to see what
happens so Miwosh helps us think about how we might be vexed in passing on the lessons gained
by hard-won experience to those who do not have those experiences and yet the experience is there
and in no way is Miwosh himself doubtful that it's true or important in a way the question is how
that language that language that is not for people how it can be made suitable for people
and the answer to that question is precisely the body of Miwosh's own poetry
for he wrote to show that language could at least be glimpsed language of real horror real
suffering could be glimpsed and appreciated by those blessedly ignorant of those phenomena at first
hand now to turn from Miwosh to his countrymen's a big new pervert is to turn from someone with
a romantic and philosophical expansiveness in his poetry to someone far more ironic epigrammatic
and terse reading his poetry reading Herbert's poetry it feels as if these poems were really
telegrams sent from some desperate city fighting off an almost insuperable army and in fact one
of his greatest books and one of his greatest poems is entitled report from the besieged city
now Herbert was born in 1924 and he died in 1998 like Miwosh he was a veteran of the Polish
resistance army against the Nazis but unlike Miwosh he spent most of the rest of his life in communist
Poland not as a supporter of the regime but as a resistor and a dissident never a favorite of the
communists for a while he was actually completely suppressed and unpublished at one point he was
reduced to having to donate his own blood to get a little money for six months that was the only
work you could do was donating pints of blood to get money nonetheless he persevered in his
writings and his convictions and by the 1980s his poetry was one of the main inspirations for the
resistance movement solidarity in fact his poem The Envoy of Mr. Kojito is considered by many
Poles the anthem of solidarity itself now Herbert's poetry is profoundly curtailed
terse each word carrying immense weight but each one also standing stripped of some essential
ease about its meaning so that the sense of urgency from line to line in his poems is tremendous
as he says in The Envoy of Mr. Kojito you have little time you must give testimony the sense of
the need to get going on sharing these thoughts with people and yet the obscurity of what the
thoughts are that are to be shared is very important to him his poetry completely lacks
punctuation there are no commas no periods no semicolons none of that this lack of punctuation
increases their sense of desperate urgency but also strips them of one aid for comprehending their
full meaning so that we have the experience in reading him of something momentous being
pressed on us violently but also vaguely as if the poems seem to have suffered some kind of
grammatical trauma they've come out of these poems have stumbled out of a terrible plane crash that
they were lucky to keep their own skin from in general the overall impression of Herbert's poetry
is one of ironic truth-telling against tremendous odds offering us and this is I think is really
important thing offering us one powerful rhetoric by which to resist the attempt of the totalitarian
state to lie to us constantly for our purposes probably his most directly relevant poem is one
entitled the power of taste in that poem he says that resisting totalitarian regimes as he did
quote didn't require great character at all unquote it only required taste he said
taste an aesthetic sense that the terrors of totalitarianism were pressed home in so ugly a
form that they could be resisted it was the ugliness of totalitarianism that someone with
a proper sense of beauty could in fact resist it's an interesting claim right that in some ways
in our ability to know what beauty is we see some kind of stiffness cartilage not bone not
totally rigid but some kind of structure of the conscience that helps us sustain our larger
moral stance in the world knowing what beauty is is connected he thinks to knowing what ethics
is here the idea is that poetry and aesthetic work more generally is not simply one way that such
evil may be described and then resisted it is in fact for Herbert the consummate way to resist
such evil to fight against the fundamental utilitarian ugliness of totalitarianism just
is to fight against its most profound instrument of darkness and if that is true then Herbert
actually has a charge a response to adorn those charge adorn those charge that to write poetry
after Auschwitz is barbaric and his response is no no no it is not to write poetry after Auschwitz
that is barbaric that would be to refuse to attempt to recover something of the civilization
and the humanity not that those two are the same things for Herbert he's he's not that foolish
to recover something of civilization and humanity in the wake of these horrors
and let's conclude on this
the visions of evil that these poets represent are diverse but in each case
the experience of the subject before the challenge of evil is directly
thematized and explored for Ceylon the problem was how to represent an evil that broke apart
normal human experience itself for Mivosh the problem was how to attempt to communicate such
untimely thoughts in a time of universal utopia and happiness for Herbert the challenge is to make
plausible the idea that totalitarian evils great vulnerability one of its great vulnerabilities
anyway is precisely its ugliness and that the work of poetry and of beauty just is the work
of resisting those evils now given those insights what can we do what about positive guidance what
advice or lessons did these poets have for us much of that depends on which one you ask of course
Mivosh and Herbert in particular seem to point to the possibility that life in totalitarian
societies outside of death camps can teach us some new insight into the nature of evil in our world
and in this their lessons are fleshed out and unpacked a bit by their less poetic
but no less deep thinking fellow intellectuals people like Adam Mishnik in Poland Giorgi Conrad
in Hungary Václav Havel in Czechoslovakia these are the great leaders of the Eastern European
resistance against totalitarianism these thinkers diagnosed their situation in terms that oftentimes
drew from and always resonated with these poets and thinkers like aren't they also the basic problem
they faced is how to live an honest life when the whole world around you wants to live in a lie
as Havel put it the power of ideology is the way it convinces people that reality is as the
ideology the totalitarian state says it is but it does throw to true terror and the threat of terror
which eventually convinces all of us to live in this lie for thinkers like Havel Conrad and Mishnik
we must instead live in the truth and this will eventuate in a certain kind of rival life against
against the totalitarian state the creation of cells of resistance within this state this rival
community survives not by a mass movement not by any kind of large-scale structures or by sheer
force but rather by expressing and sharing a certain quality of truth telling this truth telling
couldn't be denied or annihilated not exactly by ideology all it could try to do was compel us not
to believe in it but if it were denied as by the authorities it was so often denied still even in
the effort to deny it the truth called attention to itself and some people would notice that was why
amidst all the sortedness of the 20th century the world was so blessed to have a number of
these resistance movements that finally were able to show the crucial weakness of totalitarianism
and its crucial vulnerability simply to the sheer fact of telling the truth
now in the next lecture i do want to move to another genre another approach altogether
i want to think now not so much about poets and writers and intellectuals and artists but now about
a series of scientists and their own recent troubling discoveries about our propensities
towards something that looks a lot like evil
