Welcome back.
In this lecture I want to turn from the thinking of philosophers and theologians and the poetry
and prose of writers to consider several disturbing experiments that psychologists have performed
in recent decades that suggest a set of disquieting insights about human nature and its susceptibility
to what we want to call evil.
Can evil be understood?
Can it be studied in a scientific manner in the way that we study plants or rats or neutrons
or atoms?
People have tried to do this for some time.
But since World War II, this pressure has become greater because of worries that many
have, and saw this most prominently formulated by the thinker Hannah Arendt, that the evils
of the 20th century are in some sense unprecedented and need new thinking, not just the repetition
of old traditional ways of thinking, but genuinely new thinking to figure out what evil is in
its essence and what to do about its challenge.
So since World War II, and in some ways prompted by the events of World War II, a number of
social scientists, and especially social psychologists, have begun to develop experiments.
Experiments that are sometimes of questionable moral status themselves, we'll hear about
that in a minute, but experiments that attempt to get at measuring the human's tendencies
towards blind obedience or willful engagement sometimes in inflicting cruelty and suffering
on other humans.
Just as an interesting side note, it's worth noting that there have actually been significantly
fewer studies from the opposite side, from the side of victims, what it is like to be
a victim in these situations.
Why that is, I won't speculate here.
Now I have some very good friends in the social sciences who are involved in this work.
I think that sometimes they're a bit too confident about their findings, both in terms of the
lessons that they take away from them and the novelty that they ascribe to those lessons.
But nonetheless, these studies, these experiments are really quite revealing and not as well
known as I think they should be.
Most generally, these studies suggest that in a way that few philosophers and theologians
have seemed fully to appreciate who you are and how you behave is significantly dependent
on where you are, on your context, on your setting.
This character is, in other words, interestingly and significantly context specific.
If you're in a setting where conditions are conducive to being a good person, you're more
likely to be a good person.
If you are in a setting where that is not the case, the opposite outcome can be anticipated.
As I said, these are interesting and thought provoking experiments and I suspect we'll
have more of them in coming years.
One of the most burgeoning fields in psychology right now is a field called positive psychology.
That is a study of not so much how humans go wrong, as psychology has traditionally
been in the 20th century anyway, a study of human pathologies.
Positive psychology wants to study what are the conditions that make humans go right.
Now, whether on the negative or the positive side, these psychological studies will actually
answer conclusively any of the questions we've been asking and the questions we actually
want answers to about evil, wickedness, cruelty is another question.
But nonetheless, I think these are very interesting and important studies.
In this lecture, I want to look at three experiments in particular, each of which has troubled
those who engaged in them and those who reflect on them in important and profound ways.
In wide-ranging discussions of thinking about evil, these experiments come up again and
again, and so it's worth your while to hear about them and to consider their implications.
They are the famous Milgram experiments on obedience to authority, Philip Zambardo's
notorious Stanford Prison experiment, and the disturbing series of good Samaritan studies
run at Princeton Theological Seminary.
First, consider the famous Milgram experiment.
Stanley Milgram, a psychologist at Yale University, began in 1961 a series of experiments that
were prompted by his reflections on the trial of Adolf Eichmann, the same trial that Arett
reported on.
His question was, were those who perpetrated the Holocaust individually motivated to do
so, or were they really, as many of them said, just following orders?
I don't want to confuse the arguments of Arett and Milgram here, so don't think that
they're saying the same thing.
Consider each of these arguments separately.
Here let's just focus on Milgram.
The experiment he designed was designed to highlight the power of authority for humans
by showing the power that concrete authorities could have over ordinary people.
People were recruited in these studies, unknowingly, for the experiment in which they were ordered
by an experimenter, dressed as a scientist in a white coat, to inflict a series of electric
shocks of escalating and, finally, clearly deadly voltage upon a victim, strapped to
a chair in another room, out of sight, but not, unfortunately, for the subjects, not
out of hearing.
As the subjects thought they were giving the victims increasingly more powerful shocks,
a tape recorder in the other room played a series of increasingly desperate cries, while
an actor banged on a wall, then fell ominously silent as the shock levels rose above a certain
level.
Throughout the screams, some subjects exhibited clear signs of dissonance, what psychologists
call dissonance, nervous laughter, sweating, shaking, but reliably, when asked, they would
continue and they would escalate the pain.
At the point where the victim stopped making any noise, many subjects asked to stop and
see if the victim was okay, but the scientist induced them to keep going with a series of
four increasingly stern commands to continue, culminating in the final verbal command if
they kept saying we should check on this person.
The final thing they would say is, you have no other choice, you must go on.
If they still wanted to stop after the fourth command, the experiment would stop, otherwise
they continued giving these shocks until they had given three 450 volt shocks in succession
to the now silent victim.
At which point the experiment was considered complete.
In Milgram's first set of experiments, fully 65% of the participants delivered these experiments
final series of shocks, though many were very uncomfortable doing so.
Now remember, this is an experiment, there are no real people being shocked here, no
one is actually being hurt.
There's a tape recorder, there are actors banging on the walls, this is all fabricated
by Milgram, though the subjects don't know it's being fabricated.
At some point, every participant in the experiment, every subject paused and questioned the experiment.
Some said they would refund the money, they'd give it back, they were paid for participating
in the experiment.
Interestingly though, only one participant out of 40 steadfastly refused to administer
shocks at the 300 volt level or above, at which point it was unmissably clear that the
shocks were profoundly painful, agonizing for the subjects involved.
A later study of the Milgram experiment and similar experiments that were carried out
in future years found that across all of the experiments summed up and averaged, the percentage
of participants who are prepared to inflict under orders fatal voltages remain remarkably
constant at roughly two thirds of all participants.
So here we actually have some numbers, some relatively disquieting numbers to put on the
propensity of humans to be wicked.
Now Milgram's experiment is enormously contested, but in this way it seems very important that
we pay attention to it.
For what it shows is that ordinary people in modern industrial society, at least as
ordinary as college undergraduates can be, and that's one of the challenges to Milgram,
whether or not the test subjects he was working with are actually a reliable body to generalize
across the society.
But given the range of subjects and the range of experiments that were carried on in the
years following Milgram's pioneering experiments, to find again and again that roughly two thirds
of participants in all of these experiments are willing to obey the orders of the experimenter,
the scientist, and cause unbearable, quite literally unbearable pain they think to people
who are suffering in a room a little bit away from them, is an astonishing, and I would
say extremely interesting and disquieting fact about human nature.
Now, Milgram's study was famous for talking about obedience to authority, but there was
another way of thinking about human wickedness, one that talked more about humans' tendencies
to become willingly quite brutal.
And another psychology professor, Philip Zimbardo of Stanford, who actually was a high school
classmate of Milgram's, by the way, thought that he could explore this phenomenon as well.
Zimbardo undertook what came to be known as the Famous Stanford Prison Experiment.
In 1971, Zimbardo ran this experiment and had findings interestingly consonant with
Milgram's. He and his team picked 21 Stanford undergraduates, whom they deemed the most
psychologically stable and healthy of the group that they had assembled.
And more than 75 that they had initially assembled.
And these people were put in distinct roles, they played distinct roles in a mock prison
built in the basement of the Stanford Psychology Building.
Some were called prisoners, others were called guards, and the selection process between
these two groups was random.
The guards were given weapons, they were given clothes, mirrored sunglasses, and wooden batons,
not to be used in violent ways, the batons were not to be used to beat anybody, but merely
to be warned to signify that they were guards.
The prisoners were given ill-fitting smocks and stalking caps that rendered them constantly
uncomfortable. They were called by assigned numbers sewn on their uniforms instead of
by their names.
A chain around their ankles reminded them that they were, in fact, the prisoners in
this experiment.
Again, entirely from the beginning, everybody knew this was a psychology experiment, a study
hypothetical, this wasn't meant to be a real thing.
The participants chosen to play the part of prisoners were then arrested at their homes
and charged with armed robbery. The local Palo Alto Police Department helped by making
the arrests and conducting full booking procedures on the prisoners, including fingerprinting
them and taking mug shots.
If any of you have done any experimentation in the social sciences in the past couple
of decades, you realize that this was truly another era, the degree to which the psychology
experiment was run entirely on its own, irrespective of any standards of conduct or anything like
that is really amazing.
It's caused a great deal of criticism for Zimbardo, but nonetheless, I think the findings
of his project still stand.
At the police station, once they were there, once they had been photographed and fingerprinted,
they were then transported to the mock prison, where they were strip searched and given their
new identities.
Things quickly got out of hand. The guards clearly, so to speak, quote-unquote lived into
their roles more than was anticipated, and from the beginning they enjoyed demonstrating
their superior status to the prisoners.
On day two of the experiment, the prisoners revolted, and the guards, acting entirely
on their own, used fire extinguishers to scuttle the revolt.
As the days grew on, the guards grew increasingly sadistic, humiliating the prisoners whenever
possible.
Roughly one-third of the guards showed clear sadistic tendencies, as psychologically defined.
That is, they clearly and demonstrably enjoyed inflicting pain and getting pleasure from
the infliction of pain itself, no matter that the pain infliction led to other benefits
for them, such as increased power over the inmates, getting them to do what they wanted,
whatever. It was clear that these guards enjoyed the infliction of pain itself, not its benefits
pragmatically for them.
Now for a second here, just think about that. Zimbardo chooses these people precisely because
they are the most stable of the people he's assembled, the 75 people, and these are Stanford
Undergrads. These are pretty emotionally well put together people, right? Even in the early
70s, Stanford's still a pretty good school. These are some pretty well disciplined, well
organized human beings. And a third of them, probably much to their own surprise after
the experiments over, discover that they actually enjoy inflicting pain. That's a thought
to ponder.
On the third day of the experiment, the prison was moved as the guards began to worry that
a prisoner released on the second day because he was clearly undergoing psychological stress
would come back to break up the, quote unquote, prison no longer for those on the inside,
both prisoners and guards, merely considered an experiment. The experiment got ever more
brutal. Finally, on the sixth day, an external observer, a grad student, brought into interview
subjects with so troubled by the conditions and the behavior that she witnessed that she
demanded that the experiment be stopped.
Now, Zimbardo and others have argued that the experiment suggests not a kind of, quote
unquote, Lord of the Flies mentality among humans, but rather instead how malleable human
personality is, how readily we inhabit a role when we are provided with a kind of rationale
for it and a suitable set of surrounding social structures that, in our immediate surroundings,
that allow us to inhabit this role properly. Note how unimportant, this is really interesting,
unimportant the ultimately fictional character of the experiment was to the participants.
Every one of them knew from the beginning that this was entirely a psychology experiment,
right? It was a camp. It was a study. It was something with a finite beginning and a finite
ending. The crucial thing, though, it turned out for everybody, guards and prisoners alike,
was that there were immediate props around the world that could sustain the illusion
from moment to moment that this was a real situation. The guards, once they put on their
uniforms, their sunglasses, and held their batons, began to really live into that role
in astonishing ways. The prisoners, once they had been picked up by the police and transported
to the prison, clearly felt like they were, in some sense, prisoners. Zimbardo and his
team thought that this suggested, maybe evidenced quite conclusively for them, that people are
inherently creatures of context. And the context doesn't have to be in place for all that long.
It doesn't even have to be all that enduring or stable or even ultimately plausible for
us to have it be sufficiently powerful in order to organize our behavior by means of
it. Even a make-believe context, as children will play, even a make-believe context turns
out to have all the reality we need to become, for fully one-third of us, one-third of the
most stable of us, to become sadists. Now, Zimbardo's experiment was controversial
for a number of reasons, and Dr. Zimbardo himself has never been a slouch at self-promotion.
But at self-promotion, I think, for a very good cause, his studies, especially the prison
experiment, show how easy it is for humans to slip into the grip of domination and sadism.
What's equally troubling, though, is other studies that suggest how uneasy, how difficult
people find it to be, to be kind at times. How easy it is for people to be lured away
from goodness, or even decency, by circumstances that seem trivial at best. And that is the
perhaps depressing lesson of the so-called Good Samaritan studies, the third set of studies
I want to look at in this lecture. Let's turn to those now.
Now, John Darley and Daniel Batson were two psychologists at Princeton University. They
decided to run a study to figure out when people would help other people. They took as their
subjects a group of seminary students, assuming that people who were in seminary, I mean,
they hadn't been drafted into seminary, they wanted to go there, they felt some kind of
vocation to care for other people, in some sense. Half the students were given the parable
of the Good Samaritan, right, asked to read it, and then told to go to another building
across campus and give a sermon about that parable. The other half were asked to give
a sermon about job opportunities in a seminary, right? So there are two sets of people given,
one set given the parable of the Good Samaritan and told to give a sermon, another told to
give another kind of sermon that maybe is a little more self-interested. Some of each
group, right, were told they had to hurry to give their sermon. Others in each group
were not told that, right? So you actually had four different sets of people, the hurrying
Good Samaritans, the not hurrying Good Samaritans, the hurrying business opportunities or job
opportunities in the seminary, and the not hurrying job opportunities in the seminary.
Now, on the way to the building where they would each give the sermon, subjects passed
by a person slumped in an alleyway, possibly the victim of a violent attack, but in any
event, someone who looked to be in need of real help, it was ensured that the people
going on the way to give the sermon, it was ensured that they each were able to see and
perceive and apprehend what was going on with this person, right? They couldn't just walk
by unseeing. They saw what was going on. The question that the psychologist asked was,
would these people stop to help the person? As you might guess, the depressing conclusion
was that the people who had been studying the Good Samaritan, story of the Good Samaritan,
did not stop anymore often than the ones preparing for a speech on job opportunities. The factor
that really seemed to make a difference was how much of a hurry the students were in. If
they were in a hurry, only about 10% would stop to give aid, even when they were on their
way to deliver a sermon about the Good Samaritan. That is, a story about how all the people
should stop and give aid.
The ironies of this experiment are manifold. Most profound is the fact that the study uses
the biblical story, perhaps, most profoundly anathema to its findings as a core component
of its experiment. It's almost as if the psychologists were guided by Satan or something. It's just
such a perfect example of why exactly the Good Samaritan story needs to be still listened
to by many Christians. For what does the Good Samaritan story tell you, but that context
should never matter? After all, in the story of the Good Samaritan, the point of the story
is that the person who does stop and help the person on the side of the road, Samaritan
are considered outcasts in the Judaism of Jesus' Palestinian world. People thought that
Samaritans were unlikely to be moral in any situation, much less in a situation dealing
with a victimized stranger. The closest stereotype in the modern world would be the way that
gypsies were stereotyped 100 years ago. A Samaritan would be more likely to rob the
beaten and bleeding victim again than to help him. That would be the expectation.
So Jesus' parable tells you that what matters is not the outward appearance of the person.
The priest and the Levite in the story pass the victim by, though they have all the outward
trappings of those who should help. Instead, the story is supposed to say that it is the
despised Samaritan who helps because he's good on the inside, as it were, because the
good Samaritan is, in some sense, a person whose inner character is so strong as to make
him stop. What the psychologists found out, though, is that hardly anybody actually operates
under those structures. Ten percent of the people who were listened to the story of the
Good Samaritan, but were in a hurry, stopped to help.
The lesson we can draw from all of these stories, the scientists say, is a lesson contained
in what they call the situational attribution theory. This theory says that people are much
more determined by their surrounding context than their innate character. Situations cause
behavior. Behavior, character, does not drive situations. That's the idea. This fact for
the psychologists entails good news and bad news. Bad news first. The bad news is that
character, as an innate moral quality we possess, is not so important as we might think. Perhaps
it's not actually even real. Perhaps we are always just a step or two away from indifference,
obedience for cruelty, or outright sadism. On the other hand, there is in some ways some
good news about this story. In the right context, given the right circumstances, people can
be better than we anticipate. People are possibly going to be able to find resources within
themselves if they are in a context or if they have the time to let themselves be immoral.
This is a sign of some hope. Now, are either of these points really news? That is, someone
might say to the psychologist, don't we already know these insights from the history we've
been studying all along? Don't we know from our ends that people will obey mindlessly?
Don't we know that many people will turn out to be sadists even if we don't see them being
sadists in ordinary life? Don't we know that most of us don't care? The point of the Good
Samaritan story is that everyone should care. But the fact that the story is there suggests
that Jesus thought it was important for people to know that many of them didn't care and
that they should. In other words, whether or not the novelty of these experiments is as
novel as they thought it was is an open question. But I still think, even if you don't think
they're all that novel, I think they're pretty novel. I think they're pretty interesting.
Even if you don't think that, they're still profoundly interesting and sobering studies.
In different ways, they seem to suggest that, in fact, these are not just hypothetical situations
where people might become wicked. We have some confirmable evidence outside of the actual
reality of evil in history itself, but in somewhat more controlled experimental environments
of what actually could happen to people. I would hope that in coming decades, psychologists
maybe especially in the positive psychology movement may find ways to explore how people
can learn to help each other or to resist such evils as well. But this set of very depressing
experiments is at least a good start.
