Over the past twenty years, I've worked with many wounded warriors and those who have endured
other traumas. They each have incredible stories, but those stories are often too painful or
terrifying for them to share, at least at first. They can't explain it to their families.
They may not even be able to explain it to themselves. They just feel they're broken,
damaged, ripped apart somehow from the inside. When I recently asked a young veteran how he
felt, he handed me his sketch pad that he had entitled The Silent Scream, and on the cover
he had pasted a picture of the famous painting The Scream by Edvard Munch. He handed it to me,
then burst into tears. And that's where we started. In this lecture, we'll review what we mean by
trauma. We'll define the diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, and most importantly discuss
how CBT can be used to treat stress response syndromes like PTSD. Essentially, we want CBT
to unstick the brain and begin the process of repairing damage. Although combat-related PTSD
is very much in the popular press, as it should be, I want to make sure we remember that traumatic
events can arise from a number of different sources, random violence, car accidents, sexual
abuse, or even intensely powerful losses. I hope we can highlight common features and common
solutions. Now, SAMHSA, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, tells us
that individual trauma results from an event, a series of events, or a set of circumstances that
is experienced by an individual as physically or emotionally harmful or threatening, and that it
has lasting adverse effects on the individual's functioning and physical, social, emotional,
or spiritual well-being. Traumatic events overwhelm the usual methods of coping that give people a
sense of control, connection, and meaning. This might include sexual assault, combat, car accidents,
or even vicarious traumatic experiences. So how common is trauma? With the exception of sexual
molestation or sexual assault, trauma is much more likely to happen to a man than to a woman. A man
has a 35% chance in their lifetime to witness violence, a woman 15%. For an accident, men have
a 25% chance, women 15, and here this is mostly accounted for in motor vehicle accidents, more
likely to be caused by men than by women. Threat with a weapon, 20% men, 6% women, and the opposite
is true when we're talking about sexual assault. Now, on the severity spectrum of responses to
trauma, it ranges from the expected stress response syndromes to adjustment disorder to
something called acute stress reactions all the way up to the most severe and lasting reaction of
post-traumatic stress disorder, and that's where we're really going to focus. Now, if we look at
the DSM-5, they give us criteria A, B, and C for post-traumatic stress disorder. Criteria A,
obviously, there has to be some sort of trauma that's happened. An individual has to be exposed to
death, threatened death, serious injury or threat of serious injury, and actual or threatened sexual
violence. You can either be directly exposed, you can witness it in person, you can be indirectly
affected by it as in a vicarious trauma of hearing about a close friend or family member, or it could
be repeated or extreme indirect exposure, something that a police officer or a fireman might experience.
For criteria B, there has to be something called intrusive symptoms that are persistently
re-experienced, so it might be recurrent and intrusive memories, it might be traumatic nightmares,
it might be flashbacks or other dissociative reactions. There's a persistent or effortful
avoidance of distressing trauma-related stimuli as part of criteria C. There may be trauma-related
thoughts or feelings or trauma-related external reminders, such as triggers in your environment
that bring back those floods of emotions and reactions. Criteria C for avoidance. Other criteria
might include changes in cognition and emotion, changes in arousal and reactivity, and the duration
has to be greater than one month, and of course, like all of the different mental illnesses that
we've talked about, there needs to be some level of functional impairment. So how would you go about
assessing an individual if they suspect they may or may not have post-traumatic stress disorder?
Of course, the gold standard is a clinician interview, and they do a semi-structured interview
using questions derived from the DSM-5 criteria A, B, and C. Other measures that they might use
and measures that you yourself could find online include the PTSD symptom scale, or the PSS-SR.
They may use the PTSD checklist, or PCL, or the classic IES, or impact of events scale,
developed by Marty Horowitz, and lately revised in the 1990s. So how common is post-traumatic
stress disorder? Well, they estimate that there's a lifetime risk of about 8% for adults in the U.S.
PTSD is more common in women than men, but remember that men are more likely to be exposed
to trauma. Oftentimes, it's the type of trauma that lays the groundwork for the PTSD, where we
know that attacks such as sexual violence or rape in women have a much higher risk for developing
PTSD than for some other kinds of trauma. So what are some of the risk factors? We know that not
everyone traumatized goes on to develop post-traumatic stress disorder, and of course, the most
powerful has to do with the severity of the trauma. But other factors might include whether the
individual has had prior traumas or prior traumatization. Gender, remember that PTSD is more
likely in women than men. If an individual has a prior mood disorder, depression, or anxiety
disorders, or a family history of those disorders, then all of those make the risk for PTSD higher.
But remember, we may not just be talking about post-traumatic stress disorder.
People may be coping with their disorder by self-medicating with things like alcohol or drugs.
They may be reacting to the surge of feelings they have by becoming aggressive or violent.
There may be suicidal ideation or maybe even suicidal attempts. There may be distancing or
breaking away from loved ones. There may be problems at work and, of course, problems in
relationships or even homelessness and joblessness. Now, cognitive behavioral therapy for post-traumatic
stress disorder has been around for quite some time. In fact, most of the founding fathers,
such as Beck or Albert Ellis, all had versions of CBT for post-traumatic stress disorder.
Many started in the 70s working with veterans from Vietnam, and they drew heavily on learning
theories. But remember this was also when the cognitive revolution was just emerging,
and so they began to fold in not just behavioral strategies, but cognitive strategies as well.
Now, some of the things they wanted to help an individual with, remember with behavioral strategies
we want to push against avoidance, so they might help an individual to face those fearful
situations, but they learned that they need to give the individual skills to be able to deal
with that affective arousal. They wanted to teach them somatic quieting. They wanted to teach them
cognitive restructuring. They wanted to teach them how to tell their story, but not become
overwhelmed with emotions. Now, there's a number of different variants of CBT for post-traumatic
stress disorder, which have subsequently emerged. There's stress inoculation training by Mekinbaum,
there's prolonged exposure and cognitive reprocessing by Edna Foa, and more recently there's EMDR,
or eye movement desensitization and reprocessing. Let's focus on some of Edna Foa's work on
prolonged exposure and emotional reprocessing. Now, in this particular kind of therapy,
patients are encouraged to repeatedly recount the event and to confront feared situations in people.
They're taught relaxation or other emotional mastery skills, so that they can convey a sense
of control and safety while they are exposing themselves to these potential triggers. It proceeds
through a number of different stages. So in stage one of this kind of therapy, they do basic
relationship building, establishing safety, education about the disorder, about the treatment,
assessments and looking for comorbidities. So remember this is CBT and it still has those
common features of collaboration. The relationship matters, but you have a partnership with the
patient in developing a treatment plan and setting some goals. In stage two, they teach a motion
regulation skills, self-soothing, somatic quieting, and they begin talking about the event. Let me
give you a sample early homework assignment that a patient might do. It goes as follows.
Please write at least one page on what it means to you that you were traumatized. Please consider
the effects the trauma has had on your beliefs about yourself, your beliefs about others, and your
beliefs about the world. It should sound very familiar. Also consider the following topics
while writing your answer. Safety, trust, power, esteem and intimacy. Bring this with you to the
next session. Now, you might be thinking that that sounds a little bit abstract and it is
on purpose. You need to have the individual to have an exercise that's challenging but not
overwhelming before you move into stage three. In stage three is where the individual starts
reprocessing the memory while being exposed to the triggers and a lot of strong emotions are brought
up. So this is a sample midpoint or more advanced stage three exercise assignment. Write a detailed
account of the trauma. Include as many sensory details as possible, including your thoughts
and feelings during the trauma. The patient reads this assignment in the next meeting,
they may redo this assignment in between meetings, and they also will listen to tape recordings of
their therapy session in between meetings to continue exposing themselves to this particular
story and practicing those emotional mastery skills. So does it work? Well, approximately 80%
of patients show significant reduction in symptoms and improvement in functioning
after 12 weeks of treatment. In a paper published by the Journal of the American Medical Association
in 2007, it showed that greater than 40% of women with combat-related PTSD no longer met
criteria for the disorder after only 10 sessions. I wanted to share a few broader systematic reviews
and meta-analyses, the first done by Watts in 2013 where they looked at 112 studies.
They found that the effective treatments were Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Exposure Treatment
and EMDR. They found that effective medications included Paxil, Zoloft, Prozac, and drugs
Resperidone to Pyramid and Vinlifaxine. And I think the bottom line for this particular study,
it showed that there is a menu of different treatments, both psychotherapies and pharmacotherapies,
that work. There's hope. In a study done by Bisson in 2007 published in the British Journal of
Psychiatry, they did a systematic review of 38 studies and again found that trauma-focused
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy was helpful along with EMDR. In a similar study, more recently done
by Bisson in 2013 as part of a Cochrane review, they found that individual trauma-focused CBT
and again EMDR did better than treatment as usual. There are choices. There's data that
supports that these types of treatment happen to work. So what are some new directions that we
might go in? Now we hear a lot about technology. We hear about internet therapy. We hear about
smartphone applications and I wanted to share just one example where they're looking at a different
sort of trauma and here they're using internet or web-based trauma-focused cognitive therapy.
So with this internet CBT, Kirsting and colleagues in 2013 looked at a group of women that had had
miscarriages, sometimes called spontaneous abortions. Now this can be very traumatic for families and
particularly when folks won't talk about it or if the mother blames herself. In this randomized
control trial, they looked at internet CBT versus weightless controls. They looked at 228 women
doing a five-week CBT intervention and their primary outcome measure, they used the IES,
the impact of events scale. So what was the outcome? So the treatment group for this internet CBT
showed significantly reduced symptoms of post-traumatic stress, prolonged grief, depression and anxiety
relative to the weightless control. They found that further significant improvement in all symptoms
of PTSD and prolonged grief was found from the post-treatment evaluation to the 12-month follow-up.
The attrition rate, as you can imagine, was relatively low, is only at 14%.
Now there's a recent move to move more types of trauma-focused CBT online and not so specialized
just on miscarriages. There's a program at the Medical University of South Carolina looking
at TF or trauma-focused CBT online for children and adolescents. If you are interested, I would
encourage you to look at tfcbt.musc.edu where they have the full program available online.
Let's move to a core exercise that could be part of trauma-focused CBT or nearly any other type of
CBT that calls for somatic quieting and stress reduction. You'll see Maria with her first
experience of progressive muscle relaxation and guided imagery. I would encourage you to first
watch or listen to the exercise, then try it on your own.
All right, so let me give you this. Thank you. And why don't we move on then to our next agenda
item. Okay. And it falls in the category of behavior, but it's really a behavioral skill.
It's a tool that we can take out of our toolbox to help you to feel less stressed. It can take
two minutes. It can take 20 minutes just depending on how much space and time you have to give it.
It falls into a category of interventions called relaxation strategies or sometimes they call it
somatic quieting. And there are lots of different things to try and I just wanted to demonstrate
one today and maybe have you practice it a few times. It is a behavior, but what we'll do is
we'll start with behavior of relaxation. And then we'll do a little bit of guided imagery,
which moves us back into cognition. So it sort of links behavior and cognition. The goal of both
is to help you relax. So it's just to turn down that anxiety and that stress and that tension
a little bit. So what I would recommend we do, we can just sit our things here.
And if I can get you to put your feet flat on the floor and we will try a strategy called
progressive muscle relaxation. Have you done that before or heard about that before? No.
Okay. All right. So it's fairly simple to do. I'll walk you through it this time. You can try
it on your own. If you find that you get stuck, next time we can make an audio recording for you
and you can just listen to me guiding it, guiding you through it as much as you want.
They call it progressive muscle relaxation because you progress from your toes all the
way up through your body and you are progressively relaxing your muscles. It's based on a couple
of premises. One is that we're often stressed and we throughout the course of a day and we hold the
tension in our body, but we're not often aware of the stress. So we may have tightness in our
shoulders or our neck or in our lower back that happens a lot for folks. So what we want to do
is to in a sense control or even manipulate the tension that's in our muscles. So we'll first
tense them up and then we'll relax them and we'll tense them and relax them. And by contrasting
those two states, it helps you to develop more of an awareness of when you're tense and when
you're relaxed. Okay. I'm a little tense, right? Okay. And hopefully we can take care of that tension.
What we'll do is we'll just start at your toes. We'll move to your calves. We'll then move to your
thighs and we'll move up to your shoulders. We'll have you make a fist and we'll probably stop at
that point. Okay. All right. So just go ahead and get comfortable. Looks like you're sitting up straight.
Usually helps to close your eyes and that's just to minimize distractions.
Nearly all of the relaxation strategies start by first focusing on your breath.
We want you to breathe through your nose because it slows down the rate of breathing.
And we want you to breathe from your belly. So those nice deep breaths.
So just give yourself a couple of nice slow breaths.
And just let yourself relax into that chair. Feel it supporting you, holding you.
And just let your shoulders hang loose.
And just let yourself relax.
I'm going to ask you to direct your attention to your toes.
Just think about your toes. Notice how your shoes feel on your toes.
What I'm going to ask you to do is to scrunch up and tighten your toes.
So just scrunch them up. Feel the tightness. Feel a little bit of that tension in your toes,
how they're pushing against your shoes. And then just relax and relax and relax.
Just imagine this warm wave of relaxation is now washing over your toes.
And we're going to tense them up one more time. So tense up those toes. Push out that relaxation.
Squeeze them tight and feel that tension.
And then relax. Relax. And just imagine that wave is again lapping at your feet, relaxing your feet,
your toes. Next, we're going to move up to your calves. And to tighten your calves,
you just raise your heels up off the ground. So tighten your calves. Tighten them.
Feel that large muscle getting a little bit warmer. Feel that tension. Feel that squeeze.
Feel the burn. And relax. Lower your heels back down. Relax.
Feel that nourishing blood rushing back to the calves. Feel that wave of relaxation now washing
over your calves and over your feet. Next, we're going to move up to the thighs.
So I want you just to squeeze your legs. Squeeze your thighs. Tighten those thigh muscles.
Hold it. Feel the tension. These are your largest muscles. Feel the tension. And then release.
And release. And release some more.
Just feel the chair holding those relaxed leg muscles.
Feel that warm wave of relaxation is now washing all the way up to your waist.
With each successive wave, it pulls out more tension.
And you feel your legs completely relaxed.
Next, we're going to go to your hands and your arms. And I just want you to make a tight fist.
So make a really tight fist. You can feel it in your forearms. You can feel it in your hand.
You feel that tension. Just feel that squeeze. And then relax. Let your hands drop back to your
lap. Let your fingers relax.
Imagine now that wave of relaxation is washing over your arms, your legs.
It's nourishing. It's relaxing. It's pulling out all the tension.
And last, we'll go up to your shoulders. And I want you to raise your shoulders up to your ears.
So just raise them all the way up. You feel the tension across your back. You feel it in your
neck. You feel it in your shoulders. Feel the tension. And release. Release. Let your shoulders relax.
Just imagine that wave again of relaxation is washing all the way up to your neck now.
It's pulling out all the toxins, all the tension. Relaxed all the way up to your neck.
The last thing I want you to do, I just want you to tense your face by pressing your lips together
and scrunching up your nose. Just press it together. Feel that tension. Feel the tension in those
facial muscles. And then relax. And relax. Imagine you're in that warm bath now, completely covered
and completely relaxed. So all that tension is gone. Direct your attention back to your breath.
Those nice belly breaths breathing through your nose.
And just do a quick scan of your body starting at your toes.
Working all the way up. If there's any spots of tension, just imagine that wave is coming.
That wave is just massaging away any tension.
Now we're going to try a little bit of guided imagery. Just continue to breathe deeply.
But we're going to help you take your mind somewhere, somewhere that brings you peace or brings you joy.
I want you to imagine your picture of paradise. A place where you would love to go.
Maybe it's on a beach in the mountains in the forest. Maybe it's in the city.
Wherever brings you peace and happiness.
I want you to look around this place that you've created.
This place that's completely under your control.
I want you to notice what's there.
I want you to notice if there are other people around or maybe you're by yourself.
Notice the light.
Notice the temperature.
Pay attention to whatever sounds you might be hearing.
Notice any smells that might be there.
Allow yourself to enjoy the full sensory experience.
This is a place that belongs to you.
Allow that place to feed you, to nourish your soul, to take away your stress and your pain.
Remind yourself that you can go back here anytime you want. It's your place.
I want you to take a last look around.
You're going to say goodbye for now, but you're going to make a promise to come back sometime soon.
Again, notice the sights, the sounds, the smells, and make that promise to come back.
Draw your attention back to your breath. Come back to where you are.
Oh, that was lovely.
So where did you go?
I was on our sailboat and we were off the coast of Maine.
And the water is sparkling and the wind is flowing through our hair. Jack is at the helm.
Big shock of white hair blowing in the breeze.
You can hear the whisper of the water under the boat and the flap of the sails and the breeze.
And that occasional gull that's always chasing you,
crying up above. And I just sparkle with the sun on the water. That was so beautiful.
And I see you smiling, so I guess the effect on your mood was a positive one.
Oh, absolutely.
How about on your tension and your stress?
I feel so relaxed. I almost felt when you started that, like I was going to collapse or something,
like lose all of my support, you know, but it just feels really good, like euphoria or something.
You tried progressive muscle relaxation, more of a physical experience, and then we tried the
guided imagery, more of a cognitive experience. Any differences you noted or want to try one?
They were both helpful, really. I mean, I was, I don't think I would have been able to imagine
what you were having me imagine if I hadn't been more relaxed. You know, I'm always thinking about
what I should be doing and what I'm not doing that I ought to be doing.
So what helps set the stage for the other. Okay. Do you think this is something that you
want to do on your own? Oh, I would love to. Yes. Yes.
And do you see any obstacles that might prevent you from doing that?
Just the time, you know, or someone interrupts or something, but it doesn't take that long.
It's a five minutes that we spent doing it. It wasn't a long time.
Now, there are, if it helps to have an external voice guiding you, I can give you a couple of
websites and resources. And if those don't work, we can do it again next time. And we'll just record
it and we'll give you that audio recording. I liked hearing your voice. It's nice to have that with
me. So let's plan to do that then. Yeah. Thank you. So what did you just see? I hope you noticed
it's brief, simple, but effective. And you can see the implications for those dealing with
a stressful fallout of trauma. But remember that CBT for trauma isn't just about somatic quieting.
That might help you with emotional mastery, but you still need exposures and you still
need the reconstructing, the telling and the reconstructing of the, of the story. Those are
truly key. Let's close by going to our next frequently asked question. A patient asks,
traumas are often random, meaningless events that happen like a car accident or a flood
or a mugging. How can we rationally and cognitively approach something that by its very nature just
doesn't make sense? Terrific question. And I think it's important to remember that even though CBT
is very much grounded in Western empiricism and rationality, the goal of trauma focused CBT
isn't to give a rational explanation for why bad events occur. Instead, it really resides more in
the behavioral realm where we're looking at behavioral avoidance and how particular triggers
now have the power to cause extreme physiologic arousal in an individual. What we want to do
is to create a sense of safety, then behaviorally we want to expose that person to those triggers
and those situations. We've given them cognitive tools not to promote rationality, but we've given
them cognitive tools to be able to do self, self soothing and somatic quieting. So we hope that
the cognitive therapy part can help them do the behavioral therapy part so they, they can begin
to face those triggers and to become a master over those particular fears. So hope you join us
next time for our lectures on forgiveness and meaning.
