Let's go back in time to about six months ago, when Maria was thinking about whether
or not she'd like to go to therapy.
She knew she was stressed.
She knew she was not a regular self.
Her daughter and her friend had mentioned maybe getting some counseling, but it seemed
a bit extreme.
Not to mention confusing when she looked at her insurance and the long list of possible
therapists she could contact.
So she waited, and she waited until finally she read an article online about cognitive
behavioral therapy and how it could give her some practical tools.
After a good bit of soul searching and quite a few calls to her insurer, she found me,
she found my number.
She called, we did a brief interview over the phone, and we set up her first appointment.
Welcome to our 24th and final lecture.
In this lecture, we'll tackle the question of when someone or their loved one should
seek out help and how to go about it.
As you'll see, there are many levels of care and many pathways to finding help, so there's
no one right way.
Nonetheless, finding help can still be overwhelming and confusing, so we will review general guidelines.
From there, we'll look at how to make the most of your therapy once it has started,
how to evaluate its progress, and when to end it or terminate your work together.
We'll see how our three cases ended and wrap up by reviewing some very exciting changes
coming to the field, mostly thanks to new technologies like smartphone apps and sensors.
So do you think that you or someone you love might need therapy?
Exactly how can you decide?
Well, there's no clear cut threshold or rule, but there's maybe several things to keep
in mind.
The first I think about is suffering.
Most people seek out help when they're suffering the most.
We look at intensity and duration.
Now this doesn't have to be a mental illness, but maybe above and beyond what an individual
is usually used to coping with.
Do you feel stuck?
Have you made multiple attempts but failed to make the changes that you need to make
in a high stakes situation?
Has your level of social or occupational functioning been changed?
Has it declined and you've not been able to pull it back up?
And what is your quality of life?
Is it not what you want it to be, or has it dropped suddenly or precipitously?
Are you trying to make a decision?
Maybe you're wrestling with a big decision and you talked with friends and with family,
but it might be helpful to talk with an objective emotionally uninvolved professional who would
be helpful in weighing the options.
Are you trying to build some new skills and maybe you need a work space or a rehearsal
space where again you can work with an objective professional to build those new skills and
get some direct feedback?
Of course, there are other important reasons to go such as having a psychiatric illness
and remember that one in four people or 25 percent of the population will have a diagnosable
mental illness at some point in their life.
Of course, that's a reason to seek out psychotherapy, but even then again it depends on the severity
of symptoms and we're especially concerned about safety or issues of harm.
Now I don't want to downplay the use and the importance of psychotherapy in promoting personal
growth or personal insight and in fact many years ago most people would go to psychotherapy
over an extended period of time because they wanted to better understand themselves or
their relationships.
For example, an individual maybe just experienced her third breakup and she wants to know why
she keeps picking the wrong sorts of guys but she just can't seem to understand why.
It's not about psychopathology, maybe there's some suffering, maybe there's some decision
making, but it's really about trying to understand a pattern and then take some steps forward
to change it.
Now these are all good reasons to seek out therapy but there are a number of important
concerns that yield fairly typical and understandable ambivalence.
So some of the things you might think about is first of all the cost and the time involved
in psychotherapy.
Now it's always surprised me that people might be willing to spend a fairly vast amount
of money for plastic surgery but they're reluctant to spend the time or money in order to improve
their mental health.
What about the availability of quality service?
There are great therapists out there, there's medium quality and there's also fairly low
quality so you do have to be careful.
There might be issues or concerns around privacy.
There might be concerns about the stigma of seeking out a psychotherapist or someone labeling
you with a mental illness.
Is there potential for harm?
If you open things up and talk with a therapist are you afraid that things might actually
get worse?
Do you have a prior family or personal history of psychotherapy?
And often times when I finally connect with patients who may be been considering treatment
for years they'll talk about the horror stories of their mother or their brother or maybe
they saw a therapist and things didn't work out quite so well and it took them a while
before they were ready to try it again.
Now you'll want to think about the different treatment modalities and I kind of placed
them on a continuum where at one end and this is where most people start honestly is you
see a problem, you have suffering, you need to make a decision so you try to do it on
your own.
It's certainly more private, it's certainly less expensive but it might be hard to find
the motivation and if you're stuck in a rut you're probably going to see the same problem
in the exact same way and not really be able to bring in new and genuinely different perspectives.
You might use basic self-help so you might buy a self-help book, you might go to websites,
there are online classes, seminars, videos.
More recently there are technology enhanced self-help programs where you will enroll in
a program online, they might send you text messages or alerts to try to promote you or
prompt you to continue going through their program or there might be other physical and
mental wellness programs such as yoga, meditation or exercises.
If we continue along that continuum you might reach out to some of your friends or some
of your social supports and here we're really talking about non-mental health professionals.
It's a little less private but you're going to feel more connected to someone else and
you're going to get that different perspective and maybe a little bit more motivation.
Further along the continuum you might reach out to other family and friends again to get
their advice and their problem-solving skills and support.
Past that are the peer-peer programs and here I'm thinking about things like 12-step programs
or support groups, again there's not a trained mental health professional but there are other
people maybe outside of your social support network that will give you a richer and more
different perspective.
You might decide to take in-person classes or seminars or you might go to the other end
of the continuum and seek out professional help.
Now even within that particular category you might decide to first talk to a primary care
provider, you might talk to a religious or spiritual counselor, you might seek out a
psychologist, a psychiatrist, you need to make decisions about how long you're willing
to invest, what modality, individual, couples, family, and what theoretical orientation,
CBT, psychodynamic, first, second, or third wave would work best for you and of course
there might be medications that are available at any point in time so that would be part
of your decision process.
Now in reality we know that most people try something on their own first, sometimes it
works sometimes not, they'll try some of the self-help strategies I've mentioned, maybe
spiritual or religious counseling, they might turn to video, internet, or TV.
Do these things work and how can you find the good stuff because it seems like there's
an awful lot of material out there, some of it not quite so good.
Since people tend to try self-help first and move on to professional help, only when they
have to that's where I'm going to start.
So let's review what's meant by self-help and how you can go about maximizing your
chances for success.
Now I've mentioned many of the kinds of self-help, the books, videos, websites, and now smartphone
apps but I think it's important to remember that many of these are written in a for profit
frame of mind, so there's often times a lot of marketing.
I was recently in a bookstore and I saw a book that promised me that I could have self-esteem
within 10 days if I just follow their program, needless to say I didn't buy the book.
We don't want to go for fads, we don't want to go for empty promises, again we want to
look for something that's evidence based.
So what are some of the quality indicators?
Well I wouldn't look for necessarily for the best sellers although that sometimes means
that it's a quality book, so it's not about sales volume or press coverage necessarily.
You want to look for the academic affiliations, background, and training, really the credentials
of the author.
You might want to look for awards such as the Book of Merit Award that's awarded by
the American or the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies.
There's also a really helpful series put out by Oxford University Press called Treatments
that Work.
They have about a dozen and a half books right now, they're very specialized on specific
challenges or specific mental illnesses, but all of them go through a panel of experts
that then give the thumbs up or the thumbs down on whether or not that's a good book
and if it is teaching evidence based psychotherapies.
Now we've mentioned a number of different self-help books throughout this course, so
I hope that you are able to jot those down or look at those websites that we mentioned.
Of course this is not a complete list and new books are coming out all the time, so
I do encourage you to keep your eyes open.
Now with self-help, adherence and motivation are usually the Achilles' heel.
You buy the book, it looks really interesting, and most self-help books sit on the shelf
and they're not used, or you might flip through them or read a chapter or two but don't really
work through those exercises.
When you go to see a therapist, a mental health professional, we know that there's more accountability.
You have more extrinsic motivation, plus you're making an investment in yourself.
You've put your nickel down and decided that you're going to commit to this particular
course of action.
You also have an individual there to ask those probing questions to help you create a case
formulation, develop those smart goals, and make course corrections over time if things
aren't working out.
Now some websites and smartphone apps try to mitigate the adherence issue by using automated
reminders and text messages or setting up incentives or penalties.
They're getting a little bit better, but they're still somewhat all or none.
One size fits all.
So let's say you've tried self-help and maybe you weren't happy with the results or you
just couldn't quite get yourself started, so what should you do in terms of seeking
out professional help?
Well, you want to go back to your reason for seeking help, but you need to get more concrete
and specific.
So what symptoms do you find most troublesome?
Is it depression, anxiety, concentration, drinking too much, merit or conflict?
Narrowing your focus will help you search for evidence-based treatments, and that's the
most important starting point.
So how would you go about finding them?
Honestly, it's fairly straightforward, so you would go to Google and you would type
in evidence-based psychotherapy for blank.
That would be depression, anxiety, merit or conflict, whatever the issue might be.
You will see that there are a number of different websites, as well as academic articles and
books that come up that describe the evidence behind a particular kind of therapy for the
disease or condition you're interested in.
There's also a couple of other general resource websites that have nice summaries about evidence-based
practices.
You might go to the American Psychological Association.
You might go to the abct.org website.
That's the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies.
You might also look at something called NREP.
That's the National Registry of Evidence-Based Practices and Programs, and that's a site
sponsored by the federal government, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration,
and they list literally dozens and dozens of pages by many, many different conditions
about what they believe works best.
So some of the therapies that you find might be things that we've talked about, such as
CBT, or CBTI for insomnia, or TF-CBT, Trauma-Focused CBT for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.
A lot of them will include those same tools in that toolbox that we've talked about throughout
the course, the cognitive restructuring, the ABCD, the dysfunctional thought records.
It might talk about behavioral activation, behavioral rehearsals, behavioral experiments,
and of course self-monitoring, goal setting, action planning, all of these things which
I hope you're quite familiar with by now.
You may hear more about some of the third wave therapies, and particularly about ACT,
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, or Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy.
And let's not forget those special therapies designed for treatment of substance use and
support of families, the Community Reinforcement Approach, and the Community Reinforcement
for Families.
In general, when you do this sort of search, you're going to find more short-term focused
manualized therapies, and in part it's because those tend to be the things that are studied
and they're more amenable to research methods, but I also think in part because when we're
looking at symptom-focused outcomes, those are the kinds of therapies that work.
Now in your search, you may run across something called the Dodo-Bird verdict, or the idea
that all psychotherapies are equal.
The term was coined by Saul Rosenzweig in the 1930s, and it was taken from Alice in Wonderland
where the Dodo-Bird says, everybody has won and all must have prizes.
Well, it's true that most psychotherapies, regardless of their theoretical orientation,
have what are called non-specific or common factors that can be healing.
So these would be things like forming a strong therapeutic supportive alliance.
This would be the use of empathy or unconditional positive regard.
This would be education, persuasion, providing a safe and healing setting, promoting insight
and emotional learning, and all of these things are absolutely important.
But I would encourage you to also think about what does a therapy give you over and above
those common factors.
I would encourage you to look at the evidence, and in fact the Dodo-Bird verdict has been
debunked mostly from studies looking at cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety and for depression.
This category of research is called comparative effectiveness research, where they put two
kinds of therapies side by side, and when we're looking at a specific therapy for a
specific disorder, the Dodo-Bird verdict seems to be a myth.
So let's say that you've picked your type of therapy, but what modality?
Do you want individual couples, family, or group?
And again, it depends on the nature of the problem, and it depends on who else might be
involved.
What would give you the best results?
And that might be something that you would ask a clinician after you make that first call.
But there's also the issue of medications.
Should you try medications first?
Should you try them concurrently?
Should you try them only if talk therapy fails?
Now, I think you do have to be aware of the phenomenon if you have a hammer than all the
world's a nail.
So if you go to someone that only prescribes, they're probably going to prescribe.
But if you go to someone that only does psychotherapy, they're probably going to downplay medications.
So I encourage people, if you think you might be interested, to at least get a couple of
opinions, one from a prescriber, maybe one from a non-prescriber, before you make that
sort of decision.
Once you have your focus, your goals, the symptoms you're going to work in, and an idea
of what treatment is evidence-based, you can use these terms to filter your search for an
actual therapist.
So keep in mind other factors like your insurance coverage, transportation, and accessibility.
All of that's going to be important.
So first you want to send out feelers to see if any friends or family in your social
support network have recommendations.
You want to see if your insurer has recommendations or limitations on who they will allow you
to see or not, and of course you want to try some online search engines.
Now some of the better referral directories, again, can be found at the American Psychological
Association.
They have a site called locator.apa.org, where you enter in a number of different variables
that you believe are of interest and they start filtering down a list for you.
You could also go again to abct.org, or you could go to the Academy of Cognitive Therapy.
That's just the Academy of CT.org, and they again have a referral directory of people
that have received high quality training in cognitive behavioral therapy.
Two other places I wanted to mention, you can always go to your state psychological
association.
For me that would be the CPA or the California Psychological Association.
Or you can use the SAMHSA treatment locator, which is simply findtreatment.samhsa.gov.
So once you find a couple of names, and I would recommend you find at least three to
five names, you'll make the first call.
Usually you will get a voicemail or an answering service, and you want to keep it very short,
you want to keep it very direct, you'll ask for a call back.
So the first filter is whether or not they call you back, and honestly many of them will
not have case openings and you won't get a call back.
So those that do call you back, what questions should you ask, and what sort of response
should you expect?
So here are some sample questions.
You might want to ask things like, are you a licensed mental health professional?
How many years have you been practicing psychotherapy?
Tell me your areas of expertise.
What experience do you have in helping people with these types of problems, and then you
might want to list what you are interested in?
What kinds of treatments do you use, and have they been proven effective?
How do you measure progress?
How do you measure satisfaction?
Do you have any special experience with, and then if you have cultural language, age,
or other considerations, you might want to insert that there.
What are your fees, and what types of insurances do you accept?
Let's move then to the first session, let's say that you've found someone, and you should
always remember that that first session is a two-way interview.
You have a choice, and you should feel comfortable with your therapist.
You want to look at whether or not the therapist is adapted establishing rapport and starting
to build an alliance.
You want to see if there is a clear and immediate discussion of goals and a treatment plan.
You want to see whether or not the therapist seems to have a grasp of the content area
that you're talking about, and ask important clarifying questions.
What are some other quality indicators?
Well, of course, I come from a CBT perspective, but I think it's important that we do talk
about goals, that therapy should not be open-ended, that goes wherever it may go.
You should have an end point in mind, you should have that start on the horizon at minimum.
You want some baseline measurements, you want some assurance that there will be reassessments
over time to track your progress, and of course, there are the, I think of them as intangibles,
the comfort you have, the connection, how motivated you feel, and how responsive the
therapist is.
Now, how long should you wait before you start seeing results?
Well, again, that depends.
If you had a problem that has been present for a number of years, it's unrealistic to
assume it's going to change in a few weeks.
But you do want to have that conversation with the therapist about setting expectations
and establishing a timeline.
Now, I do think it's important that we have realistic expectations, and as we've said
many times, things don't work, and it's simply grist for the mill.
So I think even if it doesn't work the first time, doesn't work the second time, as long
as the attitude is, we'll figure out what happened and we'll try something different
than maybe it's worth continuing.
But how long should therapy last?
When is someone cured?
Well, again, that depends on the goals that you've set, and you should be reassessing
those goals.
Once you've reached those goals, then it might be time to talk about closure.
It might even be time to talk about possible booster sessions.
So let's move to our final clip.
This is a clip of Maria, where she's near the end of her treatment, and we're assessing
whether or not she's made adequate progress.
Well, for our session today, I brought these questionnaires and about my feelings and so
forth, and I thought we might go over and see how my progress was.
Sure, sure.
And this is wonderful.
You know, as we mentioned, and when you first started back in session number two, I think
it was you brought in questionnaires about depression and anxiety and physical symptoms.
That's what this is.
Okay, so you brought these again.
We had looked at a midpoint refresh of those surveys, and it looked like there were some
improvements, but there was still work to do.
So this is a great time to check in again on your progress.
According to the records that I have, you have two more approved visits after today.
So this will be good data to use to decide if we're on track and two is okay, or if
we need to try to extend that a little bit.
Okay.
All right.
So here's what we have, and the first one here is depression.
And it covers cognitive, social, physical, even neurological symptoms related to depression.
And in the beginning, I have that you had started out of 27, which was up at the moderate
severe range.
You had dropped down a bit by midpoint, and it looks like you're at a 13 right now.
It's pretty good.
That's really good.
And I do feel good.
I feel so much better.
Yeah.
And the usual goal is we want to get people below 10, but that's just sort of an arbitrary
cutoff.
We've got you from 27, and it's more than half down to a 13.
I think there are still some very real stressors in your life, and there's some very real things
to be sad about.
But being sad and being depressed are different.
It's okay if you're sad.
Depression is what we're trying to get rid of.
Yeah.
Beginning to see that now.
Well, let's look at the anxiety and see how you did here.
So for anxiety, there were the two categories, the cognitive worry stuff, and then there
were the physical symptoms, the tension and jitteriness that's often associated with anxiety.
And you were in a moderate range at the beginning.
So it looks like from worry, there's still some worry here.
I would say significant worry, probably not debilitating worry.
And again, you have some very real things to worry about.
What we want to do is to make sure that the worries that you're having are not only understandable,
but the worry is used in a way that's constructive or productive.
Worry is a way that our mind directs our attention to a problem that maybe can be turned over
to look at it a different way so that you can cope with it more effectively.
In this column with the physical sensations, it looks like you've dropped quite a bit.
Any idea of why physically you're feeling less?
Well, I'm sleeping a little better, and I think that helps a lot.
And the relaxation techniques that you taught me have been very helpful, really.
I mean, there are times when I do them, right after I do them, that I don't have any pain
at all.
So the relaxation strategies, the somatic quieting, guided imagery, progressive muscle
relaxation, those have really helped with the body aspect of anxiety.
Great.
So depression looks like terrific progress, physical sensations of anxiety, terrific progress.
With worry, there's still some worry that's there, but again, that might be expected probably.
The last one, you had filled out a somatic symptom questionnaire, and this focused on
your own health.
And you had talked about body pains, and part of them were emotionally driven, and part
of them were physical, your osteoarthritis, it seemed like it had been flaring up a little
bit.
And if we look at this, you're in a mild range, and before it wasn't severe, you're in a mild
moderate.
Dropped a little bit, but maybe not as much as we want it to drop.
So how do you interpret that?
Well, I think I can bear it now.
I felt before as if I just couldn't bear it.
I think I can bear it.
I might also try seeing my doctor again, and seeing if there's something physical that
I can do about it, or some medication that I should be taking, but I think exercising
has helped some, and sleeping better has helped some, and just generally feeling better.
Now, it seems from the questionnaires that you make great progress, and we're in a really
good place, and there's still two visits left after today.
But I wanted to talk about something that's a little harder to quantify on a questionnaire,
and I know the, I guess the star on the horizon was you wanted to be the best caregiver.
You could possibly be for your husband.
Recognizing that all of the challenges inherent in that, and you just felt like you're working
harder and harder, but not performing the way that you wanted to.
So if we were going to reassess your job, your performance as a caregiver, how would
you say you're doing?
Well, I would say that I'm certainly doing better now than I was before, because I have
a little more energy, and I have a little more, a few more resources, things that I can
do when I'm not doing so well, but I think I've also kind of given up the idea of being
the perfect caregiver, and I realize that I need some help.
Now, it's, nobody can do it all the time.
I mean, I tried, I really tried, and I couldn't do it.
So yeah, it's been very helpful to have somebody come in and help out occasionally.
So let's talk about some of the lasting structural changes you've made that will continue hopefully
to help you going forward, and one of them was bringing in more help in terms of the
home health worker, and she has more hours and comes in on more days.
Now, are there other changes?
You suggested getting together with that support group for caregivers, and I've done that,
and it is very helpful.
I've met a couple of women there that I really like and respect, and I think I'll try to
continue that, at least for a while.
Okay, okay.
Any other changes that you want to make sure you hold on to, or some things you keep doing?
Things I want to keep doing are, you know, seeing Judith, which we've started doing once
a week, and it's really wonderful to be back with her.
And spending a little more time with my grandchildren, and reading some, I still haven't been able
to read like I used to, but I've read a little bit more, and getting some exercise.
I think that's been a huge help for me.
Not that I'm doing a lot, but some.
Well, I wanted to remind you that part of the philosophy of cognitive behavioral therapy
is that it's symptom-focused, it tends to be shorter term, but it's shorter term because
we want to teach other people the skill, so that when you leave, even if there's not
a therapist present, you've become your own therapist, in a sense.
You can, at any time, take out your toolbox, and you can do a thought record, you can do
some activity scheduling, you can do some active problem solving, or values, clarification
exercises, or what have you.
So, I wanted to ask you, does it feel like you have a toolbox, and if so, what's in it?
Oh, definitely.
Well, one of the things, most important things, I think, is just disputing my ways of thinking
about things.
Sometimes the feelings are so strong that you think they're the only truth, but I think
one thing I learned here was that strength of feelings doesn't mean truth of feelings,
that there are other ways of looking at things, so I think that's helped me a lot, and the
guided imagery has helped me a lot, relaxation.
Well, and I want to make sure that you have all of the forms, you have the websites, you
have the resources, and the tools, and we'll leave it to you to essentially decide, hey,
I'm having a moment, you know, I need to take out my toolbox, and I need to practice one
of these tools, and I think of it just like with physical fitness, even if you've gotten
to peak performance, you still need to exercise, right, or you lose it, you use it or lose
it, right, it's the same for these cognitive behavioral therapy exercises, even if you're
feeling pretty good, you know, practice some mood hygiene, and do some of these exercises
and make sure that you're still on track.
Okay, I'll do that.
So what I would recommend you have two visits and left, and we've been going about every
week, I think we rescheduled once in the middle there, but you have two more left, and I think
it's often helpful for folks to go ahead and schedule those visits, but maybe increase
the time between visits.
Could I save one for emergencies?
And you could save one for emergencies, you could.
So what we want to do then is maybe our next one, it won't be in a week, but maybe in a
month or so, does that, does that feel okay?
I think so.
In a month?
And then we'll have...
I can always play your tape if I miss you.
And you have the tape, right, you have the tape and you can play the tape, that's actually,
that's absolutely yours.
Thank you.
So when you come back in a month, we'll have that, we can also discuss what to do with
that final visit, and if you don't have to use it, you don't have to use it.
I do recommend that folks, especially if you've had something like depression, that you come
in for checkups periodically, and we can decide on what frequency is best for you.
Maybe I can just come back and thank you for saving my life, I really feel that way.
It was a collaborative effort, and you've worked really hard, and I'm so glad to see
that you've gotten so much better.
Thank you.
But what about Carol?
When Carol came in for her reassessments, when we were thinking about potentially wrapping
up, we saw that she had substantial drops in her Beck anxiety inventory.
We saw that she had a new and budding friendship at work, someone that she ate lunch with every
day.
She started taking an art class that she was enjoying, and she had begun having coffee
afterwards with her classmates.
She's still not dating, she's still a little anxious, but she's more hopeful.
She smiles more.
She started dressing differently.
She has hope for her future.
What about Michael?
Now, he and his wife are still together, and he has stopped smoking completely.
He still has a short fuse, as he probably will, for the rest of his life, but he feels
better able to regulate his anger and to not act on his impulses.
He's working less, he's enjoying more time with his family and friends, and he decided
to join an ongoing mindfulness meditation group, and he uses his stress management smartphone
app regularly.
Now, speaking of apps, we're on the cusp of some very exciting innovations and treatment
delivery models and modalities.
We may see less and less of the standard individual 50-minute therapy session, and more tools
are what are called clinician extenders, or technology tools that help to expand the scope
or the work that can be done inside and outside of therapy session.
So examples of clinician extenders would be the use of video calls, the use of websites,
smartphone apps, even interactive voice response calls, those are the robot calls that may
call and administer a questionnaire to you in order to see how well you're doing.
Another program we're recently using at UCSF is we're sending text messages to patients
who request them in order to remind them about their medications, about referrals, or about
homework that they're supposed to be doing.
We've mentioned the therapeutic education system, this is where the online CRA modules
developed by Lisa Marsh.
I wanted to point out one other online CBT program.
It's called CBT4, CBT, the number four, you can find that online.
It is a computer-based training CBT for substance use disorders, and she's published a number
of studies in 2008, 2014, or just a few, where she looked at treatment as usual versus treatment
as usual plus the computer and found that the computer was sufficient in order to decrease
an individual's drug use.
She also found that this was sufficient to help an individual prevent relapse over time
if they continue to using the app.
Now, speaking of apps, I think we have to remember it is let the buyer beware.
We know that there are over 70,000 health apps for smartphones that are out.
Health searches are actually the most common on the internet right now.
Unfortunately, the majority of apps are not tested and they're not studied and most are
not evidence-based.
Nearly 80% of folks that download an app won't even open it, and often the most motivated
and successful people are the ones that use the apps, and they're not the folks that need
it the most.
But if you are in the market and you're interested in some good apps, what are good apps for
smoking cessation?
Well, an example would be, and I'm partial, the UCSF San Francisco General Hospital Stop
Smoking app, or Quit Start is a second possibility.
For depression and mood, we have the Depression CBT Self-Help Guide, or My Mood Monitor 3,
or a recent find, eCBT.
Now there are other systems innovations such as the use of electronic health records, home
health portals where you can log in at home and potentially do some of your CBT work.
That way, put it directly into your health record so that your provider can see it.
We're also testing models where we're looking at health coaches and what we're calling
near-peer counselors.
Third-party payers, insurance companies are also realizing how difficult it is for folks
to find therapy, and they're developing more robust websites.
An example is Optum's approach to teaching online CBT, which is available to their customers
for free.
Now the bottom line is that internet and apps may be helpful, particularly I think for more
mild and moderate cases, and for individuals who are more motivated and able to stick
with them.
The models vary, and the evidence vary.
The standalone models have the worst outcomes, and general I think if you're going to use
a technology tool, it's good to have a person, a professional, that's attached to it so you
have some sort of blended model.
Now a lot of these apps are more engaging than you might think.
They're using something called gamification to pull you in, to excite you, and to pull
you forward.
These really are the new frontier, and I'm certain that you'll hear more about them.
So we've covered a lot of ground in this course, and I hope we've laid a firm foundation in
cognitive behavioral therapy.
I hope you have been able to put a number of different strategies or tools in your toolbox,
and we've talked about enough applications so that you now have the facility to continue
applying that lens and those tools to any new situation that may come up.
I want to thank you for joining me on this journey.
May you be free, may you find peace, and may you have grace and courage.
Thank you.
