Maria is a 70 year old retired school teacher caring for her husband of 45 years.
She has a great deal of chronic stress and more recently she has slipped into a depression.
Her goal is to be the best caregiver possible to feel less depressed, to have more energy,
to sleep better, to prepare herself to cope with the loss of her husband, reconnect with
friends and family, and to find a source of meaning.
Let's move to look at our first clip of Maria where we teach her about the CBT basics and
get her started with behaviors.
So Maria, now that we have a pretty good idea of your baseline symptoms, we've had I think
a good initial discussion about your goals and your smart goals, your specific goals,
we should probably take a step back and talk a little bit about how we plan to get to
those goals, the tools that might be in our toolbox.
And we should talk about cognitive behavioral therapy and sort of how it works.
This is only session number two for you, so it's the perfect time for us both to do a
little bit of board work and to talk about how we think CBT works.
So let me ask you first, so what do you know about cognitive behavioral therapy?
Well, after the first time, I went and looked it up online and it's about thoughts that
you have and feelings and stuff and kind of making that come together.
It's supposed to be helpful for depression, so I thought I'm in the right place.
Sure, sure.
And I think you are, and your right it is, was originally developed for the treatment
of depression and the strongest evidence is in treatment for depression, but we know it
helps for a number of different things like anxiety and like sleep as well.
It's been around...
I'm all in the right place.
Good, good.
And it's been around long enough that there are a lot of subtypes that are specifically
targeted for those different symptoms that are on your list of goals.
Just to explain a little more about how we think this works, so if our goal is to change
emotions and that might be depression, it might be anxiety, both of which are relevant
to you.
You can reach in biologically with medications and change moods that way, but that's not
your only choice.
There's a couple of different possibilities.
We can look at behaviors or activities.
We can also look at thoughts or they call it cognitions and that's why they call it
cognitive behavioral therapy because the two pathways or the two categories of tools
that we'll use fall into cognitions and into behaviors or activities.
And I've drawn this as a triangle with these bi-directional arrows because we believe that
each of these are connected.
So your emotions, let's say you're depressed, it will affect the behaviors that you are
able to engage in.
So if you don't have energy, you don't enjoy things, you're going to be doing a lot less.
It works both ways.
So if you do something you really enjoy or spend time with a friend, it's going to affect
your emotions.
If you have a conflict or a fight or withdrawn, that's also going to affect your emotions.
The same is true for cognitions or thoughts.
We have thoughts all the time, oftentimes out of our awareness.
Some are very sort of superficial and fleeting and some are really sort of in your heart
and they really have a much deeper and longer lasting effect.
But the way you think affects the way you feel.
The way you feel affects the way you think and your behaviors are also going to affect
your thoughts.
So that's really related.
The good news about that is that if we want to change emotions then we can change behaviors
and or change the way that you're thinking.
Let me ask, what questions do you have about this particular triangle?
Where do you start?
They're all going every way.
Good question.
So where do you start?
And there's no one right place to start.
I will say that most people start here in behaviors.
The reason for that is oftentimes if you come in with a substantial level of depressive
symptoms it's harder to concentrate and to focus.
One of your questionnaires you mentioned that was one of the symptoms and the challenges
that you were having.
If you are doing a thought exercise that requires a bit more concentration and focus.
So we want to start with behaviors.
We want to give you some immediate relief and then we'll move on to doing some of the
thoughts.
And eventually we'll try out a number of different tools in both categories and you
can pick which ones you think are going to work best for you.
Welcome to our lecture on depression.
In this lecture we'll define this medical disorder, take a quick look at depression
epidemiology and explore what we know about etiology or what causes it.
We'll then move to look at leading treatments for depression and emerging treatments on
the horizon.
But first let's look at the full continuum of depression, where on one end we have a
medical disorder, we have a serious chemical imbalance such as the case of Maria.
On the other end we have everyday sadness.
Many of us have been somewhere on that particular continuum, oftentimes happening after we've
had a particular loss of some sort.
Many of us have experienced grief or the loss of a loved one, also on that same continuum.
Many times that sadness, that depression we consider non-psychiatric even though it might
be helpful to talk to an individual.
In Maria's case, however, she's gone beyond the level of everyday sadness.
She's gone beyond the level of what we might expect with anticipatory grief and she has
developed what's called a full-blown major depressive episode.
And when a major depressive episode, an individual has a depressed mood most of the day, nearly
every day and or a loss of interest in their normal everyday activities for at least two
weeks or longer.
In some total they have to have a total of five symptoms from a list of nine hallmark
symptoms from depression.
There has to be significant impairment or distress and again this can be at work or
home or both.
So what are those nine hallmark symptoms of a major depressive episode?
Well I've mentioned the first already, so you have to have a sad or low mood or sometimes
it manifests as an irritable mood, particularly in men.
There has to be a symptom called anhedonia.
This is where an individual is unable to enjoy things that they normally enjoy.
There's often changes in appetite or weight and this is a dysregulation so it could go
in either direction.
You could have increases in weight or you could have decreases in weight.
The same is true for sleep.
You could have hypersomnia or you could have insomnia, difficulty sleeping.
You'll see differences in the way a patient moves or in their energy levels.
You'll see something potentially called psychomotor agitation where they are shaky
and jittery or you might see psychomotor retardation which is often described by patients as they
feel like they're moving underwater or moving through molasses.
We often see poor concentration or memory, difficulty following conversations, difficulty
reading, difficulty remembering particular events.
We see fatigue and low energy, feelings of worthlessness or guilt and sometimes we even
see suicidal ideation where a patient becoming convinced that the world would be a better
place if they weren't in it.
So how do we go about assessing depression?
And here I'm really talking about that full continuum of depression.
There are a number of different instruments and questionnaires that are available online.
The first is a classic Beck depression inventory.
He also created something called the hopelessness scale.
It's a 20 item scale which was found to be particularly useful in predicting suicidal
behaviors.
There is the PHQ-9, it's the patient health questionnaire 9 which focuses on depression
and is more and more commonly being used in primary care settings.
Other questionnaires that you might want to consider are process measures of cognitive
styles such as the dysfunctional attitude scale, the automatic thoughts questionnaire
or the attributional style questionnaire.
Now I wanted just to spend a little bit talking about the epidemiology of depression so we
have a sense of how incredibly common it is and what some of the consequences might be.
Now we know that major depressive disorder affects around 15 million adults, that's around
7% of the population that are 18 years and over.
The over all lifetime prevalence is around 17% and the rates are double in women when
compared to men.
The average age of onset is around 32 years but it's important to remember that major
depression, the disease can strike at any particular age from young kids to adolescents
to older adults.
We know that major depressive disorder is the leading cause of disability in the US
for ages 15 to 44.
What about the prognosis, what's the outlook?
Now fortunately a major depressive episode usually remits within 12 to 24 months even
if untreated.
However, once you've had one episode you have about a 50% chance of having a second episode.
If you've had two episodes you have a 70% chance of having a third episode.
And if you've had three episodes of major depression you have a 90% chance of having
a fourth episode.
It's almost as if, probably because of neural circuitry, that disorder is gaining momentum
and the more episodes you have the more likely you are to have the next episode.
Of course in terms of prognosis the thing that we worry most about is suicide, suicide
related to depression.
In the US suicide is the 8th leading cause of death accounting for about 32,000 deaths
per year.
So what are the treatments, unfortunately we do have treatments quite a few of them that
are effective in treating a number of different kinds of depression in many different populations
and age ranges.
We of course have straight behavior therapy, not looking at cognition at all, just the
behavioral component.
We have the combined cognitive and behavioral therapy that we'll talk about in the context
of helping Maria.
We have something called interpersonal therapy.
Now in interpersonal therapy it really looks at transitions in an individual's life.
It looks at those core areas in work and home.
It looks at core contributors to an individual's sense of self and well-being and how those
may have been broken or somehow become disconnected.
It's also short term and it's fairly standardized much like cognitive behavioral therapy.
And lastly we have pharmacotherapy or a number of different kinds of antidepressants and
it seems that more and more come out each decade.
But let's move specifically to talk about Maria's depression and let's talk about CBT
perspectives on Maria's depression.
At this point you probably know the place where we're going to start.
We're going to look at the CBT triangle.
Remember the triangle has emotions, thoughts and behaviors as its three corners.
With depression of course the emotion that we're talking about is sadness, depression.
It may have an element of stress of feeling overwhelmed or feeling worthless or hopeless.
The thoughts if you go back to Beck's original model are thoughts about the self, thoughts
about others and thoughts about the world.
And for a depressed individual all of those are quite pessimistic and quite negative.
For the behaviors there's a special relationship between behaviors and depression where when
an individual becomes depressed they tend to become behaviorally inactivated.
So what would CBT for depression look like?
And I like to divide it into four different stages.
Now this is essentially the prototype of what CBT for depression would look like.
Of course you're going to adapt this depending on where an individual is starting and depending
on what their particular interests or abilities might be.
But in general for stage one you start with education about the disorder, you start with
education about CBT and you've seen us do that with Maria already.
We want to start the process of data collection.
So collecting information may be on behaviors, may be on cognition, may be on both.
We have our theory but we want to see if it actually works in an individual's life.
We'll teach them about something called the three downward spirals which I'll explain
in just a moment.
Stage two is called behavioral activation and mood monitoring.
So here we move to that behavioral corner of the CBT triangle.
If a patient has become deactivated because of their depression we want to turn that around.
If they've been spiraling downward we want to help them to reverse that spiral and start
spiraling up and we'll show you some video clips and exercises on how to do that.
Now for stage three we move over to the cognitive corner of that triangle and we talk about thought
records, cognitive challenges and exercises such as the ABCD.
And in the fourth and final stage we may have to make social and environmental changes.
Of course a lot of depression may reside within an individual but it also may reside or be
driven by things that are in their environment that probably need to change.
So what did I mean by depressive spirals and this is something we teach patients about
in the very first stage of treatment for depression with CBT.
So first we tell them that cognitions and depression are very much related.
We know on that one side of the triangle between emotions and between cognitions we know that
a depressed mood causes an individual to think more negatively and have more negative biases.
But when a person thinks more negatively that causes them to become more depressed which
causes them to think more negatively which causes them to be more depressed and they're
spiraling downward because of that relationship between cognition and depression.
For behavior it's a similar story.
A depressed mood causes inactivity which lowers mood which further lowers activity.
Social contacts are the same.
When an individual is depressed it lowers their amount of social contacts.
They don't enjoy them as much as before.
They may be more sensitive to rejection than before.
They pull away from others but that makes them more depressed which makes them pull
away more.
So cognitions, behaviors, social contacts, three depressive spirals that a patient may
find themselves in.
Let's turn now to look at our second clip from Maria where we talk about the basics
of behavior and depression and how that spiral might be operating in her life.
The way that depression and behaviors are often related and you sort of fit on a couple
of important points.
It doesn't mean if you're depressed that you're inactive or you're not doing anything
or you're not working hard.
You are.
You absolutely are.
But it often feels like you're sort of spinning in place.
Yeah or swimming through molasses or something.
And it's not just the energy or your sense of what you can accomplish.
It's also the kinds of things that you spend your time doing.
And I know just ten years ago, or less than that really, you were a school teacher.
That's right.
And brought you a lot of joy and a lot of...
I retired when he got sick.
I wanted to be with him.
So one big source of behaviors in pleasure and enjoyment and meaning, teaching, that
was no longer part of the picture and that's going to affect your mood.
That's right.
I still get letters sometimes or emails from my old students.
And if I were you, I would savor those.
Absolutely.
I do.
I love being with the students.
But behaviors are, you know, our job, our profession is a big category.
But there are a lot of other behaviors that happen throughout the day.
Many of them small, but when you add them all up, they can have a fairly substantial effect
on your mood.
And by behaviors, I'll just give you an example.
So taking a shower in the morning is a behavior.
What you eat for breakfast is a behavior.
If you read the newspaper, if you go for a walk, if you call a friend on the telephone,
if you turn on the TV, all of those are...
I used to do all those things.
Yeah.
And what happens with depression is a lot of those things go away.
And people just stop.
And again, it's a gradual insidious sort of process that you slowly pull away from those
things that you enjoy, the things that gave you meaning, the social contacts, the sources
of reward, of pleasure, of positive reinforcement.
And eventually you're spiraling down to a place where you are now.
Sometimes those things pull away from you too, though.
When somebody is sick the way my husband is sick, it almost seems like people are afraid
of you.
They want to be helpful, but then they...
My husband, he acts kind of strange.
He'll ask the same question, saying, how's Ed?
And it's a very kind way that he has, but he's asked it like seven times.
And Ed has been dead for five years.
People just don't know what to say, and they're afraid to come by, and so your world gets
so tiny.
You're right.
It's just us, you know.
And you brought up, I think, a really good point that behaviors, the whole gamut of behaviors,
are quite different.
Some are very simple and are absolutely within your control.
If you choose to read the newspaper or not, that's pretty much in your control.
What your friends are willing to do or your social supports, how they behave, isn't entirely
in your control.
I think where we want to start, so we want to start with things that are within your
control, maybe things that used to be a part of your day that have somehow slipped away,
and if we can start adding those back in and seeing if they have an influence on mood.
So what the theory tells us is that when a person's depressed they do less, which makes
them more depressed, which makes them do less, which makes them more depressed.
That sounds like the story of my life lately.
So we want to reverse that spiral and have you add some things in to lift your mood,
which makes it easier to add things in, which lifts your mood.
So what we need next from Maria is data, and specifically we need data about her behaviors.
So how would we go about pulling out or eliciting that data?
Well we would most likely start with an exercise called activity monitoring.
We would ask her to start recording all of the activities, or at least the highlights
of her activities throughout any given day and throughout the week.
We would also ask her to rate her mood on a simple 1-10 scale at the end of each day.
We would ask her to note potential relationships between the activities she's chosen to do
in a day and her mood at the end of that day.
If you're curious about what a standard activity monitoring form might look like, again I encourage
you to Google Satterfield, Minding the Body Tools, and clicking on the companion website
and downloading the tools from that website.
In general what an activity log would look like is very similar to a calendar.
So across the top of that calendar you would just have the days of the week, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday.
On the left hand column you would have the hours of the day.
So essentially you've created a grid where the individual simply has to write in, maybe
hour by hour, maybe not that granular.
The major activities that they did during that day.
We want to know when they got up, we want to know when they went to bed, we want to
know if there were social contacts, if there was work, if there were play, if there were
good events, if there were bad events.
And again at the end of the day they would rate their mood on a 1-10 scale.
Sounds very simple.
We could also use this same activity record to do something called activity scheduling.
So you could just use it as a way, a sort of diary to write down what you've done, or
you could prospectively look into the next week and say, okay where are my open windows
of time, and can I make plans to do something with a social support, or with another individual,
or maybe just something that I think will have a positive impact on my mood.
Now one thing that often happens with folks who are depressed is they've lost the ability
to enjoy things.
So when you tell them you should schedule something that you would enjoy, it's a little bit confusing
for them.
Sometimes they need to be reminded of things that they used to enjoy, sometimes they literally
need a list of things that might be enjoyable, and they can select from that list.
What I often ask them to do is to suspend disbelief.
Right now their cognitions are telling them, I shouldn't do this because it's going to
be terrible and I'm not going to enjoy it.
Okay, let's push pause on that cognition and let's test it out.
Go ahead and schedule it, do the activity, and once you've finished, re-rate the level
of pleasure that you've experienced.
Oftentimes, in fact, nearly all the time, they find the activity was much more pleasurable
than their depression had predicted it would be.
Let's move on to our third clip of Maria.
In this particular clip, we see her begin to work with an activity schedule, and we
see how it might be used in a therapeutic session to highlight the relationship between
activities in mood on any given day.
So why don't we start then by looking at your activity schedule.
It looks like you were trying to field that out this past month.
Tried to.
What was this like for you to record your activities in your mood?
Well, at first it seemed like I just didn't have anything to write down.
It was just hardly anything, so I started doing some things so I'd have something to
write down.
Okay, and that's not a bad thing, right, because we want to raise your activity levels
and we hope that helps to improve your mood.
It looks like you were successful, so you have quite a few things on here, and I can
see too that a lot of those activities are caregiving related.
Yeah, well that takes most of my time, yeah.
And down here at the bottom, so your mood, you have a two, a three, a two, a one, a three,
a three and a five.
So pretty low mood for most of the week, but then it looks like at the end there you had
a good day.
Yeah.
Well, why don't we, again, we're looking to see how activities in mood are related for
you and in your life.
And I usually like to look at one of the lowest days and the highest day and see if we can
see any differences between what might have caused those differences in mood, okay.
So why don't we look, say, it looks like on a Wednesday there you had a mood of one and
do you want to, what do you see about the activities there?
Well, you know, I got up in the morning and Jack had wet the bed, so we were starting
off kind of on the wrong foot and he was in a bad mood and, you know, I got him breakfast
and got him cleaned up and everything and I just didn't have any energy, I just didn't
feel like doing anything.
I don't know, I finished, got through lunch and everything and he fell asleep and I just
kind of sat at the kitchen table, looked out the window, that was kind of the whole
day.
Okay.
I had TV on in the background sort of for company.
Sure.
Sure.
And your mood that day was a one, so that was a pretty rough day.
Oh, yeah, it was a terrible day.
Yeah.
Well, let's jump ahead a few days and it looks like your mood, that was your five, your mood
of five on that particular day, which is pretty different.
That was the day I decided to start writing some things in, do some things so I could
write something in.
And tell me about these activities you had.
Well, I had breakfast and you know, Jack was in a pretty good mood and I called my daughter
and, you know, just to touch base and everything and she said she could come over for a little
bit and so she came over and I got to go out of the house for the first time in maybe
ten days, you know, and get some errands done, which I needed to do, but I also took a little
guilty moment for myself and had a Starbucks cappuccino and then I got some takeout for
dinner and I didn't have to cook for one night, so that was nice, too.
So there were a number of things.
You called your daughter and you took the initiative to do that and she came over and
you were able to go and do some practical things, not like errands or things you have
to do, but then there were things you wanted to do.
You treated yourself and got some takeout and your mood at the end of that day was a
five and if we were to contrast the activities in that day versus the activities in the low
mood day, so what differences do you see?
Well, there were a lot more activities in the day when I felt better.
I don't know if it's because I felt better that I could do more or that I did more and
it just lifted me a little.
Right, and it is sort of chicken in the egg, so you feel better, you do more and we had
talked about those spirals with depression.
When you feel bad, you do less, but that makes you feel worse.
Yeah, that's right.
It works the opposite way, too.
I think there's a spiral going in the other direction.
So it looks like on the low mood day there was that downward spiral and on the high mood
day it was more of an upward spiral.
Now what I want to point out are these activities on the positive mood day, the higher mood
day, those were under your control that you made a decision whether intentionally or not
to call your daughter, have her come over and give yourself the space to do some other
things that you needed to do.
Now what if you did that more than just one day a week?
What if it were two days or three days a week?
I wonder if there'd be time, you know, but I could try.
I would be willing to try.
So one of the challenges we have is there's the very real and important need of caring
for your husband and a need to find support for you, respite for you, of having the home
health worker or your daughter or whomever pick up some of the...
My daughter really has her own life, you know, she's got her own kids to worry about.
The home health person, I don't know, my husband doesn't really like her very well.
I hate to leave her with her for very long.
So it sounds like that sort of on a practical level, that's something we can talk about
and the home health worker stirs up some feelings and thoughts for your husband, but stirs up
some feelings and thoughts for you too.
I sort of feel like it's my job, you know, I should really be doing it.
And I know it's easy as a caregiver to feel that you should be on 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, but in reality it's not possible.
It doesn't seem to be, you're right.
Even if you're a superwoman, it's just, it's not possible to happen.
And maybe the best gift you can give your husband is to take care of yourself so that
when you are there, you're fully there.
So from here, we would probably have her continue adding in new activities and assessing their
effect on her mood.
We want to look for both quantity and quality, and we want her to have a balance between
the things she has to do and the things she wants to do.
Recall though that this relatively simple exercise isn't just about activities and it
isn't just about creating those tiny little bumps in mood.
It's helping to break through a depressed person's sense of helplessness.
An individual who's depressed, they've tried all sorts of things and nothing seems to work.
So in essence, they've given up.
But by giving them this relatively simple exercise, by doing something very small that
bumps up their mood ever so slightly, it shows them that change is possible.
It shows them that they can make a decision that will have a positive consequence in terms
of lifting their mood.
If they can make one decision to do one little thing that helps a little bit, what if they
did two?
What if they did three?
What if they did four?
What if they filled their entire week with those sorts of activities?
What you do matters.
Now recall the four stages of CBT for depression.
So first was education and data collection, followed by the second stage of behavioral
activation.
So we're now in cognitive restructuring, or the third stage of CBT for depression.
Remember we want to look at these constellation of cognitions, which tend to cluster around
negative thoughts about the self.
I'm unlovable.
I'm unworthy.
I'm a failure.
Negative thoughts about others.
No one cares about you.
People will hurt you and exploit you.
Negative thoughts about the world.
It's a very cold and caring, dangerous or even violent place.
There are different ways to measure those cognitions.
Of course, you can do a thought record.
You can interview the patient.
But you can also use questionnaires such as the dysfunctional attitude scale or the
DAS.
Now the DAS used to be quite a long questionnaire, about 100 items.
It's been recently reduced to only 40 items.
And it's particularly good at measuring self-critical thoughts and unrealistic expectations about
the self, including things like perfectionism.
It's also useful in helping to predict who's going to do well in terms of being able to
treat or to remit their own depression.
What are some sample items from the DAS?
Other items such as my value as a person depends greatly on what others think of me.
If other people know what you're really like, they'll think less of you.
My happiness depends more on other people than it does on me.
If you cannot do something well, there's little point in doing it at all.
Of course, we also want to remind people or teach patients about the common habits of
mine we've talked about earlier.
Oftentimes, we make particular shortcuts that aren't very rational in terms of how we understand
or explain the events happening in our world.
We may use personalization, magnification, minimization.
We may selectively attend to all of our failures or things that just didn't go so well.
We may use all or none thinking.
We may imagine or tell ourselves what we believe other people are thinking.
And we may use fortune telling.
And when someone's depressed, they have very dire and pessimistic predictions about the
future.
So for our cognitive interventions with Maria, we'll use self-monitoring or cognitive checklists
first.
We'll use exercises such as the ABCD, or we'll do something called the 7-column DTR.
DTR is dysfunctional thought record, sometimes called daily thought record.
And why would this be helpful?
Remember it's partly about the skills of identifying cognition and wrestling with that
cognition.
But it's also about empowering a disempowered, hopeless, hopeless individual to show them
that they can do something to help themselves to feel better.
As they begin wrestling with more balanced and more helpful cognitions, in the process
they learn to show more loving kindness to themselves.
They give themselves more compassionate explanations than they might have done before.
Now stage four, or the last stage of CBT treatment, involved social and or environmental changes.
So for Maria, this might be reaching out to her friends that she's lost touch with.
I'm also going to encourage her to join a caregiver support group, given how common these
kinds of stressors are that she's going through.
It's often helpful to talk to other people who have been there too.
Another change we might encourage her to make is to use some of her financial resources
to hire more in-home support so that she can have more time off and not expect herself
to be a caregiver 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Now what about medications for depression?
As I mentioned there are quite a few that are effective.
For Maria she's decided to try CBT first and if she needs to add in medications later she
would do that.
Folks often ask which is better medications or CBT, partly a personal choice, but the
bottom line is that medications and CBT are equally effective for mild to moderate depression
at the end of treatment and at a six month follow up.
But if you go further out it looks like CBT is superior to medications unless a person
wants to be medicated for the remainder of their lives.
And why might that be?
If you think about CBT, remember my goal is to help you to be your own CBT therapist.
To give you a toolbox of interventions that you can pull out and use anytime you want.
So when you finish CBT for depression you've ended your connection with me, but you still
have that toolkit and you can keep dosing yourself essentially with those interventions.
In a study done by Rob Derubis and Steve Holland in 2005 they did a randomized controlled
trial of cognitive therapy versus pharmacotherapy and moderate to severe depression.
They had 24 sessions delivered by experienced therapists and they found that cognitive
therapy was as efficacious as pharmacotherapy.
Now this is notable in that it used to be the assumption that if someone was severely
depressed you had to break out pharmacotherapy and you couldn't do cognitive therapy and
that just doesn't seem to be the case.
In a similar study by Siegel Vincent and Levent in 2002 they looked at combination therapy
and they found that combination therapy of medications and cognitive therapy was probably
superior to either alone.
End of the story is you could use either when more severe cases I would probably recommend
a combination but again depending on patient preferences.
So in summary we see that depression is a common condition.
At the far end of the spectrum we do consider it a medical disease that does have medical
treatments.
There are clear elements of cognition and behavior.
We start with the basic behavioral tools such as activity scheduling and then we move
on to do the more advanced cognitive work.
Now in our next lecture we'll be talking about anger.
Thank you.
