Anxiety and fear are adaptive functional features within the human emotional repertoire
that only sometimes misfire and cause impairment.
However, when they are excessive, when they do misfire, they can cause a great deal of
pain and suffering, as in the case of Carol with her social anxiety.
Let's look at an early CBT exercise helping Carol apply the CBT model to a recent event.
I want you to think about a time just this past week, so relatively recent, when you felt anxious.
So we're going for an emotion.
So can you recall a time, maybe even just the past few days, when you felt anxious?
We were in a meeting at work.
Okay.
And in the meeting, my boss who was talking called on me and asked me to directly answer a question.
And I got really anxious because there were a lot of other people in the room and I didn't know if I would get the answer right.
Gotcha.
So I got really nervous about being called out in front of everybody.
Okay, perfect example.
So relevant, timely, absolutely, you were in a meeting and your boss called you out, put you on the spot, more or less, and you felt anxious.
So we have the emotion.
So what we want to do is we want to fill in these two as well.
So the triggering event was your boss calling on you in a meeting and expecting an answer, and you felt anxious.
That was the emotion.
Now what were the thoughts you had when your boss called on you?
It was something along the line, so please don't call on me, please don't call on me.
Right.
And then, you know, they did, and I guess my next thought was, I guess panic is more of a feeling, but I was just trying to find the right answer,
and I couldn't.
And, you know, it took me a lot longer to find it than I think it probably would have taken someone else who was normal and didn't have anxiety about something like that.
Okay, so there's a lot that's there and that's fantastic.
And what we're doing is we're taking a real world event and we're sorting its elements into different buckets.
And we have three different buckets.
And you've mentioned anxiety, you mentioned panic, and you're right, that is more of a feeling.
Some of the thoughts were, oh, please don't call on me.
Uh-oh, I just got called on.
I can't do this.
Wait, I have to think of the right answer.
And there's probably your mind was going a mile a minute.
And what we want to do as you get more practice with this is figuring out, first, post-hoc, how to slow it down and actually write down,
literally write down those thoughts so we can capture them again to work with them.
The part we have less of is the behaviors.
And it sounds like there was, you were called on and there was a pause.
And what did you do?
What were your behaviors?
Were you, did you start fidgeting or did you look down at the ground or did you speak up or did you turn red or like what happened?
I don't know if I turned red.
I'm sure I did.
Okay.
But yeah, I started fidgeting.
I started looking through my papers to find the answer even though I knew it wasn't there.
And, you know, eventually I tried to make something up and, you know, and it was one of those questions that could have had, you know,
a million different answers and, you know, mine wasn't necessarily the one that she was looking for.
Okay.
That was, I guess, the big thing.
And when you spoke up, do you think you had good posture?
It was bold.
It was confident.
It was loud.
People heard you.
Or was it a different way?
I doubt it was like that.
Okay.
I didn't feel like that anyway.
I think I was nervous and my voice was probably shaking because I didn't want to, I didn't want to answer to begin with.
Yeah.
So I'm hearing there was some paper shuffling, maybe a little bit of stalling, some nervousness, maybe visible nervousness.
When you spoke up, you may have sounded audibly nervous or uncertain or definitely lacking in confidence.
So we have the panic and anxiety tied to the thoughts tied to the behaviors and they're all related to one another.
So what did we see?
We saw a relatively minor work event where Carol's anxiety was impairing her performance.
We want her through working through these examples to see the relevance of the CBT model and explaining and hopefully intervening with her anxiety.
Now CBT was originally developed as a treatment for depression, but the developed tools have proven effective in managing anxiety in a number of other disorders.
The classic menus of CBT tools are about the same, but in this case we look more at the misperception of threat at excessive physiologic arousal and the avoidant behaviors that often come with anxiety.
Let's move now to our second clip with Carol where we help her understand why it's important to journal her behaviors and we start stitching all this data together.
And what we'll want you to do before we start reaching in and trying to reconfigure thoughts and behaviors, we just want you to do some self-monitoring.
In the next week, I would say pick a couple of negative emotions and a couple of positive ones.
Write down what the triggering event was, what were the emotions, what were the thoughts, what were the behaviors.
Put those in your journal and we'll start to stitch those together.
And what you'll find is after we do a number of these, we'll be able to find that there are common threads.
So even though the circumstance is different, some are at work, some are at home, some are with strangers, some are with friends, the same kind of thoughts pop out.
We have habits of mind and certain thoughts will pop out because that's part of your history, that's part of what you bring to the table.
Certain behavioral habits will pop out, maybe even emotional habits.
And once we have a better idea of how that works for you, we'll have a better sense of what will the most effective interventions be to change thoughts or to change behaviors.
So at this point, we've partnered with Carol and hopefully empowered and interested her in collecting more information on cognition and behavior.
As she brings in this data, we'll start to flesh out the CBT model of anxiety, what causes it, what maintains it, and how it's treated.
But before we go there, we need to look at what fear and anxiety are and the functions they might serve.
We will define a family of anxiety disorders that includes things like phobias, obsessive-compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, social anxiety, panic, and generalized anxiety disorder.
First, some definitions. Fear and anxiety are psychological and physiologic responses to danger.
In general, fear is conceptualized as an emotional and physiologic response to a definite threat.
Think about your fight or flight reactions, the sympathetic nervous system. Fear is basic, primal, and gripping. Its purpose is to keep us alive.
Now, anxiety is different. Anxiety is a diffuse, unpleasant, vague sense of apprehension.
It's influenced by culture, by cognition, personality, and a number of other internal factors.
Anxiety can trigger fear, and fear can result in lingering anxiety.
Now, fear and anxiety are protective emotional reactions in response to real or anticipated threats.
They can be healthy, and they can be central to our essential harm avoidance systems.
An anxiety disorder, however, refers to a heterogeneous group of syndromes characterized by abnormally increased sensitivity to fearful stimuli,
inappropriately intense experience of fear or anxiety, or inappropriately extreme action based on fear or anxiety.
Now, there's a wide range of normal in the population and large cultural differences in what's considered normal,
but in general, the diagnosis of an anxiety disorder is based primarily on the degree of interference with normal function at work and in your social or personal life.
So, how can you decide if there's interference? Remember that a little anxiety is actually a good thing.
In fact, it might even improve performance. If you look at the Yerkes-Dotsen curve, which is an inverted U,
it reminds us that low levels of arousal equal low levels of performance. We just don't care. We haven't risen to the occasion.
Moderate levels of stress, anxiety, or arousal actually increase our level of performance.
We are energized to face whatever challenges ahead of us. Higher levels of arousal again lower our performance because now we're overwhelmed with our stress or our anxiety.
For anxiety disorders, though, the anxiety has gotten so extreme that it's taken on a life of its own. In a way, the disorder becomes the stressor.
It becomes a mental illness. Now, for Carol, she isn't just shy. She's impaired and she's often frozen by her anxiety.
She's a lovely, kind, hardworking person, but she's often terrified and consequently, she's alone.
She does meet diagnostic criteria for social anxiety disorder or what used to be called social phobia.
There are, of course, the number of other anxiety disorders, generalized anxiety, which is mostly about worrying.
Panic disorder, an individual has a panic attack and they're worried about when the next attack might happen.
Obsessive compulsive disorder, specific phobias like fear of heights or fear of spiders, and, of course, post-traumatic stress disorder, which we'll talk about in a later lecture.
As with any patient in cognitive behavioral therapy, he would first want to do a semi-structured diagnostic interview.
We did this with Carol. Then we sent her home with a packet of questionnaires and some self-monitoring homework regarding her social contacts.
So what sorts of questionnaires are good for measuring anxiety? Well, we have the classic Beck anxiety inventory.
We also have the anxiety sensitivity index developed in 1992. It's a 16-item questionnaire that's especially predictive of panic attacks and panic disorder.
We have the anxious self-statement questionnaire focusing on cognitions, 32 items developed by Kindle and Holland.
Commonly used in primary care settings is something called the GAD7, seven questions about worry and anxiety, and also the DASS21, which looks at depression, anxiety, and stress all at the same time.
Now Carol scored in the top of the moderate range for anxiety on her questionnaires, but she also showed mild symptoms of depression and shared that she occasionally drinks just a little too much before bed as a way to help her with her anxiety and to help her get to sleep.
Now there are medications which can be helpful for anxiety. They tend to fall into two categories. There are the antidepressants, even though initially developed for depression, they work for many anxiety disorders as well.
Then there are a category of drug called the benzodiazepines. These are the anti-anxiety drugs such as Xanax, Ativan, or Clonopin.
Of course all medications tend to have side effects on their pros and cons and it's a personal decision if someone wants to go that route or not. The other route available is of course CBT with its cognitive and its behavioral interventions.
So what would CBT for anxiety disorders look like?
Well first I want you to recall the CBT triangle with its emotions, thoughts, and its behaviors. The components of course would include behavioral interventions such as exposures to a feared stimulus.
Remember when an individual is anxious they often avoid the things that make them anxious. So we want to diminish those avoidant behaviors.
Cognitively we want to challenge those thoughts about threats in the environment or challenge those thoughts about not being able to cope with something or the beliefs that they don't have adequate coping resources.
We would also want to teach sort of a mix of cognitive behavioral exercises, something called reality testing, helping them build a sense of confidence or sense of mastery, and of course relaxation or somatic quieting.
Now I wanted to say a word about avoidance or something called safety behaviors, and I think that it's something, these sorts of behaviors are very natural when an individual is afraid, you avoid the thing that makes you fearful.
In Carol's case she's afraid of people, she's afraid of connecting with people and embarrassing herself, and really underneath all of that she's really afraid that maybe she's not that lovable and people won't want to be around her.
So what she's done is to engineer her life and situations so that she has as little contact as possible with other people.
In her social life, well it means she doesn't really have one. She doesn't return phone calls, she doesn't reach out to others, she doesn't respond to conversation opening comments from potential friends.
At work she's in and out as quickly as she can, she keeps her headphones on, and again she's creating this bubble of safety around her so it doesn't raise up her social anxiety.
The problem is it prevents her from connecting with others and it prevents her from testing out those beliefs that she actually is competent socially and people might actually like her.
So we want to do some exposure therapy with her and in particular we want to do a kind of therapy called systematic desensitization and as the name implies we will systematically desensitize her to things which cause her anxiety.
What we'll do is we'll have her construct something called an anxiety hierarchy using Suds ratings and Suds stands for subjective units of distress.
We'll have her create a list from zero no anxiety at all all the way up to 100 of different things that eventually she will need to go out and experience so that she can develop that sense of mastery and overcoming her anxiety.
So let's move now to watch Carol creating her Suds hierarchy.
Okay Kira, why don't we take a moment to learn about something called the subjective units of distress.
Now it's kind of a funny term, we just call it a Suds hierarchy.
It's a hierarchy because it ranges from zero doesn't cause you any distress all the way up to 100 and I want to take a step back to talk about why we would need something like this.
If you recall the hallmark of anxiety is avoidance that's the most common behavior because it's instinctive if something makes you feel anxious you avoid it.
Problem is if you avoid things that would build your social muscles you never get any stronger but we don't want to put you in a situation that's so overwhelming that it becomes traumatizing.
We want to put you in a situation that it's just the right level where it's challenging you but it's not too much.
You can have some success then you move to the next level and the next level and the next level so you start somewhere near the bottom and slowly work your way up.
We know though that people are different what might be a 50 for you is different than my 50 or a zero for you is different than my zero.
So we want to create a personally tailored Suds hierarchy so we can get a sense of what's okay what's overwhelming right now it's at 100 and we can think about the steps in between.
So if we're thinking about social interactions and this could be work or this could be home interactions with another person.
What would be a zero something that you feel totally comfortable about you don't get those anxious thoughts those anxious feelings what would that be.
I guess reading a book with my cats at home or watching TV.
So it's the social interactions really just with characters on a page so that's that's pretty non threatening.
I'll put you down at a zero so reading a book where would talking on the phone with your mom.
Well I guess it depends but or your sister.
Yeah.
So my sister would probably be probably like a 20 or 30 probably 20.
This is a midpoint of 25.
So we'll put your phone call sister and his mom higher or lower than that.
She's higher.
Is she above or below a 50.
She's I would say probably right out of 50.
And what would be the absolute most embarrassing difficult anxiety provoking social situation you can imagine.
And for a lot of people just to give you an example is standing up in front of a crowd of people and giving a public speech that's like a hundred.
That would be a hundred for me.
Okay so all right.
So with Carol we would continue this exercise and we would flesh out all of the levels of her studs hierarchy.
We would then tell her to start at the bottom something that causes her no to very little anxiety.
And between this appointment and the next we would want her to go out and to experience that event as often as she could until it lost its charge.
Once she was successful in doing that she would climb to the next rung on the ladder and again the next rung and the next rung.
What's important though is that she's in charge.
She has the power.
This is her hierarchy.
She's created herself and she can go as fast or as slow as she wants to.
But does exposure therapy work?
And I'll just mention one study actually a comprehensive review of studies done by Choi, Fire and Lipsitz in 2006.
What they did is they looked at systematic desensitization and something called in vivo or live exposures.
They found that the live intense exposure sort of all at once were most effective but people didn't like it and they tend to drop out.
It's a little too intense.
What seemed to work better and people stuck with it more consistently was systematic desensitization as we use with Carol creating that hierarchy and slowly working their way up the hierarchy.
Now on the cognitive side we might also want to teach Carol to do her ABCD or a thought record as a way to wrestle with her cognitions.
In fact she might actually do some of this while she's working her way up that ladder of HRSA's hierarchy.
I'd also like to illustrate though one other behavioral strategy that we used with her to challenge her cognitions and that strategy was called a behavioral experiment.
So we've talked about the importance of testing out thoughts that thoughts are opinions.
Sometimes they're helpful, sometimes they're hurtful.
And we did an exercise called the ABCD where we drew the four squares and talked about activating events and beliefs that it was all out of the moment and it was all on paper and those can be really helpful.
But I wanted to talk about a different kind of way to test out thoughts that's not in writing, it's in action and it's something that's called a behavioral experiment.
In my experiment it just means we're testing out a thought and you had a thought that you shared recently in one of your homework assignments that you feel very awkward and uncomfortable in public.
And the first thing that happens in the morning after you get up and go through your routine you walk to work and you pass by people and you feel uncomfortable.
It's not hugely intense but you feel uncomfortable and you imagine people just aren't particularly interested in seeing you.
So it's sort of a bad way to start off every day feeling sort of anxious and unwanted.
I was hoping we could explore the possibility of doing a behavioral experiment while you're walking to work.
So what exactly would I have to do?
Good question because we want to be specific and we want to make sure that it's helpful and realistic.
So what you would do, same morning routine, walk to work exactly the same way.
If you see someone walking towards you, you make eye contact, that's important.
And you say good morning or hello or how are you or just a simple social greeting and smile and continue walking.
Okay.
Does that seem doable?
I can tell you're a little apprehensive about that but what do you think?
I'll try it.
Okay.
Yeah.
All right.
So what is it that you're going to do?
So let's say tomorrow morning you're walking to work and there's a mom with a stroller sort of walking towards you.
What are you going to do?
I will make eye contact and I'll smile at her and maybe say hi or good morning.
Okay.
And see how she reacts and how that makes me feel.
So now you see how a behavioral experiment works and how you might set it up.
What I'd like us to do is to fast forward to the next session after Carol has gone out into the world.
She's done her homework and now she's going to come back and tell us how it went.
Carol, I believe you had a behavioral experiment as part of your homework.
Is that right?
I did.
Okay.
Well, why don't you talk about first what the experiment was and then let me know how it went.
So what was the experiment you were doing?
So you said that I should walk down the street on my way to work because I had told you that it was a big source of anxiety for me.
It always felt like people didn't want to talk to me or that I was taking up too much space or in their way.
So my homework was to instead of ignore them or try to get out of their way to actually say hi and make eye contact and smile and see what they did.
So that's tough.
And I remember you were a little nervous about doing that and you were worried you might chicken out.
It was.
What happened?
I was nervous at first and I chickened out a couple of times when I started.
But after I did it once or twice, it wasn't so bad.
The first person that I successfully said hi to was actually just like a little kid.
I don't know.
He was probably 10 or 11 and he was swacking his dog and I, you know, smiled and said hi and he said hi back.
Okay.
And then after that I tried a little lady walking down the street and she looked fairly, you know, non-threatening.
So I tried that with her next and she was really sweet and said hi, how are you?
And I said good morning and then, you know, we continued.
Did you feel connected in that moment, in that second with her?
A little bit, yeah.
And did it feel pleasant or unpleasant?
It felt pleasant.
It felt pleasant.
It was definitely unexpected.
Yeah.
But it felt good.
I mean, there were a couple of people who, you know, didn't say hi back.
Sure.
Sure.
But I'm not sure if they heard me or saw me.
I don't know.
Now you had mentioned before that you're especially anxious around men, especially men that would be in your dating range.
So did you pass any guys in that range and did you say hello to any of them?
I didn't, I mean, I didn't say hello to any of them per se.
But I did, I tried to make eye contact with them.
In a smile?
In a smile.
In a smile.
Okay.
And what did you get back?
I got, you know, a smile back if they were looking.
Okay.
All right.
And would you say that was a positive, negative, neutral?
I'd say it was neutral because it was nice that they smiled back, but I was still really nervous.
And those, going back to those beliefs, and it was the beliefs that you were testing out that people would reject you and people don't want you around and people don't won't acknowledge you and it would be unpleasant.
Do you think those beliefs were supported or they were proven not to be so accurate?
I think they were proven not to be so accurate.
So it sounds like this was a success for Carol, but where would we go from here?
Well, we'd want to repeat symptom measures to assure that her anxiety scores were indeed dropping.
We would want to make sure that we're working in service of her smart goals with a special focus on increasing the quantity and quality of her social contacts.
We would want to move to give her more control in developing assignments.
As the therapy progresses, we want the therapist to step back and the patient to step up so that they become not just a partner, but potentially the leader, the driver in their own therapy.
Let's move now to our Frequently Ask Questions section, and we often get a number of questions about anxiety and about stress, and particularly about medications.
Here is our first Frequently Ask Questions.
Sometimes emotions are so fast, it doesn't seem like thoughts could have come first like the CBT model suggests.
Could thoughts maybe come after emotions?
Maybe thoughts are just a way to put a nonverbal emotional sensation into words.
Well, it's a good question, and we do have this very simple linear cognitive model given to us by Aaron Beck that says we have an activating event.
It triggers particular thoughts or beliefs.
Those thoughts or beliefs then cause different behavioral or emotional reactions.
That's in its most simplest and I think surface form.
But I think you're right that oftentimes many of those pathways are so well-worn, it seems to happen almost instantaneously.
For Carol, she has a lot of very deep-seated beliefs about social situations and how threatening they might be.
So when she walks into a cocktail party, it's not a slow progression through a linear process.
It feels like it all happens at once.
But if we were to somehow be able to push slow-mo, we could see that Carol was actually going through these processes.
They're just happening on a subconscious, very fast level.
Now, is it possible that it happens the other way around?
Of course it's possible, but I think either way, whether cognitions come first or whether cognitions are the explanations for emotions and behaviors,
they give us a substance that we can capture, that we can write down and that we can begin to work with.
Second question, are there medications that can help with stress?
I know they won't solve the problem, but maybe they can quiet the storm enough so that I can do what I need to do.
And as I mentioned earlier, I think this is a personal decision, but there's a number of different pros and cons to weigh.
To my knowledge, there is no medication that cures stress.
There are medications which can dampen the physiologic sensations of stress.
There are medications that can help us to feel less distressed, to have more energy, to be more motivated.
Again, there aren't necessarily medications that can reach in and solve those problems in our environment that might need our attention.
For me and in my conversations I have with patients, I often think it's more a matter of degree.
Are they able to roll up their sleeves and do the work that needs to be done,
or are their physiologic symptoms so overwhelming that we first need to bring those down to a level
where they can begin to do the work that they have to do?
That varies by person to person, so again, a personal decision.
Now in the next lecture, what we're going to do is to switch gears and we're going to look at CBT for depression,
and we'll return to the case of Maria, our caregiver.
Thank you.
