The kids are sick again and need to stay home from school, but work is really busy and your
boss has already chewed you out for not being a team player.
Your bank account is almost overdrawn, you still haven't paid the electric bill, and
your elderly mom still needs you to cover her dental bills.
Your adult brother still thinks he's a kid, and he's off on one of his adventures, no
doubt assuming he can call you when he needs something.
Your house is a mess, your refrigerator is empty, and the dog just peed on the carpet
again.
Your spouse?
Well, that marriage ended several years ago, and now you're on your own.
Welcome to Life 101, and to our lecture where we'll talk about the phenomenon we call stress.
We will define our constructs, relate them to cognition and behaviors, and demonstrate
both a stress assessment and a somatic quieting exercise with our cases.
So what is stress?
We've all experienced it before, we all know roughly what it entails, but it's officially
defined as a highly orchestrated response to a perceived threat or challenge that includes
biological, behavioral, cognitive, and emotional elements.
Now the stressor is the real or imagined thing, the event that sets the whole process off.
Now it's important to remember that humans are unique in one respect.
We can stress ourselves out with hypothetical events, things that never happen or might
never happen.
We need to keep in mind a couple of other features of stress when we're thinking about
how to help people cope more effectively.
First, is it a chronic or is it an acute condition?
Now acute stress is usually short term, it's time limited, and sometimes that level of
stressful arousal can give us the energy, the tunnel vision, and the focus to face whatever
stressor or challenge lies ahead of us.
Chronic stress is a very different story.
We get that chronic burn, that chronic wear and tear on our bodies, often times from
things that won't change or can't change.
Now from a CBT perspective we are of course going to look at the cognitive viewpoint
of stress, and we're going to look at a very specific kind of cognition called appraisals,
but we also want to look at the behavioral viewpoint of stress, and behaviors are important
in sort of two different points on the stress process.
First of all, we might be engaging in behaviors that make us more or less likely to experience
stressors.
On the other end of the process, we may be engaging in behaviors as a way of coping
that could either be adaptive or maladaptive.
Let's move now to look at our first clip where we do a much more in depth assessment
of stress with Maria.
So I think the next thing we should probably do is talk in a little more detail about your
experience of stress, and you had mentioned that you've been stressed for quite some
time.
It's mostly related to caregiving.
You're worried it's affecting your health and we know that it's affected your mood.
So I just wanted to get a little more information on both the quantity and the quality of stress
that you're experiencing so we know a better idea of what we're trying to tackle.
So if you were going to rate on a scale of 1 to 10, how your average stress level, say
the past couple of weeks, what would you say you are?
We're 10 is the highest level of stress.
Well, maybe a 7, I feel stressed most of the time.
So you're a 7, and on any given day, do you ever get up to a 10, or get up to a 10?
Do that easy.
What's the lowest level you can get to usually?
You mean to relax down to, I don't know, maybe a 4, maybe a 5.
You range between 10 and 4, but it sounds like you're more often closer to 10 than a
10.
Yeah, I feel like that.
It's a rare thing when I really feel anywhere near good.
And how much of, say, the past several months have you felt stressed?
Is it present all the time, 75%, 50%, 25?
It feels like it's all the time.
It's a little less, sometimes a little more, but it's all the time.
So it's pretty much chronic.
And how long has this been going on?
Six months a year, two years?
Really the last two years, I just haven't been myself.
Okay, so about two years, pretty chronic and non-rebiting stress, and at least recently
it's been up near a 10, but some more than just recently, it's been pretty high for quite
some time.
So it's not surprising that your body and your mood have had a lot of wear and tear.
Now I wanted to talk a little bit about the sources of stress, and I know that caregiving
and your husband's illness is the primary thing.
And you've talked a little bit about finances too.
You've put money away, but there's still, of course, the stress and concern.
Other than caring for your husband and the financial stressors, are there any other things
that you think contribute to your stress levels?
I worry what's going to happen after he goes.
I mean, if I were 50, I could imagine making a life for myself.
I mean, it's something I can't even really think about because it means him dying, and
I feel so bad about that, that I'm going to be here and he's not, but I don't know what
kind of life I'm 70, you know, how am I going to make a life for myself at 70?
I worry about that.
That's the stress for me.
When you're caring for someone with a chronic disease, and especially something like a progressive
dementia, the grieving starts right away, really, because you can see the trajectory,
even if you don't know the end point, the speed, the progression, you know that it's
coming.
And to me, it sounds at least in part, you're grieving and you're worrying about the loss
that you will experience.
I mean, he doesn't even know our children anymore, and in a lot of days, he doesn't know me.
And you know, to tell you the truth, some of the time, I don't even know him anymore.
It's almost like we're two strangers and we're trapped in this nightmare or something.
He's not the man I married or that I spent 40 years raising kids and wrestling through
a life with, you know, it's just, he's not there anymore.
It's like his spirit already went, except once in a while, you know, it kind of peaks
through again.
Savor those moments.
Yeah.
Maria, I want you to know that you're not alone in this.
And I know you're coming here and working on things and-
Oh, when I do appreciate it, I really do.
It means so much to me to be able to come and talk with you.
First, I thought it would just be one more awful thing.
I'd have to fit into a day, but it just means so much to me to be able to say what I'm feeling.
Good.
And I want to just plan to seed, if I may, about another possible source of support for
you.
You are not the only person going through the loss of a spouse or caregiving of a
spouse, and I hear it from so many different patients of how isolated and alone they feel,
and they will join a caregiver support group, and they'll realize that they're not alone,
that there are other kind, caring, compassionate, stressed out, maybe depressed people who are
also caring for their spouses, and it becomes a wonderful source of support to know that
it's not just you, but other people have those same worries and those same fears.
I'm sure that's true.
Have you ever gone to a support group or thought about it?
No, I've thought about it.
It all seemed like I'd just be depressing to see how many as depressed as I was.
Okay.
All right.
Well, I'll just, I'll leave it as a seed for right now, but hope that you'll think about
it.
I will.
I will.
I can personally recommend a couple of caregiver support groups.
In fact, we run one just around the corner here, but think about it, and we'll revisit
it a bit down the road.
Okay.
Thank you.
So, I want to just wrap up our assessment about stress.
You were sharing the sources of stress, and it talked about your worries about losing
your husband and what comes next.
I wanted to ask if there's any other sources of stress.
It seems like enough.
I feel, I don't know, I feel guilty a lot of the time.
Maybe that's a source of stress.
What is that related to?
I feel guilty about everything.
I mean, I feel guilty about feeling so tired.
I feel guilty about not being able to help my husband more than I do.
I feel guilty about being the one that's going to be alive, and he's dying, and I mean, sometimes
I just wish it were over, you know, and I wish he could die and be out of it, and that
way lies madness.
I mean, I just feel really guilty about even having those thoughts, so I don't know, are
those stressors too?
Yeah, and it's all part of the picture, for sure, and again, you're not alone in that.
Those thoughts are common, in fact.
I feel guilty about being here, because he's not like me.
My next question is not about the sources of stress, but the consequences of stress,
and you've mentioned the trouble with sleeping, and of course we've talked about depression
and anxiety.
What other ways does stress affect you, or your relationships or your behaviors?
Well, I think I'm not as outgoing as I used to be, you know, I'm so focused on him and
us and getting everything done.
You know, I used to spend more time with my grandchildren and, you know, call my son
who's out in San Francisco, and, you know, this, I just, I don't have the energy for
it.
I just don't even want to cope with it.
So I think that might be one.
Any other changes in behavior or other consequences of stress you've noticed?
I don't know.
Irritability sometimes, I guess.
Okay.
In a common sometimes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I'm just so frustrated when everything, you know, you try so hard to make it all right,
and then it just isn't, and it can't be.
So how do you cope with stress, or what sorts of things do you do to feel better?
I just try to keep going, I guess.
I like music.
Sometimes I put jazz on or something, listen to that, listen to Edith P off when I'm really
down.
Okay.
All right.
I don't know.
Music sometimes helps.
It used to help more.
Sure.
Sure.
But that can help.
And do you ever reach out to others as a way of coping or?
I used to.
More.
I mean, my daughter, yeah, I mean sometimes, she's so kind, she's so busy with her own
life and the kids are at a very busy age where she's always driving soccer practice
and this and that, so I don't like to lean on her too much, but we do talk sometimes.
Okay.
Maybe I should call her more, but it's hard.
And what could another person do to help you with your stress?
What would you like others to do?
Let's talk, I guess.
Just have someone else to talk to.
Would help to have, I guess, would help to have more help around the house.
Maybe, I mean, we can afford it.
Money is scary, you know, that it goes so fast, but we can afford that.
Maybe I should get some more help.
You know, I keep thinking like I ought to do it all myself, but you're right, I can't.
Are there any groups, communities, neighborhood groups, spiritual communities that you're
part of that might be a source of support for you?
We used to go to church, you know, but I don't know, that doesn't seem to, it's another
thing that we did together.
Yeah.
I don't like to go alone without him.
Okay.
If we're just creating a list, I'm just going to write down the things that you used to
do and you can decide if you want to revisit those or not.
And we want you to have a menu of options available so when you feel like you need support, you
have some choices that have already been written down.
Well, maybe my friend that I told you about earlier, Judith, I really am, she means the
world to me and we haven't been talking much lately.
It's kind of like I've shut her out.
It's so embarrassing when somebody that's known you the way you were, you know, comes
over and then Jack is all, you just don't feel like having him remember it that way.
Such a fine man.
I think we have a much better picture of your stress, the causes, the contributors, the
saturation, things you do to cope, the way that it affects you.
We're going to sort of add that into our formulation for you and into our treatment
plan.
We want to make sure you feel supported.
We want to make sure that you have plenty of healthy ways to cope with your stress.
As you mentioned before, some things are out of your control, your husband's illness.
So some of those sources of stress, we can't change, but maybe we can change the backup
or the support that you have that you need in order to address those challenges.
Thank you.
Okay.
So let's break down what we've just seen in this extended clip.
On the surface, we've done a basic stress assessment.
Let's review those common assessment questions that you could use yourself.
Step one, first question, how often have you felt nervous or stressed out in the past month?
Question two, what's been causing you to feel stressed out, the stressors, always remembering
to ask yourself, is there anything else since multiple stressors can occur at the same time?
Step three, how long has this been going on?
We want to know if it's acute and if it's chronic, and if it is chronic, what has the
duration been?
Step number four, how has this stress been affecting you?
How has it affected your relationships or your performance at work?
Any other effects?
And the last question, what have you been doing to cope with this stressful situation,
your coping behaviors?
How well has that been working for you?
And the important question, how can others help you?
How can you elicit those helping behaviors from people in your social support network?
So when thinking about stress assessments, it's important to know where it is that you're
starting.
Those five questions about frequency, cause, duration, impact, and how you're coping.
But what else did you notice in the extended clip from Maria?
I hope you noted that grief and loss is very much entangled in her experience of stress.
She's anxious about her future as she imagines a future without her husband.
She also talks about the importance of social support and how oftentimes in her life now
it's missing.
But there are two other non-specific factors that I wanted to point out.
First, notice that the therapeutic relationship matters very much.
Some criticisms of CBT say it's too data-driven at the expense of interpersonal connection.
I couldn't disagree more.
I will not hesitate to push aside all of the questionnaires and all of the data if someone
needs support and someone needs that sense of connection.
Secondly, I want to point out that just by coming to therapy, by giving herself that
degree of love and attention, by investing in herself, she's already started the coping
and the healing experience.
It takes a lot for people to make that first step and have that first appointment, and
I always try to remember that.
So what then is our plan with Maria?
Now, she's already said that she's not interested in medications at this point in time.
We know that she has both changeable and unchangeable stressors, many of them are chronic.
She also has untapped coping resources, both financial resources as well as social support
resources.
She has a number of complex emotions that need to be sorted out, they need to be normalized,
and we need to help her to work through them.
She has become cognitively and behaviorally unbalanced over time, so we want to take a
step back and help her with those thoughts and help her with those behaviors.
We will of course want to treat her depression and give her help around the practical challenges
of caregiving, but we will also want to help her with some somatic quieting exercises,
some relaxation strategies, and help her with some cognitive work to address her hopelessness
and her feeling of being overwhelmed.
Now for somatic quieting, we're essentially creating what's called a relaxation response
or the opposite of a stress response.
We are battling two primary physiologic stress pathways.
We are battling the HPA axis, the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis, responsible for secreting
a stress hormone called cortisol.
We're also battling the sympathetic adrenal medullary system, our fight or flight response,
responsible for secreting epinephrine or adrenaline.
So what is the relaxation response, a term coined by Herb Benson in 1976?
Well essentially it's the opposite of the stress response, a sort of yin to the yang,
but in the relaxation response we get a decrease in respiration, decrease in heart rate, decrease
in blood pressure, and a decrease in those stress hormones.
So how do you get to the relaxation response?
And fortunately there's a number of different ways you can accomplish this goal.
You usually need some form of focused concentration, maybe on your breath, maybe on a guided image.
You need a quiet environment and you need a passive attitude of allowing yourself to
slowly sink into the process of relaxation.
Let's move to our next clip of Carol where she's learning a very basic somatic quieting
exercise.
So why don't we do diaphragmatic breathing and again there's, it's a very forgiving method
so you know there's no absolute way that you have to do it.
Even in general most folks will do it while they are seated.
You want your feet flat on the floors just so there's no constriction with your legs
and you feel relatively comfortable.
You want your posture to be fairly good, not uncomfortable but fairly straight and that's
just because we want your lungs to be able to fully inflate and if you're kind of hunched
over it's harder to take a deep breath.
So what we want to do is use the diaphragm and they call it diaphragmatic breathing because
you're using the diaphragm.
The diaphragm is a flat sheet of muscles that's right below your lungs and when you breathe
in it helps to expand your lungs and kind of pushes your stomach down.
Think of it kind of like a bellows and it fills air up into your lungs and then when
you exhale it contracts and pushes that air out.
So if you're doing diaphragmatic breathing properly your belly should move a little bit
and the way you can tell that is if you feel your sternum and that's where your ribs come
together.
You want to just put a couple of right below your sternum a couple of fingers there and
you can press just a little bit.
You're going to breathe in through your nose and you breathe through your nose just because
it slows your rate of breathing.
Your nostrils are just a smaller opening than your mouth so it just takes you a little longer
to get a breath in.
So you want to breathe through your nose and if you're breathing from your belly then
your hand should be pushed out a little bit by your belly.
So why don't we take just a breath and we'll breathe in through our nose and then when
you exhale you can even push a little bit, you can exhale through your mouth.
Try another one through your nose and then through your mouth.
So it looks like you're doing pretty good and I want to tell you what I'm looking for
because you might want to when you get home look in the mirror and make sure that you're
doing this okay.
So one thing I'm looking for is your shoulders.
If you are anxious in your breathing people tend to take more shallow rapid breaths so
they'll go and you can actually see my shoulders going up and a lot of times people aren't
even aware they're doing that.
It may be triggered by a situation that's made them anxious and they just start panicking
a little bit you know and their shoulders are going up so we don't want to see your
shoulders moving and I didn't really see them moving and I saw the diaphragm working
a little bit.
Why don't we do that just a couple more times again, find your sternum and you breathe
in through your nose, out your mouth and yet again and again, notice you're feeling a
little bit different after just a couple breaths?
A little bit, a little lightheaded.
Yeah, so just a little bit and you can alternate the rate sort of how many breaths you're
taking per minute.
Usually in only five breaths or so you'll notice that there's a little bit of a difference
and we want you to do this when you're in bed so you'll be lying flat and again you
can put your finger here just to feel it but if you feel like you understand how to do
it and you're doing it right you can also just look down if you see your belly breathing
a little bit then you know you're doing it right.
We'll only want you to do it for five to seven minutes or so so that's not very long at
all.
So tell me how you would do this, what you think might get in the way, any things you're
worried about?
I think it would be fine, especially laying in bed like you said, I'm there anyway.
As long as that's okay, you mentioned that most people do it in a chair or sitting.
So bed would work if I'm there anyway.
I don't know how I feel about doing it in like a meeting or at a holiday party or something
I feel like that would look weird if I was just sitting there with my fingers on my sternum
but in bed I think it would be fine.
And you know I think after practice you'll get to be a pro at this and you don't need
to use the fingers that's just to make sure that you're doing it right and what we're
hoping it will generate eventually is that you're a little more aware of how you're
breathing throughout the day and I wouldn't want you in a social situation to disengage
and focus on your breathing and just forget all the people around you because the point
is we want you to be able to interact but it's okay for you to be aware of tension in
your body or how you're breathing throughout the day and even if you're waiting for the
elevator or you're on your walk home if you can say breathe and you know then to take
some belly breaths to slow your breathing down not to breathe with your shoulders those
anxious breaths and that's okay you don't have to do the whole five minutes just an
awareness to slow things down and again to turn down the volume that's what we're after.
So we've learned a little bit about the yin and yang of stress and relaxation both mediated
by your autonomic nervous system.
What I would encourage you to do is throughout the day to think about events that trigger
your autonomic nervous system that either push you up or push you down maybe getting
an obnoxious email from a co-worker arguing with a bank about refinancing your mortgage
getting an extra long hug from a grandchild or unwinding in a bubble bath with soft jazz
playing in the background.
It's all about the outside those outside events getting inside through our autonomic nervous
system and it behooves us to be aware of it and potentially to change it.
But let's tie the experience of stress back to cognitive behavioral therapy.
How does stress relate to thoughts feelings and behaviors.
Now remember that stress affects cognitions emotions and behaviors but it is also affected
by or maybe even caused by cognitions and behaviors.
So let's take a look at the basic cognitive behavioral model of stress.
Now on the cognitive side I mentioned a special kind of cognition called appraisals.
Now appraisals come in two different forms primary appraisals which are our thoughts about
the nature of a stressor.
Is it big is it small is it threatening does it matter how's it going to influence you
how likely is it that it will actually happen.
The second kind of behaviors or appraisals are called secondary appraisals and these
have to do with our estimations of our own coping skills and our coping resources.
If you have very high or strong primary appraisals it's a very big stressor that's likely to
happen and you have very low secondary appraisals you don't know what to do and you don't have
any coping resources your experience of stress is likely to be quite high.
From a cognitive behavioral perspective what might go wrong is that an individual's appraisals
may be out of sync with reality or may be out of touch with their actual coping skills
or coping abilities.
If you're interested in how to uncover those appraisals and to begin restructuring or wrestling
with those appraisals I would encourage you to Google Satterfield Minding the Body Tools
a website will pop up click on companion website and downloadable tools and you'll see a worksheet
to guide you through working with and changing primary and secondary appraisals.
So what about the selection of coping strategies and here we're talking about those behaviors
again.
So a stressor happens you have your appraisals you have a stress response then you do something
maybe helpful maybe not helpful but we think of those coping behaviors in two different
categories one focuses on changing your emotional state so helping you to feel better somatic
quieting falls in that category or the other category is problem focused so you may roll
up your sleeves and get to work studying for that test that's causing you to be stressed
so emotion focused and problem focused coping one is not necessarily better than the other
it depends on what needs to be done at the time and you need really a balance between
those two particular kinds of coping what CBT data does is it looks at your preferred
coping styles and see whether or not you're selecting the most adaptive strategies.
So you want to select behaviors you may select behaviors that evoke a relaxation response
emotion focused coping you may decide to reach out and ask your social supports for help
that could be emotion focused coping but might also be problem focused coping you could have
task oriented behaviors if you're really stressed about the state of your home you decide to
roll up your sleeves and do some home improvements that would certainly be a problem focused
coping you could also just decide to schedule pleasant activities things that bring you
a sense of joy or at least allow you to escape an unchangeable stressor for a short period
of time but does it work what does the data show us now most of the high quality research
in the stress management cognitive therapy realm is done by Mike Antoni who's at the
University of Miami essentially wrote the book on what's called cognitive behavioral
stress management or CBSM he's done a number of studies of regular folks but also individuals
that have chronic medical stressors such as HIV cancer or chronic fatigue now the most
common outcomes he's looking at are depression anxiety quality of life and for folks with
medical conditions he's sometimes looking at adherence to treatment or the progression
or slowing of their particular illness what he's found is fairly strong support for a
mix of cognitive restructuring wrestling with those thoughts of relaxation coping skills
and also assertiveness and particularly being able to and feeling entitled to ask for the
support that you need in a recent interesting study of CBSM he looked at women with breast
cancer with Stagall and other colleagues in 2014 they did a nice long five year follow
up using CBSM and found that in these women with breast cancer who undergo underwent this
particular treatment they had less depression at higher quality of life I wanted to end
by talking about a different form of I guess we would call it a third wave type of stress
reduction intervention it's something you might have heard of it's called MBSR or mindfulness
based stress reduction mindfulness based stress reduction is a modern variant of meditation
and yoga that has been applied to stress reduction like meditation it builds concentration
present focus acceptance and somatic quieting all probably familiar at this point it was
developed by John Kabat-Zinn at the University of Massachusetts and has since been applied
to a wide array of different medical problems but it all started with chronic pain now most
MBSR programs last about eight to ten weeks they consist of two and a half hour weekly
classes and oftentimes will have a single day or maybe a weekend retreat at the end it's not
particularly spiritually based but there's certainly a Buddhist element in Buddhist roots
to the mindfulness that these individuals are learning now MBSR has been shown to improve
chronic pain low back pain coping with pain in general stress mood and even an interesting
study looking at improvements in immune function I wanted to share just one meta analysis published
in 2004 by Paul Grossman and his colleagues in the journal of psychosomatic research what
they did was to look at twenty high quality MBSR studies that covered a wide spectrum
of patients cancer pain cardiovascular disease depression anxiety and they looked at the
standardized measures of physical and mental well-being and across the board they found
moderate to strong effect sizes so it looks like there's really something there to MBSR
and I would encourage you if you're interested just to Google online mindfulness based stress
reduction tools and a number of tools videos and workbooks will pop up
so let's wrap up just by talking about one of our frequently asked questions and this is a
question that I often get is resilience to stress and enduring characteristic or is it
something that comes and goes how can I make it stay well I think it's a little bit both I think
it's partly dispositional and maybe that has to do with our genetics maybe it has to do with early
life experiences but I do think that resilience and certainly cognitive based stress management
are skills that we can learn we can in essence build up our strength we can build up our stamina
we can build up our endurance especially if we know that very stressful times are to come
now one other important point that I want to make is just because an individual is sensitive
it doesn't mean that they're fragile for some reason some individuals again it might be dispositional
it might be life experiences they simply feel stress or in general emotions much more intensely
than others that means they have a higher burden in terms of learning emotion regulation skills
but it doesn't mean they're going to break in fact some of those sensitive folks might be the
strongest people that you'll ever meet so in summary we know that stress is normal but we worry
if it's chronic we worry if it's severe and we worry if a person has selected maladaptive coping
strategies we want to manage it by looking at appraisals we want to use somatic quieting and we
certainly want to help people reach out to their social supports in our next lecture we'll talk
about anxiety and take a much closer look at the social anxiety that carol has thank you
