Wouldn't it be grand if people came with a user's manual, if we each had our own blueprint
that mapped out how we're put together and described what it is that makes us tick?
Even better, if it were to include a troubleshooting guide to assist us when things weren't going
as expected.
I think we can all agree that people are too complex for that.
However, CBT tries to do something along those very same lines in order to develop tailored
treatment plans and promote insight.
It may take weeks to pull together using multiple data sources, but each CBT therapist
collaboratively creates a case formulation and constantly revises it.
Welcome to Lecture 3, where we'll build from assessment data to develop a narrative that
explains an individual's condition and how to change it.
We'll describe the links in a possible causal chain.
We'll develop hypotheses that explain problems and situations using cognitions, behavior,
emotions, relationships, and other social interactions.
And we'll develop a treatment plan based on that formulation.
But what's a formulation?
Well, a case formulation is defined as an individualized theory that explains a particular
patient's symptoms and problems serves as a basis for an individual treatment plan and
guides the therapy process.
This classic definition, taken from Jackie Persons' 1989 classic book, Cognitive Therapy
and Practice, a case formulation approach.
With this case formulation, we'll be compiling and interpreting data.
We'll use data from self-report, from surveys, from observations of the patient in action,
or from interviews or reports from significant others.
We'll also use data taken from behavioral analysis.
We'll look at the antecedents of the behavior, the behavior itself, and the consequences that
follow.
Their interventions will flow from the formulation.
It's important to remember, though, that you can formulate a case or a patient as a whole.
You can formulate a problem, like depression or anxiety, or you can create a formulation
based on a very specific situation.
Now the word formula can be misleading, but we're looking at how key ingredients combine
to create an individual's current life circumstances.
It's not really about blame.
It's more about trying to understand the causes so that you can prescribe a treatment.
Now we could just use a standard treatment protocol.
There are fantastic treatment manuals that are out there, a sort of one-size-fits-all
approach.
But we know that everyone is different.
We need to take into account different contextual or environmental or family factors.
We need to take into account potential comorbidities, either psychiatric, medical, or otherwise.
And of course we want to take into account an individual's specific goals.
Now some of the notable features of a formulation is that it's always a work in progress.
It is shared with a patient who helps to revise it.
We'll go about hypothesis testing using the formulation and we'll either prove or
disprove particular parts of it.
For the parts that prove not to be accurate, we'll change it.
Our hypotheses are about psychological mechanisms and other factors that cause or maintain the
disorder or the other problems that brought an individual to treatment.
But what are the key elements of a case formulation?
First we're going to start with something called the problem list and a diagnosis.
Second we want to develop those working hypotheses and I think there are four important components
to remember when creating a working hypothesis.
First you want to look at the role of cognition and especially deeper cognitive structures,
something called schemas or scripts, and we're going to talk a little bit about Beck's cognitive
model.
The second part of a working hypothesis, we'll look at behaviors and here again we'll look
at those antecedents or triggers, we'll look at the punishments and the rewards that a
particular behavior evokes.
Third we'll want to look at the origins and here we're talking about early learning events
so we might be talking about your parents or family of origin issues.
And lastly we'll tie it all together and create a summary to tell a story.
Now the third key element of an overall case formulation, you want to focus in on an individual
strengths and assets.
Yes it was probably suffering or a problem that brought them to therapy in the first
place but they also have strengths and assets that we might be able to tap into.
And fourth we want to create a treatment plan.
So given what we know about the person, given our hypotheses, the strengths and the assets,
what are our goals, what are our measures, and what are the interventions that we're
going to use?
So let's look at each of those components.
The first was a problem list or a diagnosis.
Now in a medical setting they would call this the chief complaint or the presenting complaint.
Patient presents with pain, patient presents with depression or anxiety but we want to
go a little bit further than that and we want to include other domains.
So we want to cast a wide net in terms of other psychological issues or maybe psychiatric
disorders.
We want to look at interpersonal issues of social supports or social conflicts.
We want to look at something called occupational functioning so how well are you doing at work?
What are your successes?
What are your failures?
We'll want to include potential medical diagnoses or medical concerns or symptoms.
It might include finances, housing, legal issues.
It might also include basic quality of life and enjoyment.
Once we have a full list created it needs to be ranked.
Of course we're going to put things like suicide or violence or any emergent type issues up
at the top of our list but we'll also want to look for something called therapy interfering
behaviors.
So if I know that a patient has a habit of skipping their sessions I'm going to address
that problem first because if I can't get them in we can't really help them.
For our case of Maria her problem list would include things like her social stressors,
her husband or caregiving for her husband, her relationship with her daughters and friends
and maintaining that relationship, maybe her finances.
Mood and emotional problems would include depression, stress, worry and anxiety and
she's mentioned a couple of different physical symptoms.
Her difficulty with sleep, her chronic pain especially from her osteoarthritis and she's
having frequent upper respiratory tract infections.
We know that her diagnosis is major or clinical depression.
Now for Michael his problem list and diagnoses are different.
His social stressors include conflict with both his son and his wife, conflict with co-workers,
rejection from his friends and his neighbors.
Mental and medical problems include his cardiovascular disease, his high blood pressure, his high
cholesterol.
We know emotionally he has a problem with rapid onset and tense anger and he sometimes
has difficulty in regulating his behavioral responses to his anger.
And his diagnosis?
Well he doesn't have a psychiatric diagnosis, at least not yet.
So the next step would be building that working hypothesis and how could we go about doing
that?
We want to look for explanations as to why a particular problem exists or we want to
look at an individual's reaction to a particular situation and try to understand why they've
reacted in that particular way.
What caused it?
What causes it?
What maintains the problem?
What makes the problem worse or what makes the problem better?
We want to remember that there might be both internal factors as well as external factors.
Now I want you to recall when we talked with Carol about the CBT triangle.
Now we're going to focus on cognitions and behaviors and emotions, but we should remember
that biology may be exerting an influence too, so that might be on our map or our formulation
as well.
Now as I mentioned with the working hypothesis, there are four components.
We talk about cognition or especially schemas using Beck's model, we'll talk about behaviors,
we talk about early origins, and then we tie it all together to tell a summary.
So let's look at the first part, Beck's cognitive theory.
So the general assumption is that events make us think or feel a certain way.
My boss made me angry, my significant other makes me stressed out.
We may acknowledge that we have a choice in how we react, but we often see it as a direct
cause and effect relationship.
Now Beck's cognitive theory has a different model and this really takes us back to the
Greek and Stoic philosophers who tell us that it isn't events that trouble us, but it's
the view we take of those events.
So in the cognitive model we have an activating event which triggers cognitions or what are
called automatic thoughts which then cause emotional and behavioral consequences.
Now particular kinds of automatic thoughts are linked to specific reactions.
For example with anger it tends to be preceded by thoughts of I'm being mistreated or there's
some sort of injustice that has occurred.
For depression it's often thoughts about loss.
But you might want to ask well why did we have those particular automatic thoughts?
Two people in exactly the same situation may have dramatically different automatic thoughts.
To answer that question we'll have to use Beck's model to drill down a little bit deeper
into our belief system.
We'll need to better understand our rules of life or what are called our conditional
if then assumptions and we'll need to look at what Beck called schemas or scripts that
tell us what to expect, how to react and how to live our lives.
Ultimately we'll boil it down to our basic beliefs or core beliefs about ourselves, about
others and about the world.
Let's move to watch our first video clip where we're talking with Michael about how to set
up a formulation and we begin to connect the dots.
Okay Michael why don't we take a step back and let's revisit what we had talked about
a few times ago and I wanted us to talk about a case formulation.
Formulation is kind of a formal term and we can't reduce a person to a formula obviously
but we've been gathering stories from you and you've been great in doing your homework
and helping us understand what are the common thoughts, behaviors and emotions that you
have around anger and this is our opportunity to start chaining them together to see sort
of what are some of those habits maybe that sort of sit inside you that we can pull out
and understand and maybe change.
What a formulation tends to have in it, we've talked a bit about automatic thoughts and
in the ABC we call them beliefs.
So these are the sort of surface situational thoughts, a guy takes your parking place and
thoughts pop to mind, your wife walks out and catches you smoking out on the deck and
certain thoughts pop to mind and a lot of those thoughts were things like this is unjust
unfair, not right, they all kind of fell into that category and you had lots of different
kinds of events and some of them triggered sadness and some were happiness but the anger
ones many of them had that sort of automatic thought.
What a formulation does is it starts drilling sort of down to get a little more deep, they
call those automatic because they just pop to mind uninvited but often times they flip
in and they flip out and they're not terribly substantial, sometimes they are but not always.
So a little bit deeper than that, those out of all the world of possible automatic thoughts
you had this one so it must come from somewhere, maybe it's a prior life experience, maybe
it's the way you see the world, maybe it's the alignment of the stars, I mean who knows
right but there's reasons, there's reasons why it happens.
So in cognitive therapy we look at the automatic thoughts but then we also want to look at
things like, I'll call this one conditional assumptions and sometimes they call them
schemas, it's almost like having a script of the way things should be and that would
definitely relate to your perception of what's just or unjust, you have this pre-existing
belief of what is right and what is wrong and belief underneath the conditional assumptions
and schemas are something called core beliefs.
So some would even argue that sort of in your heart or your head or your belly or whatever
you want to say sort of deep inside you there are some really basic thoughts that we often
learned very early on about our worth, about the world and about what other people are
like and we want to start sort of filling these in.
Now this is a work in progress, it's always open to revision and I hope it's a living
document that we can keep revising but let's see if we can come up with just a few examples.
So we have lots of automatic thoughts from like the ABC homework that you did before.
A conditional assumption would be like and I've heard you make a few of them before so
in the guy that took your parking space at the gym and I know that was a little while
ago but you'd said something like if I let him get away with this then he won't be punished
or in the way of the universe it's not fair for him to not have some sort of punishment
for, so it sounds like there's a rule there can you put that into your words for me?
People should be responsible and held responsible for their actions.
People should be held responsible and I'll just put a dot dot dot and what does that
mean held responsible?
If I'm at work and one of my senior supervisors asks me to do something I am taking on a responsibility
when I say yes I'll do that and I should then follow through.
If I don't follow through I need to be held responsible and there need to be consequences
for that.
So there is a contract I guess in the way that we all interact you know you use the example
of the parking space to my mind the contract is if I'm there first and I'll get my blinkers
on that's my spot and he's not upholding his end of the contract just as if I didn't
do what my supervisor expected me to do I'm breaking the rules I'm breaking that contract.
So there's something about and I'll just put it into words so social contracts should
not be broken and if they are broken then what?
There should be consequences I don't know what those consequences always should be but
I just feel that there should be consequences whether it's in my case I'm reprimanded or
I have to work the weekend extra hours I would understand that those are the consequences
for breaking my social contract as you called it here.
Now they call these conditional assumptions because they're often written like if then
statement so if a social contract is broken then there must be consequences or earlier
when you were talking about work you said if I agree to a particular project then I
should be held accountable for that and if you don't follow through if I don't follow
through with that obligation then I should receive some sort of negative consequence.
So that's a lot of rules like if then you know the world needs rules right we have civilized
society there has to be rules but what we want to look at is sort of what's your set
of conditional assumptions is there an element of flexibility or context specificity are
they pretty hard fast regardless applied uniformly across the board.
Well I suppose that in the case of the driver the jerk I've called him in the past if I
were to find out that he really was in a hurry someone in the building that he knew he had
been called to the scene and there was an emergency then that would be one of those kinds of
circumstances that makes me not be so rigid about the consequences.
If I as an employee am asked to do something and I become very ill and I can't deliver
that would be a circumstance.
So I'll just put if circumstances then there needs to be some sort of flexibility.
That's fair.
That's fair.
And I guess the challenge then is knowing this when there are circumstances and knowing
how much to flex.
I suppose in the case of the fellow in the car with that sarcastic way of suggesting
to me that there were no circumstances like this but that makes sense to me.
Sure.
Sure.
Okay.
Now when we were setting goals and we were writing out your problem list anger was definitely
up at the top and we talked about how it affects relationships both at work and also
with your wife and kid and even extended family but there was another element that was there
too and you talked about work stress and there's a lot of pressure on you and it seemed like
and we talked a little bit although not much that you have a perfectionistic streak that
you have really high standards you expect yourself to be 110% 110% of the time pretty
much is that is that fair to I think that's the way I am.
Okay.
Now if we were going to put that into some sort of a conditional assumption or schema
so what would that sound like?
What would that look like?
If I am doing my best people should recognize that.
Okay.
So if I do my best then recognition.
Okay.
Michael and I go on to elicit a number of additional conditional assumptions then we
move on to discuss the deepest levels of all schemas and core beliefs.
Let's watch this next clip.
So what we'll want to do as we move forward is we'll keep hearing about stories, we'll
keep pulling up beliefs, automatic thoughts but I want to start a little bit and have
us think about some of the core beliefs.
Now the core beliefs it's really sort of a simple idea of there's really sort of two
things that sit in our core and it's really about self-worth and oftentimes it's about
that sense of self-worth of who you are, the coin of which you're made.
It drives our beliefs we have about the world, it drives our automatic thoughts and our relationships
at home and at work and there's kind of two big buckets and one is about your level of
lovability to put it simply and the other is about your level of success.
So one is really about am I a successful person to find however you want and the other is
about relationships and connection and intimacy and am I someone that's made of the stuff
that other people will love and for people who are depressed they often have the thought
that they're not lovable and that they're a failure and they feel really lousy about
it but what would you guess your beliefs are in terms of lovability or success?
Well I feel that I'm successful on my own terms and that is I expect a lot of myself
and I think that I typically deliver so in that sense I would expect that others would
look at him professionally say he's successful, lovable, that's maybe another matter, it's
hard to know what people think of you, I think that generally my heart's in the right place
but maybe I don't express that in a way that people can really grab onto and say that's
a likable or a lovable fellow, I guess I never really have thought about it all that much
if I thought about it a lot and I feel I'm not lovable then maybe it would depress me
but I don't feel that way really but I can see how maybe lovable isn't the word you'd
naturally attach to my personality.
And that's important to know and maybe to think about and I think people's value systems
sometimes value success more than lovability or vice versa and there's no one right way
to be, it's just different but the other part of lovability isn't just are you lovable
to other people, it's do you love yourself, do you care about yourself?
At the end of the day when all is said and done are you happy with who you are?
I would say probably not, okay tell me more about that.
No, I mean part of it is what motivates me to talk to my wife and see what concerns her
and out of those conversations and out of the sense of yeah maybe my anger is getting
out of control and even it's physical ramifications and the way it manifested itself in the past
just in terms of my physical health the way I feel that's driven me here and I guess
no slam on you but if I really were feeling that I like myself at the end of the day maybe
I wouldn't be here talking to you.
But certainly setting this conversation and this context aside my anger seems to be arising
out of almost a dissatisfaction and I like to say it's a dissatisfaction with things
out there but really maybe it's a dissatisfaction with my inability to control the things out
there and so I want to be in control, I like a guy who's in control and if I'm not in control
maybe I don't like myself so much.
Does that make any sense?
Makes a lot of sense and sounds like you have a working hypothesis about what's driving
some of this behavior that at core you have this dissatisfaction with who you are or maybe
the way you behave sometimes it's not in line with your values you've told me about your
charity work you told me how much you love your family and sometimes it's not evident
that that's the person that you actually are that you have a fear of not being in control
and feel like you have to control things in order to be successful in order to be loveable
in order to protect yourself or protect your family.
So why don't we pause for now with the formulation but I would encourage you to think a little
bit in your journal and maybe even to reflect or write a little bit about this idea of loveability
and control and exactly what it is that you need to do to feel comfortable in your own
skin and maybe the possibility that sometimes all this stuff about injustice and unfairness
isn't really about that maybe it's about sort of your sense of self and what you think
you're made of and your sense of control or power in the world.
That's food for thought.
So for Michael we want to formulate anger.
Now our formulation will be part cognitive theory those kinds of thoughts that tend to
precede anger but we're also going to use real world data from Michael's life.
We want to think about those cognitive themes that precede anger but again we want to make
it relevant and salient for him using examples from his life.
We'll also want to look at behaviors and for him we'll want to look at behaviors in
at least a couple of different ways.
The most obvious we will want to look at the ways that he responds to his anger.
Does he act on those impulses and act out his anger with other people and if so how
do others respond.
However we'll also going to look at what are the antecedents so what are those things
that trigger his anger in the first place and it's possible that he may be making behavioral
choices that puts him in high risk situations for triggering his anger.
But remember this is cognitive behavioral therapy and thus far we mostly focused on
emotions and cognition.
That leaves a fairly large area unexplored.
We'll dig deeper into behavior and behavioral activation in our depression lecture but let
me for now define behavior broadly and why it would matter in terms of a formulation.
So for behavior we cast a fairly wide net and here we're talking about all sorts of
activities, mundane, big activities, small activities, activities we do alone, activities
we do with others.
It would include activities for pleasure as well as activities for work, the things you
have to do and the things that we want to do.
The ideas that these activities throughout the course of the day are summative in terms
of how they affect our mood.
A lot of little activities can add up into a fairly profound effect.
The roots of the behavioral part of the formulation are from behaviorism and behavioral theory
where it talks about how rewards and punishments from our environment subtly shift our behaviors
until sometimes they can create very complex, functional or maybe dysfunctional behaviors.
Whereas we would also want to do self-monitoring with cognitions and emotions we would want
to do self-monitoring for behaviors as well.
Now lastly for our hypothesis we want to look at origins so here we would start delving
into the past.
We want a broad picture first and we won't spend probably substantial time going back
unless we feel that we're stuck in the present and not able to make progress.
So for Michael we might look at his history of anger at work at home, his attempts to
change, the role of anger in his family of origin.
We'll weave all of these together into our hypothesis to tell a story.
Now an actual case formulation can run between seven to ten pages and typically includes
all of the assessment data, the smart goals and treatment plans, so for Michael I'll
just share a little bit of his narrative and it goes something like this.
Michael is a fifty year old married man with one teenage son, educated and gainfully employed.
He's motivated to address his anger and sees how it will help him and others.
He's uncertain if treatment can help but he's willing to try.
His anger has a quick onset and high intensity but often a short duration.
Michael's pattern of angry arousal has been mostly lifelong and is similar to the pattern
displayed by his own father, much to Michael's chagrin.
His anger is triggered by any number of environmental events usually involving a perceived transgression.
The combination of his perfectionism and his hyper-responsibility, he must be the enforcer.
Further fuels his anger and his sense of self-righteousness, all in accord with the traditional cognitive
model of anger.
Michael doubts his own power and influence and often underestimates the effect he has
on others.
He worries that he and others won't learn or improve as human beings unless a punitive
force keeps us in line.
He clearly possesses some self-regulatory capacity as he's been in a successful marriage and
has been promoted and successful at work.
His anger has damaged and sometimes ended relationships and damages reputation.
He's currently using exercise and self-help as a means to improve his anger control.
He's interested in somatic quieting, deepening his empathy, and using classic cognitive behavioral
therapy.
Now remember the last couple of parts of our case formulation include looking at strengths
and assets.
So for Michael, a strength is certainly his insight and his motivation, his love and value
of his relationship with his wife and his son.
He is gainfully employed so doesn't have financial stressors and his cardiovascular disease might
actually be an asset because it helps to raise his motivation to control his anger.
The last part of our formulation would be the treatment plan and here we want to look
at evidence-based treatments but we also want to look at the patient's willingness to engage
in those treatments and what the patient preferences might be.
Now for Maria, we're going to use the cognitive model for depression where we'll look at
a different family of cognitions and behaviors.
We'll also use the model for stress and coping and we'll want to look at her beliefs about
her need to do it all and her difficulty in asking for help.
We're going to need to look at her rising and profound grief and her sense of loss,
her beliefs about suffering and her personal strengths and values, and her treatment ultimately
will probably be mostly focused on depression but will include elements of stress management
as well as coping with loss.
Now for Carol, we'll use a classic CBT model for anxiety where it talks about the perception
or misperception of threat coupled with an estimation of having deficient coping resources.
We want to help her look at herself image and I'm curious to see if maybe there's a
little bit of depression or early life events underneath that might help us to understand
why she's so socially anxious.
We want to know her thoughts about herself, others, and the world.
Next I'd like to move to a frequently asked question and a question from this individual
says, do you always share a formulation with a patient?
What if you share it and the patient thinks you're wrong?
Well the short answer is yes, we almost always share a formulation with a patient.
In fact it's seen as a collaborative process.
And if the patient tells me that that formulation is wrong, well I assume that it's wrong.
And we need to roll up our sleeves, we need to go back to our data, and we need to rewrite
that formulation.
Every by definition it's always a work in progress and it's always an iterative process.
That formulation guides our treatment and if we don't have the formulation right we
might not have the treatment right.
Now in our next lecture we're going to talk about emerging therapies that fall into what's
called CBT's third wave.
Thank you.
