Stu, in trying to understand the nature of reality, how it's all structured scientifically,
the concept of emergence is really important.
Many people today point to emergence as a way of understanding levels of reality, how
biology works, or systems work, as opposed to fundamental physics.
But when you really probe, and I'm going to try to see what it is, people can't explain
how that emergence really works, it's just a word.
You've worked in complexity theory, and you've worked in the biosphere, and have really a
very profound understanding of emergence, which I need to understand.
Let me tell you that I think that the word emergence is used in an ill-formed way, and
I think that the way that it's used is inadequate.
I think that there's a much more stunning example of emergence that's happening all
the time in human life and in the life of the biosphere.
Let me take two examples.
Many years ago, I invented random Boolean nets, so just a bunch of light bulbs hooked
up to one another, with rules turning one another on and off.
I asked things like, what are the patterns that emerge?
It turns out that these can behave in three ways, ordered, critical, or chaotic.
It turns out that there's evidence that cells are critical, and it's neat, and it's lovely.
People would like to call that emergent, but it's not.
It's hard to calculate, but we know ahead of time the state space, it's just my Boolean
nets.
We can certainly simulate it, and people have even proved theorems about it.
If you could prove theorems about this, and it's been done in 1985, this phase transition
from order to chaos, I don't want to call that a merge.
I don't either.
People also say on the topic of consciousness that if you have enough neurons, consciousness
will emerge.
I think it's gobbledygook.
It could be right, but I still think it's gobbledygook.
Let me give you an example that I think is true and profound, and for me it's life-changing.
I need briefly to tell you about a Darwinian pre-adaptation.
If you said to Darwin, what's the function of Stu's heart?
He would say pump blood, but I'm a doc, and I might say, but look, my heart makes heart
sounds.
Why is pumping blood the function of my heart?
Darwin would say, because pumping blood was a selective advantage to your ancestors, that's
why you have a heart.
I add that at the level of complexity above atoms, the universe will never make all possible
complex things like molecules and hearts, so getting to exist is a big deal.
The universe is non-repeating, it's non-ergodic, so it matters physically.
History has entered.
Now, notice from this the function of the heart is a subset of its causal consequences,
pumping blood, not making heart sounds.
Then says Darwin, you know what, a property of an organ in me or you of no use selectively
in the current environment might turn out to be of selective use in another environment,
and they're called Darwinian pre-adaptations or ex-aptations.
And my favorite example, which I'm going to tell, is the swim bladder.
Some fish have a sac partially filled with air and water, the ratio of which turns neutral
buoyancy in the water column.
Paleontologists believe that they evolved from lung fish that were flopping from puddle
to puddle.
Water got into some lungs, and now it's poised to become a swim bladder.
Well, let's suppose they're right.
I always ask three questions.
First, did a new function come to exist in the biosphere?
Sure, neutral buoyancy in the water column.
Second, did it change the evolution of the biosphere?
Sure, new species with a fish with swim bladders, new proteins, and the one that I'm going to
come back to that I find stunning, once a swim bladder exists, it's what I want to call
a new, adjacent, possible, empty, ecological niche, because some worm or some bacterium
could evolve to live only in swim bladders.
Agree?
I'm going to come back to that.
Let me go to my third question, which I always go to.
Do you think you could say ahead of time, all possible Darwinian pre-adaptations?
Well, we all agree now, and I think there's deep reasons for it, but just briefly, how
would you list all possible selective conditions?
How would you know you'd listed them all?
How would you state ahead of time the features that might become pre-adaptations?
Well, we can't.
And that requires more discussion, but in fact, we can't.
This means something huge before I get back to my surprise point.
It means that not only do we not know what will happen, like when you flip a coin 10,000
times, and you don't know if it'll come up heads 4,423 times, we don't even know what
can happen in the evolving biosphere and in the economy and in life.
And that means something huge for us as humans.
It means that reason is an insufficient guide for living your life.
It means we need reason, emotion, intuition, sensation, metaphor.
It means what just happened to the Enlightenment, where reason is our hero.
It's insufficient.
Life is much richer than we thought.
Now I want you to see what stunned me.
Let's come back to the swim bladder, being an adjacent possible empty niche.
Again, could a worm or a bacterium come to live in it?
Yeah.
Okay.
Now, did natural selection probably act on a population of fish to make a functioning
swim bladder?
Sure.
Probably it did.
Here's my surprise question.
Did natural selection act to create the swim bladder as a new niche?
No.
It acted to make a functioning swim bladder, not a new niche.
But we've just agreed that the new niche is a new direction of evolution of the biosphere.
Right?
Right.
This means something that stuns me.
It means that without any selection doing so, the biosphere is creating its own future
possibilities of becoming.
I'm going to say it again.
The biosphere, honest to God, without any selection is creating its own future possibilities
of becoming.
That's not in Darwin.
Now that's emergence.
Radical emergence.
It's a radical emergence.
I'm glad you use the word radical emergence, because A, we couldn't pre-state it.
B, we don't know how it happened, and B, it changed the course of evolution.
Just briefly, the same thing happens in the economy.
I won't go into cases, but nobody foresaw Facebook when the computer was invented.
So go from computer to personal computer to Microsoft to saving and storing files to
the web, to selling things on the web, to Facebook.
How did that happen?
These all got enabled by and were new economic niches that were created by what happened
beforehand, becoming into the adjacent possible.
It's radical emergence, Robert.
It's radical emergence.
It cannot be deduced in principle.
It can't be deduced.
Therefore it's not like the case of Stukofman's random Booleanets, where you knew the state
space ahead of time.
You've used these two descriptions.
One is epistemological emergence, the other is ontological emergence.
Epistemological emergence is like the Boolean networks.
And ontological emergence is the word coming to live in the swim bladder.
Because that's unpredictable.
It's impossible to predict ahead of time.
Epistemological emergence is maybe a descriptive way you could have described if you had all
the details.
But there's no way with the swim bladder, or with Facebook for that matter, that you
could have predicted ahead of time.
Those are true emergent, radical, ontological sense of being kinds of emergence.
