Alright, so here we are with Daniel Schmockdenberger.
Good to see you, dude.
Good to see you, my friend.
Thanks for having us into your home.
I look forward to this conversation.
Thanks for coming.
Yeah, dude.
We're going to go deep here, my friend.
So I'm just going to jump right in.
A couple of things that I've learned about you from reading about you and listening to
you on other shows is that you were homeschooled.
That's true.
And at the same time, you're a really bright guy who is very knowledgeable and articulate.
I would consider you, and I don't throw this term around, but I would consider you to be
someone that's highly intelligent to the point where you could be called brilliant.
And I don't call everyone brilliant, you're a really smart guy.
So why did your parents elect homeschool you?
And what impact does that have on your mental acuity?
So it was an educational experiment my parents were interested in.
And my dad particularly spent his life thinking about educational philosophy and human potential
and how do we actually actualize human potential better.
And my mom had shared interests and different skills, and so they decided to take it on
together.
And the experiment was what happens if we give a kid no curriculum at all, no fixed curriculum.
So I didn't have English and social studies and mathematics.
But just expose them to everything possible, facilitate their interests, and see what happens.
And so that was the experiment.
And having gone through the whole experiment, we could do it much better now.
There were parts that got learned along the way, but the effective parts that I would
say were a successful experiment is every kid has profound fascination with life in
their own ways.
And we usually do a good job of breaking it.
And we also usually do a good job of training them not to think well.
So little kids ask, what is that, what is that, what is that at first, right?
It's the first question.
They're getting the anatomy of the universe down.
And then why, why, why?
And the depth of why run into philosophically and physically deep questions that we usually
don't know how to answer.
And so we give them, we just don't answer them or give them shit answers.
Or some less conscious parents would say, because I said so.
Yeah, or because it just is or God made it that way or whatever.
So when a kid asks, why is the sky blue?
And most adults realize they don't actually know something that is that fundamental to
our experience every day, right?
And all human experience, they either say, I don't know how do you spell cat, right?
Like they move it into the domain of the known, but they move it from something that was fundamental
about the nature of universe to something that wasn't.
And so if you really want to explain why the sky is blue, you have to understand that our
upper atmosphere is made of nitrogen and oxygen and the percentage of it and nitrogen specifically
as N2 and how molecules work and how light coming from the sun works and the speed of
light and diffraction and understanding what optics is.
And like there's a lot of deep things and then, but wait, that's why it is that specific
wavelength.
But why do I subjectively experience it as blue?
So now we're looking at the mind-brain interface, right?
And the relationship between consciousness and physics.
And kids want to know that, right?
They want to know why it's fire hot, which again is a fucking deep question.
And they're like, every kid asks these things.
And since we don't know, we don't facilitate what they're naturally fascinated in, that
fascinated by, and we force them to be interested in stuff that is totally not interesting.
And in doing so, we don't teach them the interesting things.
We don't teach them the things that are foundational about life that actually lead to the ability
to understand everything else.
And we actually break their interest in life, which is why then they just want to veg out
and watch TV or, you know, the whole welfare person phenomena, who is actually-
I was going to say, they become great taxpayers.
But see, those are broken people.
That's the key insight is that everyone is born fascinated, interested.
And if you facilitate that, then not only are you helping them learn a tremendous amount,
and they're going to be fascinating about different things, some more in the direction
of aesthetics or ethics or fundamental science or athletics.
But there will be a unique genius actualization if it's followed.
And so that was the experiment, and we could go on about educational philosophy.
But one of the key-like insights there is that we have an educational system in the
U.S. right now, and in most of the West, that was built in the Industrial Revolution to
make industrial bots.
And it was the-
Thank you.
No, I love going here.
I was hoping we could get into this, so carry on, please.
And so as we started to look at building industrial supply chains, then we wanted every assembly
line worker, before we had automated that task, to basically be an automata, right?
They would do the exact same thing.
And so anyone who had been trained into doing that could be replaceable.
They were fungible for anyone else.
And any MBA from a good business school was replaceable for any other MBA, any VP of marketing.
So we want to take unique humans and collapse them into fungible roles.
And so then we can just have an order chart and say, I'm looking for three of these and
four of these, totally replaceable.
In the process of doing that, when you collapse the uniqueness of a human to a fungible role,
there's, of course, the intrinsic motive to do that is gone.
Deep competition comparison, because we're competing on being the exact same role.
So we're competing on the same metrics rather than any uniqueness.
There's no way to compare Salvador Dali and MC Escher and Da Vinci, because how the fuck
would you do that, right?
You can't compare them on the same metrics.
And if Dali hadn't done what he did, some other artist wouldn't have done the same thing.
The universe would just have been less.
That was the uniqueness of that being, expressing in a totally fucking unique way, which is why
all the artists for history hadn't done that thing.
And so so much of the jealousy, envy, comparison, competition also comes from being collapsed
to categories.
And there were reasons why we did this, as we, you know, for all of human history until
not that long ago, until the beginning of what we call civilization 10,000 years ago
could give or take.
For 8 million years of hominid history, we never got more than 150 people.
And those 150-person tribes, everyone could be pretty unique and actually get along well,
because they knew everybody else and they could actually keep track of it.
And as soon as we wanted to go to start having very large numbers, we had to create some
homogeneity between everyone.
So we started making them a lot more like termites or ants, which are animals that can
do a lot of them working together.
But within a class, a worker ant or a drone ant, they're all fungible, right?
They're all replaceable for each other.
So this system is very much like that.
And education is the indoctrination into being, going from a unique human to a fungible
button.
Dude, you just described my whole, in a very deeply intellectual way, my whole experience
subjectively with education.
And the whole time we were talking, I'm thinking, this is why I have a podcast and this is why
I do what I do, because I'm so curious and so fascinated by the way things work and the
questions of why, right?
And so I was always seeking truth, even as a kid, like, how does this work?
Why does it work?
But the system that I was put into, and literally physically the desks I was put into were like
little torture chambers and my creativity was actually discouraged and was, you know,
almost forced to join the basketball team because I was having behavioral problems and
their solution was like, cool, make him conform to something that makes him even more insecure
and feel like even more of an outsider being the kid with long hair and refusing to wear
the right shoes.
So I wore my vans and slid around the core and got made fun of and, you know, harassed
and picked on and stuff like that.
It's like, once I turned, the day turned 18, I quit high school.
I was marking it off on my calendar like a prisoner, you know, putting notches on the
wall as like marking the calendar to October 29th, 1988, and that was the day of freedom.
And from that moment on, once I left school, then I became obsessed with learning.
And so it's so interesting to look from the standpoint of your perspective because it
wasn't that I didn't want to learn, it's that I didn't want to learn that way.
That those topics.
And that way.
Yeah.
And so now it's like, you know, here I am 47 and I'm like, I'm like the most curious child
like energy.
I think there is.
I mean, I don't know anyone that's as curious as me about the way things work.
And it's such a gift to be able to interview people and really learn about this stuff.
So, so that's how fortuitous that your parents, you know, you were so situated that your parents
got that, right?
You had an opportunity to take a different path.
Now, it's because you didn't actually identify, you didn't actually succeed at school in that
way, that you were able to actually do something else to the degree you succeed at it, then
you're trapped by the continuation of that curve forever.
So notice the smarter the kids are smart, meaning good at that particular definition
of smart, the earlier we push them into hyper specialization, right?
We want to get them in AP classes towards their specialty young.
And then the further we push them in specialization.
So by the time they do their dissertation, 10 people in the world know what the fuck
they're talking about.
So they know so much about such a narrow area.
So they're not thinking about big picture things or the interdisciplinary things at
all.
That means that the smartest people aren't actually questioning macroeconomics and
questioning culture and questioning governance, questioning the foundational axioms of how we
do academia or science, because they're they're just doing one tiny little thing.
So we're training them to be very sharp cogs in the industrial wheel.
That's so true.
And the only people who are usually left thinking about any big picture things are people
that didn't have those types of proclivities.
And that is actually a way of taking things that could be dangerous and making them not
only not dangerous, but very good tools of the continuation of a particular system.
And so because you didn't actually do that well at it, then you were able to say, fuck
it, I want to do something totally different.
Right. Well, that that is interesting.
It reminds me of something I've talked about on the show.
And there was this, I got to find this freaking, it was some study or evaluation or paper or
something that I came across at one point, and it was talking about entrepreneurship
and how the top 10 people with the highest IQs in the world all work for someone else.
And all the great inventors in the monumental colossal entrepreneurs in the world dropped
out of high school, didn't go to college.
I mean, it's this universal trend that the smartest people don't think outside of the box.
And it's the theory was that the people that you're describing that are highly specialized
and that rise to the top of their class intellectually, that they're so smart that
they're able to over calculate the risks involved in a venture of creativity.
Whereas if you have a more of a visionary creative type that doesn't fit within that box,
but also obviously still has a certain degree of intellectual prowess, that they're smart
enough to have the idea and creative enough to have the vision, but just dumb enough to
not be able to calculate the risk and be willing to go out and walk the plank and lose it all
for the sake of.
So saying dumb enough is one way of thinking of it.
Another way of thinking of it has to do with the way they're trained in relationship to risk aversion.
OK, OK, I like that because I think of myself as that and I tend to be self deprecating.
So I appreciate you seeing in an NLP way, seeing that word dumb enough.
So what is really happening?
Think about this.
If the kid who gets a 4.0, one of the keys of getting a 4.0 is making no mistakes, right?
Like that's how you that's how you write that is that you did everything right and everything perfect.
Now, everything right means you learned what had already been figured out was the Orthodox
truth and you were able to repeat it effectively, right?
And then at a certain point, once you understand that system completely enough, you can extend
it a little bit, which, you know, in the postdoc level, you take the current whatever the field
is and extend it a tiny bit after proving that you understood it perfectly.
People who got a lot of praise and a lot of success and identity around never making any
mistakes and getting everything perfect are not oriented to do things that have a very
high risk of failure.
That's great, dude.
So true.
So when when kids are praised for getting things right, you fuck them up because a number of things.
One, so think about this.
In general, all the praise that kids get is when they do something that the authority wants them to do and has already
designated as right and good and true, right?
So whether it's the teacher, the preacher, the parents, they get praise for doing what someone else
wanted them to do.
They almost always get punishment for doing things that made sense to them that they wanted to do.
So this is how you condition people to be good, you know, cogs within an authoritarian system where we
defer our own agency, our ability to assess the world in our own agency to somebody that knows better than
us and the teacher, the preacher, the parent, right?
They all represent that.
And then it becomes the boss and the, you know, macro economy, the state, the et cetera, writ large.
And so if we want people that actually can really be innovative, we can't train them that way.
We have to train them to self assess and self initiate and not actually get hits of praise from getting
something right that others already figured out.
And when we do that, like oftentimes there's a kid who becomes a spelling bee champion or math
genius, because they just happened to fucking figure out like how spelling works or how math
works, and they got so much praise for it that, and they weren't getting enough unconditional love
otherwise that they were optimizing for the extrinsic reward associated with the math of getting the
praise, even though they might actually hate math or be not terribly interested in math, they just
happened to get it.
If you didn't do that, then you might find math is all right, but they're actually fascinated by art.
And so then they can become very good at something they have no passion for.
And it's all based on extrinsic motive that is damaging intrinsic motive.
Wow.
Wow.
Do you have kids?
I don't have kids.
Like you'd be a great dad, dude.
I was picturing your kids, man, they're going to be so well developed.
If and when you have them.
I don't, I don't, I don't either.
I think partially because I'm like terrified of not doing a good job of it because I still feel like
I'm doing so much work on myself.
But it's, it's interesting to think about a generation of people close to our age that have an
understanding of things in this way that can actually usher in the next generation of human that is
allowed to express their full potential without being confined into this system.
And, and most of the people that have the deepest have had the deepest expiration about the nature
of reality either aren't having kids because they see how much is wrong with the world and they're
applying that creative and parental energy to try and dissolve problems in the world where they
don't feel secure enough in the world with nuclear war looming again for the first time and macro
economic collapse and climate change, et cetera, to want to bring kids in.
So, yeah.
So, okay, so moving on into, I mean, I, there's so much, I mean, there's literally so much done
back in any one of these topics, but there's so many things I want to cover with you.
But the education thing definitely piqued my interest just learning that you're homeschooled, but
you're a really bright guy.
So where's the connection and that's making sense.
Now, what about, I see, I didn't go to college.
To me, higher education was moved to Hollywood, plan a band, deal drugs done.
I mean, I had it figured out.
So I thought, I think I went to LACC for like two weeks.
I took health and which, you know, later, I guess came to serve me.
Violin made it two weeks and I took health and classical guitar.
I was like, oh, cool.
I'll learn how to play rad guitar.
I go in and they're like, oh, we're going to learn how to read music.
I was like, no, that's math.
I'm out.
But when I look at higher education now, just from what I see in social media, there's this just
where we are culturally is so interesting because this millennial generation, I read
something the other day, for example, that they surveyed a bunch of millennials and 50%
of them indicated that they would prefer communism over capitalism, you know, and there's this
whole postmodernism and Marxist ideas and all this, to me, really crazy stuff that
they seem to have seeped its way into higher education and have this generation of kids
that are in this weird Orwellian 1984 thought police, political correct insanity.
Like, what's the deal with that right now?
And do you know what I'm talking about?
And do you think that this has been perpetuated intentionally?
Or is this just a natural progression of A plus B equals C and how things have carried on?
All right.
That's it.
Like quite a few really deep topics mixed together that really need kind of unwound.
Yeah.
So postmodernism has one topic in its relationship to higher education.
Okay.
The trend of higher education writ large and the other issues beyond postmodernism, looking
at macroeconomy and questioning capitalism and looking at other macroeconomic systems
and generational dynamics that millennials are expressing are all important.
And they're somewhat tied, but they're also some different dynamics.
So in my classic interview style, I just ask six questions under one umbrella.
Yeah.
So take a stab at any part of that.
To me, I'm just, you know, I'm very zoomed out and I'm looking at things that I see
like that, like, wait, kids don't understand communism doesn't work.
How did we get there?
You know, it's just, it's so bizarre to me in this whole, I don't know, the climate
of so there's a free speech being crushed unless the people agree with you.
Like this sensitive snowflake, weird safe space, whole college thing.
Okay.
So the issue, as I see it, is actually quite nuanced and complex.
And most of the reactionary simplistic takes on it are part of the problem.
So let's explore this nuance.
All right, cool.
So let's take the issue of race, which is right at the heart of that topic.
We can look at race.
We can look at gender.
We can look at transgender LGBTQ.
We can look at any of those dynamics that are part of the, the identity
politics part you're bringing up.
Right.
Now this is related to postmodernism and it derives some of its intellectual
basis from postmodernism, but it's also related to some other key things.
So if we look at race and we look at Black Lives Matter or people of color
movement or et cetera, we have not ever properly dealt with the fact that this
country was, that this land that we call this country was fully inhabited by lots
of nations of people that we completely slaughtered to make this land.
Right.
It was, we're going, we're getting taxation without representation in London.
We don't want to be here anymore.
So we're going to go somewhere else and hey, look, there's a whole continent
that's totally free because we have better military than equipment than they do.
So we can kill all those people and take that whole land.
There's a real moral fucking problem to having your moral legitimacy as the
United States of America and the beautiful constitution declaration of
independence being based on genocide.
And we're pretty happy to acknowledge like after Germany's genocide, they're
fucked up, right?
There's a whole cultural thing.
But our genocide was not that long before and it was more people.
It was a lot more people.
Wow.
That's interesting.
And it was the genocide of the Native American people employing the slavery
of the Africans and we mean real fucking slavery, like captured the people by
military force, killed lots of them, tortured and killed lots of them, lynching,
et cetera.
And we, we, like, we don't want to really acknowledge that this country was
built with that.
It was built with a pretty decent amount of Chinese slavery, a lot of
African slavery and one major genocide.
All right.
So then we've got, you know, we have to fight a war to finally get rid of
slavery not that long ago, like really not that long ago, where there are old
people alive today that still remember elements of slavery dynamics, right?
Like that's a big deal to get.
But then, okay.
So we abolish slavery without abolishing the mindset that was associated with it.
So a lot of people didn't want to go on.
So then we've got Jim Crow and segregation and all that.
And then we kind of overturn that, kind of, right?
But slaves actually economically work really well.
It's kind of nice to be able to have people do all the shit work and not get
paid and be able to concentrate the profit margins.
And as soon as you don't want to do that with the slaves, now people got to take,
you know, other people have to take the shit jobs and who wants the shit jobs.
And now you have to dilute the profit margin to pay minimum wages.
So there's a lot of people that just didn't like that, right?
For legitimate understandable reasons.
And they could justify making another group of people different enough that
slavery was better than their own sacrifice in that zero-sum game dynamic, right?
Or near zero-sum game dynamic.
And then we have, okay, so now it's not full segregation legally, but that
mindset's still there.
And the people who are coming out of segregation have generations of trauma
and no education and no inheritance, right?
As opposed to people who are coming from generations of education, inheritance,
and not the same types of trauma.
So we have the ghetto phenomena and what that means.
And we know how epigenetic trauma works now generationally, right?
We know how mimetic trauma works.
And so then we look at, do we still have a system of systemic injustice?
Fuck yes.
We still have a system of systemic injustice.
And any white person who wouldn't just trade to be black recognizes that the
ethics of the pie slice theorem aren't in place, right?
Pie slice theorem is if it's just, there is a symmetry, right?
Between you and I, which is all cut the slice of pie and you get a pick which side.
But I don't get a cut and pick, right?
If I cut and pick there's something fucked up, or you can cut and I'll pick.
But anyone who says I wouldn't want to trade positions with the other person,
but they should be fine with it, there's a problem.
And that's, that's the dynamic here.
So there is a real response to unresolved trauma that is still affecting things.
Now that said, the response is coming from a place that is largely influenced by
trauma rather than clear strategy and trauma usually perpetuates itself.
And so if a bunch of people with black lives matter saying, hey,
there are real issues where, where there are a lot of black people who are getting
killed by police for reasons that are totally unfounded and then not getting
prosecuted in the same way, not getting attention in the same way.
Like that's a real deal.
And how does anyone go about trying to go to school and feel safe when you can be
going to school doing all the right things and, and have that kind of dynamic occur?
All right.
So then they go shut down a freeway out of like upset and anger or whatever.
And then while that's trying to get attention for something that is real,
it is strategically problematic, right?
Because then you have the alt right largely arising as a response to those
type of dynamics saying, look, our way of life that we care about is being threatened.
And look, these people are rioting and causing chaos and whatever.
They're validating our ideas about them not being strategic good thinkers, et cetera.
And so, and because of a postmodern dynamic that in general, the progressive
left has, it makes it harder for them to cohere because they want to validate
everyone's perspective because they're suffering, they're still in response to
the pain of imperialism or one perspective is imposed on everyone.
So part of the response is to say, hey, fuck, everybody actually has a perspective
and the perspective that you're saying is just true because it's science or whatever.
A lot of our social science that arose at the same time as our physical science
was actually just imperialism.
And so postmodernism emerged amongst I'm radically simplifying here.
Postmodernism emerged with a partial meaningful truth, which was to say,
this is just objectively true.
This is science.
We did the right epistemology subjectively true and it's true for everybody.
Doesn't acknowledge that especially as we get into the social sciences,
there's a shit ton of bias, right?
And so, you know, we went looking for monogamy and pair bonding in the animal
kingdom because of Victorian age ideas that actually made us do.
Zoology badly, right?
And so we like we see that kind of thing.
Everywhere.
So postmodernism said actually different perspectives on reality, running different
experiments, end up yielding different kinds of insights.
And we still know that are you healthiest on a vegan diet or a paleo diet?
I can show you just as much fucking research on both of those that look at
different metrics, right?
And so whether I'm looking at pH or I'm looking at insulin levels or I'm looking
at telomere level, like I'll get different answers and also which populations.
But when I try and reduce health to some finite set of metrics and there's a
million fucking metrics that we can't calculate, I can get a lot of partial
answers that seem like the whole answer and seem like complete science because
I'm studying a very complex system in a very simplistic way.
So bias is very easy when you try and set a complex system in a simple way
because your metrics look really fucking clear.
They just don't happen to be all the metrics that matter.
And so postmodernism acknowledged that and said, Hey, all the perspectives
actually have to be factored.
Now there was a kind of virulent version of that that didn't acknowledge.
They're all the perspectives should be acknowledged, but they're not all going
to be equally true.
Some of them can have distortion in them.
So we need to be able to bet for distortion and all the perspectives are
going to be less different in simpler systems.
So in chemistry, the epistemology is more straightforward than it is in social sciences.
And some of the virulent version of postmodernism just started rejecting
truth writ large, right?
Like any claim of truth is an imperialist claim and nobody can claim truth.
And all perspectives are equally true.
And, but we can see that that was a virulent version of an appropriate
response to the way that science, imperialism, capitalism, along with
fucking like, you know, colonialism, right?
All kind of co-emerged and trying to untangle those was like part of the goal there.
So if you actually read Foucault or Derridaugh, there's a meaningful good
thinking in there.
Most of what you see happening that tries to intellectually reify itself with
those people is not actually being done very well, but that's because trauma is
influencing a lot of it.
But then on the other side, we've never actually taken responsibility to deal
with that trauma was created.
So when I say it's nuanced, it is, and it's a really big deal.
Because if we look at the alt, the alt right and the control left, they have
moved to a level of polarization and radicalization that is very hard to
imagine how that reconciles.
And with a tremendous amount of fear on both sides and trauma on both sides.
And associated with that, the desire for secession from the nation, the desire
for whatever that leads to war in a world where our military technology is
that we don't get to make it through wars the way we did in the past.
And so the idea, hey, look, we fought a war with the British to come get this
area and it worked well.
Yeah, we had fucking muskets, right?
And as the military technology goes up, it becomes more and more problematic.
And when we get to the level where you have decentralized, exponential
technology, which is where we're at right now, we don't get to make it through wars
anymore.
And humanity has always had different dynamics that led us to polarization
and radicalization and then war.
And we have to actually learn how to fucking deal with that.
And part of it is we have to be able to understand how to take multiple
perspectives that have partial truth, that the not successful parts, you know,
find the successful parts and figure out how to do dialectic, how to do
synthesis and be able to find a solution that doesn't just solve for some
things while externalizing harm to something else that's affected, but
actually solve for the whole set.
Okay, so that's just the postmodernism snowflake part.
That makes perfect sense.
Because to me, looking from the outside, I'm like, I see the trauma and I see
that these young people that are wrapped up in that ideology, I see them as victims,
you know, but I didn't think about the past.
I'm just like, you're victims of a perspective that you've adopted, I guess,
because there was trauma.
And I'm just like, God, I feel so bad that this kid thinks that communism works.
I mean, it's just like.
Okay, so now I want to address this part.
Yeah.
When in the depression, there were people openly in the streets discussing
socialism, Marxism, laissez-faire capitalism, because the system was failed.
Right, in a failed state, people are open to like look at any possibility.
We are very near a failed state.
And we're actually very near a failed civilization globally.
So when you look at climate change and the fact that we can't fucking get it
right, right, like we can't get it right, we, we keep driving ourselves towards
the point of self-induced catastrophe and possibly extinction.
And despite the fact that the Club of Rome identified this over shooting
limits in the sixties, right, and, and limits of growth in the world through
models, despite the fact that it's been called out and we're, we're following
the model, we keep progressing on the motherfucking model, right.
The Paris Accord was not enough for us to make it.
We would have, everything would have been fucked if we did the Paris Accord
and we couldn't even do that, right.
And so, and that's driven mostly by our current structure of capitalism.
Because if I over fish the ocean, right, if I use a mile long drift net and I
take all these fucking fish out of the ocean, that's more money for my
fishing company this quarter and leaving them in the ocean is worth nothing to me
economically.
Now it's worth something in the future, but the other guy's going to fish
him out if I don't fish him out.
So it's not like I can leave him there for the future.
So it is a competitive race for near term wins, mortgaging the future.
So we make 13 species a day extinct on average.
We've fished out 90% of the large fish species from the ocean on a three
quarter water planet that took three billion years to get all that fucking
life and in a hundred years of industrialized fishing, we've fished
out 90% of the large fish species, extincted many of them, 80% of the
old growth trees gone.
That's capitalism working really great.
Not working really great, right.
We're on the verge of a very realistic AI apocalypse where we should be
developing the AI very slowly.
We should be very intelligently looking at what it, because unlike, you
know, when, when Edison's working on a light bulb and light bulb fails, it
just doesn't work.
Maybe it blows up.
No big deal.
You do it inside of a container.
You work on AI and it fails and sometimes it doesn't work and sometimes
it kills everything because it is an auto poetic tech.
It is a self organizing, self authoring tech light bulb business.
It works or it doesn't work, but it's built on the outside.
But, but biotech, right, where you make a new fucking life form and now it
replicates and it does its own mutation, that is a self replicating tech
where if you get it wrong, you don't get to stop it.
And nuclear wasn't, right?
Nuclear is a reaction and then it stops.
It's really bad, but nanotech, biotech and AI are auto poetic, self
replicating tech that might be, depending upon how we do them, in
commensurate with biological life as we understand it with faster
feedback loops than us.
Now we should develop that as slow as fucking possible because the
upsides are awesome, but we should do it in highly controlled, safe to fail
environments, but all of the fiscal incentive is getting to market first.
That's a capitalist incentive who gets to market first, where we're in a race
towards the cliff and the arms race is the same thing.
Why do we have when Carl Sagan showed us in the early 80s that it only took
four 100 megaton bombs to kill all life on earth with a nuclear winter, why
do we have 600 times that many?
Like why the fuck do you keep making nukes after you have enough to kill
everything down to viruses?
Because if you have a for profit military industrial complex where you have
a source of supply where you need to manufacture more demand to keep your
supply going, it's not like supply and demand is a real thing.
There's an initial demand, you create a supply, but now you have supply and
you manufacture artificial demand, which is why we buy all kinds of shit that
doesn't make us happy that we think will make us happy because marketing
creates artificial demand.
So capitalism is actually broken existentially.
So there are people who learned that, okay, Marxism had some nice ideas and
there were some good ideas that didn't actually end up working out that well.
No, of course, if we really go study it, we never implemented Marxism, just like
we've never implemented laissez-faire capitalism.
We've implemented weird models of capitalism.
And by the time the USSR came around, it was nothing like Marxism for a bunch
of reasons, but Marxism doesn't actually work at scale.
It works, that kind of model works at 150 person tribal model, it doesn't
extend beyond it.
Capitalism did seem to work, but at the cost of radical externality.
That externality, when you get to this many people in this much tech, actually
self-implodes.
So what has worked up to this point worked, worked at the, but when we say it
worked up to this point, we have been utilizing unrenewable resources moving
towards the point of criticality the whole time.
And it has required war, right?
And it has led to diseases we didn't have before because of environmental
devastation and et cetera.
And we have a world where today almost everyone has low grade mental illness.
Like ubiquitous addiction, ubiquitous low grade anxiety, existential angst, fairly
decent low grade depression, right?
These are not natural to the human condition.
Tribal people don't have this shit in the same way.
So we say it worked, defined work.
This is optimizing for some metrics at the expense of others in a complex system.
So the fact that there are people questioning, is there a fucking better
system than this?
Because we're not fixing climate change in the system where it's still more
profitable to do the fucked up thing.
The perverse incentive is ubiquitous in healthcare.
Why do we do biohacking stuff?
Like why doesn't healthcare prevent diseases?
Because there's no fucking money in preventing diseases.
There's a lot of money in treating them.
There's not that much in curing them, but there's a lot in treating them forever.
So what is going to get researched when the money goes in, has to have ROI back
out in the capitalist system?
So the fact that people are recognizing that and questioning is a very good thing.
Now, the fact that they try to find other things that didn't work as the answer is
just a basic, basically hopelessness and a lack of knowing how to go about
solving something so fucking hard.
So one of the core focuses of my life is what is the macro economy of the future?
What are the governance systems?
What are the civilization systems that can allow us to actually human together
well without needing to go to war and unrenovable use of resource and producing
ubiquitous mental and physical illness that's unnecessary and et cetera?
And it's not any system that has ever happened.
So we can get into that if you want to or we can go to other directions.
But also most of the young people who say communism, what they're really saying
is Denmark looks better than here.
Like that's a social kind of dynamic where better access to medicine
don't have a lot of homeless people.
Masters to PhD is average level of education, largely secular because of that.
Like the Nordic countries just look better.
They are just fucking better.
There's more socialized dynamics now.
Are they better on every metric?
No, if you look here, we have a tremendous amount of innovation here
because of certain types of freedoms and a tremendous amount of damage.
And our bell curve is very spread out.
And so for everyone who's not winning at this system to say nobody is losing
as bad in Denmark as they are here and there's a lot less of them
and they're not ruining the environment as fast and they're actually
figuring their trash problem out, maybe let's actually think about this.
And I'm actually not proposing Denmark as a solution.
I am saying there are a lot of things that are actually evidentially
better on meaningful metrics and things that are adequate to the scope
of what do we do with almost eight billion people and distributed exponential
technology don't yet exist.
Oh, my God, that was amazing.
That is a lot to unpack.
And it's funny because I've never actually talked about any of these issues
on the show.
It's always very much about meditation or mindfulness, spirituality
or just full on health stuff.
But I know that you have a systems approach.
So kind of zooming out and looking at like, whoa, what's even beyond
Hey, am I optimizing my sleep or taking, you know, how does my blood work look
this year?
I mean, this is stuff that goes way above and beyond that.
And where are we going from here?
Which is interesting.
I just think it, you know, I spurn the question because I knew that you'd be
someone that could answer it in a way that encourage more questioning.
But it's such an interesting time to be alive.
That's why sometimes it's hard for me not to deviate from my format and the basic
topics and get way off into this stuff because I'm watching things happen
that have never happened before as we all are, right?
It's just such a trippy time on earth.
And there's so many positive things going on.
And I feel that there's this massive awakening thanks to people like you
and shows like this and just the proliferation of information
through social media and through the internet.
But at the same time, it's so dark and we are on this, you know, as you said,
about to go over the waterfall.
I mean, we are at the precipice of absolute destruction.
Well, at the same time, there's this light that's really
I think we're in this sort of spiritual evolution at the same time.
It's just so interesting.
So let's just for a minute touch on the are we talking about
biohacking, meditation, spirituality, individual optimization?
Are we talking about interpersonal collective optimization?
Well, that's what I'm saying.
Normally on the show, it's more just subjective, each person optimizing
and then that rippling out into the community at large, right?
But we've sort of like zoomed out and are coming back in from the other
direction to see the systemic model.
Here's why we have to think about them together.
If we work on increasing our cognitive capacity and our energy and etc.
so that we can do more of what's killing the world, then we go extinct faster
because of it.
We're optimizing ourselves to like integrate into a system that is not working.
And that's most of it, right?
Like that's interesting.
We watched as we started, you know, Neurohacker, we were looking at
the amount of smart drug sales going up.
And smart drugs that increased hyper competing, increased
motivation and drive while decreasing empathy, decreasing creativity
and making hyper competing psychopaths like Madafino less like like Adderall.
Oh, Adderall, OK.
But Madafino can do things in that direction.
And it's different.
I just came to I don't do Adderall, but I do Madafino from time to time.
And when I'm on Madafino, I don't think I've become a bad person.
But I definitely I'm not interested in interfacing with other humans at all.
I'm like very task oriented and locked into whatever I'm doing,
which has its place, but it's definitely not like, hey, man,
I should go out and give some hugs right now.
It's like, get out of my way, don't interrupt me.
I'm focused.
So how do we this is the key thing is like, let's learn how to win
at the game that is killing the world.
No, let's not do that.
Right. Let's learn how to have the capacity to create a new game.
And that's I mean, like that's really the thing that I want to emphasize here.
And even the people who are winning at the current game are not.
Living happy, meaningful lives for the most part.
When we look at hypernormal stimuli, right, why it's so easy to get addicted
to sugar because in an evolutionary environment, we just didn't have sugar,
right? We had a little bit of fruit and the fruit was not hybridized.
So there was a major evolved dopamine reaction to get it because the caloric
density offered increased ability to survive a famine.
Now we have so much sugar, but we still have the same dopamine response.
That's a dangerous phenomenon, hypernormal stimuli.
And then we find that of course, social media is a hypernormal stimuli
because everybody's pictures are prettier than they actually are.
And everybody's liking you and you're liking them and you don't have to face
like real difficulties of interaction.
And it can be a huge number of people in a short amount of time.
And porn is a hypernormal stimuli.
And there's a whole generation of kids becoming adults who don't know how to
relate to women, who don't know how to have sex properly, who have issues
erectile and et cetera, because they have oversaturated a certain kind of stimuli
and normal stimuli are actually very insensitive to it, right?
And video games are hypernormal.
So we've had a world that's just all hypernormal stimuli, which is addiction,
which always corresponds with less fulfillment, right?
Because it's desensitizing you to actually getting pleasure from life.
And so you need the hypernormal stimuli to get the hit.
And so you need the whatever it is, however many likes that your thing gets.
And the hypernormal stimuli proliferates in the presence of hyponormal stimuli,
which is we don't live in a fucking tribe, which is our evolutionary environment,
where we actually have real authentic interactions with lots of humans regularly.
And so imagine in a tribe where you're dancing around the campfire regularly.
Most people find that when they go camping with friends,
they aren't checking their phone as much, right?
After the first day or two and the addiction kind of chills,
in the presence of more authentic fulfillment,
there is less emptiness pushing some hit.
And so the society we've optimized for is a hyponormal stimuli
to everything meaningful, where everybody's fucking lonely
and has some sense of meaninglessness and a lot of pressure together.
And so then in that place, addiction is going to run rampant.
And most people have 30 to 50 different addictive behaviors,
meaning compulsive shit they know isn't good for them, they keep doing.
Totally.
That's really interesting because in the model of the 12 steps,
which has been the most effective single thing in removing deadly addictions from my life,
the model there is what I think people from the outside of that model think is that,
oh, you go there and you quit drinking or you go there and you quit sex or overeating
or whatever it is, you go to some 12 step group.
And that that's what your problem is, but that you get there,
subjectively one gets there and you go, oh, shit, that was actually the symptom, right?
So I'm addicted to heroin.
Well, why?
Because of everything you just described.
So is this set of principles then going to just take that addiction away?
No, what it's going to do is it's going to give me a framework to live
by spiritual principles, ineffable laws, right, that I can apply to my life
to become more fulfilled.
And then the need for that thing that I was using goes away.
And it's the straight, I mean, I've experienced this again and again and again
using that model of getting the human connection and a spiritual connection and,
like, living by those principles that kind of keep your mind and emotions in check,
then the problem is removed.
And the principles represent a pretty small percent
and the human connection represents a pretty large percent.
Like the group dynamic and the group support.
I guess it's that tribe we're missing, right?
You walk into a room and there's 25 people in there that you might not know,
but you understand one another on a deep level because you've both suffered in the same way.
Think about it.
How many people get the blue book read on their own, apply the principles,
and quit their addiction?
Probably nobody.
Nobody.
That's funny.
Whether they join that group or they join the Christian group or they join whatever fucking,
it's mostly the fact that we are actually social primates,
right, involved in a tribal environment.
And so when in the 12 step thing, what's happening is the main thing happening in those rooms
is you have people having authentic sharing about things they don't normally get to share about.
So they feel seen, they see other people and there's real intimacy.
Right.
And most of the time, again, the world praised us for certain very narrow things
and we're optimizing for a lie all the time.
Now, just because this is adjacent to a topic I want to discuss,
this is one of the things that is most gruesome about social media.
And I'll say most gruesome about the topic of personal branding.
And I'm using the word gruesome, you know, acknowledging what a strong word it is.
I struggle with this a lot, so I'm looking forward to what you have to say.
When someone creates a brand as a business,
but even if not, they're just social media and there's a persona, right?
But let's take the brand as a very clear example.
They're now a life coach, they're a yoga teacher, they're an Instagram model,
they're whatever the fuck it is, right?
Which has become radically easier.
There used to be a few people did that with, based on the media tech,
now everybody gets to do some degree of this.
Then what happens is I have a feedback, I have an analytics mechanism
of how much people like my persona, which is how many likes the thing gets
and how many clicks and impressions and purchases, whatever, you know, thing.
And so I'm going to now split test optimize my persona based on what people are responding to
and they're going to respond to hypernormal stimuli.
And so the brand is going to get based on the financial driver,
based on the analytics, is going to evolve in the direction of what gets maximum engagement.
It's going to get further and further from who I actually am.
There'll be whole areas of who I am that I definitely don't share
because they will actually be anti-correlated to what gets the like hit.
And the more people are liking that thing now that I feel different
than the more depressed I feel, right?
The more addictive desire I have in that depression to go get a hit.
And put out another fucking thing that's going to get a few hundred likes.
And the more I feel like a fraud and a phony and that if anyone really saw me,
they wouldn't love me and I'm really unlovable and et cetera.
So in the 12 step room, the opposite of that's happening, right?
Someone is actually saying, I'm a fucking fuck up.
I just did all this dumb shit and they're like, I get it, me too.
Yeah.
Whoa.
A real human interaction just occurred.
Yeah.
And which is rare, which is really rare.
And this starts to be the basis.
It's not sufficient, right?
But it starts to be the basis of a human life that doesn't drive addiction
as a way to deal with the emptiness, right?
Remove the emptiness and then the need to run from it goes away.
It's interesting though, as you were talking about the social media persona
and the profile, because I've owned a company for nine years and it's a company.
It has its own identity and then myself and my partner were the drivers
or the face of that company at a certain point.
But then we've sort of phased out as we've gone in our own separate career
paths and things and mine's gone away from fashion.
So I really enjoy the process of building a brand and a personality and
coming up with your core values and the mission and it's a thing.
It's a living entity, which has been amazing.
But I really struggled when I started the podcast and decided to get out of
having this identity as a fashion stylist and a musician and all the things
that I was so identified with before that I just ran their course
or weren't my true heart's passion.
And so I decided to do this podcast and make this brand called Luke Story.
Have this thing the life stylist.
I really had a hard time with launching it.
It was about two years ago because I didn't know how real I wanted to be
or that I would have the courage to be and how forthcoming and just transparent
and authentic I wanted to be about my past and my struggles with addiction
and just current struggles and everything.
And so I kind of paused for a moment before I put anything out
until I really was sure that I was willing to accept a possible rejection
or other consequences of just being me.
And I've done this social experiment now for about a year and a half
where I've just pushed my own boundaries of transparency and authenticity
just to see what would happen if I am in fact disliked or rejected or abandoned
or ostracized by the world at large or what we call a following or a fan base
or listeners or whatever.
And it's been so bizarre.
I've been talking about this a lot.
It's the more goofy and real and just true I can be like treating social media
and my outward facing persona and brand like I'm in a 12 step meeting
and just like, hey, this is the shit I'm going through.
I'm at a certain degree of, you know, prudence, I guess.
You know, I don't you don't want to be lose your tact, you know what I mean?
But I'm finding this spiritual explosion of growth and just allowing myself
to finally be seen and to really accept myself and love myself.
And what's so weird about it, and this is just this cosmic joke
that I'm just constantly giggling at, is that I actually get more approval
from showing these aspects of myself that I've always hidden
because I was embarrassed about or, you know, my insecurities, my struggles.
It's like actually people like me more for the things that I've been afraid
for them to see my whole entire life.
It's like this strange paradox, which on the other side of it, I've lived
at the side you were describing is like, oh, I'm going to present things
in a certain way so that I'm like, and I'm sure that's there to some degree.
But I've kind of flipped that on its head and just like, all right,
how myself can I be and what point at which do people go, all right,
you're too much, we're abandoning you.
We actually don't like you, which is that sort of, you know, primal egoic fear.
And I'm just having such a great time like using social media actually
as a tool to make myself uncomfortably vulnerable and then to find that it was a boogeyman.
It's like a phantom fear who gives a shit if they like you or not.
It's like if you have that self worth, which I'm really starting to cultivate more actively,
then I don't know, even the response doesn't matter, but it's fascinating
when the response is positive to things that I would think like, oh God,
now people are really going to think I'm an idiot or whatever, you know,
just letting that be seen on a macro more public level.
And then it's giving me the ability to do that more as you mentioned,
the word intimacy, you know, just with my friends to be like, hey, I just want to be real.
I think it's one of my goals in life is to, you know, to someday pass on.
And if anyone could say anything, just be like, at least he wasn't fucking phony.
Yeah, you know, it's like just to be authentic and real,
despite whatever false one might have.
So so in the world where we have ubiquitous loneliness and ubiquitous depression
and without talking about it, everybody knows that there is a longing for authenticity,
right, and a longing for intimacy.
And so people will respond to that.
And so that's awesome, right?
And I love that you're having that experience with people and sharing that experience with people.
And anyone who wants to share themselves where there will be a personal brand,
that's the only way to go, that doesn't make their life suck
and actually propagate shit in the world.
Now there will still be times where there is something that is less authentic that sells better.
And this is where you have to say, OK, choosing between two masters,
where how do I make this choice?
Right, it's a tricky one sometimes.
But it's one to just have continuous awareness of and vigilance of, yeah.
So so at a certain point when I guess you hit a threshold,
perhaps where you really have to start looking at things from scalability
and from having a brand that's sustainable,
are you saying that at a certain point you are faced with a decision on editing the level of authenticity in order to...
Our analytics say this particular market will like this part of your message,
but not this part.
If you gear it like this, you'll scale significantly.
Right, right.
And this particular hypernormal stimuli will get a lot of people to respond
because addiction actually sells.
Right.
So now come back to capitalism for a minute, again, in the problem of it.
The more addicted people are, the better capitalism works.
GDP goes up with more addiction.
Right, because this is why there are not salad bars that have the scale of McDonald's,
is because if we make shit that is addictive as fuck,
because we just exploit the hypernormal stimuli button,
people will buy it and have to keep buying it.
And we do that with cigarettes, we do it.
And you know, with social media, this is like, you know,
when Tristan Harris left Google and started talking about this
and people started waking up to social media, Facebook, you know,
or platforms of any kind, Google, they get paid by how much time,
how many eyeballs spend how much time on site,
because the marketers are, you know, the advertisers are going to pay for that.
So the goal is keep you, have as many people spend as much time on site as possible.
Now, what's actually good for you in your life is to get the fuck off of the screen
and go interact with people.
Right, right.
But since we're going to get paid more by more time on site,
then we're going to figure out the most addictive things to do with the news feed
that will keep you clicking and, you know, paying attention as much as possible,
and then justify why it's a good thing, because we have to do that, right?
And so then if you look at...
You just described a rift in so many of my relationships, you know,
the woman classic, like, do you really have to be on Instagram all day?
I'm like, hey, this is my work, like, you know, that's always my excuse.
It's part of my job.
And, you know, it's an interesting thing,
because the studies keep rolling out of the more time people spend on screen,
the more depressed they are.
Oh, dude.
And for gazillion reasons, right, right?
Is there, for the most part, there isn't any real intimacy, authenticity,
et cetera, in those interactions.
If so, it's the tiniest fragment of the total time spent.
And even to the degree there is, the real kinesthetic feedback of intimacy
with another person is not happening.
It doesn't mean there aren't good sides.
Of course, the ability to have people talk with people in other parts of the world
and be able to have messages that are valuable be shared has value.
Those will be the parts that we solely focus on if we have a profit stream
associated with it, because we need to justify that.
Right.
So this is where it becomes important to really look at what is meaningful.
Now, come back for a moment to the individual optimization, right,
biohacking individual optimization.
We're interested in people optimizing as individuals so
that they have more capacity to actually do things that are meaningful.
Because when people look at climate change and they look at species extinction
and they look at refugee issues and et cetera, they're like, fuck,
I don't know what to do with that.
Let's go back on Facebook.
Let's go back to work.
But for the, and again, back to education, they're waiting for somebody to tell them
what to do and do a good job at it, as opposed to be able to self-assess
on a very complex scenario what might actually be effective.
Because if anybody knew it would be fucking happening, right, to self-assess
what needs to be done and then to actually start to initiate and do that
and self-author.
So individual optimization for that purpose is meaningful.
But it's interesting how the pursuit of happiness is core to the mission statement
of our country, right.
And the pursuit of happiness is an oxymoron.
It's a misnomer because when one is pursuing happiness,
they will definitely not be happy.
You're inherently dissatisfied if you're seeking, yeah.
They're affirming their emptiness, lack of happiness,
and they're in a fundamentally narcissistic pursuit.
And happiness occurs when you let the narcissism go and actually connect,
meaningfully to the world.
And happiness is mostly this direction, not this direction, right.
Mostly that feeds it.
And that also, that also impacts another piece of the addiction recovery,
is once one has enough stability, I mean, kind of the whole point of this,
then go help the next person that comes along that is struggling
and wasting what you have.
And then that's where the magic happens, right.
That's when the lights turn on, when you make a difference, right.
Yeah, it's not just because now you're affirming the principles to yourself
and so you want to live and it's that.
But it's also because now your life actually has a sense of meaning
exactly where it doesn't need a hit from something else as much.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah. And I think I figured that out pretty early on into my recovery,
which is almost 21 years ago.
Like the first time I was even just together enough to have a car
and give some kid a ride and just be of service.
And that was like, God, I was experiencing the helpers high and I didn't even know it.
And now to have the ability to do that on a more broad scale of having a podcast
and making these videos and talking to people like you and getting feedback.
Although it's not a true connection, but like a direct message or a Facebook message
is like, oh my God, I've struggled with X, Y and Z and I've been listening to your show
and now I'm getting over it.
I mean, it's like, well, OK, my life has meaning and purpose finally.
And not to say that being a plumber or working construction or working in a gas station
or whatever wouldn't as well because, you know, there's people needed
in all of these different areas, but to do the thing that I really love to do.
It's been so fulfilling and it directly helps people on a on a really deep level.
So God, man, that's funny.
I was just going to like touch on like just sprinkle on a couple of things
that we went into and yeah, I have a feeling weird.
I'm going to have to be coming down a lot if you'll if you'll have me
because there's many conversations that need to the need to happen.
But I definitely want to get into, you know, Neurohacker Collective,
what you guys are doing, qualia, just getting now that we sort of created
a framework and a reason that someone would want to optimize themselves.
Is other than just like, well, now I can get more stuff for myself
and be happier for myself, but to actually, you know, be a piece of biology
and consciousness that can go out into the world and have some discernment
in terms of what I want to put my energy into or not.
So how did Neurohacker Collective come to be
and what are you guys all about for those that are unfamiliar?
Yeah, so there's a few founders
and they all had interesting different stories that kind of came together.
I'll share mine here is so I was running a think tank
that was working on the types of issues we're talking about, social issues.
How do we actually have civilization self-organized as well?
And so one of the things we noticed, pretty easy to notice,
is that all the problems we want to solve are problems that are caused by human action,
whether we're looking at species extinction or climate change
or female general mutilation or war, like this or human behavior,
or mod topics, right?
And so how do we get, how do we support humans to behave in ways
that are good for themselves and good for the whole simultaneously
without directly or indirectly causing harm?
So then it's the question is, what are all the things that influence human behavior?
Obviously, we talked about economics.
If a particular action is incented, it's pretty hard to prevent it, right?
So how do we create an economic system where the whale is not worth more
than it is alive if we don't, if we want to have any whales?
That's a big topic, right?
How do we create, you know, social systems and tech influences our behavior,
our environment influences our behavior, our psychology, our worldview,
our definition of what is fundamentally meaningful to us?
But our biology also influences our behavior.
And everybody who has ever had a, you know, a pretty significant sickness
or even just had their hormones out of balance or a hangover knows
that your physiology can go into a state that affects your psychology
and your cognitive capacity and disposition significantly,
where if your neurotransmitters are off or your hormones are off or et cetera
in a particular way, accessing gratitude or happiness or hope,
it might be very, very hard and staying out of anger, frustration, et cetera,
it might be very hard.
And that's going to affect behavioral, not only their own suffering,
but also behavioral predispositions.
Same with complex thinking.
I've actually got to be able to have a decent working memory to be able
to hold multiple perspectives at once and synthesize them.
If I don't have enough working memory to hold multiple perspectives at the same
time, I'll default into a simplistic perspective.
So, right, which is why malnourished people are so easy to brainwash, right?
That is a part of it.
And, and so the, you know, the thing we started looking at there is how does
physiology affect human predisposition, not just their own experience,
but how likely they are to behave violently or behave charitably,
psychopathy, empathy, you know, types of dynamics and also the ability
to understand complex things, the emotional resilience to hang in with them
in difficult times.
And as we're understanding more about mind-brain interface,
there is a bi-directional interface, both influence each other.
As we're looking at the way the brain and the physiology affect the mind,
right, the emotion and the cognitive dimensions, we, it's not just a genetic
like, oh, you're, you have a genetic predisposition for psychopathy,
therefore you're a psychopath.
Typically, the genetic predispositions for a psychiatric thing are, are genes
that do something like process a specific nutrient, right?
Like we'll, we'll look at psychiatric issues from genes that process the
methylation of a B vitamin or the excretion of a mineral like copper
and zinc or something.
And so if those nutrients are necessary for a specific type of brain function,
like empathy or impulse control, and they're not being processed well,
then you might not be able to have impulse control.
And what, what we actually can do about it is without changing your genome,
just actually say, oh, the gene that would code for the transform of this
vitamin isn't happening.
We can just give the post-transform version of the vitamin and that mental
illness is actually better.
So this is the kind of field of integrative psychiatry and psychopharmacology.
And I started seeing how many of the dynamics that address the world have a
physiologic component to them and starting to look at, could we up-regulate
the neural networks that mediate empathy, that mediate impulse control,
that mediate emotional resilience, that mediate complex thinking,
that mediate a sense of agency so that human bio-hardware was not only
predisposed to feel better, but also predisposed to have increased capacity
and behave in ways that are fundamentally more, you know, pro-social,
which just does correspond with healthier too, right?
And it's interesting because we're evolving in a social environment,
healthy people are pro-social, right?
Think about a psychopath in a tribe doesn't make it very well, right?
They're going to get killed or taken out of the tribe or they're going to get
better, but they don't actually get to be in a social, deep social environment
without pro-social behavior and work.
And so Neural Hacker started for me with a deep exploration into understanding
how we can affect human physiology in ways that decreases suffering,
increases capacity and positive disposition.
The first product we launched, Qualia, was one of many.
And this next year, a bunch of the additional ones are coming out in various categories.
Oh, cool. Oh, I'm excited.
And the reason...
I don't want to get into the Qualia thing because people,
I get a lot of inquiries about it and I'm so into it.
But we'll go into that so a little of the framework,
but I definitely want to cover that because it's exciting.
So in a world where we have so much distraction from all of the things
going off from social media and on the phone and et cetera,
with so much hyper-competitive pressure to try and produce,
almost everyone has a pretty strong sense of pressure to want to be able
to focus better and to be able to have more sustained attention and get
it done while having a pretty significant challenge doing that.
And not only the, you know, focus issues like from distraction,
but insufficient nutrients that are necessary,
certain kinds of toxic exposure that affects the brain, you know, et cetera.
So so we see this ramp in energy drinks, so more and more caffeine
and then smart drug usage.
And and so with smart drugs in particular,
which in contra distinction to brain nutrients are things
that you would just get from a normal healthy diet,
but we probably don't get enough because of depleted topsoil and whatever else.
Right. And those are just nutrients that in our evolutionary environment
were necessary for brain function.
Now, we also didn't try to do 12 hours of productive work
that was cognitive, pertinent and evolutionary environment.
So we're using nutrients differently.
So we might have increased nutrient need.
We've obviously got radically decreased topsoil density.
Interesting. Right.
So going out and collecting acorns for a couple of hours that day
or hunting for rabbits or whatever is quite different from sitting down
and solving the complex problems that we are in this technological age.
So we're interested, you know, deficiencies, pretty rampant,
different kinds of toxicity, like, you know, just volatile organic compounds
in this paint and this carpet are, you know, there's hundreds of VOC's
in the air that we're breathing, just normal stuff, right?
Let alone industrial pollution, the atmosphere and glyphosate
and agriculture and whatever else.
And they're almost all either carcinogens or neurotoxins
or endocrine disruptors and like it's a significant issue.
So we've basically, as tool builders, we built a world that we're not adapted for.
And so how do we deal with that?
We were looking at the cognitive issues, one of the first ones.
There are many we looked at, you know, issues related to anxiety and depression
and pain and addiction and sleep.
And those are all things we'll talk about.
But, you know, we saw this meteoric rise of energy drinks.
So they're doing $15 billion domestically per year of, you know,
300 milligrams of caffeine at a time.
And God knows what else, man.
Anytime I see someone drinking one of those things, I'm just like,
because you every once in a while in a 7-Eleven, I'll just pick something up.
Not like I'm going to buy it, but I just read the ingredients out of just morbid curiosity.
And I'm like, oh, my God, it's like so toxic, man.
So, you know, the artificial flavors, sweeteners, colors are not adding to brain health.
Dude, and just the thing when you go buy a drink is the water.
It's fluoridated tap water.
In most cases, that's really the bulk of what you're getting.
And when you buy a 12-ounce, whatever drink, you're drinking a bunch of tap water.
So you've got, you know, that kind of rise.
Then you see with smart drugs, obviously we have a lot of people on prescription,
Adderall, Wellbutrin, Vyvance, Mdaphanel, for psychiatric disorders, for cognitive disorders.
And there's a pretty big question about what percentage of those actual
prescription cases are good for people.
I'm stating that conservatively.
But then we have all the people on off-label use, which is not even prescribed.
They're just black market universities, midterm and final Adderall sales everywhere, right?
And even Wellbutrin, Daphanel, lots of different things.
And so estimate is something like $15 billion a year also in off-label smart drug sales,
something like $5 billion in Adderall.
And they work, right?
Like they work for a very narrow set of metrics.
So if I want to focus, get my midterm done or my tech start up or whatever it is,
the dopamine-ergic dynamics from the Adderall are going to make me focus better
and have more motivation and more drive.
Now, some of the interesting things that we find is because it's just modifying dopamine
and not looking at acetylcholine and how it's involved in memory, not looking at glutamate,
not looking at all of the rest of neurochemistry and not even looking at all of the dopamine
process, just typically one small part that one synthetic molecule is going to override,
you get certain effects and certain side effects and certain missing effects, right?
So we get increased focus, but we don't get increased memory.
We actually get decreased memory of certain kinds of Adderall, decreased creativity
and then decreased empathy, increased anxiety, aggressiveness,
sometimes depersonalization, derealization, decreased task switching, you know, et cetera.
These are really important things.
And so, and because even insofar as we're affecting dopamine,
we're just overriding a regulatory system, providing a whole bunch of an in-chain chemical,
not actually saying how does the system regulate its own dopamine and how can we support it to do that,
then we're going to create dependence and addiction.
And so these were the things that I saw was a scaling amount of dependence and addiction
and very narrow positives with a lot of the positives that were necessary, missing
and meaningful side effects.
So the question in that space, we worked with people in an integrative medical,
clinical environment to when we had their genomics, we had their blood labs,
we had brain scans to customize chemistry that helped them tremendously.
So we knew we could do that.
And the question was, can we do that at scale without personalization?
Which I didn't know because personalization is a big deal and we're working towards
methods to build a personalize.
There are some things that I just won't do widely because they have to be personalized.
They're so different person to person.
So we don't have any type of folate or folic acid because whether someone should be
on a methylated or non-methylated folate makes such a really big difference that we just don't
fuck with that axis if we can't personalize it.
But there are a lot of axes that everyone who is self-selecting into a particular kind of thing
like something for cognitive enhancement do pretty well across the whole board.
So high success and well tolerated.
So what we wanted to do with quality was say, can we make an alternative so that people don't
have to go to just tremendous amounts of caffeine or off-label smart drugs or just suffer
without the ability to focus that will actually help them in what they're looking for with
enough subjective effect that they actually feel it and that will actually have a much
wider host of positive effects that we're getting focus and concentration and drive.
But also emotional resilience and task switching and creativity and analysis and synthesis.
And so we started by doing a kind of cognitive map of what are all of the states and all of
the capacities that people are looking for when they're really wanting to do productive work.
And then saying, what are the underlying physiologic pathways that mediate those that we
know about from the various neuroscientific and bioscience fields?
And then can we understand how those systems work?
So how does the body regulate dopamine?
So as you start to look at it, you say, all right, so protein comes in dietarily, gets broken
down to amino acids, phenylalanine converts into tyrosine, converts to emicidal tyrosine,
converts to L-dopa, crosses the blood-brain barrier, converts to dopamine in a presynaptic
neuron, transport a protein down an axon, crosses a synapse, has to get by synaptic enzymes
that will break it down in different ways, hydroxylase and MAOB and COMT and et cetera.
And then goes into one of a few dopamine receptors.
There's intercellular dynamics that are involved.
So you just start to look at that and say, how does the body do this thing on its own?
And are there deficiencies in any of those key nutrients or transform factors or things
that are oftentimes under-fully supported that we can support?
And that would be just looking at dopamine, right?
Then you do that with acetylcholine, then you look at glutamate, then you look at functions
like neurogenesis, bodies continuously developing new neurons are the things that actually
support increased neurogenesis or neurotophagy, killing old neurons better so you don't have
synapsic neurons.
So we looked at what are the host of things people are looking for that are healthy states
and capacities?
What is the underlying physiology involved?
How does that physiology naturally regulate and what might we be able to do to support
the natural regulatory systems so that people both have a more complete positive state and
that rather than create dependence, right, they're on it for a while, we overrode their
regulatory system and now there's addiction, that it actually is supporting the robustness
of the regulatory system so that when they get off it, there is elevation from baseline
that lasts, right, the exact opposite of side effect and the exact opposite of dependence.
So that was our goal and so we did hundreds of iterations, bunch of testing, you know,
after doing full literature review, database of 500 notropic chemicals and looking at the
pathways of them and then looking at positive synergies, negative synergies, delivery mechanisms
and we ended up getting to this formula, you know, that's there right now which over a
large enough number of people, over a large enough amount of time, tested well enough
that we were actually really happy with it and so that's that first product and the goal
there was to be able to support people having increased productive capacity, right, increased
cognitive clarity and the associated emotional states like resilience and drive that was
actually not bad for people and good for people. Now, I can't claim that we know that because
we haven't done long enough term trials with enough metrics with enough controls to claim
all of it but, you know, we've done preclinical trials with pre and post brain scans and biometrics
and seen, you know, really meaningful statistical correlation change and we've had, I don't
know, 40,000 people over three years where we're collecting data from what their experience
is and so we were very happy about that and that's the first product and, you know, what
it kind of is is a complex approach because our brain is a complex system, our body is
a complex system so rather than here's one molecule to override it, it's how does it
self-regulate and can we support it self-regulation across many related axes. Now, if we were
going to approach anxiety, we would do it the same way, if we were going to approach
pain rather than, you know, just some NSAID or opiate, we would do it the same way. How
does the body naturally produce its own opiates? How does it naturally deal with inflammation?
How does it, and can we support those dynamics? If we were going to work with sleep, we'd
do it the same way. So those are...
This is exciting.
I can't wait to see what you guys are coming up with next. So there's a couple of things
in there that I really like is that you guys really were very thoughtful about the synergy
between the different compounds. I think there's a lot of cowboys and Indians right now in
the new tropics phase as I'm sure you're aware where you see the same kind of formulations
on 10 different products and it's like one guy just looked at what the next guy's doing
on the label, oh yeah, I hear that's good for short-term memory, focus, cognition, whatever
blah blah and they just kind of throw those stacks out there without necessarily forethought
as to how those interact with one another, right? So you have one molecule and it does
one thing and let's just even say that that effect of that molecule is universal and you're
choosing ones that are kind of universally affecting people in the same way. But then
you combine that with other molecules and other ones and other ones and now you have
something totally different. You have a third party compound now, right? And so that can
go well or not based on self-experimentation. There's been times where I've taken too many
different things at the same time and too much of them and I'm having the opposite effect
where I can't focus and I'm actually, I feel like I'm freaking nuts because I took too
many smart drugs or whatever. I overdosed on Yo-Himby once, for example, just random,
like don't do that kids at home, you know, pay attention to the dosage and stuff. But
I think what's cool about qualia is that you really looked at how things relate to one
another, that you're not putting anything in there that's going to cause your body to
down-regulate its own production to the point where there's a dependency and oh my god,
now I can't make this neurotransmitter or whatever because it's been done for me for
so long. And then also that the whole basis of it is coming from what I like about the
company itself is that it's coming from this intention that we're trying to create people
with biology that runs better so there'll be better people. I mean, to me that makes
total sense. I had the flu a couple of months ago and I was in Colorado and I had to speak
at two events and they were pretty substantial for me and I was so sick, dude, and I could
not make myself be in a good mood. Like I literally just couldn't be happy, you know,
I was just depressed and even though my mind was right and I wasn't fighting it, I wasn't
like caught in some sort of negative spiral, I wasn't actually negative at all, I just
wasn't in a good mood. I didn't feel happy like I do right now because I wasn't firing
on all cylinders, you know, so I really think that you do have to approach your own development
from all sides. In other words, I can't be eating, you know, glyphosate and aspartame
and all this evil things that they put in food and just think I can meditate my way into
a higher consciousness while I'm destroying my biology. And in the same way I can't become
obsessed with herbs and superfoods and utropics and then be running around flipping people
off in traffic caught in my trauma issues, you know, it's like you have to kind of approach
it from all angles. So I like that you're not like, Hey, you guys, let's make a cool
vitamin that makes people better at computer work. It's like, no, we're have a larger scope
of vision, which is really cool. Now back to the qualia. It's been interesting to observe
the friends that I've turned on to it and you know, listeners of the show and stuff
like that is that I've, I've yet to have anyone say that they had a negative experience
as a result where with a lot of other new tropics, people say that it's too stimulating
or made them tired, made them like this, made them like that. So I've had no one report
back like, Oh my God, I felt horrible. And only a couple people that were like, man, I
didn't really notice anything. Yeah. So the majority of people that I've interacted with
that have tried are like, Oh my God, this is the best thing ever. Like where has this
been my whole life? Like an overwhelmingly positive experience. And that's what it's
been like for me too, which is one of the reasons I wanted to track you down. And I
found out there was so much more to your story than just being like, you know, a guy that
knows about new tropics. But for me, what's been interesting, speaking of especially the
the down regulation piece is that when I started, I took the full dose. I think it was three
of number one and six of number two. And I did that a lot. And it kind of just brought
me up to a nice base level. And then at a certain point, that became a little too stimulating.
And now I'm like, I take one number one, two number two, and I'm like, I feel great. There's
no need to even push it beyond that. So it actually has the opposite effect of building
up a tolerance say, right? That was intended. Yeah. So good job on that. Because with most
other things, you take it and you take it and you build up a tolerance, you need more
and more and then your body forgets how to make it and you end up in this imbalance.
But I think that there's just something really cool about what you've done. I'm going to
come back to the problems of capitalism for a minute. Yeah. Every MBA student learns one
of the first principles of business is maximize lifetime revenue of a customer. So you guys
are blowing it because now I'm like, I need to I was on auto ship of quality because I
was pounding so much. But now I'm like, actually, I'm getting too many shipments. I had to
stop that and just order when I run out because I'm going to run out. It's so you guys, your
business model is going against that theory. So you think about it from a, say I'm a pharma
company and there are MBAs that are looking at the financial instruments and making decisions,
right? I mean, at the financial metrics and spreadsheets and saying, okay, maximize lifetime
revenue of a customer, the things that treat symptoms forever. So we say depression is not
curable. You have a biochemical imbalance, which is like some magic term biochemical
balance with the fuck cause of it, right? Genetic, which is just a magic term for we
don't know or we haven't bothered to look at it in depth. And so we have to symptomatically
treat that forever. Heart disease always symptomatically treat that forever cholesterol. We're going to
treat the fucking all of them, right? So that's very good from a lifetime revenue point of
view. And if it creates side effects that need other drugs to resolve them, that's called a
cross seller and up perfect. And then if to maximize lifetime value, I want to start them as
young as possible. So we make up new diseases like ADD after we put into a little shitty desks.
And do they still make those desks like they had in the 70s? This little wooden prisons. So we
get them started as early as possible on an nitrogenic cycle, right? So pretty much everything
that happens in medicine, we want to do the opposite. If it causes addiction, we want to create
long term benefit of it causes side effects, we want the side effects to be comprehensively
positive. If the people have to stay on it, we want them to be able to get off of it, right?
Like that's the goal. And so really theory of market should not apply to medicine, because
people really can't choose to not participate with something that will make them better if they're
sick. And since they really can't choose not to do that theory of markets is a fucked up thing,
just like there shouldn't be for profit prisons, right? And so this was hard for us because and
is why we started with supplement as opposed to bigger things we could have done is because I
didn't want to take capital from any financial service places that would then bind us to doing
things that were unethical. So like our our cost of goods to make quality is more expensive than
most no tropics retail. And it's because if you want to use the right form, right, you use the
phosphorylated version of this and the methylated version of this and etc. And with the right
concentration of the dose, you notice you take nine fucking capsules. And that's not filler. It's
because it just takes that much of those things. It's just expensive. Now, and also the fact that
you guys aren't using excipients and binders and all that weird stuff, which I always notice right
away. I'm like, I go to the end of the label on a something like that. Yeah, there it is,
which means that you can't work with almost any manufacturers because that's what they need to
make it work in their machines. The magnesium, stearate and all this stuff, right? So all of that,
like doing the integrity thing is just a hard thing to make work fiscally. But like you have found
with your podcast, if you do, there will be people that are attracted to that thing and it can grow.
So that's what we're trying to do. That's cool. Yeah, the real deal. So in terms of the other
things that people typically use, I want to just run run a couple of these by you because I take
my qualia, I guess about five days a week. And as I said, it's been strange that my dosage has gone
down. It must be fixing me. That's the way I look at it. Like it's, it's connecting synapses or
something that were off and now they're, they're getting more in alignment. That's the way I look
at it. But there's other things too that depending on where I'm going, what I'm doing, I find to be
useful. So today, for example, I knew that I was going to have a very social day. I'm going to be
talking to you. I'm being interviewed on the way back home after this. So I did a number of
different things, one of them being a fennebot, for example, which I'll maybe do once a week or
something like that. And I just find it's just a really great social lubricant. And, and also took
some paracetam because I find that it really helps me with speech. So some of these other things
I'll do, but I could give Joe here paracetam and it'll give him anxiety. Or he won't notice anything.
Or I give someone else, I gave a girlfriend once fennebot and she probably took a little bit too
much, but she got deathly ill, you know, and on what I would take for this is like a sprinkle to me
to her. She was a bit smaller and just had this huge adverse reaction. Same thing. I'm a daphanel
is another one that I really like. And for me, I take an eighth, a dose of a daphanel for me is an
eighth of one tablet, right? So it's like a 200 milligram tablet. Once I took a half, I was like,
oh my God, I feel like I'm on crystal meth, not fun. A quarter, if I'm really, really tired, set me
straight. But if I just want to have a productive day and be relatively alert, just a tiny, tiny
little piece, which is about an eighth of a tablet does me, I've given it to friends. I say, man,
be careful. This is a, this is a drug. This is not an herb. Like go easy. They take a half. They're
like, I didn't feel anything. They take another half. They're like, man, I didn't notice anything.
Like, oh my God, if I took a whole midaphanel, I would be like, you know, scrubbing the freaking
bathroom floor with a toothbrush. I mean, I would be tweaking so hard. So what's up with some of
those, or you mentioned deprenel, I was on like low dose deprenel for a while. And I've tried a
lot of different things outside of the safe and more plant based stuff that you guys work with
in qualia. What are some of the other ones are even micro dosing on psilocybin, like that whole
other world of smart drugs and new tropics? What do you got to say about any of that? Sure.
Okay, so let's,
let's make some categories here. So we've got smart drugs as a category, which are pharmaceuticals
that are usually being used for an off label purpose. They're oftentimes psych meds, like
well butrin, or Adderall, or they are narcolepsy meds, like midaphanel, or they are sometimes
anti Parkinson's meds. Deprenel. Yeah, right. I remember when I was taking that stuff, someone's
like, what is that? There's no big deal. It's for Parkinson's. I'm just micro dosing it. Now,
all of those are dopamine urgics, right? So for different purposes, they're dopamine urgics.
You'll have some, like for Alzheimer's, don't have a cell that work with it. Does urgics mean
they raised dopamine? Okay. No wonder I like all of those. Yes. So you've got, you know, various
types of smart drugs is one category. Most of the time, those are going to have a pretty strong
effect and a pretty decent chance of side effect if used improperly. There's really nothing that
is going to be all that dangerous if used properly, but properly is the big thing, right? Like,
whether we're talking, I mean, you can use heroin not dangerously if you use it properly,
but that's like, not how people use heroin. And specifically, Adderall is amphetamine,
right? It's a D amphetamine. You add a methyl group to it and you have methamphetamine.
Methamphetamine used to be a pharmaceutical. And so, like, the distinction between pharmaceuticals
and illegal drugs is where the legal categorization of the minute happens to be based on lobbying,
not based on much else. So you've got smart drugs as a category. And in general, people should
explore there if they are well educated, if like, if they really educate themselves well
about the topic, and they're really paying attention in a quantified self kind of way
to the results, and they should not be looking at doing that super regularly. Now, there are
exceptions. So Deprenil, for instance, works through MAOB inhibition. So MAOB is an enzyme in
the synapse that breaks down certain neurotransmitters, like dopamine, like other catecholamines,
like phenylethlamine. So if you inhibit the MAOB, those neurotransmitters will get across the
synapse more into the postsynaptic neuron. This can be very dangerous because if you take that with
anything that is also increasing monoamines, those types of neurotransmitters going into
the synapse, specifically ones that should be broken down by MAOB, they can get to too high
level. So one wants to be careful with that. So what would be some things that you, with Deprenil,
for example, that you wouldn't want to combine with that? Adderall. Interesting. And that doesn't
mean nobody does it and has a good experience. What about Medaffinil? Same, right? So if you're,
now, they're different. Medaffinil, we don't know all the mechanisms of Medaffinil that well. It is
the least symptomatic dopamineergic for the most part for most people. It seems like it works
through transporter proteins largely, which is going to be a little bit less tricky than many
of the other mechanisms. But if you are flooding the synapse with dopamine and not breaking it down,
you can get to dangerously high levels, right? And not everyone has too high MAOB. Genetically,
some people's MAOB is too low. They actually feel anxious because they have too many of those
excitatory neurotransmitters. And Deprenil would make them feel terrible. But there are a lot of
people who are genetically overproducers of MAOB. And they will have certain kinds of
depression tendencies because their transmitters are just not getting across the synapse that well.
And if they take something that's just increasing their level of dopamine, they might feel better,
but it's actually not doing the right part of the mechanism, right? And the right part of the path
that was going on for them. If they actually break down the excessive levels of MAOB that
they're genetically producing, and there's other things that can cause MAOB to go up other than
just genetics, it's inducible. And so as people age, MAOB goes up, dopamine goes down, it's a part
of agent, which is why Deprenil is one of the few drugs that is actually correlated to be a life
extension agent. And there are people who, when they're young, wouldn't do well with it when
they're older. They would because their MAOB levels went from a healthy place where it would
imbalance them to being excessive and now balances them. So Deprenil can actually be therapeutic
for some people. For other people, it'll be an enhancement that they shouldn't do regularly.
So to the degree you're getting into stronger tools, you should have more education, just
like in any field, right? Like playing with the skill saw, rather than the hand saw, you kind of
need to learn a little bit more because there's more of a consequence, but you can also do cooler
stuff with it. So for us, empowered responsibility and self-education is a really key thing because
we want people to be empowered in their own health and not just feel like a victim and waiting for
someone to tell them what to do who has no way of knowing what their own experiences are spending
enough time, even if it's a well-educated doctor where their fiscal structure only allows them to
spend five minutes of time, like they just can't apply what they know that well. So smart drugs
is one category. Research chemicals is another category where you have a bunch of chemicals
that are not actually categorized as a drug. They're also not categorized as a nutraceutical.
They are for research purposes only and they live in that kind of regulatory barter and that's most
of the no tropics. Like the racitams and whatnot? The racitams are in that category and the ampikines.
Those are the kind of two primary categories that people get into, but then also the NSI-189,
the P-21, the cerebrolysin, the lots of the fenibut, right? They live in that research chemical
category. And some of those are basically smart drugs that just didn't go through approval,
but and then some of them are more what we call a formal no tropic, which is something that can
increase cognitive, some aspect of cognitive performance without meaningful side effect.
Most smart drugs will have some side effect unless it happens to be one that's therapeutic for you.
So and then we've also got brain nutrients, which are just the amino acids, fatty acids,
vitamins, minerals that the brain needs to function well that are often deficient.
And then you've got botanicals and you know plants that modulate different things and
different things. And botanicals can be very powerful, right? You can you can get L-dopa from
Makuna, which is a Parkinson's med in different dose, right? It's not the same kind of dose,
but you can get very potent botanicals. So all those categories of things to play with.
And of course, as people really get into biohacking and neural hacking and become well educated,
you've got different delivery mechanisms. People do them subcutaneous or IM or IV or
snort stuff, intranasal or you know, whatever, right? So there's a big interesting field and
some of them can also be not just cognitive enhancing for the normal well-being, but very
therapeutic. If someone is dealing with post, they're dealing with a post TBI situation,
something that is neurogenic that enhances development of new neurons after they had some
micro brain damage can be very helpful. There's a whole lot to learn. So one of the things we're
working on is really competent education and, you know, community space so that people can
learn as well. Right now, it's forums on Reddit and, you know, places like that where people
can really have to sort if the input is good or not. Yeah, it's funny now too with the algorithms
online. Search results are very skewed oftentimes. Like I was looking for something a couple days
ago that was something political and it was a little bit conspiratorial. I think I was researching
the number of times CNN has been busted for lying and producing fake news. And I googled like
how much, how many times has CNN been caught doing fake news in 2007? Something like that. And I
phrased it a few different ways and nothing came up. You know, you can't find an article if you use
Google to find that, for example. And it's the same way when you start looking for some of this
stuff, you'll read something on a forum and you're like, okay, this guy says this about
Madafino or Fentiment or whatever. And then literally you get to the next 10 sites and it's
the same exact copy, you know, that some other shmo has like copy and pasted into his blog or
some other forum or like, wait, they're all getting the same, you know, five talking points from the
same place. So even if you are a good researcher, sometimes it's hard to come up with original
valid data just because it doesn't exist. You know, like you said, some of these things that are in
that gray zone in terms of their categorization, it sometimes is difficult to even educate yourself
because you don't know what's true and false. So let me give you a classic example. We had a,
we had a, you know, scenario where people had questions about is Centrophonoxine safe? And
because even on some very good, you know, tropic sites, it says Centrophonoxine might cause birth
damage, birth defects. And because Centrophonoxine converts to DMAE, which is a choline urgic
choline donor, and there were some studies that showed DMAE causing birth defects in rats. Now,
people do their research and say, well, you should avoid that, you know, in that scenario.
Now to actually get into it, if we get out of, if we really look at the rat studies and we say,
what kind of dosage through what administration is it relevant to normal dosage? No, the,
it's nothing in a normal oral dosage range was there at all. It was, it was even close. DMAE
actually became approved as a drug without that being a concern in many different countries.
And then Centrophonoxine never had any birth defect studies. And so yet that's all over the
web. Centrophon, don't do it because of birth defects. Now, we pulled every single study ever
done on Centrophonoxine that we could find, 186 studies, most of which weren't online. We had
to go to medical libraries, find them in other countries and other languages, right? Because
they, they were, they started, the research started in the 50s, so they would just were never put
online, translate them all. And then we had a few PhDs in neurochemistry, neuroanatomy, etc, do a
structured literature review, meta analysis of all that for us to come up to it with our opinion on
Centro. Damn. This is not a trivial thing to do. Wow. But it matters if you really don't want to
know what's going on. So I like the wild west of the space because people are starting to take
more responsibility rather than just wait for the doctor to tell them what to do and then get
mad at the doctor when it doesn't work. Yeah. When the doctor couldn't possibly spend enough time with
them or keep up to date with all the research happening. But I really do long for higher quality
control. And it's one of the things we're working on. And we can only work on it as fast as we can
afford without moving into physical models that suck, which is the tricky part. But like
NeuroTech, you know, we were talking about different devices that we have around the house and PMF and
etc. It's pretty easy to say this seems compelling. Let's share it. What we're working to do right
now is with all the types of NeuroTech, whether we're talking about low level laser therapy and
transcranial intranasal lasers, or we're talking about PMF or TMS or, you know, whatever, right?
For us, it's a process of doing the full literature review on everything that's known
about this, what things does it affect, what things does it not affect safe, etc. And then
doing full research on the actual products and say, does this product have the specifications
that the literature shows are useful? And then curate those things. So we're building a platform
to do that. It's just a non-trivial process. And the same with just curating knowledge on
notropics is in the forum, you've got like some real gyms and then a bunch of shit. And it's not
necessarily obvious which ones are the gyms and the shit. Same like if you look in the
bodybuilder world and you go to the steroid forums, some of the smartest endocrinologists
anywhere are in there. And then there's just so much dumb bro science in there. And it's like,
but if you don't know the field well, they're all sand shit, you don't know. So this is something
that we're really working to do is to have a moderation process where everything that goes
there is better. That's cool, man. That's cool. That's a really valuable resource. Because that's
exciting. Another positive thing about right now is that I think more people are waking up to the
fact that they don't actually have to rely on the allopathic medical system. I have episodes and
I call them things like, learning to become your own doctor. It's like, you really can do a lot
on your own. And then if you are tied into someone good in functional medicine and they're able to
kind of be a step above you in terms of their body and knowledge. But like with my relationship
to medicine is I do a lot of my own research and footwork and order my own labs and geek out on
like which labs are the best and most updated because even my functional medicine doctor,
they're still in the labs that were the best GI test last year. I'm like, no, man, in the biohaggin
community, there's new labs with new parameters and things like that. And I really feel the sense
of power and autonomy because I know my limitations in terms of my body of knowledge and what I'm
capable of kind of understanding or care to take the time to learn when it comes to my biology.
But I know what I know. And then I go to the experts that are higher up the food chain in
their area of special specialization, right? So it's really cool that that you guys are
thinking that far ahead and enabling people to help themselves. One of the parts I'm most excited
about is a integrative medical functional medical program. So we've got a number of doctors who are
kind of the best integrative psychiatrists that I'm aware of. And psychiatrists or just functional
medicine that does psychoneuropharmacology. And so, you know, we're not allowed to provide medical
information, prescribe, diagnose, treat anything like that, right? So if people and if someone has
conditions or are on psych meds, we say don't use our stuff because there's real interactions that
need to be factored. But we don't want to just say go to your doctor if your doctor doesn't know
anything, we want to provide better resources. So go to your doctor and here are doctors that
actually know the field really well. They can run a QEG on you, they can run neural hormones,
they can run your Walsh metabolic labs, they can run your gut brain access, they can look at your
genomics, etc. and actually do the best of what functional brain chemistry optimization currently
looks like. And so that's something that we'll be rolling out in this next year and that we've
been already working with a number of clinics on this. That's amazing. That's amazing. Yeah,
because you do need that middleman, you know, unless you're just a freaking genius and you have the
time and energy to devote to yourself. But I think each one of us can only take it to a certain
level and we need, you know, we need that help. But it's like how do you find a good one? I always
get the question of who's the best functional medicine doctor and I'm just, I just made it
easy on myself after working with a number of them individually and I just joined Parsley Health,
which is like a, you know, sort of, I think of it as the Uber of functional medicine, just a
modern interface and a membership model rather than paying per visit. And I find it to be really
effective because they can deal with my insurance and the billing and they know how to code the
labs and stuff. But it's still very much self directed. Like I could just follow their program,
probably be healthy, but I'm always digging deeper. So I'll do, you know, three different
tests for metals where they might just order me the pre and post challenged urine test and like,
cool, that gives me a certain metric. But there's hair analysis, there's blood, there's other ways
you can dive into that. But it's helpful to have someone you trust that'll go along with what you're
doing. Because back in the Western medicine model, I go into the general practitioner and be like,
Hey, I have X, Y and Z wrong. They send me out to a number of specialists that are their cronies.
And it's like, you get stuck in that whole thing. And I'm going in there telling them about some
new supplement or technology. And the doctor's like, what? I don't even know about that. You
know, like I was having some problems with like vertigo and dizziness. And I, you know, went up
the ladder and LA medical system, which I think is probably a pretty good place to live if you want
some, you know, high level medical care. And I got sent to the, you know, the world's best EMT
that people travel from all over the world. I go sit down with this guy said, yeah, man, I don't
know, man, I have, you know, I have a little hearing loss over here. It's about 20%. I'm well aware
of that. But I have this thing where I'm getting dizzy all the time. And I always feel car sick.
And he ran some tests on me. I came in again, he goes, yeah, I think you probably should just
not drink coffee. I think it's the, the caffeine can do that. I'm like, really? This is what you
guys, this is the best you guys can do is that the caffeine is making me, you know, it was just
like, oh my God, I could have done a much better job of being my own doctor. And of course, I,
you know, finding finding the root of that, but it's a cool time to be alive where those of us
that are waking up and have access to information like you guys are providing can really take
responsibility and not become this dependent infant on the teeth of Western medicine and all
the inherent expenses and things that come along with that. And it's really important to keep the
Pareto principle in mind, which is it does get complex quickly. And to be able to synthesize
the complexity is a really deep topic. And the foundations are still 80% of it. And the foundations
are not that hard, right? I mean, they might be hard to do from a discipline point of view in
the life that is conditioned otherwise. But if someone is not sleeping enough, sleeping well
and sleeping enough, everything else they'll do is just tiny diminishing returns and comparison
sleeping enough. Right, right. And if someone is not exercising, and if they're not generally
eating well, and if they're not doing some kinds of stress management and mental processes, then
you know, biohacking is actually a way to support living shittily, right, trying to like symptom
manage the fact that their life actually sucks. Right. And that's just not the way to go. Right.
And so if someone really just does the foundational stuff, it's amazing how much of it that addresses.
And even like, say we look at heavy metals. So I can do a pre and post provocation test,
and I can test with DMPS or DMSA or EDTA, and I'm going to get different specific bindings. And
I can look at hair labs, which will give me a different time scale of what's being excreted.
And I can look at, you know, metal antibody stands and then what I'm going to find is, okay,
there are specific chelation or binders that I'm going to use differentially if it's lead versus
mercury, right, or gadolinium or whatever it is. That's a lot to figure out. It's a lot of expense.
And if I just put the person in a sauna every day, and I gave him chlorella in the morning,
that would be 80% as good. Right, right, yeah. And so it's just kind of important, like one of the
things we want people to know is that there are foundational things, that if they don't have the
time, money, proclivity will really help them be radically healthier. And then optimization on top
of that is nice. Right, right. Yeah, that's well stated. Sometimes I'll find myself taking 50
pills in the morning trying to turn my brain on. And then I realize, maybe if I hadn't gone to bed at
2am and woken up at 730, you know, so that's very true. Some of those things are just basic
lifestyle choices. If you eat, if you think about it, if you're going to eat food that's measured in
pounds, and it's all nutrient, right, that's all toxin or nutrient, and then you're going to take
supplements that are measured in grams, the supplement, the word supplement means to supplement
that what you're getting from diet, right, like getting the pounds right is a big fucking deal.
Right. And similarly with sleep, like when you exercise, all that torn muscle that it needs
repair is going to be repairing during sleep, during delta sleep in particular, and all those
nutrients that need to go into new tissues are going to do that during sleep. And so if you're
not sleepy enough, like all those such things kind of doesn't matter that much. And so this is one
of the places where I want to empower people in the face of the complexity to know that there is
a simplicity that is most of it, which is if you live a life that is relatively closer to
an evolutionary environment, an evolutionary life, you'll just do a lot better. And then
all the other stuff, if you're sick, you definitely want to go find good functional
practitioners. And if you really want to optimize, you want to go. Yeah. Well said. Well said. I love
it, man. Well, I've got about one, not even a quarter through the questions that I had in mind
for you. But in the interest of time, we're right around the two hour mark, which is I try to cap
any conversation off, no matter how much more there is to do. But I have my notes for part two.
I'd love to sit down and have another talk with you. I mean, every time every like,
every time you have an answer to a question, 20 more questions populate. I'm just like a stifling
more that have come about. So we're definitely going to have to talk again. But I really appreciate
your perspective. I would love to talk again. This is fun. And yeah, it's just fascinating. Dude,
you're just you're so full of information. I mean, you really are just the fascinating guy was
all pumping people up on Instagram on the way down. But this guy's really smart, you guys. And
you know, you know, I'm not stroking your ego. It's just you are. It's the thing that you and
I were talking about is that people are are actually fascinated by life without being broken,
right? Right. And they can restore that if they were broken. And if you just spend your life
following things that you're fascinated about, you will tend to learn things. Right.
I want to know what's up next with neurohacker collective. You mentioned the functional medicine
kind of interface thing. Can you reveal yet what your next supplement or product is going to be?
We've got we've got about 10 products that have already tested well in the prototype phase
of different types that will be going through, you know, final refinement and trials and like that
before being released, we're actually, we're actually hiring right now for additional formulators
and VP of product and etc. and researchers to come help because as we're scaling, it needs more
work to be able to do it as the speed we want to. So things to we will not produce any product that
is to treat any medical condition cannot do that. Right. That's a medical thing. But things that support
sleep, things that support a healthy sensory process, meaning if there are sources of chronic
pain, the chronic pain is not loving people, things that help support. I'm looking forward to that one.
Things that help support natural calmness, which is not saying anti anxiety thing, but is yeah.
I think our audience is able to read between the lines. All of those. I find that I dance around
terminology so much on this show in the interest of protecting my guests that happen to produce
a different product or service. So those are things that will be coming soon. We have a new
version of qualia also that is just a single step, less total pills. Oh, wow. And right now is
testing as effectively. So we spent a year, we're finding out early this next year. So a handful
of new products in the nutraceutical mind brain health space, then curating neurotech across
those platforms. I mean, all types of neurotech with a proper scientific vet and curation platform.
And then the doctor program are the things that I'm really most excited about. Awesome. When you
say neurotech, are you talking about lasers and light devices and magnetism and all this kind
of stuff? Oh, cool. That's interesting. What are some, you know, as I've, those of you listening
that aren't seeing the videos, I walked into Daniel's home here. It's a beautiful home. It's
gigantic house. It's a lot of big rooms. It's lovely. But in every, everywhere I look, I see some
biohacking tool or something. There's big amethyst crystals everywhere. There's a semina bed right
in front of me and a bulletproof sleep induction mat and earth pulse, essential oils in the air.
I mean, it's like, it's just so in alignment with my lifestyle. What are some of the
neuro enhancing or just life enhancing technologies that you're digging right now personally?
Some of the ones that I appreciate a lot that are like consumer neurotech, they're not still in
R&D. I'm a big fan like everybody else's of red light. And so companies like
Juve and Violite and other ones that are working on intranasal transcranial whole body near
infrared and visible infrared. And we wouldn't need that if we just spent enough time in the sun.
But if you don't spend enough time in the sun, it is removed from normal indoor lighting because
it's the part that makes it expensive. It uses that more energy to make warm light, right?
So rather than do the whole house, you just do your body with your clothes off.
We photosynthesize molecules like plants do. Not as many as plants. Plants are all surface area
photosynthesis. We're not that much surface area, but it's a meaningful part. So we know that the
bluer and UV into the spectrum helps us with vitamin D. And the way that it does vitamin D
synthesis is different than only supplementing vitamin D. So there's meaningfulness there.
But nitric oxide is also photosynthesized from exposure to light. And ATP specifically
is up-regulated, mitochondrial output of ATP is up-regulated from the red end of the spectrum.
And so up-regulating ATP output is kind of just good for everything, right? This just means
increased cellular energy to do whatever the cells are doing. So that's a that's what I like. And I
do like transcranial and intranasal applications, especially where there is TBI or tinnitus or
things there where you don't quite know how to address it specifically. But interesting because
I do the V light, the 810 nanometers near infrared. It's invisible, right? I used that one. I used
to have the one that was six something. It was very red. It lit up the whole front of your face,
which I just like that for a fact. I don't know which one does what. And then I do the juve.
And I love both of those as well, like seriously. But here's the thing. I also get a lot of sun.
My vitamin D levels are off the chart. I still supplement with it. Here's one thing that I
want to get your opinion. And I always say, okay, it's the end of the interview and then it goes on
for another hour. But in all seriousness, with the spectrum of light, because I do sun gazing,
I've been doing that for years grounding, while I'm sun gazing when the sun rises or goes down,
I get full naked sun as much as possible. So I'm getting a lot of the natural spectrums. I limit
blue light at night like pretty hardcore in the home when it gets dark outside. It also gets amber
and red inside. Like I'm dialing that in my sleep's great circadian rhythm. But when it comes to the
spectrums of sunlight, you know, different people might have different opinions on this. But based
on being a 47 year old guy and knowing what the sky looks like normally with planes in it or planes
not in it, there is unequivocally some geoengineering going on on the planet. And I think anyone that
doesn't acknowledge that to some degree, like has serious psychological issues. Having, you know,
looked up in the sky and not seen weird clouds and the formations and stuff we have now, there's
definitely something going on, which is of course a different conversation. But with with the weather
manipulation, what's been going on in the sky, I often wonder because it does have apparently
something to do with reflecting the sun's, you know, radiation back out into space to
cool the planet, wherever the fuck's going on. But the temperature of the light and the spectrum
of light is being altered in an unnatural way from whatever's being done in our skies. Do you think
that that's having, you know, an effect on our biology just aside from whatever toxins we might
be breathing in with just the actual nature of light itself? Of course. Very short answer
to a long question. So geoengineering is an approach to us recognizing that we're very close
to positive feedback loops on certain climate change dynamics and people freak out and freak
out says, well, we need to actually get the temperature down because even before the acid
is killing the coral from ocean acidification from CO2 diffusing into the water as carbonic acid,
even before the trophic cascades are killing the coral from the large fish dying off from overfishing,
the temperature is the main thing driving them into bleaching and hypometabolism.
They can't stay in that place very long. Most of the photosynthesis of the world happens in the
oceans and a lot of it depends on the coral. So how do we get the and and the positive feedback
loop on the on the albedo cycle at the caps? Like so it's like, whoa, we need to get the temperature
down. So the idea of let's just reflect 20% sunlight by putting particles in an atmosphere
that will reflect 20% sunlight is the same exact approach as our cholesterol's high use of statin.
Right. It's addressing the symptom in a way that will then have effects that are negative for
other parts of it because we're scared of the symptom without understanding what caused it
and addressing it at a cause level. So of course, what we should be focused on is how do we just
increase photosynthesis for sequestration and decrease emissions and what has to happen to
be able to do that at what scale and time. But yeah, it's very interesting. Allopathic medicine
is looking at individual metrics that we've correlated to something and how do we exogenously
override that individual metric without looking at what brought it about to be that way. So complex
multifactorial dynamics we suck at, which is why we don't have a single cure for any chronic illness.
We can cut cancers out, radiate them out, poison them out. We can't make them stop growing.
And understand why they grow in terms of current medicine, same with psychiatric illnesses,
same with neurodegenerative, same with autoimmune, because they don't have a single cause.
We're actually awesome at acute cause issues, right? Right. If it's an acute injury or an acute
infection or an acute toxicity, that's really straightforward and we know how to treat that
thing. But if it is anything other than an acute single cause, then we kind of suck at it right
now because it requires a different approach to science, this complexity approach, which also
requires a different fiscal model and a different IP structure and a whole bunch of things. We
approach the world the same way. Our approach to climate change, to starvation, to whatever is
to tweak something to affect that thing here without addressing the underlying dynamics.
So geoengineering is like allopathic medicine. It is a statin to the environment.
Yeah, that's funny, man. And definitely it's affecting the light. Going back to your top
devices, a lot of the stuff that's coming out and I think that's really effective is ways to sort of
use technology to mimic nature, in a sense. And that's how I think about an infrared sauna or
cryotherapy, I mean any of the things that I do as quote-unquote biohacks or grounding,
using earthing technology, PMF, all this stuff. It's all really just trying to create that homeostatic
experience of being the sentient being on planet earth in its natural state. But we're not in a
natural state, including the light spectrum that's coming at us from the sun. You can't even get
what you would have gotten a hundred years ago. It's true. Our main biohacks are actually just
putting us back in something closer to an evolutionary environment. So our air filter
is not making special air, it's just making less fluid air. I saw that you have one over there too.
I have them in every room. And our water filters are also still not as good as spring water.
Do you have a pristine hydro filter? I don't have a pristine hydro filter.
Okay, they're in Laguna Beach, not far from here. But I've done a lot of research on the
filters and I'm going to interview that guy. But I think if I had to have a filter, he'd probably
be the guy. He vortexes the water, he puts magnesium, bicarbonate, silica back in it.
He's like making spring water out of municipal water. It's crazy. But anyway.
But whether we're changing our, whether we're pulling toxins out of the environment,
or like, you know, I was mentioning the VOC here, actually it's not releasing much because I used
the AFM safe coat. Oh, no way. And safe coats, another biohack that I think is awesome. If you
have a place that's new carpet or new paint, or you're going to paint or install things,
the non-toxic products that AFM makes are really good. No way. Cool. That is going in the show notes.
But yeah, I mean, so much of it is just recreating evolutionary environment, which is why so many
people who are ill go, like, move to or visit some more rural, natural place and they get better.
Right, right. And so that's a lot of it. And then there's of course advanced shed that is not just
doing that. Yeah. What other, what other kind of tricks you got up your sleeve that I haven't
observed walking by tech, tech-wise? Well, QEG based neurofeedback is awesome.
Yeah. And whether you're doing alpha-theta training or SMR training or delta training
should be based off your QEG and someone knows how, who knows how to do that well.
I don't know if you've ever went to peak brain since you've been there all the time. Yeah.
But Andrew's good. Yeah, Andrew is good. I interviewed him here on the show and I was on
his show too. Yeah, a brilliant guy. So that's a great therapy. Right now, I mean, TMS is actually
interesting. It's early, but it's interesting for many things. What's TMS? Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation. Oh, okay. Transcranial ultrasound is profoundly interesting in the
early studies at University of Arizona and some Japanese universities in curing Alzheimer's
through a very novel proposed mechanism involving microtubules. So, but it's too early to really
know what it's doing. So there's a number of high-tech methods that are really cool and specifically
there's also some of the most high-tech ones are actually still evolutionary environment ones.
Like the cutting edge of microbiomics right now is mostly that the vaginal flora and the
breast milk of indigenous people who were never exposed to chlorinated water and antibiotics
and glyphosate have a whole bunch of bacteria that we just don't have in probiotics anywhere else
that are actually part of our evolutionary environment that are the most significant factors
for epigenetic modulation of our genome. So that's a very cutting edge. Right. Understanding
of epigenetics and microbiomics. Right. And it is also saying, oh, evolution actually kind of makes
sense. Right. Or fecal implants from a clean source, so to speak. So we have a chunk of work
in microbiomics we're working on right now that we're not that close yet because of what we want
to do but I'm excited about it. Cool. Awesome man. Okay, so yeah. So I will say obviously we didn't
get into psychedelics and entheogens. I have a whole section on that. Yeah. And we didn't get
into any of the psycho-emotional, psycho-spiritual work. Right. But on the just evolutionary
environment I will make a thought in closing is just like a statin is optimizing for one thing,
right. Lower your cholesterol without looking at, hey, is the cholesterol maybe protecting the
arterial system from oxidative damage and that's not a good idea or what's the whole rest of the
story going on. When we optimize for something that is affecting a lot of other things and we're
not paying attention, we get externality. Right. Which is also called side effect. We built the
entire world, the human built world for a few purposes in ways that affected a lot of other
things. So we build a house to protect us from the elements and give us a safe place to be
and then maybe for certain aspects of aesthetics but we didn't pay attention to, oh wow, there's
actually chemistry that's in the paint that is affecting us. And oh yeah, the fungicides that
are in there that are making fungicide resistant funguses that are why we have an issue with mold
we never did before. That actually is an important thing. It's like in the drywall?
Oh, in the paints. In the 70s started having fungicides added to resist mold.
And then the mold became super. Merce mold. Oh, God, that's insane. So the reason everyone has
mold issues when we lived with mold forever in an evolutionary environment is because it's a mutant
mold. Oh my God, dude. So, but even things like, you know, the color and angle, right, all of these
end up affecting the psyche that's filled with environmental psych. So like, if you're in an
area where there's graffiti and trash on the ground in the walls, this kind of environmental
psych study has been done many times. If you just paint over the graffiti and clean up the trash,
violent crime drops like 30 to 50%. Wow. And it's because you think about what the environment's
transmitting when you're there is, one, this is a wasteland and I'm in survival mode. And two,
this is a place where law doesn't operate, right? Because laws have been broken and they're not
rectified. Right. And as soon as you fix those things, how violent human beings are is being
changed at the like 50% level by an environmental psych. Right. I've heard David Hawkins talk
about that. He called it the broken window theory, you know, you have a building in the ghetto and
it gets ignored and then someone breaks a window and then someone comes on breaks another window,
then comes the graffiti, then the drug dealers on the corner and never I never thought about the
kind of mechanics of it. That's very interesting. I guess it's like the level of consciousness
of anything. Could you say, would you bring it in that way? I would say that's a way of reducing
the complexity of it. Right. Which is kind of my thing. I interview people like you and go
squish that down into a bite-sized thought. But I mean, so if you go into a cathedral,
they're doing environmental psych. And so the sound and the smell and the visual and every
aspect of the sensory process is designed to uplift and exalt. But then specifically,
that it's narrow and very high has a certain effect that's different than if it was wide and high,
or if it was not high, right? Which is you're very focused on up. And so then you feel very small
and you can both have a sense of feeling, you know, and then the priest is halfway between you
and where Jesus is up there and where God is. And so both, I mean, if you want to look at the
cynical side of the, this is how you make a good authoritarian kind of dynamic where everybody
feels small with an authority up there, but also the beautiful, the mystical side of people feeling
a sense of awe and exaltation, right? The environmental psychology of how those buildings
are done in due state, right? Just like Burning Man induces state because of the environment,
periods. So what we are realizing is that we have built a world that we are not well adapted to,
right? And it's affecting us in a lot of ways that we didn't pay attention to that are mostly
not good for us. And so there is this task that you, and it's not good for the planet, right?
And it's not good for us. So there's this task of how do we rebuild the entire physical built world
in a way where the goal, the primary goal is not, you know, it being inexpensive or fast or
aesthetically beautiful. Those are all partial goals. The primary goal is that it is enlightening
the humans that are inhabiting it. How do you create a built world that makes the healthiest,
most enlightened, most pro-social human beings that are inhabiting it? And how do we rebuild
the entire world with that in mind? And in relationship to, you know, harmony with the
ecosystem. So that's the biohack that is most interesting to me.
That's amazing, dude. I love that. Really good way to sum it up.
All right. So closing question. Who have been three teachers or teachings that have
influenced your work where we might be able to go find more from them? Like who have you learned
from that we might go up and learn from as well? Specifically more related to individual health?
Just anything. Anything. Totally broad. Could be a book, teacher, philosophy, relative.
Preferably something that one could go look up or we can put in the show notes, you know,
Buckmeister Fuller, whatever, you know. Buckmeister Fuller would definitely be at the top of the list
and either operating manual for spaceship earth or critical path being the most approachable books on
understanding state of the world and how to think and how to design.
So that would be very high on the list. And then ordering three is impossible for me.
So I'll just say the ones that came to mind first. Yeah, yeah, that's the idea.
Finite and Infinite Games by James Kars is a great book that is,
it's a book that will help you understand both the future of economics, the future of worldview,
and very deep spiritual principles together from a game theoretic perspective.
And it's a small, easy read. Wow, cool. Is a great one. And then
the next one that came to mind was Anthony D'Amello, who's actually a Jesuit priest,
but was someone who studied all the world religions and traditions and spent most of his time in India.
A little book called The Way to Love. And it's a tiny little book and
principles of sovereignty. What does it mean to actually be whole and to be able to love from
a place of wholeness rather than this commodities exchange we usually call love of what do I have
to give someone to get the security and reassurance and validation I'm looking for and how will I
punish them if they don't do what I want. But because there is really no such thing as being
able to really love someone, which means to see them and want for them if you need them to be
something. Because you can't see them if you need them to be something else, right? And you
can't want for them if what's in their highest good isn't them meeting your needs. So loving from
a place of wholeness, it's a great little book. Damn, that sounds awesome. Those are good books.
All right, great. Thank you so much. Wow, fascinating. So much more research to do now.
Well, thank you so much for joining. Where would you like to send people in terms of
website, social media, any of that? Yeah, two things is if people are interested to learn
more about what Neurohacker is doing, easy, Neurohacker.com. If people are interested more in
some of the larger social topics, the economics, education, et cetera, I have a blog at
civilizationemerging.com and you can go check stuff out there. Awesome, great. We'll put those links
in the show notes. For those of you listening and you want the show notes for every episode,
please remember you can go to lukestory.com, forward slash newsletter, enter your email,
and we'll send them to you. So thank you so much for joining me. Do I look forward to doing it again?
