Lecture 2 The Basic Cells of the Nervous System
Welcome back.
Let's see, hopefully we are all stoked up now on Rocky Rodeik's ice cream from the
last break and ready to learn about neurobiology.
Okay, what was the main point of the last lecture, the introductory lecture?
We want to understand behavior.
We want to understand human behavior, where it's coming from.
We want to understand the biological basis of it.
And where all of those influences starting with evolution a gazillion years ago are
going to funnel eventually into is the nervous system.
How do all of those things influence the functioning of the nervous system?
And how does the nervous system in turn produce behavior?
And what we'll be doing in the next half dozen lectures is starting off introduction
to the nervous system.
How does one neuron work?
How do a pair of neurons work?
Working our way out until getting a sense of how the nervous system controls every outpost
in the body, how it produces behavior.
So we start off here with the single cells making up the nervous system.
And there's two different types, one of which gets most of the attention.
Your basic off the rack brain cell is a neuron.
Neuron, that's the workhorse of the nervous system.
That's the type that sends the messages down your spine that remembers somebody's birthday
that tells you to shake hands at the right moment.
That's the part of your brain that's really central on the level of single cells.
There's another type of cell in there called glial cells.
And the general take over the years has been that they're utterly boring and you should
pay no attention to glia.
And there's all sorts of neuroscientists who would stab you for believing something like
that.
And that's really where glial cells fit into this picture, for our purposes for the moment
they have a supporting role in getting neurons to work.
Okay, so we switch over here to looking at our prototypical neuron.
And this neuron, this is exactly what all neurons look like, identical.
And remarkably enough, they all go from left to right.
It's required if you're going to be a neurobiologist to always draw your neurons from left to right.
And here we have the classic pieces of a neuron.
On the far left, we have dendrites, what are called dendrites, also termed dendritic
spines.
Metaphorically, these are the ears of the neuron.
This is where information flows into, as we'll say, information from other neurons coming
in there, dendrites.
Sitting next to the dendrite is a basic part of a neuron that you find in every cell out
there, the cell body.
This is where energy is mostly produced.
This is where your nucleus, full of your DNA is.
This is sort of the centerpiece of the cell.
Then, heading towards the right is metaphorically the mouth of the neuron, the means by which
the neuron communicates to the next neuron in line.
Beginning with something called the axon, and you could think of an axon as just the
long cable reaching out towards the next outpost in the brain.
And reasonably enough, the axon terminating in axon terminals, a whole bunch of little
fibrils, each of which reaches out to the dendritic spine of the next neuron.
As we'll see, the end of the axon terminal and this dendritic spine don't actually touch.
That's the subject of the next lecture.
So this is the basic neuron.
And despite my stating they all look exactly the same, they all look completely different.
You've got some neurons that are a thousandth of an inch long, absolutely tiny, very local
little neurons.
And then, amazingly, you've got neurons that are feet long.
If you're a blue whale, you've got neurons that are 60 feet long going down your spinal
cord.
I don't mean one neuron sending a message to the next one next one.
I mean 60 feet worth of one single cell.
This is outlandish from the standpoint of cell biology, a big challenge in understanding
how these cells work is dealing with that they have these long, long cables.
This is a special challenge for any cell from a standpoint of energy.
Okay, so we switch back to the diagram and the basic thing that happens in a neuron when
it's got something to say to the world is there's a wave of excitation.
And we'll see in a bit what excitation means in this case.
For the moment, the most important thing is the excitation starts at the dendritic end.
From there, it flows to the right.
Where does that excitation come from?
This is a result of the previous neuron in line sending an excitatory message causes
this wave of excitation in the dendrites.
This wave then spreads over the cell body and from there spreads on to the axon.
There's this transitional point between the end of the cell body, the start of the axon,
called the axon hillock.
We will see in great detail what's happening there.
Taking the axon, shooting down the axon all the way to the end out to every single one
of those axon terminals, and the wave of excitation, then sweeping on to the next neuron in line.
Now the whole point here is that this flow of information is not guaranteed.
Just because you have excitation at the dendritic end, it doesn't guarantee it's going to get
all the way to the axon terminal.
What we will need to see now is how does this occur?
How do the various inputs into a neuron, how do the various neurons upstream yelling messages
at this neuron turn in some cases to this neuron passing on the information?
How does this game of telephone work in this case?
In this case, the challenge isn't one neuron saying something to the next one, to the next
one, the traditional telephone game, but a hundred different neurons saying something
to this neuron, and this neuron sorting it out, and deciding whether the message goes
on.
Now to begin to make sense of the functioning of neurons in these ways, the most important
thing to keep straight is neurons do very dramatic things.
What they are all about is contrasts.
Let me give you an example.
Okay, think back to the day that you reached puberty, the day that there was sudden change.
Your parents had been preparing you for this for months and giving you these boring books
to read about cows and babies and who knows what, and finally that morning came and this
was a big event and your mother baked waffles and you were carried around town on a sedan
chair by your neighbors and they slaughtered a goat in your honor and all of that.
This was a big event biologically, however, would it have made all that much of a difference
if you had reached puberty 24 hours later?
Probably not.
Second scenario, you are suddenly finding yourself confronted with a saber tooth tiger,
you are running for your life.
What do you need to do with your nervous system at that point?
You need to tell your heart to beat faster, increase your blood pressure, do something
or other effective with your thigh muscles.
What would happen if your brain did that to you 24 hours later?
You would be consumed.
What we see here is a critical thing.
All sorts of parts of your body do what they do and if they do it right now, if they do
it a minute from now, if they do it a day from now, it's not that big of a deal, growth
can start tomorrow, hormones don't have that much of a time pressure.
Your nervous system is all about incredibly rapid, incredibly synchronized behaviors.
Your nervous system is about being very quiet when it has nothing to say and screaming its
head off when some sort of message comes along.
You could see this in all sorts of settings.
Okay, let me give you an example here and I'm going to do a demonstration on somebody
in the studio audience.
You go up to them right now and you take your second and third fingers and quickly whip
it on either side of their nose and pull your hand back with your thumb stuck out between
the two and then you say, got your nose and as well known, that delights everybody up
to age three and irritates anybody over age four and this takes amazing coordination
in your nervous system and amoeba would kill to get to do something like this, but they
can't because they don't have a nervous system to get that sort of amazing coordination.
The only way you're going to do this is to have very special cells and what neurons are
about is the specialty of being very silent when there's nothing happening and then exploding
into our mysterious process of excitation when they're excited.
So we start off with how they do this silence business, how they are so quiet and the term
that's given for this is the resting potential and the resting potential reasonably enough
is about the neuron resting and everything that's going on there is about a neuron that
is quiescent.
What this is about is you have a whole bunch of thingies floating around outside the neuron
and others inside.
We step here for just a second into dread ninth grade chemistry.
The whole notion that there are ions, okay, don't panic.
Things like sodium and chloride, which together make up salts and other things, potassium
do not panic.
The only point of all of this is they're not evenly distributed within the neuron and
outside the neuron.
There's not the same exact amount of sodium inside and outside or chloride inside and
outside.
That's utterly boring.
That's just even distribution.
What you need instead is a contrast.
When you are being a quiet neuron, you want all of the sodium outside the neuron and as
soon as you're screaming your head off, you want all of the sodium inside.
When the neuron's being quiet, you want to keep all the potassium inside.
When it's getting excited, you want it to go outside.
The main point here is contrasts.
Contrasts and that's the way you tell the difference between a quiet neuron and a hysterically
screaming one.
The neuron has to work a whole lot to keep these ions separated, to keep charge separated,
to keep an unequal distribution.
During the resting potential, you've got a profile of unequal distribution and I'm not
even going to torture you with telling you which way it goes.
A whole bunch of the sodium is on one side of the picture, a whole bunch of the potassium
is on the other side, outside the neuron, inside.
The main point here is this is a very clear cut state.
There's no missing the fact that this is a neuron that's being silent.
Very importantly, you want to just have your ions evenly distributed the same exact amount
outside and inside.
You don't have to spend any energy on it.
If you want to set up this huge sort of dam to keep all of one bunch of ions outside and
all of one bunch inside during this resting stage, that costs you a fortune.
Amazingly enough, neurons spend almost half of their energy just keeping these ions separated
under resting circumstances.
What that begins to tell you just sort of as an aside is when you get nervous systems
that don't have enough energy, you begin to get all sorts of chaotic changes in those
resting potentials.
A lot of neurological diseases involve that.
Okay, so we've got the resting potential.
The main point there is there is no mistaking the fact that is this neuron that has something
to say, this is a neuron that's spending a fortune being quiet, and that's a hallmark
of the nervous system.
So what we have to transition to now is what happens when the neuron gets excited.
You already know on an ionic level what happens, contrast all of those ions, the sodium, that's
kept outside the neuron is going to come pouring in, eventually the potassium you're spending
a fortune to keep inside is coming out, major, major change in your state, you're moving
from a resting potential, this quiescent state, to a state of excitation.
And the way this happens is we start back at the dendrites, back to our diagram, something
or other, next lecture, something or other happens to those dendrites which causes this
ionic change to begin to happen, which causes those dendrites to switch from a resting state
to an excited state.
That's the excitation, a wave of ionic change occurring at these dendrites, what is going
to happen now is that wave of ions suddenly going from their resting state into their
excited state, this wave now sweeping down the cell membrane, sweeping to the cell body,
all the way down to the axon.
That's the chemical basis of this excitation we've been hearing about.
We have to focus on here is a very important feature of this excitation.
You remember what I said, you get one little dendritic spine and is drawn here, there's
a whole bunch of these little fibrils, you get this excitation going on at one little
dendritic spine, does that mean this ionic wave of excitation is going to sweep over
the cell body and the axon, helic and the axon down to the axon terminals, no, we already
heard any given input is not going to necessarily produce excitation all the way down the line.
And the reason for this has to do with how that dendritic excitation works.
Switching here to the next diagram, what we have is our prototypical neuron once again
and we have some of that excitation, some of that leaving the resting state, some of
that ionic change, some of that excitation occurring out at one little dendritic spine.
And what we've got in this hypothetical case is we've stuck in an electrode that could
measure these ionic changes, we've stuck in this electrode right at that dendritic spine.
And as shown in the diagram right there in that neighborhood, you suddenly get a wave
of excitation. This excitation occurs, the wave is over with and what we've seen already
is the wave now moves down further down the membrane heading towards the axon.
You want a metaphor, what you've got is this pond and you've just taken a rock and thrown
it in the middle of the pond and the ripple you produce is the wave of excitation.
And that metaphor is real useful for what happens next. Now we've stuck the electrode
just over on the cell body a little bit away from the dendrite and then we've stuck another
electrode even further down and what you'll notice is that wave of excitation that was
this huge dramatic ionic event out at that dendritic spine is a little bit smaller when
you get further out and even smaller further out and this ripple eventually decrements
down to nothing. You throw that pebble into that pond and you are not going to see the
same size wave, it heads outward and it dissipates. How come? Because that same amount of water
displacement is spreading further and further out, a larger perimeter, it eventually decays.
And that's exactly what you wind up seeing here. You have this local ionic event and
this little patch of dendritic spine and that wave of ionic perturbation, this wave of excitation
and it decrements, it disappears. And by the time you've gotten out to this corner of the
cell body it is long forgotten. There is no way excitation at this dendritic spine is
going to get you all the way down to the other end. What you get instead is a very set bunch
of rules where you essentially need a whole bunch of neurons talking to this one at once.
No given dendritic input, no given excitation at any single dendritic spine is going to
be enough to send a message shooting all the way down to the axon terminal. Instead you've
got to have summation. Jargony term in the field, you've got to have either the one neuron
sending this excitatory message to the dendritic spine. You've got to have it firing over and
over and over and over again. What is called temporal summation so that you get enough
of a wave going here that it finally gets all the way down. Or you need to have a whole
bunch of neurons having inputs all at once, a whole bunch of little dendritic spines starting
their little wavelets which combine together. In this case spatial summation, you've got
to have a whole bunch of neurons agreeing all at once or one neuron talking over and
over. What you wind up having then is an implication. No given single input is enough to pass on
the message. You've got to have a whole bunch of signaling going in there all at once.
So that's great. Eventually what you have with one neuron going over and over, temporal
summation or a whole bunch of neurons having their input at once, spatial summation, eventually
what you have is enough of a wave, enough of this ionic chemical wave, enough of it happening
that it reaches the axon hillock. And this is where something very important occurs.
Back to the axon hillock on the diagram, it's the very first piece of the axon, it's that
transitional point from the cell body to the axon itself, the axon hillock is real important.
Because what it does is sit there and count on its fingers and toes how many inputs are
we getting per second, how many inputs, how much of a wave, it's the threshold, it's
the thing in the neuron that decides whether to pass on that signal. Metaphorically again,
you've got that pond, you've thrown in the pebble and you've made this wavelet and the
axon hillock is this wall down at the end and as long as that wavelet doesn't get over
the top, the message doesn't go on. If and only if there's enough of a wavelet, enough
of a wave of excitation that you finally get something going over the top, that's the signal,
that's the threshold for now passing the signal down the axon. And it's when that happens
that something very different occurs. What have we seen at the dendritic end, what's
called a decrementing signal? You get some excitation and you get this wave and it goes
a little bit further and it disappears and no given input is all that exciting, you get
the axon hillock suddenly excited and something very different occurs, you get this explosion
of excitation, this massive influx of ions and outflow, this tremendously excited event
called the action potential. And the main point of the action potential is we're not
talking pebbles being thrown into ponds and wavelets that decrement, the action potential
shoots down the axon and it doesn't lose force over time, it gets propagated again and again,
that's the term that's used, it has an all or none property. If you manage to get an
action potential by getting two little droplets over threshold at the axon hillock or getting
a tidal wave over it, it doesn't matter, at that point you initiate the same exact massive
action potential which goes shooting down the axon with the exact same strength that
keeps getting regenerated, it doesn't decrement and that thing goes hurtling down the axon
down to the axon terminal and triggers this neuron to talk to the next neurons in line.
So we have from an engineering standpoint a very interesting system, we have an analog
digital system, analog at the dendritic end, a wave could be of all sorts of different
sizes and over space and time the wave decrements and the second you get the axon hillock in
on the scene you've got this digital, this all or none property, either nothing's happened
in the axon or everything is happening there, this wildly excited action potential. And you've
got this wonderful mechanism on a cellular level for integrating inputs into the neuron.
Just to give you a sense of what we're up against here, your average neuron has 10,000
dendritic spines and your average neuron has 10,000 axon terminals, your average neuron
could be getting input from 10,000 other brain cells and be talking to 10,000 other ones
in line. What's the implication of that? No single neuron talking to this guy is going
to have much influence, no single dendritic spine carries that big of a wavelet, an amazing
amount of information coming in and it's the axon hillock that sits there deciding what
the threshold is. One additional piece of the system, one
additional way of making sense of how a neuron works and what we have here on the diagram
is a solution to a big problem you've got in these neurons, back to cell biology cells
or things that fit on the period at the end of the sentence. And here you've got this
neuron with this three foot long axon going down your spine from the world of cell biology,
you get some action potential starting right by the axon hillock and you've got a three
foot long neuron and it's going to take a week and a half to get the message down to
the end and your brain thinks what a clever time it would be to take my foot out of the
fire here and three weeks later you manage to do that, you need some sort of mechanism
to send that action potential shooting down the axon even faster. And that's something
a neuron had to evolve simply because you've got these outlandishly long cells, what it
has come up with is essentially a form of insulation, something that's called the myelin
sheath, what's that, you remember we talked about those boring glial cells, what they
serve here is they're basically insulation around your wire and for extremely complex
reasons that I barely understand it causes the action potential to shoot down even faster.
It's a way to accelerate the action potential so that you can get a message from your brain
down to your toe in some reasonable amount of time. This myelin, this axonal wrapping,
this insulation is real important stuff and you can see two measures of that, why that
is the case. The first one is when you were born you don't have a whole lot of myelin
in your nervous system yet and you can see there's all these developmental landmarks
right around when some behavior starts occurring, that's when the relevant part of the brain
has myelinated. The part of the baby's brain that comprehends language for example, myelinates
fully about two months before the part of the brain that produces language, aspects
of motor pathways, here the most amazing thing of all, there's a part of the brain
which we are going to hear about over and over again in this course, a region called
the frontal cortex and it's got something to do with regulating your behavior, gratification
postponement and this part of the brain does not fully myelinate until somewhere in your
mid-twenties, it is the last part of the brain to fully come online, this myelination process
is extremely important. The other way of appreciating how important this myelin is, is what happens
if you have a disease that destroys the myelin and that's the disease MS, multiple sclerosis,
you've got your immune system for some bizarre reason attacking your myelin and that's not
a nervous system that works very well afterward. So we've got this basic picture here, excitation
at the dendritic and these decrementing little wavelets if and only if you have enough inputs
into there to get the axon hillock suddenly excited, you generate your action potentially,
go shooting down to the end really fast thanks to your myelin, gets to the end there and
causes all of your axon terminals to release its message on to the next neurons in line,
this is the basic flow of information and it is a staggering complexity when you think
about the 10,000 inputs, the 10,000 outputs, that's why our brain can write poetry and
our spleens can't, that's where the complexity comes from. Now as promised, the two things
we will focus on in every one of these lectures is number one, where do individual differences
come from at that level of the biology, number two, how could that function change over time?
In terms of the individual differences, all you need to do is come up with a whole list
of suspects here, we differ in our brains as to just how many dendritic spines we have,
just how many axon terminals we have, we differ as to just how quiet our resting potentials
are, just how big that dendritic wavelet is, we differ as to how excitable our axon hillock
is, we differ as to how fast the action potential goes, we differ in all those realms and put
that together with a couple of hundred billion neurons and you begin to see a very subtle
enormous array of ways in which one nervous system can work differently than another.
And just as one example from an extreme, there are certain neurons and thus certain nervous
systems that are markedly more excitable than others, what's that about, that's what epilepsy
is, that's what a nervous system is that has uncontrolled synchronous action potentials
in certain areas, all you need to go is from that sledgehammer on subtle example to everybody
else's brains with these subtle differences, that's where these individual differences
come from.
The other thing we need to explain here to take at least the first pass at is plasticity,
how could the functioning change over time?
And in lots of different ways, but the one I'll concentrate on here in these last few
minutes is the axon hillock.
Axon hillock is important, big news, it's the one that's sitting there deciding am
I impressed enough with all this dendritic murmuring and all this dendritic whispering
in my ears to finally pass it on and form an action potential?
What is my threshold?
Of those 10,000 dendritic spines there, do I need to have 9,000 of them get excited to
cause an action potential or do I need 9 of them to get excited, what's my threshold?
And critically, that threshold could change over time.
Let me give one wonderful example of this.
Once again, you are a female hamster and female hamsters have this reflex, reflex the doctor
hits you on the knee, out goes your leg, female hamsters have a reflex called the lordosis
reflex.
If there is pressure placed on your flanks, you suddenly get this reflex where the female
arches her back.
You get a lordotic reflex.
What's that about?
Who is normally pressing on the flanks of a female hamster, a male hamster?
This is when mating is going on and by arching her back she exposes her genitals, increases
the ease with which mating occurs, we've got some evolutionary song and dance, female hamsters
who evolved the capacity for lordosis, left more copies of their genes, etc.
What we have here is a reflex and you could elicit the lordosis reflex with a male hamster
or you could elicit the lordosis reflex with some poor graduate student having to press
the flanks of the female in order to get a doctorate out the other end of it.
You can elicit the lordosis reflex out of a female hamster, if and only if she is ovulating
at the time.
And what you have is a rule, the axon helix of the neurons, the relevant neurons in the
spinal pathways of the female hamster are sensitive to estrogen levels.
The axon comes along and changes the threshold of that axon helix and in the absence of estrogen
you could be pressing the flanks of a female hamster with the entire encyclopedia Britannica
and you're not going to get a lordosis reflex, the axon helix threshold is way too high,
along comes the right hormone at the right levels and literally what you change is the
chemical composition of some of those sensors at the axon helix.
Here we have the environment in the form of this neuron's environment, what sort of hormones
it's marinating in, changing how excitable that neuron is.
This is a first pass at plasticity of the nervous system, how readily a neuron functions
in our terms in this lecture, how readily a neuron responds to input by forming an action
potential that sends an output out the other end, changes in response to the world around
us.
Ok, so this gives us a first pass at how a single neuron functions, how a single neuron
functions differently in you versus me, how it would be functioning differently today
versus last week, what we now need to see in the next lecture is how is that single neuron
when it finally has that action potential going to pass on the excitation to the next
neuron in line.
As we're going to see, it needs to use a very different language than the ionic wave
of excitation we've seen already, it's going to have to find a way to send a chemical
messenger to the next neuron.
So that will be the topic of the next tape, looking at how two neurons communicate with
each other.
