Lecture 4 Learning and Synaptic Plasticity
We are back for more, back for more on our goal to understand how biology works in shaping our behavior.
And as we've started in these lectures, trying to understand that from the standpoint of how the brain works.
We've looked at how one single neuron works, how it integrates an incredible number of inputs from all sorts of other neurons,
how it in turn talks the next neuron in line, last lecture's world of neurotransmitters, transynaptic communication,
communication across the synapse, finishing up with a sense of individual differences,
and now one person's synapse may work differently from another.
Now what our theme has been at the end of each lecture, two-fold.
One is looking at plasticity, how things change over time, individual differences.
When it comes to plasticity in the synapse, how it functions differently in response to experience,
that's such an important topic that that gets an entire lecture today.
And what plasticity means in this case is learning.
How do you learn something new? How do you remember it remarkably enough?
Or maybe not so remarkable when you think about it, your brain works differently when you have learned a fact.
And what we now know is somewhere in your brain, your synapses work differently.
What learning is about is changes in synaptic communication.
What memory is about is those changes lasting a long time.
Now people have not always understood learning to involve changes in synapses.
Mainly because earlier on in neurobiology, people didn't even know synapses existed.
What was the first notion in this quaint, charming idea that anytime you learned a new fact, you made a new neuron?
And then people figured out adult brains don't make new neurons, that can't explain it.
So the next version of charming incorrect theories was the notion that when you learn a new fact, you form a new synapse.
Either an axon terminal and a dendritic spine that weren't connected now connect form a synapse.
Or you actually grow a new axon terminal.
Then people figured out that was ridiculous and that was some charming outdated idea.
And what people came to realize instead was synapses that were already there work differently.
Naturally in the last decade, what people have learned revolutions in this field is the adult brain actually does make new neurons.
And they may have something to do with forming memories.
The adult brain actually forms new synapses that has completely overturned some of the dogma in the field.
Nevertheless, what still remains the dominant paradigm for how learning occurs is synapses work differently.
And the official jargon in the field is what learning is about is you strengthen pre-existing synapses.
What does strengthen a pre-existing synapse mean?
If the first neuron, the pre-synaptic neuron has an action potential and talks to the second neuron,
it is now more likely that that second neuron will have an action potential.
You have strengthened the communication between the two.
And this was a notion come up with by a guy named Donald Hebb, this famous neuroscientist in the 1950s.
And Hebb basically, if you're a neuroscientist, you're not able to talk about any subject without somewhere in there saying,
and it was in the 1950s that Hebb first predicted that this is how the brain was going to work.
This guy predicted the next 80 years worth of neuroscience.
He was the first one to say, it's not about new neurons, it's not about synapses forming anew.
It's about synapses that are already there working differently, working stronger.
What learning is, is the strengthening of synaptic connections.
What people have realized is your brain is not this undifferentiated mass of tofu.
There's different parts of your brain and different parts do different things.
And there's two areas that from day one have been implicated in learning and memory.
We now get into our first anatomy of the entire brain.
It's these two regions, one called the hippocampus.
And Latin fans will recognize hippocampus means seahorse in Latin.
And presumably some neuroscientist who didn't go anywhere near the seashore often enough decided this part of the brain
looks like a seahorse. It actually to me looks more like a jelly roll,
but nobody knew the Latin name for it. It's this curving structure underneath the surface of the brain.
It's very involved in learning and memory.
The other region at the top of the list is the surface of the brain called the cortex.
All across the top we have the cortex.
The hippocampus buried underneath a subcortical structure.
These are two really important areas for making sense of learning and memory.
What's the best evidence for a two-fold?
The first one is a horrendous disease, the disease that probably collectively we are most afraid of out there.
Disease that most polls show are more frightening to us than cancer, than HIV, than heart disease, Alzheimer's disease.
Alzheimer's disease which melts away your brain, melts away your capacity to learn new things,
access memory, and overwhelmingly Alzheimer's disease is a disease of the hippocampus and the cortex.
The other strongest bit of evidence comes from a man who's probably the most famous patient in the history of neurology.
This is a guy who is only known by his initials, H.M., and he winds up in every single textbook.
H.M. had an extremely rare type of epilepsy when he was a kid before any of the modern drugs existed.
The epilepsy, the seizures tended to begin in his hippocampus.
He was having multiple seizures per day and in an extremely desperate and radical move his hippocampuses were surgically removed.
The only time this has been done to a human and a mostly solved as epilepsy and since then H.M. has had a 30 second memory capacity and then everything is gone.
An amazing story in and of itself, but this is some of the evidence along with Alzheimer's that shows hippocampus and cortex is what learning and memory is centered in.
These are the parts of the brain where experience causes synapses to be strengthened.
And the particular jargon used in the field is you potentiate the synapse, you make it work more strongly.
This potentiation is long term, that's what the memory is.
Thus the jargon is long term potentiation, LTP.
That's the jargony term for synapses working stronger in response to experience and remembering it.
Now here we see sort of on a schematicized version what happens during LTP in this diagram.
We are recording from some dendritic spine and an arrow here represents a point where you stimulate it.
You dump some neurotransmitter on and as we know by now we get our little wave of excitation.
Now what you do is you potentiate that synapse.
You stimulate it over and over and over and over 20 times a second for a certain number of seconds even faster.
This cluster of arrows you stimulate that synapse like crazy.
Then you wait a bit and you stimulate it again and something amazing has occurred is shown here.
That little wavelet of excitation is a lot bigger than the previous time.
You have potentiated that wave of excitation.
This is now a more excitable synapse.
The signal coming out of the presynaptic neuron makes the second postsynaptic neuron more excitable than it used to be.
You get a greater likelihood of an action potential occurring.
Now the really amazing thing is you take a break from your experiment
and you go out and you take a nap for three weeks and you come back after that
and you check out that synapse and it is still potentiated.
The potentiation is long term LTP and for lots of people out there this is the nearest thing to what's going on during learning and memory.
At first it was thought this is a great model for strengthening a presynaptic or pre-existing synapses.
What is now pretty much accepted is this is no model.
This is what goes on during learning.
What's come to be realized is even though LTP was first identified in the hippocampus
than the cortex that's ground zero for learning and memory,
it occurs all over the place in the nervous system.
One example, there's another part of the brain called the amygdala
and we will hear about that in later lectures.
The amygdala has something to do with fear, with trauma and the right type of stimulation,
the right time of trauma, the right type of trauma and you get long term potentiation in the amygdala.
What do you get then?
You have just conditioned a phobia.
You have just conditioned something like post-traumatic stress disorder.
You now have an amygdala that's hyper excitable.
There's parts of your spine that undergo LTP in chronic pain syndrome
so that you're left with the slightest touch in that area, a hypersensitivity causes pain.
LTP seems to be common throughout the nervous system,
how different parts of your brain become more responsive, remember it.
So how does LTP work?
This has consumed the careers of a gazillion scientists over recent decades
trying to sort it out and people actually by now have a pretty good sense of it.
And it is built around a neurotransmitter that is pretty studied at this point.
It is interesting for two reasons.
A neurotransmitter called glutamate.
Glutamate is the most excitatory neurotransmitter ever discovered.
What do we mean by that?
For the same amount of glutamate coming out as any other neurotransmitter,
you get a bigger wave of excitation in that postsynaptic neuron
than is provoked by any other neurotransmitter out there.
It's the most excitatory neurotransmitter.
The second thing about it that is really interesting, that's real important,
is glutamate has not one receptor, it's got two types of receptors.
And it's this transition to a dual receptor system
that begins to explain where you get learning and memory from.
So what happens?
You release glutamate, what's the most glutamatergic part of the brain?
What's the part of the brain where the greatest percentage of synapses
use glutamate to speak?
You guessed it, hippocampus and cortex.
So we're sitting there in the hippocampus and out comes some glutamate
and it binds to the first type of receptor.
And you get your little wavelet of excitation in the postsynaptic neuron.
Nothing's happening with the second receptor.
So you dump a little bit more glutamate out and you fill up the first receptor.
The second receptor doesn't fill up as readily.
Fill up the first one and you get another little wavelet.
It's not until you get enough glutamate coming in there,
it's not until you buzz that first receptor enough times
that there's a certain chemical coupling between it and the second receptor
pass a threshold and the second receptor suddenly responds
with a tidal wave of excitation.
And suddenly you've got the biggest burst of wavelets going on
in that postsynaptic neuron that you ever see in the nervous system.
So what have we got? We've got a nonlinear system.
You get a little bit of glutamate, nothing's happening with the second receptor.
You get a moderate amount, nothing's happening, you get a whole lot,
nothing's happening, you get a real whole lot and suddenly it explodes,
opens up with excitation, you've got a nonlinear system.
And this is what learning is.
You sit there, a lecturer says something, it goes in one ear and out the other.
A lecturer draws on, says again, it goes in one ear and out the other,
says it over and over and suddenly you get this aha,
suddenly the light bulb goes on.
That's the moment when there's been enough stimulation in this pathway
that you switch over to the second receptor system,
you get that explosion coming in.
And what that explosion is about is an entirely new ion,
one we haven't mentioned before.
You remember back a couple of lectures,
we're dealing with sodium and chloride and potassium changing directions.
The ion that's critical now that comes pouring in is called calcium.
Calcium, the same thing that's good for your bones,
a little bit of calcium is used up in your brain for this sort of excitation stuff.
And when that second receptor gets excited,
it allows this tidal wave of calcium to pour in and that causes tremendous excitation.
That's the potentiation, that's that sudden burst as shown on the chart here.
And what you've done with this repeated stimulation, repeated stimulation,
is finally dump enough glutamate into the synapses to kick open that second receptor,
this calcium-gated receptor, and in goes this tidal wave of enormously excitatory calcium.
And you've potentiated this pathway.
Hooray for you.
So this event has made an impression on you.
And what people have shown is repeated stimulation,
with an electrode in there, which stimulation, a fact coming in over and over,
drives those neurons enough to finally cause that calcium influx.
So you've just explained the learning part.
You've explained how you potentiate this pathway with repeated stimulation.
So that's great, but most of us would like to remember the things we've learned
for more than 30 seconds.
How do you turn it into long-term potentiation?
How do you turn it into a memory that will be there an hour from now,
by definition long-term memory,
or that will be there in your old age remembering your childhood,
language, things of that sort?
How do you turn it into a change of synaptic strength
that will persist for three-quarters of the century?
And an enormous amount of work has gone into understanding
where the long-term comes from in long-term potentiation.
What we see on this diagram very schematically is what goes on.
And there's a whole bunch of mechanisms.
And what I put down here are four of the more common ones.
And what you see is in different parts of the brain, LTP involved,
different to these mechanisms, other ones as well.
People make entire careers sniping at each other as to whose mechanism is most important
in their part of the brain and whether their version of LTP is the real gold standard LTP.
A bunch of things happen and they make sense.
Here what we see on top is our usual synapse pre-LTP
and we got the presynaptic neuron with its neurotransmitters and the vesicles
and we got the receptors on the postsynaptic side
and everybody's happy they're going about its business.
How does that influx of calcium now become a long-term signal,
a persistent signal, what comes close to being a permanent signal?
And the calcium does it in a bunch of ways.
First thing that happens, calcium comes rushing in
and you see an interesting thing.
It turns out neurons have a whole bunch of spare receptors around.
They have the mothballed in storage sitting there just underneath the surface of that dendritic spine.
There are these little bubblet things, these little sort of spheres of membrane
that's got all sorts of receptors stuck in there.
Do these receptors do anything?
No, they're in storage.
What calcium does is initiate a pathway by which some of those receptors
are pulled out of storage and put onto the surface.
Put onto that dendritic spine and what have you got now?
More receptors.
Metaphorically you got more ears, actually that's a terrible metaphor
but you have more ears at that point.
Instead of listening to the presynaptic neuron with two receptors,
you're now listening with four.
You've increased the sensitivity of that presynaptic neuron to a signal.
The next thing you do in addition to changing the number of those receptors
is you change their function.
And specifically what's done, as shown here by these asterisks in the diagram,
is you make a chemical modification in those receptors.
For those of you who care about such things, you do something that's called phosphorylation.
You basically throw a switch on those receptors so they work differently.
How do they work differently?
They stay open, activated for a longer time.
So for the same amount of glutamate buzzing the system,
you not only have more receptors to act upon,
the receptors allow more excitation, more of those ions to flow in and out of the neuron.
So you've got the presynaptic neuron listening better,
more receptors, more receptor sensitivity.
A third thing happens.
And this was actually the first mechanism uncovered to explain LTP.
What you could see in this diagram, what may look arbitrary at first,
but it's quite intentional, the shape of the dendritic spine changes.
In the top picture, we've got the dendritic spine as this very sort of constrained little outpocking.
And literally what happens with LTP is the spine flattens out a little bit.
And for extremely complex biophysics reasons,
what that means is each little wavelet of excitation spreads further than it used to.
Technical term, there's less resistance in the membrane,
just like in electrical systems, the same wavelet spreads further.
And why was this the first mechanism discovered?
Because this was before fancy biochemistry, this was before molecular biology.
You just need a microscope and you see, aha, neurons from brains that have undergone LTP in the hippocampus.
The dendrites have a different shape.
And it turns out when calcium comes in, it causes all sorts of restructuring in that dendrite.
You disassemble this whole scaffolding, this superstructure of proteins.
The term is the cytoskeleton.
You undo the whole superstructure there and rebuild it in a way so that the shape's a little bit different.
So now what have you got?
You've got a dendritic spine with more receptors that stay open longer
and the wave of excitation sweeps further.
One last step, and this one boggled people when this first became clear,
when the dendritic spine is stimulated enough when that calcium wave comes in,
what does it do?
It releases a neurotransmitter that goes back to the presynaptic neuron
and causes it to make more glutamate,
causes it to now release more glutamate.
Okay, you should be leaping out of your chair in a fence and finding your receipt for this course.
What's going on?
You've got neurotransmitters in the dendritic spine being released going backwards across the synapse.
This is heretical.
This is a whole new area that people have discovered.
Neurotransmitters, unconventional neurotransmitters.
These ones are called retrograde neurotransmitters.
They go in the wrong direction.
There's a way of signaling.
What do you know?
It turns out the nervous system can communicate in both directions across the synapse.
There's a whole bunch of these weirdo neurotransmitters that are made in dendritic spines,
and they go backwards.
Not only are they weird for where they're found and what direction they go,
turns out they're weird in terms of their structure.
Some of these are made of gas.
For example, there's a neurotransmitter called nitric oxide.
Others are made of all sorts of unlikely materials.
Others are made out of the membrane.
These are really weird messengers.
They go backwards.
They go in the wrong direction.
They're made out of unconventional things, but what do they do?
They go back and they stimulate the presynaptic neuron to start making more glutamate.
What have you got here for very effective steps?
You are now releasing more neurotransmitter out of the presynaptic neuron.
There's more glutamate on board, so you're yelling louder,
and the presynaptic neuron is listening more effectively.
More receptors, they open longer, more of a spread of that wavelet of excitation.
This is what LTP is.
This is what a potentiated synapse is about.
Now, what's very interesting is from out of nowhere,
this turns out to be very relevant to a bunch of neurological diseases.
Now, if you talk about glutamate and calcium influx and multiple glutamate receptors,
and you're doing this at a meeting of scientists who think about learning and memory,
glutamate is your friend.
It's the greatest neurotransmitter on earth.
It gets you better SAT scores.
Meanwhile, over in the next auditorium,
if you're sitting with a whole bunch of neurologists and you're talking about glutamate and calcium,
it is at the centerpiece of some of the most common of neurological diseases.
And this makes sense.
What's going on here?
So you've got glutamate coming out,
and you've already heard it's the most excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain.
What if glutamate levels get too high?
And there's a jargony term in the field given for it.
When levels get high enough, you transition from glutamate being an excitatory neurotransmitter
to what is called an excitotoxin.
If you get too much of the stuff on the scene,
you can excite the postsynaptic neuron to death.
Through a number of mechanisms, but one that's readily appreciated,
how about you do regular old LTP?
You get a big wave of calcium, but nothing insane.
And what did we see?
You undo part of the scaffolding there in the dendritic spine,
and you change the shape a little bit.
What if you get a massive amount of calcium coming in
because of a massive excitotoxic amount of glutamate?
You don't just remodel this little dendritic spine.
You blow apart the scaffolding in the entire neuron,
and it collapses on you, and you've got a dead neuron at that point.
When does this occur?
This is what happens during a stroke.
This is what happens during epilepsy.
During epilepsy, you've got so much glutamate coming out
by this repeated stimulation that you get glutamatergic toxicity.
In a stroke, your brain is running out of energy
and doesn't have the energy to remove the glutamate from the synapse anymore,
and you excite the second neuron to death.
This whole world of glutamate excitotoxicity
is at the centerpiece of understanding these neurological diseases.
Two quick disturbing uh-ohs.
One is glutamate.
Glutamate is some dietary thing that's resembling MSG,
monosodium glutamate.
MSG does not get into the adult brain very well.
It just gives some of us a headache,
but it doesn't get into the adult brain.
It gets into baby's brains very well,
where it could potentially be excitotoxic,
and the FDA long ago banned MSG from baby's food.
I grew up in the era of, like, eating MSG no doubt three times a day,
and that was probably not a good thing to have happen to my brain.
Currently, it is recognized you don't want MSG into the brains of babies.
You increase the risk of some excitotoxicity.
The other thing, and hopefully I won't get sued for this,
is pointing out a compound that structurally is pretty close to glutamate,
and this is aspartame.
Nutrisweet, when it is broken down,
it generates a neurotransmitter a lot like glutamate.
Nobody can tell you whether consuming a lot of food
with nutrisweet is causing brain damage,
but enough of it in a lab rat can.
It's something to be a little bit worried about.
Okay, so we've got the basic workings of the system,
and we've got the basic ways in which the system can go awry,
it could be too excited.
Somewhere in there, you have to ask the reasonable question,
how do you ever forget anything?
Big topic in the field, not at all clear how it works,
but in some manner, you need to reverse all the steps we've just seen.
So now we see how LTP works.
What we begin to look at now is how external factors in your environment
can regulate LTP, can make it more likely to occur,
can make it less likely,
and there's at least two things that are now recognized that enhance LTP.
And they both make sense.
The first one is lots of energy.
If you've got a lot of food in your gut,
that translates into a lot of glucose in your bloodstream,
which translates into neurons with a lot more energy,
energized neurons or happy neurons,
and they can pull off LTP more readily.
I mean, think about this massive project,
you're dumping glutamate over and over and over,
and you've got to get it out of the synapse
so you don't get excited toxicity.
That reuptake pump is extremely expensive.
Lots of energy facilitates LTP.
That's a good thing.
The next thing is there's a class of hormones
which you secrete during stress,
and during the first few minutes of stress,
these stress hormones make LTP work better.
They enhance LTP, and that makes perfect sense.
What do we call short-term stress?
We call it stimulation, and stimulation enhances memory.
That's the whole business that you don't learn very well
when you're semi-comatose.
You've got to be alert, you've got to be sharp,
and that's this whole flash-bowl memory phenomenon.
Where were you when you heard that I'm willing to bet
like most anyone watching this
will remember exactly where they were
when they heard the news about which actress
had some truly hideous outfit at this year's Oscars.
We need some mechanism for remembering
the really important stuff in life.
These short-term exciting,
stimulatory, stressful events sharpen LTP.
So that's great.
Meanwhile, there's a bunch of things that disrupt LTP,
and they're exactly the flip sides of these.
Energy depletion makes LTP less likely to occur.
What do you know, being severely hypoglycemic
is not a good time to take a final exam in college.
LTP synapses don't work as well
when you're running out of energy.
The whole transport of neurotransmitters,
the whole resting potential is disrupted.
The next thing is, what if those great stress hormones
that enhance memory short-term,
what if it becomes chronic stress,
anything more than a couple of hours,
those same stress hormones now disrupt LTP.
And that's why severe stress does very bad things
to memory consolidation, memory retrieval.
I will just briefly mention a third thing that disrupts LTP,
and need to know more than merely mention it
because it's obvious and the take-home lesson is clear there.
Another thing that messes with LTP dramatically is alcohol.
No surprise, get enough alcohol in your system
and you are not LTPing anything,
and the next morning you don't remember a thing.
Alcohol is not very good for it either.
Okay, so now we've gotten an enormous range of ways
in which there's plasticity in the synapse,
a number of different mechanisms by which the synapse works differently,
learns, remembers,
a number of outside factors that modulate such plasticity,
energy, stress, some of the things you consume.
The last issue, the one we always need to look at at this point,
is how does LTP differ from one person to the next?
And you know immediately what the usual suspects will be,
how much glutamate do you release,
how much glutamate receptors, what are the ratios
of the two types of glutamate receptors,
how much calcium, how much you phosphorylate those receptors,
all that sort of thing.
A couple of really striking examples of how this can work.
About 10 years ago, a bunch of scientists at Princeton
made a transgenic mouse, a mouse that they manipulated its genes
to express more of one type of glutamate receptor.
And these mice were the smartest mice anyone had ever seen on Earth.
These were brilliant philosophical introspective mice.
These were mice that they quickly, the scientists sensing a fabulous
public relations opportunity, gave a name to.
They called this the doogie mouse,
named after some television character, Doogie Hauser,
who is, I think, like a six-year-old going to medical school.
This was a genetically engineered mouse,
which had better than average LTP and better than average learning.
And this was all over the media time magazine on the cover.
Manipulate LTP, manipulate the building blocks of it,
and you manipulate the ability to learn.
Now at that point, these scientists sat down and did
what in retrospect was an even more interesting study.
They made a different type of genetically engineered mouse.
This is one where they knocked out the glutamate receptor,
removed the gene for it so that these were mice that could release
glutamate till it was coming out of their ears,
and they would not excite that postsynaptic neuron.
And these mice were not the sharpest ones on the block.
These were very impaired mice, and they were so impaired
that they didn't even get some flashy, irresistible name.
But these were mice with impaired capacity for LTP and learning.
So what seems to be the punchline there?
Look at this. You manipulate one single gene,
and you dramatically change the learning abilities in an organism.
Genetic control of cognition, genetic control of intelligence,
genes as destiny, not so fast.
Then these guys did a really interesting follow-up,
showing that these were more than just some mindless molecular
biologist futzing with genes.
They then took these glutamate receptor impaired mice
that couldn't learn anything, and they raised them
in an extremely stimulatory environment.
And you know what? It completely overcame their deficit.
So what initially looked like one big win for nature over nurture
and genetic destiny and genetic control over brain function
and intelligence, get those mice in the right environment,
and you overcome that genetic deficit.
In other words, if it can happen in a mouse,
we've got no excuse to talk about genetic destiny and brain function.
Okay. So what have we gotten to here?
First in time for all of us to take a nap now,
we now see the functioning of one neuron, how it talks to another one,
and most importantly, how that is not set in stone,
how our brains, via our synapses, function differently in response to experience.
What this sets us up now for in the next lecture
is the huge leap now from the functioning of two neurons to networks of neurons.
How do networks operate and give us much more complex function?
Thank you.
