Lecture 7 The Autonomic Nervous System, A-N-S
As she melted small and wonderful in his arms, she became infinitely desirable to him.
All his blood vessels seemed to scald with intensity a tender desire for her, for her
softness, for the penetrating beauty of her in his arms, passing into his blood.
And softly, with that marvelous swoon-like caress of his hand and pure soft desire,
softly he stroked the silky slope of her loins.
She yielded with a quiver that was like death.
She went all open to him.
Why have you stopped eating your potato chips all of a sudden?
Think about what I just read to you, or better yet, later, at a quiet moment alone.
Think about what I just read to you, and if DH Lawrence happens to be your thing, something
interesting might have happened to your body just now.
You won't have just run up a flight of stairs, but your heart may be beating faster.
You won't have done anything physically exhausting yet.
Your breathing rate may have changed.
You may suddenly be aware of tingling and all sorts of unlikely outposts in your body.
You would have just learned the main point of this lecture, which is sometimes all you
need to do is think a thought, have a memory, have an emotion, and every single organ in
your body will work differently.
This is what we've gotten to so far, expanding from one neuron to a pair of neurons to networks,
to networks changing over time, to entire areas of the brain, the limbic system.
And as we saw in the last lecture, the entire desire of the limbic system is to influence
the hypothalamus.
And thus, we get to this section of how does the hypothalamus go about its business?
What's so important about the hypothalamus?
And what we will see in the next lecture is its control of hormones.
What we will see in this lecture is its control of all sorts of neural responses throughout
the body, all sorts of things you have no control over.
Okay, most of your spinal cord does boring stuff.
It makes you shake hands and sign checks and shift the gears in the car, but then there's
this whole part of your spinal cord and the brain that commands it that does the good
stuff, that does things you normally don't have any control over, blushing and goose
flesh and orgasms and pupillary contractions, all those things that could be evoked simply
by a passage of a book, all these things that are automatic, things that you don't
normally have a whole lot of control over.
And thus, this part of the nervous system is called the autonomic nervous system, the
automatic nervous system, the part of your nervous system that does not have a whole
lot of conscious control.
And the center of it is, you guessed it, the hypothalamus.
Have something emotionally arousing, emotionally stressful, emotionally anything, and you
get a bodily response two seconds later, that's your autonomic nervous system.
So we have this contrast between the voluntary nervous system, ooh, I think I'm going to
extend my arm and thus I do it in this very conscious, voluntary way, controlling skeletal
muscles and then you've got this autonomic nervous system that's sending projections
to your liver and your gonads and your diaphragm and you're sending projections to virtually
every single spot along your skin causing you to get goose flesh.
This autonomic nervous system under the control of the hypothalamus doesn't bother with these
voluntary skeletal muscles, instead it's changing functions all throughout the body.
And this is the first way and in lots of ways the most dramatic way by which your brain
can sit there and reach out and take control of organs throughout your body.
First by way of the autonomic nervous system, this lecture, and then by way of hormones
the next lecture.
Okay, so focusing in on what the autonomic nervous system does, for starters we need
to see how it's constructed.
And the autonomic nervous system comes in two halves and there's this theme that will
go throughout a lot of these sections, different parts of the body working in opposition, different
parts of the brain, we've got two different components to the autonomic nervous system
and for the most part they work in opposition.
First part, the sympathetic nervous system.
And don't worry about the terminology because this will become very comfortable and familiar
by the end of this course, sympathetic nervous system, all hell breaking loose, emergency,
arousal, fear, terror, excitement, stress, adrenaline, everything kicking into gear as
it is stated, and this is an obligatory joke that all first year medical students have
to hear.
The sympathetic nervous system subsumes the four F's of behavior, fear, flight, fright,
and sex.
Okay, that's required, I lose my license if I don't give that joke, that's what the sympathetic
nervous system does, it does all this emergency arousal stuff.
Meanwhile, next door to it, in your brain, in your hypothalamus, in your spinal cord is
the other half, termed the parasympathetic nervous system.
Parasympathetic just the opposite, calm vegetative function.
You take a nap, you turn on the parasympathetic nervous system, you eat a big, heavy starchy
meal, you turn on the parasympathetic nervous system, you get disemboweled by a predator,
you turn off the parasympathetic nervous system, you turn on the sympathetic, they work in
opposition and you can bet already what the wiring is going to be like straight out of
the network lecture.
The parasympathetic axons have a collateral that inhibit the sympathetic ones.
The sympathetic axons have a collateral that inhibits the parasympathetic, a system that
is brilliantly evolved to make sure you never put your feet on the gas and the brake at
the same time, they work in opposition.
Alright, so what do these two halves of the autonomic nervous system do?
Lots of different things throughout the body and where we start off is with this diagram
getting a sense of the sheer range of autonomic function.
There we've got coming down the spine, all the stuff not diagramed there are the projections,
the axons for the voluntary nervous system going out to all of your skeletal muscles
but shown here instead are the descending projections of the autonomic nervous system.
And I haven't even labeled which is sympathetic, which is parasympathetic, it doesn't matter
in this case you see parallel projections, two separate cables descending the spine and
each one of them exiting at various points to send a projection to different organs.
The actual anatomy of this is somewhat different but this is basically the notion there.
And what you've got is a parasympathetic projection to this organ, a sympathetic projection to
the same organ.
Parasympathetic here, sympathetic there to all of the organs throughout the body, you've
got the heart, you've got the kidney, you've got the stomach, I'm actually not sure if
this is an eyeball or a breast but it works the same in either case, you've got these
projections going all over the place to these target organs working in opposition.
What would be an example of how this works?
And here we see what's happening in the heart.
The heart, which in real life looks exactly like that.
The heart is very interesting, you take somebody's heart out and put it on a table and it's
going to go on beating all on its own.
The heart has its own endogenous rhythm, what is called a myogenic rhythm, a rhythm generated
by muscle myogenic.
The heart beats on its own.
All your brain does is tell it to slow down or speed up.
All it does is send bi-directional messages by way of the autonomic nervous system.
And thus you have a sympathetic projection to the heart, fear arousal anxiety, all hell-breaking
loose the 4 F's, it stimulates heart muscle.
To beat faster, indirectly to beat harder, increasing heart rate, increasing blood pressure
and meanwhile you've got the parasympathetic doing exactly the opposite, slowing down the
heart to that sort of thing, working in opposition.
So that makes a great deal of sense.
Meanwhile, you've got another autonomic outpost, you've got for example your gut, your stomach,
your small intestines, what's going on there?
Something very different, something in the opposite direction.
Now what did I describe before?
What the parasympathetic nervous system is about is calm vegetative function.
You take a nap, you eat a big meal.
Calm vegetative is a perfect time to be doing digestion.
This is a wonderful time.
What happens in your gut, the parasympathetic nervous system stimulates it, stimulates it
to go about its business.
You do digestion.
Your stomach churns and contracts and empties out various enzymes that degrade your food
and your small intestines, this rhythmic sort of conga line thing called peristalsis where
it moves food down the line there.
And this is digestion.
And this is precisely what is stimulated by your parasympathetic nervous system.
Eat that big star-cheat Thanksgiving meal, you turn on the parasympathetic in order to
stimulate digestion.
Meanwhile, what is your sympathetic nervous system due to your gut, your stomach and intestines?
Exactly the opposite.
The lion is chasing you.
You got much better things to do at that point than worry about digesting breakfast if you're
trying to avoid being somebody's lunch.
You don't mobilize energy to run for your life away from the lion with your thigh muscles.
You don't mobilize that by increasing the rate at which your stomach is churning.
That takes hours.
For running for your life, you borrow energy from your fat cells.
It takes hours, slow, expensive.
And you're trying to avoid this.
You've got better things to do right now with your energy.
What do you do during a crisis, during a stressful event?
What do you do with your sympathetic nervous system?
You turn off action in your gut.
You inhibit there.
So what you see now are two very different ways in which the autonomic nervous system
works.
And here we see on sort of a more diagrammed level, we've got the heart.
Just for convenience, we have purely the sympathetic projection into there.
Your stomach, your gut, sympathetic there.
Okay, in general, what the sympathetic nervous system is about is fear, emergency, arousal,
everything turning on.
What we see is in some cases, in some parts of your body, it accomplishes it by stimulating
an organ.
At the heart, the sympathetic nervous system and the neurotransmitters it releases works
in an excitatory way.
And sometimes in order to accomplish that same emergency switch to a crisis budget,
some of the time what the sympathetic nervous system does is turn off the activity in organ.
In this case, going to the gut, the neurotransmitter releases there having an inhibitory role.
So down on a local cellular level, it could be either excitatory inhibitory, same thing
with the parasympathetic nervous system, inhibiting the heart, stimulating the gut.
Also in a cellular level, very local effects, but fitting within this large picture, sympathetic
nervous system, emergency, arousal, parasympathetic, calm vegetative function.
So you wind up getting these two branches of the autonomic nervous system working in
dramatic opposition to each other.
Except there's a few outposts where, in fact, they work in a coordinated fashion.
And one of the best examples of this is looking at how your autonomic nervous system regulates
erections.
Okay, we have finally come to this point in the course, seven lectures in there where
we need to deal with how does your brain regulate erections, finally something useful in this
course here.
Get out those pens, write down this information.
What you've got is this remarkably subtle choreography between the parasympathetic and
the sympathetic.
Okay, we start off with our first rule.
In order for a male of any mammalian species out there, in order for a male to get an erection,
he has to turn on the parasympathetic nervous system.
Calm vegetative function.
Okay, that's great.
So he's got the erection.
What happens next?
Maybe something having to do obscurely with the social setting that brought about the
erection in the first place, maybe for some obscure reason, the guy starts feeling a little
bit less calm and vegetative.
Maybe he starts breathing a little bit faster.
Maybe his heart rate begins to increase.
Maybe he's slowly turning on the sympathetic nervous system.
More time goes by, breathing faster, heart racing, gasping, toes curled, sweating, all
of that eventually reach this point where his whole body is screamingly sympathetic except
for this one lone outpost where he's desperately holding onto parasympathetic tone as long
as possible, finally can't take it anymore.
You turn off the parasympathetic, you turn on the sympathetic and you ejaculate.
Okay, so that's how erections work.
How do erections work and how can this go wrong?
What happens during stress, for example?
During stress, you're not feeling very calm and vegetative.
You have trouble getting that parasympathetic tone.
What happens then?
You can't get the erection, stress-induced erectile dysfunction, or you can have a second
problem.
Suppose you've managed to get that erection and suddenly you're thinking, oh no, the prime
lending rate, whatever it is, you have something that stresses you.
It accelerates the transition from sympathetic, from parasympathetic to sympathetic.
It accelerates that transition and everything occurs more quickly than you would like premature
ejaculation.
Either of these things can happen and they are stupendously common amongst stressed males
of every species out there.
And estimates are something like 60% of the doctor's visits in this country, of men complaining
about erectile dysfunction, it turns out there is no organic basis, there's not a spinal
tumor, there's not something wrong with a hypothalamus, it is instead stress-related.
And what that essentially is, is a disorder of getting the choreography between the parasympathetic
and the sympathetic out of whack.
Okay, so we've got a sense now of how the two branches of the sympathetic nervous system
and the parasympathetic, these two components forming the autonomic nervous system, we've
got a sense by now how they regulate events throughout the body.
And what we need to look at now is what regulates the centers in your brain that direct the
autonomic nervous system.
And what we have in the next diagram is a very schematic outline of the brain as a whole
and we've seen some of these broad categories.
Before midbrain, high brain, hypothalamus, limbic system cortex, we'll be framing it
a little bit differently here.
And what we've got is the hypothalamus sitting there at the very center and below it the
pituitary, next lecture, hormonal regulation of the body by way of the hypothalamus and
the pituitary.
And then we've got with the hypothalamus a bunch of projections, axonal projections
into key brainstem structures, which then send their projections down the spine, we've
got the autonomic nervous system.
And now the question becomes what regulates the hypothalamus in telling the midbrain brainstem
what to do with its autonomic projections.
And what we have here in this schematic form is this grand formulation of brain function,
something come up within the 1950s by this eminent neuroscientist Paul McLean, what is
termed the triune organization of the brain, the three-layered organization of the brain.
Basically built around hypothalamus brainstem midbrain as one area, the second layer, the
rest of the limbic system layered on top, the third layer of the cortex.
And this actually gives us a lot of insight into the regulation going on here.
Okay, first type of event that could turn on cause changes in the autonomic nervous system.
You're sitting there and you've hemorrhaged, you've just had some horrible injury, massive
amounts of blood flowing out, your blood pressure is dropping, and what you need to
do is now constrict certain blood vessels to preserve your blood pressure.
This is a classic job for the autonomic nervous system.
How does the autonomic nervous system know how to do it?
Know how to do it?
The blood pressure sensors throughout your body send signals up the spine, get to those
hypothalamic neurons, stimulate them, and then they send their message down the spine
to have an appropriate response.
This is exactly how it works in us, in a rat, in a lizard.
All you need are your basic ancient building blocks of the nervous system.
In this case, when you were taking care of shifting the function of organs in response
to some physical damage, in this case, all you need to run the autonomic nervous system
are these very local circuits.
Now we move to the next layer.
We move to the limbic system.
And as we know from the previous lecture, we are now in the realm no longer of lizards,
but of those emotionally labile mammals.
Suddenly you've got a huge chunk of the brain devoted to emotional regulation.
Lizards have limbic systems.
They're just not very big.
It's not until mammals that you have all that stuff going on there.
And as we know from the last lecture, what's happening, all those complex projections down
into the limbic system, all of those emotionally relevant brain structures wanting to regulate
the ability of the hypothalamus to regulate the autonomic nervous system.
And suddenly you have a world in which you're some wildebeest and the right menacing, threatening
wildebeest is shown up on the edge of your territory and your heart is racing.
Nearly by the emotional arousal in this case, that's your limbic system.
You are not injured.
You are not hemorrhaging.
All you are is seeing this guy who you hate more than any other wildebeest on earth and
your heart is speeding up.
Or in another circumstance, all you need to do is see the person who makes your blood
run scalding like no one else on earth and your heart has sped up.
In all these cases, we are not dealing with some local little loop in the brainstem and
the hypothalamus.
Instead, we have limbic structures.
And suddenly we are in a world in which olfaction, sensory input, smell, etc. can change functioning
throughout your body.
So that's our second layer.
Then we move up to our third layer.
And by the time we get up to the cortex, we are dealing with stuff that is much more the
realm of primates including us.
Suddenly we have a world where you are not changing autonomic function, you are not
changing blood pressure, you are not changing heart rate because you are hemorrhaging, you
are not changing it because you are smelling your rival, you are not changing it because
of the sight right now of someone who is emotionally arousing to you, you're changing it, thinking
about the fact that, oh my God, someday I'm going to die.
You're changing it, thinking about refugees on the other side of the planet.
You're changing it, thinking about late Beethoven, you're changing it, thinking.
And suddenly we're in this realm where thought and memory can change how our spleen functions
and how our gut digests and the rate of our heart beating and we're in the realm of thought
influencing the rest of the body.
And this is suddenly a very different realm and a very, very primate specialized one.
And here we've got something that happens like no other species other than primates,
massive projections from the cortex down into the limbic system, down into the hypothalamus.
We've already heard how big the cortex is by the time you get to primate, and that's
not just for them to sit around and do fancy math and baseball statistics.
By the time you're getting a big cortex, some of what it's doing is having lots of neurons
up there to send lots of projections down south into the limbic system and the hypothalamus
suddenly to have this abstract cognitive part of your brain mucking around with your emotions
and mucking around with how your body responds to those emotions.
And suddenly we have this realm of an enormous capacity for the cortex, for thought, for memory
to regulate bodily functions.
And once again, all you need to do is the experiment to prove that, is sit there and
really, really think about the fact that your heart is going to stop beating someday.
You're not hemorrhaging, you're not running for your life, you're not smelling the pheromones
of arrivals simply with thought, and you will be turning on aspects of your sympathetic
nervous system.
Now the fact that the cortex has such strong projections down into the limbic system, down
into the hypothalamus, this gives us insight into one of the most prevalent, one of the
most disastrous, one of the most primate specific diseases out there, major clinical
depression.
What is a depression about?
Okay, let's think about this.
Finish watching this lecture, step outside, unexpectedly get gored by an elephant.
What's going to happen at that point?
You're going to turn on your sympathetic nervous system.
You're going to be bleeding in pain, all of that.
You're going to be turning on all of those pain-relevant pathways, hemorrhage-relevant
pathways, all that brainstem, midbrain stuff.
You're going to feel unhappy.
You're going to feel an absence of pleasure, a sense of grief.
You're going to feel exhausted, a big buffet may not be the top thing on your list at that
point.
Sex may not seem like the highest priority.
This is what your body does during a physical crisis like that.
Go and have yourself a major clinical depression, and what do you do?
You turn on a lot of the same stress-responsive pathways.
You feel a similar sense of grief, of exhaustion, appetite is lost, interest in sex is lost,
pleasure goes down the tubes.
The defining symptom of depression is anhedonia, hedonism, the pursuit of pleasure, anhedonia,
the inability to feel pleasure in a very, very simplified level.
What depression is about is your cortex comes up with these abstract, sad thoughts and gets
your hypothalamus to go along with it just as if you've been gored by an elephant.
On that very simplistic level, it is a disease of having an overgrown cortex with a capacity
to regulate limbic and hypothalamic areas.
Now given this idiotically simplistic notion, depression is a cortex that thinks too many
sad thoughts and whispers it to the hypothalamus.
What's a solution for depression?
What's a treatment?
I know, go in with a pair of scissors and cut along the dotted line, disconnect the cortex
from the rest of the brain.
Oh right, that is going to work.
Remarkably enough, there is some evidence that a very extreme version of depression can
be made better by a procedure kind of like that.
This is not a frontal lobotomy where you are loping, glopping out the front part of the
brain.
In this case, it is called a singulotomy, a singulumbundal cut.
It is disconnecting one part of the cortex from the underlying brain, and the notion
is you are making it impossible now for this cortex to come up with these abstractly sad
thoughts and get the rest of the brain to go along with it.
Now naturally, somewhere along there, amid these studies suggesting that this can help
in some types of depression, and these are controversial findings, naturally what you
also want to wonder is, well, what else is different than somebody where you've gone
in a disconnected part of their cortex?
Do they lose the capacity for abstract pleasure?
Yes, indeed.
And suddenly we have this great sort of philosophical debate over the dinner table and George Bernard
Shaw play of are we more human for our pains in addition to our pleasures and great philosophical
arguments.
Anybody who's a candidate for a singulumbundal cut is not feeling a whole lot of abstract
pleasures.
This is someone in the back ward of the state hospital.
Every antidepressant, every combination, electroconvulsive therapy have been tried,
and none of them make a dent and they're slashing their wrists every three months.
This is the sort of person where remarkably enough this may help.
You take the most sophisticated clinician on earth and you run by them this like idiotically
simplistic notion, ooh, what this procedure is about is you disconnect that sad, overly
influential cortex from the rest of the brain and it can't tell the sad thoughts of the
limbic system.
They can't come up with a more sophisticated explanation for what this is about.
So here we see layered is the most subtle way by which your brain via your cortex can
regulate autonomic function throughout the body.
So now of course we switch to our two themes, plasticity and individual differences.
Plasticity, how does the working of the autonomic nervous system change over time?
And in a whole bunch of ways, one is the same sort of stimulus that would trigger an autonomic
response becomes less effective as you do it over and over.
You habituate and that's very often the case for certain stimuli that are frightening.
The first time you're on the roller coaster, your heart races and the 47th time in a row
that you're on it, your heart is not as responsive.
Your autonomic nervous system is habituating.
Some of the time it goes in the opposite direction.
With each exposure, your autonomic response becomes more extreme sensitization and that
appears to be relevant to some anxiety disorders built around trauma.
You could change the functioning.
You could change the sensitivity in one direction or the other.
What is most remarkable is you can change function in the autonomic nervous system in
a conscious, volitional way.
Let me give you an example of this.
Sit there and think very carefully for a moment.
If you had to, could you urinate right now?
I bet a fair percentage of people watching this could.
I could.
Probably lots of you can.
Now ask the question, how many of you are urinating right now?
My bet is very few of you.
How come?
Because back when we were about three years old, we learned you gained control over your
bladder.
You get toilet-trained.
You get toilet-trained and you remain that way for the rest of your life.
What is that in a neurobiological level?
Somewhere up in the cortex, you LTP, do you potentiate pathways by which you could now
consciously control autonomic regulation of your bladder?
You have learned how to do that.
That's a pathway that was not very strong before.
Back to a bunch of lectures ago, you have made those synaptic connections stronger.
You have learned how to regulate that aspect of the autonomic nervous system.
Another example of this is one that is clinically very relevant.
You get some guy with elevated blood pressure.
It's one solution, pour a whole bunch of drugs into him, many of which wind up not working
very well or with side effects.
An alternative is biofeedback.
What is biofeedback about?
You sit the person down and you hook them up to a blood pressure monitor and it's sitting
there going too high and you ask them, think about your favorite piece of music.
Think about your favorite food.
Think about a recent vacation.
And suddenly you get some thought where down goes the blood pressure.
Ha!
What did you just think about?
Oh, it was the vacation, the Hawaiian vacation.
Think about that again.
Think about what down goes blood pressure again and what the person is slowly learning
to do is how to consciously, cortically pull forth certain memories, certain thoughts,
which are ones that strengthen the parasympathetic nervous system, ones that decrease blood pressure.
And what training with biofeedback is about then is LTP-ing, strengthening, potentiating
those pathways so that you get better and better at evoking some cortical state that's
real good at toning down the autonomic nervous system.
So that tells us a whole lot there, just like any other part of the nervous system that
could change over time.
Finally, we come to our other finishing topic here, the whole notion of how the autonomic
nervous system works differently between one person and the next, and you know exactly
the sort of ways in which that could play out.
And at this point, there's lots of reasons to think that differences in autonomic function
have something to do with why some of us are more vulnerable to clinical depression, why
some of us are more vulnerable to anxiety disorders.
It has cleared this tremendous variability in this realm.
Once again, nothing here is set in stone.
Once again, no nervous system is exactly the same as the one in the neighboring person,
tremendous individual variability, which can respond to changes in experience.
So on that note, I assume everybody needs to go to the bathroom at this point, and they
probably should, and we will call at the end of this lecture.
What we will now do in the subsequent one is the other half of the role of the hypothalamus,
the control of hormones.
