Lecture 15 Behavior Genetics
We are back again just in time to change buckets.
Okay, you remember from the very first lecture,
the song and dance that dominates this entire course.
If you want to understand behavior, the biology behavior,
the biology of human behavior, the biology of abnormal human behavior,
you're not going to get very far if you decide,
all I need to understand is what hormones have to do with behavior,
what early environment, what neurons, what evolution, what genes.
Instead, you're going to have to integrate all these different approaches.
And we've been doing that so far, probably three different ones by now.
First, our big stretch of looking at the nervous system,
then saying, okay, we got these brains, as we now know,
functioning on the back of all these different types of proteins,
proteins coded for by genes.
Where do these genes evolve for?
A bunch of lectures in the bucket of thinking about the evolution of social behavior,
just like giraffe evolving their long necks.
Then in the last couple of lectures,
we've switched instead to thinking about the evolution of genes
down to the detail of the way molecules,
the way sequences of DNA change over time.
Microevolution, macroevolution.
We're now going to switch buckets again to a new field,
a field called behavior genetics.
And this is another way in which people think about this question,
which is dominating this part of the course.
How do you figure out if a trait, if a behavioral trait has a genetic component?
And what behavioral geneticists do is not sit there
and come up with these evolutionary models.
And can I look at a new species and decide,
is it going to be pair bonding or tournament, that sort of thing?
Nor do they sit and look at sequences of DNA and transposable genetic elements.
What behavior geneticists look at is patterns of behavior shared amongst relatives
versus non-relatives.
What patterns of behavior run in families?
And as we'll see, this is not a trivial question to get at,
but with the underlying assumption very broadly,
if behaviors are more in common amongst relatives than among non-relatives,
that's a hint that we may be looking at a genetic component.
Now back to a caveat that should be abundantly clear after the end of the last lecture,
which is there is like zero reason to think about genes having to do something with behavior,
genes as deterministic, genes as inevitable, genes as meaning things,
that cannot change, that are impervious to environment.
Instead, as we've seen, this picture of genetic function utterly entwined
with the environment that regulates it, genes as propensities, as tendencies,
this much more sophisticated model of genes,
one that is going to become much more clear as we progress through the course.
Okay, so now thinking from the standpoint of behavior geneticists,
how do you think about patterns of traits, behavioral traits,
running among relatives versus non-relatives?
How do you infer something about genes from that?
Now the obvious approach, which has sort of been floating around forever,
and is one that is completely unacceptable at this point,
is just very straightforward notion that, okay, traits run in families, genes run in families,
therefore, behavioral traits that are more common amongst relatives than non-relatives,
aha, you've just uncovered a genetic basis.
And it should be pretty easy by now to see exactly what the flaw is with that one,
not only do genes run in families, but environments run in families.
It is very unlikely that one of you as a close member of your family
is going to be living in suburban Virginia and the other one is a goat herder in Tibet,
environments run in families, it is impossible simply from the,
hey, all the people in that family do it to decide that there's the remotest bit of evidence for genetics.
Okay, so you get the next more sophisticated approach, which is to say,
okay, okay, instead of just are they relatives or not relatives,
you remember back to our rules of mental and I'll lay down my life for two brothers or eight cousins,
you're more related to close relatives than to distant ones,
and thus you share half your genes with a full sibling,
you share a quarter of your genes with a half sibling, less and less as you get out to your 18th cousin.
So now the logic goes, aha, not only does this trait run in the family,
but the closer the relatives are to this individual, the more they share these traits in common,
ah, now we're looking at a genetic trait.
Because in this case, it's not merely genes run in families,
but the much more strict sort of requirement that the closer the relative,
the more the shared genes, if the closer the behavior is shared,
hm, that sure fits the pattern, and we know exactly what the problem is there,
which is not only do genes become more overlapping as you look at close relatives,
environments do as well.
You were raised in a much more equivalent environment with your full sibling
than with your 27th cousin, this approach doesn't get you very far either.
So what you now begin to shift to is sort of one of the more rigorous tools
that's used amongst behavior geneticists.
And the logic of this one basically runs as follows.
If you have two individuals and they're raised in an identical environment
and they have different genes, if out the other end pops different behaviors,
it can't be due to environment, it's got to be due to the genes,
because the environment is the same.
As shown in this diagram, schematically two individuals with genetic makeups that differ
and a shared identical environment and out pop behaviors one and two,
two different ones that has to be a way of telling you, ah, there's a genetic component to this.
Mind you, you notice what we're doing here, which is blithely, utterly ignoring
the big lesson we got in the last lecture, you can't talk genes, you can't talk environment,
they've got to interact, we will see the extent to which it has come to haunt this field
in the next lecture for this moment, this approach.
Two individuals raised in an identical environment, non-identical genes,
outcome different behaviors, it can't be due to environment,
you've just shown a strong genetic component.
Now what sort of examples have people used for studies like that,
and that's where you look at two individuals who pretty plausibly are raised in the same environment,
which is two siblings, in one case identical genes, identical genes,
in one case identical twins, and in the other case fraternal twins,
or in the jargon in the field monozygotic versus dizygotic twins,
identical twins from one egg monozygotic, or dizygotic, identical versus fraternal.
Okay, identical twins have all of their genes in common, fraternal twins only have half their genes in common,
and twins of all types are raised in the same environment, in the same household,
so with the case of comparing mono versus dizygotic twins, identical versus fraternal,
if you see differences there, you're seeing differences reflecting genetics,
and if you see differences between individuals being raised in the exact same environment,
who are fraternal twins,
aha, you're seeing differences in genetic influences because the environment is absolutely the same,
and you better bet where we're going with the problem there,
but for the moment, let's assume that,
and what these studies have shown are things like the incidence of certain disorders, psychiatric disorders,
as a function of whether you are comparing identical or fraternal twins,
fraternal, half their genes in common, identical 100%,
and what the study shows are, in a number of cases, you see a difference,
for example, major clinical depression.
You take somebody who's clinically depressed and has a long history of it,
and they've got a twin, a fraternal twin, what's the likelihood of that twin having the same depression?
About a 25% chance.
Now a person has depression, and you look at their identical twin,
what's their chance of the second one having the depression as well?
50%.
You double the risk of the disease when you double the degree of relatedness,
and similar patterns like that have been shown for a number of psychiatric disorders,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, consistently in those cases,
what you see is the likelihood of sharing a trait is less between fraternal twins than identical twins.
The only thing that differs about them is the amount of genes they share in common.
Therefore, if the degree to which they share this behavior is changing also,
it's due to the genes because they've got the identical environment.
And what is obvious, the confound there is identical twins,
and fraternal twins are not raised in equivalent environments.
The differences in treatment of non-identical twins, fraternal twins,
is much greater than how identical twins are raised.
Identical twins are raised in a far more similar environment than are fraternal twins,
especially if the fraternal twins are of different genders.
And suddenly, what seems like a foolproof way of detecting a genetic influence,
you don't know if you're looking there are genes,
or if you're looking at environment, let alone lectures less in the interaction of the two,
so that's a problem there.
But this approach has been used in other realms as well.
Okay, for example, you look at the whole notion that there's gender differences in behavior,
and you ask, well, genders differ genetically.
You've got that XX chromosome stuff versus that XY.
If you see some differences in behavior between the genders, does that reflect some genetics?
Well, obviously, the environment is different.
Let's use that same strategy.
Let's get a setting where you have the identical environment.
Do you see differences in behavior by gender?
And a number of years back, there was a highly influential study that purported to show that,
and it was a whopping of a finding that got all over the place in the media.
And this was a study looking at some very precocious kids at mathematics,
some junior high school kids who were already up in the league of taking the SATs.
They were some major math whiz kids, and looking at this whole bunch,
and looking at their math performances as a function of gender.
Massive sample size.
And what you wound up seeing was there were a whole lot more boys performing at the very highest levels of math and girls.
Interestingly, there were also more boys performing at the lowest level of math,
and on the average, the mean right in the middle there, boys were doing better than girls.
Okay, so what you've now seen, the paper concluded, was insofar as these kids were in an identical environment,
if you see this difference in math, the long recognized difference in math skills were on the average.
The sort of highest echelon of mathematics is invariably filled disproportionately with males.
Ooh, we've just shown a genetic component.
Why did these authors argue that there was an identical environment?
Because it's not until high school that you get to choose, are you taking AP calculus and stuff like that.
Junior high, everybody is still tracked through the same classes.
These kids have gotten the same mathematics environment.
And if, despite that equivalent environment, you're seeing a gender difference,
well, round up those X and Y chromosomes, we've just isolated something that has to do with them.
And this particular study, which was extremely carefully done by the authors,
yet made this one assumption, wound up having a tremendous influence in the press
and a tremendous influence amongst teachers and parents and guidance counselors.
And what the gigantic assumption there was, of course, was that you were raised in identical environments.
And what an enormous literature already shows is virtually starting from day one in school
for the same exact answer in the realm of a math question.
Boys are more likely to be praised by teachers than our girls.
Already, by junior high school, for the same exact level of math performance,
girls are already underestimating how good they are at math.
There is no way you're dealing with a bunch of 12-year-old kids who differ by gender,
who just happened to have been in the identical environment all their lives.
We see a problem there with this approach.
So a limitation there.
Another version of how this is thought about.
Another one of those identical environments, different genes, different behaviors,
we must be seeing something with a genetic influence.
And this is a fascinating literature looking at ethnic differences in behavior.
And this is, as you might imagine, a very contentious area.
And this is one that, for example, has looked at child development as a function of ethnicity.
And there's a literature out there showing, for example, that Asian American children
and European American children differ, like, on their first day of life, in their levels of activity.
Whoa, that's kind of interesting.
And I'm not even going to tell you what direction the finding goes, because that's irrelevant.
The main thing is, within a day of birth, on the average,
whatever kids are already more active than whichever kids.
And in a similar realm, even at a day of life,
infant boys tend to be more active than infant girls.
Whoa, they've had, like, 24 hours to soak up environment.
There's not a whole lot of environment going on there.
And what the studies also show is, within minutes, depending on the gender of your child,
mothers are already interacting differently with the babies.
Classic studies where you tell the mother, initially, a different gender than the child.
I don't quite know how these studies are done.
Maybe these ones are done on lab rats, but already you're seeing that, by gender,
babies are being treated differently within moments of birth.
And what they also show is, within the first day of life, the parenting style,
the extent to which you hold the child, even the degree of movements and such,
are differing in those ethnicities once again.
An assumption that environment starts right at birth and can be controlled completely,
so you can have an identical environment, very shaky.
Okay, so we see some of the findings that come out of this approach,
but we see some of the pitfalls there also.
Another approach taken by behavior geneticists,
and this is one that has a similar sort of logic exploited in a somewhat different way.
This time, you have individuals who share some genes,
and in this case, you get completely different environments.
So you have individuals who share genes, and if they are raised in completely different environments,
and despite these totally different environments, they still do the same exact behavior,
aha, you've just uncovered yet again another area where genes have an influence.
And you could probably once again see what the assumption is there that can get you into trouble,
which is this notion of completely different environments.
Completely different environments.
Let's see some examples of that.
Back to that whole notion that you can control an environment entirely,
this whole approach was the backbone of one of the classic studies in behavioral genetics,
an extremely important study likewise in the history of psychiatry,
one that pioneered an entire new approach to this issue of,
is there a heritable, is there a genetic component to behavior?
And this was pioneered by a Harvard neuroscientist named Seymour Kedde,
one of the giants in the field, who thought up this approach,
and this has been a sort of bread and butter approach in that field ever since,
and it's a tough one to do.
Okay, here's the basic logic of what you look at.
You look at kids who have been adopted, aha,
so they're raised by non-biological parents,
and in the perfect version of this, what you do is you take a kid very shortly after birth,
so minimal environment shared with the parents, shared with the mother,
minimal environment, then they're adopted away,
and thus you can separate out all they've gotten from their biological parents are genes.
They got no environment from them,
and all they've gotten from their adoptive parents is environment, no genes.
You see how the logic of this runs.
And what Kedde did was this massive study, which wound up being the first one,
to show what everyone considered to be irrefutable evidence for a genetic component to a psychiatric disorder.
Now, you've not able to find a population to study this in very easily.
Kedde's insight, among other things, was to find the perfect population
that turns out Scandinavian countries have had obsessively good records of adoption
back forever, enormously detailed adoption records,
so that you can track down who the biological parents were.
An approach to confidentiality of information different some ways in the United States.
What Kedde and Crue did was march off to Denmark and spend quite a few years there,
going through every single adoption case there,
getting a hold of the adopted individual, the adoptive parents, the biological parents,
and asking a simple question, one very relevant to psychiatrists,
who among those three cohorts adopted Kedde, adopted parents, biological parents,
who is schizophrenic?
And what they wound up seeing, and this was a small team of psychiatrists,
so they were doing all of the checking, so there was a lot of reliability.
It was not 400 different psychiatrists coming back with their reports.
I know you guys talked to the biological parents and you guys talked to the adoptive parents.
That would be a terrible design for an experiment.
It was the same psychiatrist doing all the interviewing and all the testing,
and they came back with a very interesting, classic finding.
We've got four possible outcomes.
You were raised in a non-schizophrenic household,
and your biological parents were not schizophrenic.
Raised in a schizophrenic household, biological parents were not schizophrenic.
The converse, if I could remember by now, raised in a non-schizophrenic household
with biologically schizophrenic parents, or double whammy,
biological parents, history of schizophrenia, adoptive parents' history as well.
And here's what they saw.
First scenario, raised in a household where neither adoptive parent is schizophrenic
and neither biological parent was schizophrenic,
what's the chance of schizophrenia in this population that they study?
One percent incident.
And that's roughly what you see in the general population.
Now, let's raise the kid in a schizophrenic environment.
One of the adoptive parents is schizophrenic, neither biological parent is.
And what you see is three percent chance of schizophrenia.
Three-fold increase in, with this sample size, a huge population.
This was a very reliable difference.
Aha, being raised in a schizophrenic household approximately triples your chance of the disease.
Now, the critical one.
Kid is raised in a non-schizophrenic household, adoptive parents, no evidence of schizophrenia.
However, the biological parents, one of them had schizophrenia.
Remember the biological parents from whom you got no environment,
all you got was genes, all you got was genes.
What's the chance of schizophrenia?
Nine percent.
Almost a ten-fold increase.
And for everyone, this settled it.
This was the proof of a genetic component to a psychiatric disorder.
The clearest evidence you could get.
Finally, just as interestingly, you get this scenario of biological legacy of schizophrenia,
adoptive household pattern of schizophrenia, and a sixteen percent chance.
And notice, sixteen is more than the difference between one percent and three percent,
plus one percent and nine percent, you get this synergy going on.
Okay, everybody loved this.
This was just a pioneering groundbreaking approach.
And people since then have done adoption studies looking at incidences of depression,
of anxiety disorders, of alcoholism, and what they very frequently show is a genetic component,
a contribution where when you've gotten absolutely nothing from your biological parents
other than genes and are put into a totally different environment,
that's the way to tell if there's a genetic component.
And by now, you should be able to see what's the confound in that approach,
which is the notion that you get put into an entirely different environment,
that there is no shared environment between the world of the biological parents
and the world of the adoptive parents.
And all you need to do to appreciate that is look at adoption records.
And in our own country, in the United States, there are definitely patterns
where children are often placed, adoptive agencies try to place children with parents
of the same race, the same ethnicity, things of that.
You are actively selecting for a shared environment.
The notion that you have this child who's being adopted, and you sit there and you close your eye
and you spin the globe, and as long as you don't land in the middle of the ocean,
wherever they land there, that's where they're going to be adopted to.
You're randomizing your adoption.
Anything but that, it is not a randomly different environment.
There is, it turns out, a lot of shared environment, often quite intentionally,
between the biological parents and the adoptive parents.
Okay, so that's a problem, that's a problem.
That environment is somewhat overlapping as we will see what dominates the next lecture,
dramatic hint here, and one that is really interesting,
the assumption that if you were adopted away at birth,
if you were adopted away two seconds after you're born,
that you have shared no environment with your biological parents is completely wrong.
And we will see a whole world in which your fetal environment is very much shared with your mother.
Okay, so that's a problem.
Now we go to what's considered the gold standard amongst these folks,
which is to get two individuals who are genetically identical
and are raised in completely different environments.
What's that about?
That's a study you can do in a lab rat very easily.
As soon as a litter of identical animals are born,
you raise them with different mothers, you foster them out.
What's the human equivalent?
Identical twins who are adopted away into different settings.
This is the whole world of identical twins separated at birth.
And if you are a behavior geneticist,
you will gladly stab your competitor for the chance to get a hold of identical twins separated at birth.
These guys, everybody loves these guys.
What could be better than this?
And there's a whole literature that's grown up about these guys by now.
And we're just like these perfectly dramatic differences.
I'm recalling there was some pair where they were adopted away shortly after birth
and one of them wound up in an Orthodox Jewish household
and American, the other one wound up in some neo-Nazi family in Uruguay or something.
And at age 40, they bring together, you know,
Wolfie and Shlomo for the first time.
And it turns out both of them like, you know, the Macarena or something like that.
And it's from there, from that sort of stuff you could begin to infer
identical genes totally different environment yet shared behavior.
Aha, we've got to be seeing some sort of genetics going on here.
And the whole identical twins separated at birth is a very powerful paradigm.
Once again, with the confound of just how different are the environments,
nonetheless this approach has given all sorts of hints of aspects of heritability,
genetic influences on behavior.
And these have mostly fallen into three realms and these are doozies of ones.
As you sit there and say, oh, only three areas,
but nonetheless they are three areas that set up all sorts of red flags.
First one, performance on IQ tests.
And you notice that's weirdly worded performance IQ tests as we know amply by now
performance on an IQ test does not equal intelligence, multiple intelligence,
social intelligence, things not tested for cultural biases to your test.
Forget intelligence, even how you perform in an IQ test,
that is one hell of a label that you can get in lots of societies.
Okay, so estimates from these identical twins separated at birth
that there's a non-trivial heritability to IQ performance.
Next one, introversion, extroversion.
One of the more stable features of personality out there.
What studies usually show is one-year-olds who are introverted,
who are reactive to novel environments, are at more than chance,
likely to grow up to be introverted adults, extroversion likewise.
This seems to be a very stable personality trait.
Interestingly, with all sorts of disease implications,
certain diseases that extroverts versus introverts differ in their propensity stores
and what the identical twins separated at birth studies show
are some non-trivial degree of heritability there.
The third area, and this is one that is real relevant
to the last bunch of lectures in here, degree of aggression.
That's kind of interesting too.
We will come back to that one in great detail.
Okay, so this approach suggesting that take two individuals
who are genetically identical, separate them at birth,
and 40 years later bring them back into your lab
and they have all sorts of behaviors in common,
those behaviors have to have some genetic component.
And this was summarized in this classic perfect cartoon by Charles Adams,
the guy who found the Adams family and his cartoons of New Yorkers back when.
And it shows these two guys and they're sitting in these two armchairs
in what's clearly a waiting office.
And you can see on the door there, out by the waiting office,
you can read backwards through the glass there,
it says something like patent office.
And these two guys are sitting there and they're both dressed identically
and they're both wearing like hip waders and bizarre water whatever
and weird plastic clips on their shirt and they look the same
and in their laps are sitting both identical,
these two bizarre little gizmo machines for no obvious purpose
and the two of them have invented these identical machines
and have shown up identically dressed in this patent office
with the legend at the bottom,
the Malifur twins separated at birth, meet by chance.
And this was the notion of this twin separated at birth,
the identical twins, you see a similarity there
and you're looking at genetics.
So what are the caveats we've got by now?
Okay, if you find something genetic,
does that mean genes are determining not a chance?
Back to last lecture, most of what goes on with genes
is regulation of genes, environmental genes are not sitting there
with the blueprint and running the whole thing.
Okay, so when we've uncovered evidence for something being genetic
we're not talking determinism,
we're talking utter intertwining with the environment.
What's the next thing we figured out, a backbone of all these studies
is the notion that you can get two individuals raised in very different environments
and what we've seen there is that's very frequently a problem,
environments can be similar in all sorts of subtle ways
and settings where you think people are raised in identical environments
they can differ dramatically as well.
Now the other assumption that runs through all these studies
is one that was sort of intrinsic to the adoption studies
whether of identical twins or the KETI style approach
of looking adoption in Denmark and schizophrenia
which is this notion as said before that you have somebody who's given birth
and two seconds after that woman gives birth
the child is adopted elsewhere, thus all the child has gotten from her mother
are genes.
All that is shared are genes, 50% sharing, there is no shared environment.
And the problem with that is the subject of the next lecture
and it's an absolutely fascinating subject
and virtually anybody who plans to reproduce at some point
or who is a fetus at any point finds this to be an enormously unnerving literature
built around the fact that environment does not begin at birth.
If you are a human you have just spent nine months
sharing a very intimate environment, the circulatory system with your mother
and what we will look at in the next lecture
are all the ways in which prenatal environment can influence behavior.
Okay, so some incredibly toxic prenatal environment
which gives you a brain like Swiss cheese at the end.
Yes, it can produce changes in behavior, this is not very exciting
what we will see is number one, some incredibly subtle things
that can go on in the fetal environment that can affect behavior after birth.
Number two, that can affect behavior after birth
all throughout your lifetime and then even be passed on to your offspring.
Inheritance of traits that are not genetic, inheritance passing on of traits
built around the fact that you share environment with your mother when you were a fetus.
So that will be the subject in the next lecture with some really surprising findings.
