Lecture 19, The Neurobiology of Aggression, Part 1
Well, 19 lectures into this course, we are finally ready to try to put some of the pieces of this together.
What have we been doing so far? This broad approach we've had, this whole notion you want to explain a behavior,
you want to understand the biological components of the behavior, there's this terrible temptation to think categorically.
Here's how you explain everything with this bit of neurobiological insight, this hormone, this gene, this whatever.
And as we've had in this chart over and over, instead is our goal to start with a behavior
and to understand not only all these separate buckets starting with the neurons that played a role one second before
and producing that behavior all the way back gazillionaires to the forces of evolution
that sculpted the genes that gave rise to the brain, etc., etc.
Not only to understand the separate buckets, but to see their interactions.
And what we've had so far amid all these lectures were not only introductions to each of these buckets,
each of these categories, each of these disciplines, but a sense of how they began to interact.
What we're now going to do in this final stretch of the course is to look at this integration in a far more detailed way,
finally looking at a set of behaviors.
And as discussed at the end of the last lecture, there's a lot to choose from.
We could now try to integrate these different disciplinary approaches to the biology behavior
in thinking about sexual behavior, or thinking about parental behavior, or language use,
or any of a number of other topics.
What we are going to focus on at length here is in some ways the most interesting,
the most challenging, the most important of topics, understanding the biology of why sometimes we humans
can be so awful to other humans, the biology of aggression.
Now as we have outlined here, what we start off with on the far right of our chart is
what does the behavior look like?
And this is one of those, when we talk about aggression, you can either start off with a
what's behavior of aggression, we all know that, we don't need to get technical.
It's one organism doing something damaging to another organism of its same species,
or at the other extreme you could spend your entire career looking at the fact that
aggression is an extremely heterogeneous state.
Is aggression about a resource that you want that's contested?
Is aggression instead completely absent of that?
Is aggression about long term planned behaviors, the person mapping out their assassination years in advance?
Is it about instead an impulsive scenario where not only could you have had no more than a second to think,
on some level you never did think before lashing out?
Is the aggression about complete spontaneity, or is it about a reaction to somebody else's actions?
And of course one of the biggest challenges in making sense of human aggression is,
we very often can rationalize a way in which all aggression is reactive, all aggression is provoked,
all aggression is coming with a very solid rationale, all these different subtypes of aggression.
Rather than try to go into that in too much detail here, we will see throughout these coming lectures,
when certain aspects of the biology of aggression are better explaining impulsive aspects of aggression,
premeditated so on, probably a good place to start here though, in terms of making sense of the sheer
heterogeneity of these sets of behaviors, is to do one of the things we've been doing throughout the course,
which is to try to frame we humans as just another animal.
Where does human aggression fit in the context of what other animals do to savage each other?
And what's become clear is just as in lots of other realms of biology, we are the only species that makes tools,
we are the only species that communicates symbolically, and those have gone down the drain,
we are not the only species anymore that kills, and that used to be seen as a defining feature of human behavior,
and we've seen plenty of other species so far in this course that will be violent to each other to that extent,
not merely accidental and injury that goes septic, but instead we are not the only species that kills intentionally.
Likewise, what's gone down the tubes is we're not the only species that kills infants,
and we heard already about the viciously logical evolutionary imperative of
infanticide, competitive infanticide in certain species, we're not the only ones who do that.
Furthermore, what's now recognized is we're not the only species that kills in an organized way,
organized violence rather than one individual lashing out at another,
groups of cooperating animals trying to do violence unto another,
and it's not just humans who have something that vaguely looks like warfare,
chimpanzees, for example, will do something built around a lot of the evolutionary logic we've seen already,
which is a band of brothers, and that's a term we will come back to,
but in this case literally a band of chimpanzee brothers or close relatives who will do border patrols
at the edge of the territory of their group, and if finding a male from another group will most intentionally go about killing him.
We are not the only species with organized violence.
Another thing that's not unique to us is we are not the only species that is invented,
come up with the idea of hierarchies, structured hierarchies,
where there's a number one and a number ten and a number twenty with qualities of life working very differently.
We're not the only ones who use hierarchies as substitutes for punching it out with nature,
bloody and tooth and claw over every contested item.
We and other species have evolved things like hierarchies as means to reign in some of our aggression.
Nonetheless, amid this picture of, oh, we're just like other animals,
there's a lot of things that we do as humans when it comes to being aggressive
that have to be viewed as human specialties, if not absolutely unique on our parts.
Nonetheless, things we do like no other species out there to the sheer extent,
and one of the things we're amazingly able to do is just as we can use communication in a very abstracted way,
what most animals do when they are communicating is talking about right now in the present tense,
I am happy, I am scared, I am hungry, I am aroused, I am angry, whatever,
and we instead can talk about philosophy and the Italian Renaissance,
and instead when we get to our aggression, we can have aggression enormously abstracted over place and time.
We can be aggressive to someone on the other side of the planet.
We can be aggressive to somebody whose face we have never seen.
We have a capacity to abstract our aggression like no other species out there.
Similarly, another thing that we do like no other species out there,
we're fortunately only a small subset of us who are among the most psychopathologically troubled of humans,
is we confuse sexual behavior with aggressiveness, and that is very much a human specialty.
Another thing we do is bring a technology to aggression like nobody else out there.
We are the only species that not only has come up with patent offices,
but it means to patent weapons, and weapons of mass destruction in some cases.
Any other species out there pretty much gets by on its muscles and canines and a few other things.
By the time you get to chimpanzees, there will be the occasional use of an object within the realm of tool use.
We are the only ones out there where people can spend careers carefully
building a better, faster, more efficient whatever means to damage another member of our species.
More aspects of our uniqueness, even though chimpanzees, as we just discussed,
can go about organized violence, we are the only species that has organized violence
where the level of organization transcends the local group, the local band.
We've invented militaries, whereas we will see later one of the most extraordinary features of it is
individuals who are not related in the slightest to each other go about giving up their lives
for each other in an organized context of violence.
We are the only ones that have organized aggression on a scale well above that
of the local community of second and third cousins.
Finally, we get to all sorts of subtly weird psychological states.
When we think about aggression, we're the only species out there who can be passive aggressive,
where we have this ability where we can be extraordinarily aggressive to somebody else
to a certain extent by in this perfect right condescending tone telling them,
oh, what a great new hairdo. Oh, they hate it. They hate it. I can't believe they said it to me that way.
We're the only ones who can damn with faint praise. We're the only ones who can do it in that fashion
being aggressive by not just being cooperative, but being exaggeratedly, ritualistically,
so to show how much you're contemptuous. No other species can do that.
Here's a wonderful recent example I heard of the subtleties of human aggression in the realm of passive aggression.
And this was the child of a friend of mine in preschool, and she apparently was not getting along with some other kid
in frequent squabbles, and this was around Easter, and they were all in there painting their Easter eggs,
and some tension broke out between her and this other kid, and she broke the other kid's Easter egg.
Tears, upsetness, the teacher swoops into intervene. We do not do that.
We respect each other's bodies and properties, and you don't break somebody's Easter egg,
and you need to sit down now and paint her an Easter egg to replace the one you broke.
So my friend's kid goes off in the corner and grumbly and resentful and painting away,
and seemingly some scheme begins to emerge in her after a while,
and she's painting away and schemingly looks back now, and then she's up to something or other,
and eventually finishes and comes over to the other kid and says,
here's your stupid Easter egg, happy Easter, and hands her an egg that's been painted completely black.
Hippos wouldn't get what the point is, and suddenly we're in this realm of human aggression
where you can follow the letter of the law, you need to paint an Easter egg for this individual,
but you can savagely violate the spirit of the law, Easter eggs, bright pastel colors,
you don't paint Easter eggs like this unless you're trying to communicate to this kid,
they made me do it, here it is, and I don't like you one bit more than five minutes ago,
and just showing that the other individual was a human and not the hippo,
and that this other individual understood the subtlety of human aggression,
she promptly broke into tears. Hippos wouldn't get the point.
We're the only ones who could do something like that.
Finally, there's another feature of aggression that we have to wrestle with,
and this is one that is so central to the subject and at a certain level,
so at the core of the ways in which we are in trouble as a species.
And let me give you a personal example of this.
Okay, I happen to play soccer. I happen to be a terrible soccer player.
I'm short, I'm slow, I'm uncoordinated, I'm aging, I don't have a whole lot of stamina.
Nonetheless, I love playing soccer, except for the fact that a couple of seasons ago,
there was this one guy I was literally playing against who was younger and faster and taller
and more skillful, and on top of everything else was this phenomenally dirty soccer player,
and he would spend like half the game elbowing me in my ear and that sort of thing,
and there was this one day where I got the ball and in two seconds a brief panic,
I was about to completely boggle it and sort of lamely pass it off to somebody else,
and he swoops in and for the umpteenth time steals it from me,
and I'm really frustrated with this, and he kicks it off to somebody else,
and the two of us, momentum carrying us, still running off to some corner of the field,
I'm really frustrated that he's gotten away from me yet again,
and the fact that he elbowed me in the process of doing that,
and we're running along, and I have about a half second to glance back the balls elsewhere,
everybody else's attention is elsewhere, we're running along, I'm half a step behind,
I'm just being carried by momentum, and without giving it a thought,
I just slip my foot in front of his ankle and just trip the guy up and he goes rolling,
and this is in the middle of the dry season where eight miles from any substantial amount of water,
there's a puddle right there, there's a puddle, he goes rolling into it,
I don't even go through the pretense of, oh sorry, how are you, it was great for the rest of the day,
I was in the greatest mood for doing that.
Mother Teresa, you remember Mother Teresa, saintly, fragile, octogenarian,
what if I had been playing soccer against Mother Teresa,
and had tripped her up into this puddle of mud there, I would have felt awful about myself,
and it would have been the exact same behavior in both of those cases,
and here we have in lots of ways the biggest challenge of studying aggression,
we don't hate violence, we hate the wrong kind of violence,
we will pay good money for the right kind of violence, we will get seasoned tickets,
we will sit on the edge of our seats, we will give medals to people who are violent in the right way,
we will vote for them, we will preferentially mate with them,
we've got no problem with violence as a species,
we just simply have problems with violence in the wrong social context,
and it's the same exact behavior in those two cases,
and what will be the biggest challenge of understanding the biology of this behavior
is not the biology of why some individuals are so abnormally violent in terms of magnitude extreme,
but the biology of why some individuals don't master the rules of appropriate context for violence,
and that is something we will wrestle with again and again in these coming lectures.
Okay, so as is our strategy now, beginning to move our way backward,
leftward on this chart, now having thought a bit about the behavior,
we now begin to look at what's the neurobiology of aggression,
and as you could guess where we are going to barrel into is the limbic system.
Of course, the limbic system, emotion, all of that,
and the first evidence for this was in the 1930s,
something that was called the Cluver-Bucey Syndrome,
where this was an experimental technique that was done on laboratory animals,
experimental technique, this was not subtle,
this was lopping out the frontal parts of the temporal lobe,
this was not a frontal lobotomy, frontal cortex in that case,
the temporal lobes, a different part of the brain, among other things,
taken out a whole bunch of chunks of the limbic system,
and afterward you got an animal that was abnormal in its sexual behavior and abnormal in this or that,
and an animal with very, very odd levels of aggression.
Aha, what people concluded from that fairly crude experiment
was this part of the brain has something to do with aggression.
And it was in subsequent decades that attention began to hone in on an area of the brain
we've talked about quite a bit already, the amygdala.
And the amygdala in lots of ways is the center of aggression in the brain.
We should be very skeptical by now of a word center,
the notion that there's any center in the brain for anything,
this is a part of the brain that is highly implicated,
highly relevant to understanding aggression.
Now, what's the sort of evidence for that by now?
We know the approaches.
You go in and you lesion the amygdala,
you experimentally destroy the amygdala in a laboratory animal,
and you get an animal who has lost the capacity for aggression.
Take out this part of the brain, aggression goes down,
and what you have to conclude is, ooh,
that part of the brain had something to do with mediating aggression in the first place.
The lesion approach.
And remarkably, what is stated as either an experimental approach,
you go in and you destroy the amygdala of a laboratory animal,
or occasionally an accident, a human damaged in their amygdala,
and you see the same thing where it's destroyed.
Every now and then, though, a few decades back,
people would go in and intentionally surgically destroy the amygdala of people,
and this was an enormously, just incendiarily controversial procedure
back when court ordered amygdalactomies,
a notion that go in and destroy this part of the brain
and intractably violent, aggressive humans become much less so.
And this, of course, is a more modern version
of all of the horror stories of lobotomies, frontal lobotomies,
a notion of often trying to fix something that ain't broken,
the notion of, can we ever do something like that to another person?
Nonetheless, what those studies showed was, in some cases,
they destroyed the amygdala of a person,
and some of these were done in the United States,
and aggression goes down.
Okay, so the lesioning approach.
You also have the approach of electrically recording from the amygdala.
What are the circumstances that cause those neurons to have action potentials?
We can have the converse approach now putting an electrode
and stimulating there and seeing,
aha, this does not produce feeding behavior,
this does not produce singing of opera,
this does not, this produces aggression.
This seems to be a part of the brain that mediates it.
More modern techniques, functional brain imaging,
looking at activity in parts of the brain,
while thoughts, while behaviors, while emotions are going on,
using brain imaging to do that,
and once again, amygdala implicated in this.
Another bit of evidence implicates the amygdala as well.
And some people of the right age,
or the right sort of penchant for trivia,
will remember the name Charles Whitman.
Charles Whitman, back in 1966,
was a young man of extraordinary potential,
an eagle scout, a serious musician,
a fine boy next door, all that sort of thing,
who one day inexplicably climbed the tower at the University of Texas
and opened fire on the crowd below,
killing 13, wounding 34 others,
and this was the first case where they rounded up the neighbors who got to say,
oh, such a nice boy, and so quiet,
and we don't understand the first case of not understanding
the unexpected outburst of serial murder of mass slaughter
by the boy next door,
and Whitman killing himself in the process,
and upon examination afterward,
a tumor in his amygdala compressing the amygdala quite dramatically.
Okay, so evidence for the amygdala being involved.
And what we've learned now from our neuroanatomy
is what do you want to do to get any insight into the amygdala
is to immediately ask what projections go into the amygdala,
what parts of the brain does the amygdala get sensory information from,
what parts of the brain does it send information to thereafter.
And what we see in this diagram is very informative.
What influences the amygdala?
Stress hormones, lots of receptors for glucocorticoids,
lots of receptors for testosterone,
lots of pathways that send information to the amygdala about pain,
about fear, and this is a theme we'll come back to frequently.
The amygdala is the place that teaches us the lesson
of how intertwined fear and pain and anxiety
and frustration are with aggressive acts.
Also, the amygdala gets sensory information.
Sight sounds will, of course.
What's most interesting there is it gets it through two different routes.
One is information slowly meandering through the cortex
and we've seen plenty of how this works,
and eventually the cortex lets the amygdala know
some very detailed sensory information.
What is it, that face you just saw, what sort of expression,
what sort of movements in the periphery of your visual field?
However, at the same time, there's an alternative loop,
a faster little side loop that gets to the amygdala with sensory information,
and it's got two characteristics that tell us a whole lot about impulsive violence.
First off, it's real fast.
It's much faster than this cortical route of sensory information,
and second, it's not very accurate.
It doesn't send very detailed pictures of exactly what the expression was.
It sends very, very rough crude stuff,
and it's a pathway which, in lots of ways,
is more powerful in influencing the amygdala
than the more detailed sensory system.
That's a world of just peripheral vision,
and suddenly you act, that's a world of friendly fire,
of shooting before you have time to recognize that's your uniform,
not their uniform, extremely informative.
And where does the amygdala talk to?
Projections outrunning the autonomic nervous system.
Of course, the sympathetic nervous system.
Projections regulating, stimulating the release of more stress hormones.
Projections to motoric parts of the body.
Of course, causing those muscles to flail out,
sending that message to pull that index finger to pull the trigger.
The amygdala has really logically wired up for making sense of these behaviors.
Now, this whole notion of fear, the amygdala of fear,
and we've heard about the amygdala being hyperactive
in people with post-traumatic stress disorder.
Fear, what does fear have to do with violence?
Lots and lots.
An endless theoretical sort of stance is explaining the connection.
Mainly you just see, in terms of the biology, the neurobiology,
you cannot understand aggression outside of the context of organisms feeling fearful,
feeling threatened.
And the transition from flight to fright is overwhelmingly
when an organism feels like they've got no way out,
there's no capacity for flight,
and that's where you get the transition from the amygdala about fear
and escape to the amygdala about violence instead.
Now, what striking is making sense of the things that we fear
and what the amygdala has to do with it.
And there are things that we fear innately.
We don't need repeated experience to understand that pain is something we fear,
find aversive, try to avoid.
There are parts of the amygdala that mediate pure, instinctual, hard-wired aspects of fear,
but far more importantly, there are parts of the amygdala
that learn like crazy, long-term potentiation, things of that sort,
where you can condition fear,
where you can associate fearful responses and sympathetic outflow
with stimuli, with information that never once occurred to you before
as being bad news until you get the experience to prove it to you.
And what you wind up seeing is these aspects wind up becoming overly active,
increased metabolism, as shown in this diagram,
with individuals when they suffer trauma, post-traumatic stress disorder,
and what you get as shown on top,
a circumstance of being shown a frightening face,
and metabolic activity will increase in the amygdala,
and we know exactly, we construct a pathway by now going from your eyes
all the way into those neurons and depolarization, excitation of those neurons,
and then shown on the bottom, you put someone through stress and trauma,
and this is an amygdala for the same stimulation will activate far more, far longer,
and we will look shortly at the cellular mechanisms that explain that.
So the amygdala here is playing a very central role,
and we already heard some of the most disturbing aspects of the amygdala.
For example, it lighting up metabolically when we see a face of another race,
ooh, that's real disturbing,
and just as you're about to attribute that to the part of the amygdala,
having everything to do with the hard-wired innate aspects of fear,
seeing instead in the last lecture, this is learned, this is conditioned,
this is associational, and when you present it in very different ways,
you don't get that outcome from the amygdala.
Now another feature of what the amygdala does is very, very informative.
Again, for making sense of another highly specialized aspect of human aggression,
in males, the amygdala activates metabolically during sex.
A part of the brain, which probably is playing a role there in sympathetic arousal,
speeding up your heart, all that sort of thing,
but what we see is a part of the brain intimately involved in the arousal of violence
is also involved in the arousal of sexuality,
more insights into the subset of us who pathologically intertwine the two.
Now the amygdala, of course, is not the only place that's relevant in the brain,
and one of the themes that already came through in the limbic system is
all the different parts of the limbic system yelling at the hypothalamus
and trying to inhibit each other.
A world of this part of the brain tends to work as the accelerator, this part as the break,
and there is a break metaphorically in the limbic system as well,
a part of the limbic system called the septum.
And you better bet both the amygdala and septum send their projections to the hypothalamus.
You better bet that our collateral projections coming off from an axon
to inhibit some other neuron laterally, that that's the wiring between the amygdala and the septum.
One of them gets excited and is trying to shut the other one down.
In a broad sort of way, the septum does exactly the opposite of the amygdala.
And what's the sort of evidence for that?
Exact same experimental techniques destroy an animal's septum,
and metaphorically you've just cut the break.
You now have a system that is out of control in terms of aggression,
and the term that's given for this is septal rage,
where you get animals that are uncontrollably aggressive, lab rats,
and this is a rather disturbing thing to have to deal with.
Again, the same approach is destroy this part of the brain, stimulate this part of the brain,
record electrically from it, and begin to see what it's got to do with this behavior.
So in this very broad simplifying way, the amygdala and the septum working in opposition.
Now another part of the brain people used to think was involved in aggression,
and this is one called the lateral hypothalamus.
It's just a pathway going through the hypothalamus.
People used to think a few decades ago that this was absolutely central to aggression.
How come?
Because you take some lab rat, and you put a mouse in its cage,
and you stimulate that part of the brain, and it savagely leaps out and kills the mouse
and rips it to shreds and all that sort of thing.
Meanwhile, you do the same thing with a dog and stimulate its lateral hypothalamus,
and it savagely leaps upon the bag of purina dog chow and rips it open.
Oh, this is an aggression, this is feeding,
and you stimulate that part of the brain in a carnivore and a predator,
as is the case with a rat who commits muricide, the term for rats kill mice.
And what you see there is this is a behavior that's got nothing to do with violence.
It has to do with getting your morning cereal in your cup, sort of in your bowl,
wherever you put your morning cereal.
And in this case, this sort of sent people down the wrong path for years,
inadvertently confusing one set of behaviors with each other.
Ow, what do we need?
Let's get ourselves an ethologist to show up here and tell us
what's the appropriate naturalistic setting for that behavior.
Oops, we just spent the last decade studying the wrong behavior,
attributing it to a different category, interviewing the animal in its own language.
Now, another part of the brain gets very active during violence,
and this is brain stem hindbrain areas, and well, that sounds very interesting,
that sounds kind of informative, this is an area of the brain
centrally involved in mediating violence, and this, in fact, is an incredibly boring observation.
Simply because you take those parts of the nervous system,
and they get just as metabolically active during euphoria, during any...
These are the parts of the brain that say, speed up the heart, make you breathe faster,
and whether you are exhaling and breathing in wildly because you're about to be violent,
or because you just won the lottery,
nonetheless, you have to speed up your heart, this is a non-specific part of the nervous system.
And essentially, you look at those neurons, and when they're having action potentials,
and you cannot tell if the person has just murdered somebody or just had an orgasm,
it's non-specific arousal.
And this brings up a concept that's going to run through the coming lectures,
a concept that could be stated neurobiologically,
but instead has been stated just in a beautifully poetic way
by Ely Weisel, Nobel laureate, concentration camp survivor,
who has spent much of his life since then writing about the context,
the philosophical implications that we have to deal with in a world
that could commit the sort of violence that he experienced firsthand,
a wondrous quote of him that he uses often.
The opposite of love is not hate.
The opposite of love is indifference.
In this context, what he is saying is there is this imperative to remember the lessons of history,
to remember the lessons of your own history, and even more importantly in some ways,
the lessons of others' history of suffering.
If we don't learn the lessons of history, we're destined to repeat it.
The opposite of love is not hate.
The opposite of love is indifference,
being indifferent to the history that somebody else has experienced,
never again either to yourself or somebody else's suffering.
When applied in this case, what you see on a remarkable neurobiological level
in areas of the brain like this, the opposite of love is not hate.
In this case, there is a remarkable biological intertwining between the arousal we feel
in our most commendable, our most pleasurable, our most euphoric states,
and the arousal we feel in the most violent ones,
and that gives us a hint of the neurobiology of why we can so often confuse those two states.
So this sets us up now for looking in the next lecture at in some ways
the most interesting part of the brain when it comes to understanding
why some of us are violent and others not the frontal cortex.
