Lecture 21, Hormones and Aggression.
Welcome back to our attempts to pull together all the different disciplines and thinking
about the biology of our behavior, and as has been the case for the last couple of lectures
trying to do this and understanding violence, human violence, dealing with these issues
of why the right kind of violence just feels so damn good and is so reinforcing, and why
the worst kind is the worst things we can imagine.
What is the biology of the appropriate context for aggression, beginning first with what
counts as aggression, what are the human specialties, what are the ones that we in fact share with
other animals, then looking at the neurobiology of this, and very importantly not just the
parts of your brain that contribute to a violent act, seemingly the amygdala essential for
that, but fascinatingly the role of the frontal cortex and often keeping you from doing that
violent act, making you do the harder thing, resisting the temptation, but also seeing
that sometimes doing the harder thing is to do the violent act.
Then beginning to look at some of the environmental triggers and the absolutely logical things
that make us miserable are the things that make us more likely to take out those miseries
on other individuals, pain, fear, frustration, stress, and then beginning to look at the
role of hormones.
And where we left off in the last lecture was the inevitable first subject that you need
to deal with, the role of testosterone and the role of males in disproportionately giving
rise to an awful lot of this planet's violent misery, what does testosterone have to do
with it?
And what we saw at the end were two very important points, which was you see males on the average
becoming a whole lot less violent when they don't have testosterone around.
The subtraction approach, taking out the testes, and in species after species including us
aggression goes down.
The other key point that we finished with is nonetheless aggression does not go down
to zero.
The more prior experience with aggression, the more it persists afterward in the absence
of testosterone, what aggression is about is social learning of it being an appropriate
set of behaviors.
What we pick up now with is looking more at what testosterone does.
Okay, using these classical intercurrent approaches, we've now proven testosterone has something
to do with it, because when it's not there, aggression goes down, when you put back the
testosterone aggression comes up, thus we are wondering whether we can use one of the
most inflammatory words in this business, does testosterone cause aggression?
Is testosterone responsible for aggression?
What we've seen is knowing that there's testosterone on board gives you a fair amount of predictability.
Are you allowed to start using these deterministic words like this hormone is the cause of aggression?
And what you wind up seeing is no surprise given a lot of the skepticism that's run
through this course, it doesn't cause aggression.
What it does is exaggerate pre-existing social tendencies towards aggression.
And if you want a really clunky metaphor to keep in mind, testosterone does not turn on
some radio playing martial military music, what testosterone does is if and only if the
music's already on, it turns up the volume.
Let me show you two examples of that, one from the social realm and one from the world
of individual neurons functioning.
Five male resists monkeys living in a social group and as is typical then they form some
sort of dominance hierarchy, numbers one through five.
Number one makes everybody else miserable, number two makes everybody else accept, number
one miserable so on down the line.
Take number three, number three who is subordinated by one and two, number three who dominates
four and five, take number three and shoot him up with massive amounts of testosterone,
so much testosterone like he's growing antlers on all of his limbic neurons, enormous amounts
of testosterone and what happens to him at that point?
He becomes more aggressive, he becomes more aggressive as in he initiates more aggressive
acts with other resists monkeys, aha, testosterone causing an increase in aggression.
Is number three now challenging number two and one for dot, absolutely not.
What's happening instead is number three is now being just a miserable son of a bitch
to numbers four and five.
Testosterone is not creating new patterns of aggression that were not there before.
Testosterone is exacerbating, amplifying, increasing the volume of what was already
there by social experience.
We see the same principle now played out in our world of single neurons back when a single
neuron sitting in the amygdala, aha, amygdala, real relevant to violence, aha, the amygdala
just teeming with receptors for testosterone, so what happens when you pour testosterone
into the system?
The official scientific answer is it depends, it depends on what was happening beforehand.
If you've got an amygdaloid neuron sitting there silently that has not had any action
potentials recently, flood the system with testosterone and the result is no difference.
It remains silent.
Now in contrast, take an amygdaloid neuron that's firing now and then firing, having
its action potentials throw in testosterone and suddenly the rate of the firing increases.
And you have an answer there, testosterone does not activate those neurons.
And amplifies the effect of whatever was activating those neurons.
And it is not hard to now translate that from our world of single neurons into our world
of how much pain does it take to cause a violent act, how much frustration, how much fear
what testosterone is strengthen the ability of those releasing stimuli in the world around
us to turn that into an amygdala making us more likely to commit a violent act.
Okay, so we've now gotten more sophisticated.
Testosterone officially has something to do with it, but we've just seen the ways in
which testosterone is not causing aggression, it amplifies pre-existing tendencies.
Now we ask the next question about testosterone, which is, can testosterone begin to explain
why one individual is so much more violent than another?
Do small individual differences in the level of testosterone marinating your amygdala
do small individual differences predict small individual differences in aggression?
Does knowing that this guy has higher levels than that guy help predict that this guy is
going to be more aggressive?
Does knowing that you have higher levels today than last week predict more aggression?
At first it looks like that's absolutely the case.
More aggressive individuals tend to have higher testosterone levels that comes to in all sorts
of studies, frequently studies of prisoners, violent versus not violent prisoners, things
of that sort.
Well, that seals it then.
Individual differences in testosterone levels drive individual, nope, not at all.
And as the classic correlation does not equal causality, you look at it and, aha, doing
a violent act raises your testosterone levels.
And thus the individuals who are more violent drive up their testosterone levels more the
correlation comes from there.
Okay, so let's undo that correlation.
Is there any evidence that fluctuations in the level of testosterone in one individual
also winds up influencing the likelihood of aggression?
And it turns out within the normal range of this hormone, not in the slightest.
And here we have a way of presenting this schematically.
Our diagram from before showing 100% levels of aggression in a normally intact male and
female, again, totally artificial numbers, castrate the individual, go down to zero testosterone,
and aggression drops way down to about 25% of normal, reinstated as we saw, raised the
person's testosterone levels back up to 100%, and aggression comes back to 100%.
Now the more subtle thing, castrate the individual and instead of returning their testosterone
levels to absolute normal, return them to only 50% of what they used to be.
Return them to twice as much as they used to be.
What happens to aggressive levels now exactly the same as if it was brought back to 100%.
What that tells you is within the normal range, half the average, twice the average, that
sort of thing, within the normal range, yes, testosterone permits typical levels of aggression.
Yes, testosterone does so by amplifying preexisting tendencies, blah, blah, but individual fluctuations
within that range make no difference at all.
The amygdala is sensitive to a testosterone signal, but the amygdala is not sensitive
to little fluctuations in it.
Take some guy and completely poison him with massive levels of testosterone on the chart
here, 10-fold higher than normal, pump him up with anabolic steroids, and yes indeed, aggressive
levels go way through the roof then, but within the normal range, that is pathologically
elevated within the normal range, individual differences in the level of this hormone
do not predict individual differences in the level of aggression.
What you wind up having to conclude from this is this is not the usual suspect, this
is not the single cause, no hormone is the single cause of anything in behavior, this
is instead a factor.
This factor is shown beautifully in a study I referred to earlier, and what this shows
is what it looks initially like, a real indictment of testosterone, and you look at when males
are likely to commit violent acts over the course of their lifetime, when is the peak,
as we heard already, not in nursing homes, but instead in your archetypally violent 20-year-old
male, late adolescent, early adulthood, and showing in three different societies on this
planet remarkably similar overlapping curves as to when you get your highest levels of
aggression.
And then, as already discussed, you look more closely where these three curves come from,
the city of London, the city of Toronto, and the city of Detroit, and you see tenfold
higher levels of aggression with each step.
What does that tell you if you want to predict levels of violence in one of these urban settings,
what do you want to know?
Do you want to know somebody's testosterone levels to get the most scientifically predictive
power, or do you want to know what environment they're living in by far environment, telling
you once again, yep, hormones have something to do with it, but not that much?
So now we shift to the other side of the equation, what about hormones and female aggression?
And remarkably, weirdly enough, where you need to start off is the effects of testosterone-related
hormones in females.
Females of all outlandish things, including human females, secrete a certain amount of
male sex hormones, androgens, like testosterone, into the bloodstream, out of the adrenal
gland, adrenal androgens, so you ask the same exact questions.
Do circulating testosterone levels in women, like an order of magnitude less than in men,
do they have something to do with female aggression?
And you ask the exact same outcomes of classical endocrine approaches, the subtraction approach,
there's a number of diseases where adrenal glands may need to be removed down, go levels
of aggression.
Aha, do they go down to zero, absolutely not.
Are they reinstated by putting back the androgens, yes indeed, do they turn on aggressive pathways,
know they exacerbate pre-existing, do little individual differences predict not the same
exact punchline?
Even in this unlikely world of testosterone and related hormones affecting female aggression,
it is no more the hormone responsible than in the male, the same sort of punchline.
Okay, what other hormones become relevant for female aggression?
And by far the most important ones to think of are estrogen and progesterone.
Estrogen and progesterone, and a very important feature, a very complex feature of endocrinology,
not so much the levels of estrogen, and not so much the levels of progesterone, but the
ratio of the two.
And on a cell biology level, how some neuron can sit there and can measure the ratios of
two hormones is fascinating, complex issue, but the ratios are important.
When do ratios of estrogen and progesterone change, change dramatically like mad around
one's period, around the time of ovulation, around parturition, giving birth, around the
time of menstruation, and what you see are dramatic, dramatic fluctuations there and
thus get the control a little bit off and very dramatic shifts in the ratios of the
two, and what you see is a whole remarkable literature linking periods of aggression in
females to those points.
In all sorts of non-human species, aggression coming around the time when estrogen, progesterone
ratios and levels are dropping dramatically, and in humans a number of studies showing
a markedly disproportionate percentage of aggressive acts in women incarcerated coming
around the time, the perimenstrual period, the area right around one's period, a few
days before and after the misnomer we have the premenstrual syndrome, half of the symptoms
of premenstrual syndrome are about depression, social withdrawal, the other half are about
aggression and irritability, so that's relevant.
Meanwhile, you see that even more dramatically when you get very similar changes in those
hormones right after giving birth.
What is that about?
What is that about?
That makes perfect sense.
All you need to do is go over the logic of why you don't go over and pick up these adorable
newborn kittens because mom is going to savage you.
It makes a whole lot of sense evolutionarily that the same hormonal changes that signal
that you've given birth to some highly dependent individual who shares half your genes with
you is a really good time to have those same hormonal changes make you real pissy about
anybody who gets too close.
There's a huge logic to why the post-parturitional period triggers an enormous set of endocrine
changes relevant to aggression.
Okay, how about some of the other hormones?
You've got the circulating hormones of the sympathetic nervous system, epinephrine and
neuroepinephrine, perfectly logically you can predict those levels go up during periods
of aggression.
Are they causing aggression?
No, we know that whole song and dance by now.
Are they even interesting?
Not particularly because we're back to the same lesson of two lectures ago, brainstem,
hindbrain activating.
You win the lottery, your adrenaline levels go up, you murder somebody, your adrenaline
levels probably go up, it's a non-specific marker, the opposite of love is not hate,
it's indifference, the same thing again, circumstances of strong emotional arousal with very different
meanings associated with activating the sympathetic nervous system.
How about glucocorticoids and stress and that whole realm of the relationship to aggression?
What we already know is periods of stress increase the likelihood of displacement aggression.
In everybody, no tends to be an individual who already have a strong social propensity
towards violence.
What other things do glucocorticoids do?
Two interesting things, one of the things they do is they increase the metabolic rate
in the amygdala.
Aha, and that's got a whole lot to do with why stress, why trauma can leave you with
a post-traumatic stress disorder as we've seen, an amygdala that's hyperactive, hyperactive
and relevant to fear, hyperactive and relevant to aggression as well.
The other thing interestingly that glucocorticoids do is they impair function of the frontal
cortex and that's why during periods of stress, all sorts of acts that suddenly seem like
the most logical and reasonable thing on earth are just the stupidest things to possibly
do.
We get very imprudent in our decision making during periods of stress and glucocorticoids
is central to doing that.
Okay, so this has given us a very quick overview of our next box.
What do hormones, acute levels of hormones, not back when you were fetus, what do hormones
have to do and fitting perfectly with our model, they're not causing anything.
What they're doing is changing your sensitivity to the environmental releasing stimuli that
do this or that to the nervous system and out pops these behaviors with once again none
of those steps being deterministic, what can you do?
It was my neurons that did it, it was my hormones, it was the environment that triggered it,
instead our theme ad nauseam, the interactions among them.
So this sets us now to move our next step backward, looking at environmental factors,
the pain that came two seconds before lashing out, but long term aspects of the environment.
What does environment and the sort of environmental factors you're exposed to have to do with
levels of aggression?
No surprise given what a big sprawling subject that is, there's been no shortage of people
making careers out of coming up with theories, models about this.
And no surprise also, they have often come with some hidden agendas or not so hidden
agendas, reflecting very much the socio-political system from which the person is coming from
and some very extreme stances, how much do we need to understand environment to understand
to control aggression.
And in some cases, the models, the theories have basically pushed the idea that environment
has nothing to do with it.
Environment is irrelevant and one of the main people pushing that view was our friend, the
noted scientist and war criminal, back to Conrad Lorenz.
Conrad Lorenz, fresh out of jail after his World War II adventures, coming out afterwards,
spent much of the next decade writing a book, which eventually published in the early 60s,
which to my retrospective horror, became one of the most influential books in science
of all times, a book called On Aggression.
And Lorenz wrote a book theorizing as a founding father of ethology and understanding of animal
behavior in its natural context, asking why is it that animals, including we humans, are
violent.
And he came up with this appallingly influential answer, which is to not be facetious in the
slightest exactly what you would expect from a Nazi propagandist that he was, which was
saying, I was just following orders.
I was just following the orders of my biology, aggression is universal, aggression is inevitable.
That was the Lorenzian view.
And it came with a couple of notions.
It even came with the famed Lorenzian hydraulic model.
He had these little diagrams in there of automatic flush toilets.
And literally, that's what these things looked like.
And clearly, that's what he spent a lot of time thinking about during his jail years.
But I seem to be obsessed with this man.
But in his model, you would be having some metaphorical tank of water related to aggression
filling up over time.
And the higher the levels rose, the easier it was for some environmental factor to trigger
the aggression until it gets high enough and it overflows empty's inevitability at
some point you don't even need an environmental trigger.
It is inevitable, it is universal.
Along with that model came another feature of the concreteness of this toilet bowl model,
which is after the aggressive act occurs, you flush the toilet out, you deplete the
water there, for a while afterward you've depleted the system, aggression gets it out
of your system, an aggressive act decreases the likelihood of another one shortly afterward.
And all you need to do is think for three seconds, and you could rip this one apart
from top to bottom, aggression is something we all do in certain circumstances.
Nonetheless, the vast majority of us are never likely to grievously intentionally injure
another human.
But a murder, aggression is not universal, aggression is not inevitable, and aggression
is not self-depleting.
All you need to do is look at the studies of aggressive individuals in crowd settings,
soccer, stadium riots, things of that sort, aggression does not deplete, aggression justifies
and desensitizes you to the next act of it.
Very little evidence for this Lorenzian view of, we're all just following our biological
orders.
Next view comes from a very different realm, classic Marxist interpretation of what aggression
is about.
And it is one that fits readily in with some of the biology we've seen already, aggression
is about frustration, aggression is about resource limitation, aggression is about not
having enough when the other individual does, in a world in which there are no resource
limitations, in a world in which there is not competition for the essentials in life,
aggression will go away.
And what we've seen is, amid that very optimistic view, there's much evidence for it, pain,
frustration, resource limitation as sources of aggression, and what you also see when
you study the literature are all sorts of realms of aggression that are impervious to
factors like that.
There's all types of animal aggression that in fact become more common when there are
a lot of resources.
You see this in young male lions during the peak of migratory seasons where they're eating
like crazy, and as far as I can tell they get some mindset of, okay, our stomachs are
full, no need to hunt, nobody's going to mate with us, so we might as well go out and make
some trouble.
In those cases, not aggression driven by resource limitation, aggression disinhibited by an
ample amount so that behavioral fat is the term often given for it, you can afford to
expend calories on social nonsense like that.
So there's much to support in many aspects of aggression fitting this model of in a world
without deprivation, you would have no aggression.
Meanwhile, the classic American behaviorist school comes up with its own optimistic model,
which is control the whole world, I can turn any child into Dr. Lawyer or Beggar Thief or
a pacifist, turn them into some utopian nonagree, all you need to do is control the rewards
and punishments.
And all you need to do is do that and you can rid the world of aggression.
And all you need to do to see the nonsense basis of that is look at this one enormous
behaviorist experiment we've been having in our country for the last two centuries for
the same violent crime, how likely are you to be convicted, how likely are you to be
put to death, what are the effects of the death penalty on levels of violence, and what
you see is yes indeed instituting the death penalty tends to drive down levels of premeditated
violence.
The person sitting there planning the murder for weeks beforehand, their likelihood of
punishment afterward does influence the likelihood of them doing it, but at the same time punishment
like that institution of the death penalty has no effects whatsoever on impulsive crime
because there's no guy there in the middle of the bar in the middle of the brawl about
to pull out the gun who stops and says, wait a second, what was the vote in the state legislature
last week?
Did that vote pass or not?
You don't think that then because the characteristic of it is you don't think.
Your frontal cortex is way offline, you don't see any evidence there for aggression can
be shaped by the rewards, the punishments, the reinforcers around you.
So lots of these different theories and in some cases no support in some cases mixed
support.
What do you know, as promised two lectures ago we are dealing with a very heterogeneous
set of behaviors, impulse of aggression is very different from premeditated, proactive,
very different than reactive, very different realms, no single unifying theme.
So in that context we could now begin to think about what the actual data show, what things
in the environment of a child influence how aggressive they become as an adult.
And a whole lot of this making sense of this fits within the realm of what happens with
child development.
And initially it's this transition from a realm in which the child begins to differentiate
her or himself from the rest of the world, begins to form ego boundaries and you will
see like a 12 month old child goes through the stage where mom has a cut on her finger
and the child walks around the rest of the day holding their own.
Not out of sympathy but out of a confusion where does mom end and where do I begin.
Now as the self begins to differentiate there, intrinsic in that is you begin to get a sense
of there is a me, a self concept, an extraordinary studies going back decades showing we're not
the only species that has this self concept, a number of primates besides us do as well.
What next becomes relevant is the emergence of what's called theory of mind, the recognition
that other individuals have other thoughts than you do and that's prerequisite for the
next step.
Other individuals have different feelings, different needs, different capacities for
pain than you do and this has been shown in non-human primates as well, extremely subtle
complex experiments showing a chimpanzee can understand what information another chimp
has and can shape its behavior accordingly strategically.
This is generally viewed in the field as the next step, the prerequisite for empathy.
You cannot feel for somebody else's pain until you've recognized somebody else can feel pain
at times that you don't, there is somebody else with a separate experience of the world
and the general view has been a theory of mind is necessary but not sufficient for empathy
until you suddenly deal with a world of kids who are nowhere near old enough for theory
of mind typically around age 4 or so when you first pass formal tests showing this and
then there's the world of 15 month olds where an adult is upset around them and you come
up, you the 15 month old and you try to give the adult your passi.
You try to give the adult your favorite stuffed animal showing you understand they are in
pain and using a very age sort of egocentric notion of an adult not necessarily feeling
better because they're holding your blanky nonetheless that's long before theory of
mind a big issue in the field how much is that true empathy versus how much is it I
just don't like hearing people get agitated and upset around me a distressed reduction
sort of mechanism.
So this sort of dominates the field these days and understanding of how much feeling
somebody else's pain and recognizing they are somebody else is intrinsic to the process
of children beginning to develop this capacity for empathy.
Now another thing critical during learning is one that's run through a bunch of these
previous lectures that business we don't hate aggression we hate the wrong kind of aggression
a whole lot of development being built around not teaching an infant to be more or less
aggressive but teaching an infant the appropriate social context and these were these classic
studies by Harlow we heard about previously the Reese's monkey is raised with the surrogate
mothers other studies where the Reese's monkeys were raised in the absence of mothers in the
absence of peers were they more or less aggressive as adults neither they were just inappropriately
aggressive they had never learned the context and what you often see what primates do as
they are growing up is learn from their mom their place in that primate society who you
can aggress and who you count how to learning the appropriate social context.
Now what you see then is a whole realm in which the pathologies or some of the environmental
excesses can have very interesting consequences for kids and what they deem to be appropriate
context for violence for example the finding over and over that even though most individuals
who were not abused as children who sorry let's do that again even though most individuals
who were abused as children do not grow up to be child abusers nonetheless having been
abused as a child increases your likelihood something about the rationalizing that television
violence does not uniformly make kids more violent it makes kids who are already tending
to be violent more so legitimizing pre-existing tendencies and that's what you see with cultural
differences as well cultures and what the studies have shown that not only emphasize
their historical victim hood but have a credo of what you do when you were a victim is exact
revenge that's a great cultural recipe for producing children who will grow up to be
more violent.
What is also shown and these were classic studies in the aftermath of world war two
various sociologists looking at what sort of societies produce children who see violence
as culturally acceptable authoritarian societies one where blame is externalized don't blame
me it was the people who did this to us we have been the victims and a realm of social
conformity a realm of social rigidity these are the context also children who were raised
in those settings more likely to become violent what we see over and over is not more violent
but what most of us would view as socially inappropriately so what development is often
about is learning the appropriate social context and what you see is depending on who your
mother is or who your species is or what the rules and beliefs and values and myths
are of your society what counts as an appropriate context now what this sets us up for in the
next lecture is now to see the biology of very early experience also which in some cases
can blunt and in some cases very strongly amplify these early experiential features
of when is it okay to do violence onto somebody else
