These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day,
you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or web page
by clicking on the link in the description.
And imagine how much you could learn
if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors
carefully selected by The Teaching Company
and its customers for intellectual distinction
and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Victorian Britain Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Patrick N. Allatt.
Dr. Allatt is a professor of history at Emory University,
where he has been on the faculty since 1988.
He was born and raised in Central England
and received his BA in British and European history
from Oxford University.
He then went on to earn a PhD in American history
from the University of California at Berkeley.
Dr. Allatt has served as a postdoctoral fellow
at Harvard Divinity School
and at the Princeton University Center
for the Study of American Religion.
Dr. Allatt has written and edited numerous books,
articles and reviews.
He keeps in touch with his homeland
by spending two months every year in Britain,
teaching the history of Victorian England
with Emory's summer school program
held at University College, Oxford.
Dr. Allatt is a recipient of Emory's Excellence
in Teaching Award and was recently appointed
to the NEH Arthur Blank Professorship
of Teaching in the Humanities.
Dr. Allatt is also the lecturer
for the Teaching Company course
American Religious History.
Professor Allatt prepared the course guide
that comes with these tapes.
The course guide includes a detailed outline
of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline,
biographical notes and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course,
you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1, The Victorian Paradox
Victorian Britain was a paradoxical society
and a society of extreme contrasts
between wealth and poverty,
morality and cynicism,
creativity and constriction,
imperial grandeur and domestic squalor,
and between collectivity and individualism.
It was a society that was committed
to the ideals of material and moral progress,
industrial and commercial expansion,
and the achievement of worldwide free trade.
But it was a vulnerable society as well.
It was vulnerable to economic fluctuations.
It was vulnerable to the harshness
of the prevailing ideas about capitalism
and eventually foreign competition
intensified Britain's vulnerability.
With the result of that, the majority of its people,
the big majority of the British people,
the working classes and the poor,
lived lives of constant chronic anxiety.
The benefits of British society
were unequally distributed
and that was true throughout the entire period.
Victorian Britain is a society
that's still close enough to us
to evoke our admiration in many ways.
But it's also close enough to us
to provoke our censure in many other ways.
It's difficult not to admire
some of the great Victorian characters
whom we'll be studying in this course.
And it's equally difficult not to condemn
the moral narrowness and hard-heartedness
that some of them displayed.
And it was a perverse society
in the sense that it didn't value
and didn't reward highly enough
its own most necessary qualities.
The thing that made Britain great
was its commercial achievements
and yet commerce was never a particularly
highly valued activity within the British nation.
So at a very fundamental level,
it was a dysfunctional place.
Queen Victoria came to the throne of Britain
in 1837 when she was just 18 years old.
And she reigned for 64 years
and died in 1901 in her 80s.
She reigned longer than any other British monarch in history.
And she governed over a society
that was riddled by paradoxes.
One strange thing is that the very rich
and the very poor lived extremely close together.
Even the biggest city, London, was quite small.
And the palaces of the wealthy
in the west end of London
were often sometimes just a few hundred yards
from the rookeries of squalor and crime and poverty
where some of the most intense suffering took place.
It was an immensely creative society
and yet it was one that was burdened
with a stifling social class system.
And all the way through the course we'll see
the way in which class limitations
created problems within British society.
It took great pride and in some respects
justified pride in its worldwide empire
and yet it was unable to control
its oldest and closest colony, Ireland,
the Irish question,
dog's Victorian British history.
The Victorians took very seriously the idea
that they were racially superior
to the other people of the world,
religiously superior as Anglicans,
and that their civilization itself
was better than those of anybody else.
And yet sometimes it was brutally destructive and cynical.
Perhaps the most notorious episode
is that of the Chinese opium wars
of the late 1830s and early 1840s
where a British army forced the illegal drug opium
into the Chinese market.
Many of Britain's most brilliant intellectuals
lived during the Victorian period,
an incredible category of eminent writers.
And yet they lived in a society which was largely illiterate.
Only probably a minority of the British people
could write at the beginning of Queen Victoria's reign.
So what I want to do in this first lecture
is preview some of the things that Britain did right,
some of its great qualities,
and then to look at some of the things which it did wrong,
and then give some introductory thoughts
about how the course will proceed from this point.
Well, first of all, it was a society
which took seriously the idea of progress.
Progress is an idea, it's not a fact.
It's a way of interpreting some of the things
which have happened to say things are better now,
they're better materially, and they're better morally.
And it's certainly one of the governing ideas
of the Victorians.
Well, they did build up a great worldwide empire
with lasting consequences right up to the present.
The jewel in the crown,
the centerpiece of the British Empire was India.
And an extraordinary development was the Indian Empire
in which by the early 19th century
about 25 or 30,000 Britons
ruled over an Indian population of more than 100 million,
a tiny British presence in a massive Indian population.
And in the early Victorian period,
India was run not by the British government,
but by a private company, the Honorable East India Company.
After 1857, after a series of events
called the Indian Mutiny, which we'll study,
the government took over directly and ruled India from then on
right through until Indian independence in the 1940s.
At the beginning of the Victorian period,
Australia was a prison colony.
It was a place to which convicts were sent.
But the convict's shipping system lapsed,
and Australia itself then became a thriving colony
of white settlers.
Throughout the Victorian period,
Britain was sending out emigrants,
quite a lot to the United States of America,
but more to its colonies,
to Canada, to Australia, to New Zealand,
and to South Africa.
And in each case, Britain invented ways for these colonies
to become self-governing while still connected to Britain.
Britain dominated strategically important places around the world.
The reason the British had gone to South Africa in the first place
was because the Cape of Good Hope
was a staging post between Britain and India
in the days before the building of the Suez Canal.
That was how you got to India,
and that's why the Cape colony was there.
With the building of the Suez Canal in 1869,
the best way to get to India from Britain
was through the Mediterranean Sea.
Britain controlled Gibraltar at the western entrance
to the Mediterranean,
and it controlled Suez and Aden at the mouth of the Red Sea,
and so on.
There were strategically important places around the world
to keep open its sea lanes to India and other colonies.
And in the Victorian period,
Britain became decisively the world's predominant trading nation,
the most powerful trading nation,
building up not only the world's most powerful military navy,
the Royal Navy, but also the largest merchant marine.
There was an enormous cult in the 19th century
of Britain's great naval heroes.
He was called Nelson, who died at the climax of the Battle of Trafalgar
in 1805, defeating the French and Spanish navies.
And all the way through, there were adventure stories for boys
about great English sailors.
Some of it rising to the level of good literature,
the novels of Robert Louis Stevenson are one example,
or a little bit later on, the great works of Joseph Conrad,
a Polish sailor who became a great English novelist.
Well, Britain's greatness was based
upon its industrialization.
And it was immediately before Victoria came to the throne
that Britain went through the world's first industrial revolution.
The first commodity which it made in an industrial way
was cotton textiles,
the cotton coming very largely incidentally from the American south.
So the production of cotton textiles began the industrial revolution
and later it diversified into iron and steel, coal mining,
and many other manufacturers.
It was based first on water power, the use of water power
to drive water wheels to power the factories,
but then very quickly switched over to steam power.
And again, it was the work of people like James Watt
in developing effective steam engines,
which led to the maturing of the British industrial economy.
Britain was the first nation in the world to build a railway network.
And that had an enormous impact on everything else in society.
It brought every town in Britain
within an easy days journey of every other place.
It made it possible to speed up economic life,
bringing goods quickly into the place where they were manufactured
and shipping them out again when they were finished.
It made it possible for the first time for ordinary citizens
to travel great distances.
Until then, Britain had been intensely autochthonous.
Nearly everybody stayed in exactly the place where they started out,
lived and died in the same place.
This remains true to some extent, although it begins to break down
as the Victorian period goes on.
If you've read the novels of Thomas Hardy,
you can often find that the farm laborers, the yokels,
meet together in the malt house, the pub.
And they've always been there, and their fathers have been there,
and their grandfathers, an intensely localized society.
The railway begins to break down some of that localism.
And it makes possible the creation of nationwide marketing networks.
For the first time, it became possible to make a commodity in one place
and sell it everywhere in Britain,
which previously had been very difficult.
It's no coincidence that when the railway network was finished,
it became possible to have professional sports teams
because they could visit each other's cities.
The trade unions became nationwide.
Political campaigns became nationwide.
One after the next, activities which had previously been very local
could expand.
Britain pioneered not only in manufacturing, in industrial manufacturing,
but in all the things which have to go with it.
That is, in the development of modern banking techniques,
in the development of effective insurance methods,
and in legislation for free trade.
So long as Britain was a commercial leader,
it was clearly advantaged by having easy access to foreign markets
and by importing goods cheaply.
Well, Victorian Britain was not a democracy.
It moved gradually towards a democratic political system
during the 19th century.
But it was blessed because it didn't suffer the revolutionary upheavals
which were common in most other parts of the world, of Europe.
The French Revolution had taken place in the 1780s and 90s,
and fear that Britain might have an event like the French Revolution
had caused tremors of anxiety
and continued to do so throughout the 19th century
as France recurrently went into revolution in 1815 and 1830
and 1848 and 1870.
On each of these occasions, there were people in Britain very anxious
that the same thing was going to happen there also.
Political stability is a great blessing,
it's one of the achievements of both the United States and Britain.
And so sometimes in studying history,
we have to be attentive to what didn't happen.
And what didn't happen in Victorian Britain was a political revolution.
The institutions changed and adapted and evolved,
but were never overthrown in some violent upheaval.
The British political system went through a series of changes.
First in 1832, then again in 1867,
and then again in 1884,
by acts of parliament,
the rules governing who could participate in political life were changed.
The electorate was expanded so that more members of the middle and lower classes
were brought into the franchise.
And gradually, by 1884,
it had become possible for working-class people to vote
and even to become potentially members of parliament.
That's the foundation for the creation of the Labour Party.
At the beginning of the Victorian period,
political participation was also very narrowly restricted
to members of the Church of England,
but that also began to expand.
First non-Anglican Protestants could participate,
then Roman Catholics, then Jews, and then atheists.
Bit by bit, the political system was opening up to a larger number of people.
Now Queen Victoria herself and her husband, Prince Albert,
restored the prestige of the monarchy,
which had been very badly damaged by Victoria's immediate predecessors.
The three monarchs who preceded Queen Victoria were, in some respects,
a rather disreputable group.
George III, who was king during the American Revolution
and who suffered from long periods of madness,
George IV and William IV,
rakes, reprobates,
people who brought the idea of the monarchy into disfavor.
Victoria was their absolute antithesis.
She was a paragon of decency and uprightness
and moral backbone,
especially once she'd been married to Prince Albert,
who brought an enormous gravity with him when he came to Britain.
By the end of the Victorian period,
the place of the monarchy in Britain's constitutional monarchical system was secure.
Back in the 1830s, it had seemed a little bit tentative.
Now Victoria was lucky in the sense that she had a whole succession
of extremely brilliant prime ministers.
When she became Queen, Lord Melbourne took her in hand.
She was then 18 and he was already in his late 50s or early 60s.
Lord Melbourne taught her her constitutional duties
and was glad to find her so receptive.
Robert Peel was his successor, a brilliant politician.
Lord Palmerston was the prime minister in the 1850s and 60s.
And then in the later part of her year,
two giants of British political history,
William Gladstone and Benjamin Disraeli,
were the most brilliant parliamentarians in the whole history of the nation.
Well, now along with all these achievements, which are unquestionable,
Victorian Britain had severe shortcomings.
So let's turn and now look briefly or have a preview of some of those.
First of all, most British people were very poor.
And as growing numbers of people went to work in industry instead of agriculture,
they became more vulnerable.
After all, if you live as a farmer,
the fluctuations of the business cycle don't particularly matter.
As long as you're growing food in your own little plot,
there is always going to be something to eat.
And once you're working in industry for wages,
if the work stops, so do the wages.
And that means that suddenly you're in a completely vulnerable position.
There was no welfare state at all throughout most of the Victorian period.
With the result that business fluctuations led to lives of chronic anxiety and instability
for the majority of working-class people,
and could lead to very, very acute privation.
There was a lot of charity.
Victorian middle classes were philanthropic.
But nevertheless, there wasn't sufficient charity to deal with the magnitude of poverty,
which periodically afflicted the nation.
If you were destitute, you had to go to the workhouse.
The workhouse is a widely hated place.
Members of the working class bitterly hated and feared and resented the workhouse.
There were constantly stories that, for example,
the bodies of people who died there were used as food among people who had to go there.
And people would do anything to try to prevent dissent into the workhouse itself.
There was a very sharply defined class system.
And it had the effect of closing off avenues of opportunity
to the most talented members of the lower classes.
Britain's always been an enormously snobbish society.
Class distinctions are very sharp.
And they become sources of friction and discontent.
It was very easy in Victorian Britain to tell somebody's social class by their accent.
They're regionally very specific.
And also class-specific.
George Bernard Shaw's play, Pygmalion, jokes on this,
that Henry Higgins is such an expert
that he can even tell which end of the street somebody comes from by exactly how they speak.
Well, although that's a slight exaggeration, it's only slight.
Regional accents are very, very various and can be narrowly identified.
This is true incidentally just as much of me as of anybody else.
When I'm in Britain, people can tell from how I sound where I come from
and can even speculate very accurately on my social origins and so on.
Well, class antagonism fueled the growth of the British trade union movement.
In America, there's a big ideology of gaining wealth,
of being born in a log cabin but becoming president, of rising from rags to riches.
And this is enshrined in the books of Horatio Alger.
There's not the same kind of tradition in Britain at all.
The assumption in Britain was, certainly then,
that you're born into a certain class and that you stay there
and that your children stay there as well.
Now, that meant that it was relatively easier under those circumstances
for a vigorous trade union movement to develop because people were ready to believe,
here we are in this position, let's get the most that we can for ourselves in this place
because we're not going to be able to move off into some completely different realm of life.
The trade unions grew gradually more powerful in the mid and late 19th century
and eventually created their own political party, the Labour Party,
at the very end of the 19th century.
And that, in turn, was going to displace one of the two major parties in the British political system
and dominate political life throughout the 20th century.
Members of the British upper classes, the aristocracy,
there were certain things they would do and certain things they wouldn't do.
They would work in government.
They'd become members of parliament, a very honourable profession.
They'd become army officers.
They'd become navy officers.
They'd become clergymen in the Church of England.
But what they wouldn't do was that they wouldn't go into trade.
They wouldn't go into trade or commerce or business
because they regarded it as socially beneath them.
It's clearly a mark of downward mobility to have to go into trade.
So this is what I meant at the beginning when I said that it was a paradoxical society
and that it didn't reward and didn't value adequately the activities upon which its greatness was based.
Trade remained something slightly despised beneath their dignity.
Now this meant that British industrialists, although they'd created a lead,
they'd done everything first.
They didn't maintain their lead over their rivals.
So that by the late Victorian period, two rivals, particularly the United States and Germany,
were catching up and passing by Britain.
British manufacturers failed to modernise their equipment.
Now American manufacturers, incidentally even someone like Andrew Carnegie,
he was a Scottish immigrant to America.
Carnegie was a fanatic for modernising his iron and steel equipment constantly.
And when he came back to Britain periodically and looked at the way in which the English steel and iron manufacturers
were still using outmoded technology,
he was astonished by their reluctance to continue to change.
British entrepreneurs who made a great fortune, rather than passing the business on to their sons
and creating a father and son dynasty,
would send their sons to the English private schools, the elite private schools,
from where they'd go into Oxford and Cambridge.
But there they'd learn to get out of trade rather than to stay in it.
They wanted the status which came from buying a landed estate and living a life of leisure.
So again, there tend not to be durable dynasties of British manufacturers
in the way that they were in America and Germany.
Eventually the British business relied on having a protected area, the British Empire,
within which it could continue to conduct its inefficient business.
So a glance at the map in 1900 would give you the impression that the British Empire
bestowed the world and was magnificently powerful.
Well that was true in a way, but in another way to become a sign of weakness,
it was a protected area within which British businesses could operate
without having to face up to the harsh realities of German and American competition.
Now as I mentioned at the beginning, Britain was never able to deal adequately
with the problem of Ireland.
Ireland hamstrung the Victorian politicians, and it was a problem they were never able to solve.
In the 1840s, 1846 to 8, there was a terrible famine in Ireland.
Ireland was agriculturally a monoculture.
Potatoes was the dominant food of almost the whole population.
And a potato blight deprived large numbers of Irish people of any food at all.
There was perhaps as many as half a million people starved to death.
Certainly a million people emigrated to England and to the United States.
And even now, a century and a half later, the population of Ireland
hasn't regained the level of the early 1840s when it was about 8 million.
One of the other great problems in Ireland was that its majority population was Roman Catholic,
whereas the majority population in England was Anglican.
And so in addition to a national rivalry, there was a religious antagonism
which intensified the conflict.
In the 1880s, as we'll see, there was a struggle for home rule.
Ireland wanted to become self-governing within the British Empire.
But a majority of British politicians fiercely opposed it.
Eventually in 1886, William Gladstone, the Prime Minister,
became converted to the idea of home rule
and tried to pass legislation through Parliament to achieve it.
Legislation for Irish home rule passed through the House of Commons in 1893,
but failed in the House of Lords.
Why? Well, because the Conservative Party in Britain,
which was a clear majority in the House of Lords, the second body of the legislature,
was opposed to the idea of Irish home rule.
They took the point of view of the Protestant minority in Ireland.
There are six counties in the northeast of Ireland, the Ulster Counties,
where the Protestants are a majority.
And they were eager to prevent Irish home rule
because then they said we're going to be swallowed up in a Catholic majority.
Now, that's a problem which continued to fester throughout the Victorian period
and finally was only resolved by a bitter revolutionary war between 1916 and 1922.
Well, many colourful and larger-than-life characters lived in Victorian Britain
and we're going to be looking at many of them in the course of this series.
Their work has a resonance right down to the present.
Let me just glance at a few of them straight away.
First of all, Queen Victoria herself, a wonderful person,
absolutely brimming with contradictions and paradoxes.
She hated the idea of votes for women.
She thought that the English feminist movement was pernicious.
And yet she was herself a strong-willed, imperious and very purposeful lady
who knew exactly how to make the most of the monarchy's remaining prerogatives.
Another very strong and capable woman from the same period
is Florence Nightingale.
We'll study her.
An upper-class woman who went off to the Crimean War in the 1850s
and transformed the British medical system for the better
by introducing elementary principles of cleanliness and sanitation and good diet
and helped far more soldiers survive than had been doing so until then.
And it was she who made nursing a respectable profession for middle and upper-class women
where previously it had had a very, very low social status.
We're going to be looking a little bit at the work of Ismbard Kingdom Brunel,
a man with a magnificent name.
He was the man who engineered one of Britain's best railways
and who then built the first series of transatlantic ocean-going steamships
which marked an enormous jump in the safety and reliability of Atlantic crossings.
We're going to look at Charles Darwin.
It was Darwin who in 1859 published a book called
On the Origin of Species by Natural Selection.
And it had a revolutionary effect upon understandings of the natural world.
What is a species? Where does it come from?
It was important not only for biology but also for religion
because it contradicted the Genesis story of the creation,
which until then most people had assumed to be an actual description of what had happened
that God had made all the species distinctly.
Darwin's presenting a picture where that seems not to be true.
In fact, species themselves have origins.
The title itself embodies a contradiction.
We're going to be studying Benjamin Disraeli,
who became the conservative prime minister in the 1860s and 70s.
Nobody was less likely to be prime minister than him,
most of all because he came from a Jewish family
in a society full of racial and religious prejudice
for a Jew, even a converted Jew, one who had converted to Anglicanism,
to become prime minister was an astonishing achievement.
Yet it was he who brilliantly adapted the conservative party
to a much wider electorate
and found ways to give it a continuing resonance into the 20th century.
We're going to have a look at John Henry Newman,
one of the most brilliant Anglican churchmen of the early 19th century,
who scandalized the entire nation in 1845
by doing one of the things which was then regarded as the most reckless act imaginable,
became a Roman Catholic.
The whole civilized society went through tremors of horror at Newman's conversion.
He'll explain why he did it
and why he then went on to scandalize his new co-religionists,
just as he had with the old ones.
And we'll be looking at the work of English writers, people like Charles Dickens.
Dickens's novels were mainly serialized, they came out in stages,
and each episode would end with some cliffhanging episode.
In Britain and America, people would be waiting for the next episode to come out
when the series had finished, sometimes a year and a half long,
the book would be published entire.
And he was not only a very good novelist, but also a great social critic.
And one of the ways in which we get a sense of the nature of the debates
is from his biting satire, as he described injustices in British life.
And so from these people, and from many others like them,
we can see the bright lights as well as the shadows
that made Victorian Britain so distinctive.
Well, now, the Victorian's reputation declined sharply in the early 20th century,
but it subsequently revived.
It declined most sharply, probably during the First World War,
when the young generation which had to fight the war
treated its elders who'd grown up in the Victorian period
as responsible for this terrible catastrophe.
In 1918, Lytton Strachey published his book Eminent Victorians,
which lampooned Victorian high-mindedness.
It took four famous Victorian people, General Gordon, Florence Nightingale,
Cardinal Manning and Thomas Arnold, people with immense reputations,
and denigrated them.
There's a masterpiece of belittling.
A wonderful book, very, very entertaining,
which I'd cancel you all to read if you haven't done so.
After the First World War, the aesthetic style of modernism dominated.
The art of Picasso, the international style in architecture,
minimal, the very opposite of the elaborate decorativeness,
which had been so characteristic of the arts and architecture
in the Victorian period.
So, an austere simplicity now was the favored style
instead of the lavish Victorian styles.
There were always scattered enthusiasts for Victoriana.
One of them was the English poet John Betchman.
Another was an eccentric and lovely artist called L.S. Lowry,
who did lots of paintings of industrial cities,
and the centerpiece of his paintings is Victorian churches covered in sort.
Because Britain was a coal-based society, everything got covered in sort,
and Lowry loved black churches and painted them very enthusiastically.
Well, in the 1980s, and since then, really,
the Victorians have enjoyed a recovery of reputation,
perhaps partly because Mrs. Thatcher, the great British Prime Minister of the 1980s,
summoned up in some of her actions and ideas,
reminiscences of the Victorians.
I certainly don't want to compare the two people.
They're very, very different.
But there was something which they had in common.
They're both obviously very strong and capable women.
It certainly is true that Victoriana, if popular once again,
the art and the architecture of the Victorians is now valued and treasured
in a way it certainly wasn't throughout most of the earlier 20th century.
And even some of the ideals of the Victorians have begun to come back a little bit
into popular circulation.
Now, during this course from here onwards, we're going to do two things.
First, we'll generally follow a chronological pattern,
starting in the 1830s and moving gradually forwards to finish in 1901
at the time of Queen Victoria's death.
But we will have to look backwards a little bit first
to understand the developments and changes in the economy
to make sense of some of the political dynamics of her reign.
And then periodically, we'll pause to look at things like the lives of servants,
ideas about the relationships between men and women,
and some of the music and the art,
which don't lend themselves quite so well to a chronological format.
But that's the way in which the course will now go forward.
Thank you.
