Lecture three, the Industrial Revolution, 1750 to 1830.
Britain was in the middle of a great transformation when Victoria became queen.
In the preceding 50 years, it had taken many of the steps necessary to become a primarily industrial nation.
Agricultural enclosures and the beginning of scientific farming had raised crop yields,
so now it is less necessary for as many people in the population to devote themselves to farming.
Also, the nation had been politically stable ever since the glorious revolution back in 1689,
and this long period of peace and tranquility at home had enabled it to develop a strong commercial infrastructure.
The invention of cotton spinning machines and of steam engines to drive them is what really set off the Industrial Revolution.
Displaced farm workers and a rising population created the labour force and the growing demand for the goods that the factories could now produce.
And people going from agriculture into factory life had to adapt in a way which for us is hard to realise,
learning a new kind of attitude towards time and the seasons and the discipline of industrial work,
by contrast with that of work either in workshops or on the land.
And finally, transport developments and the pursuit of overseas markets, particularly in the Empire,
accelerated the Industrial Revolution by continually generating more stimulus.
Let's look first of all at the agricultural questions.
Historically, British farming had been done mainly on the open field system.
In many parts of Britain still today, when you look at fields, you can see an undulation,
a wavering between shallow depressions and crests.
This is because the fields had been broken up into strips.
A typical parish village would have a series of large open fields divided into strips of land,
and each of the farmers living in the village would have strips in each of the field.
It was a way of sharing out the better farmland.
Each man had the right to graze his own animals on the village common, just a piece of open land,
the kind of common you can still see occasionally in American villages like Lexington.
And each one had a traditional right to gather firewood in the village waste,
an area where it was possible to graze animals, pick up wood.
Now these village communities were very isolated and very insular,
especially in the days before the Transportation Revolution.
So in the late 1700s, it was common for the only two literate people in the village to be the squire and the vicar.
Sometimes not even the squire, or he would have some elementary literacy.
The squire was usually the local magistrate who resolved problems arising inside the little village.
And the vicar, to whom everybody would go to listen preaching on Sundays,
was also the person who'd bring news into the community from the outside world.
So Britain was made up of hundreds and hundreds of these little agricultural islands.
But the enclosure movement was beginning to transform Britain.
It had begun earlier, but it began to accelerate greatly after 1750.
Ambitious landlords realized that farming could be much more profitable
if instead of having the fields broken up into these little strips, they were consolidated and fenced.
Because then it would become possible, first of all, to use some of the new farm machines which were just beginning to be invented.
And it would be possible to do things like selective breeding of animals
rather than having them mingling indiscriminately on the commons.
And in the late 1700s, agricultural chemistry was just beginning, it was in its infancy,
but the idea of farming more scientifically was beginning to attract the attention of more ambitious farmers.
So selective breeding, intensive cultivation, the use of the first farm machines,
and also the introduction of new crops which made different demands on the soil.
Usually what had happened is that a simple rotation system would take place.
A different crop would be grown in the field each year, and then after two or three years
it would be left fallow for a year to begin to recover some of its nutrients.
And now the possibility of using legumes which could actually introduce nitrogen compounds into the soil
started to replace the old hazard methods which had just been used time out of mind.
Now this enclosure system usually required an act of parliament that was expensive and time consuming
with the result that only the more prosperous farmers could hope to participate.
The ones who lived a marginal existence already, the poor cottagers or small holders,
or ones who didn't have a defendable legal title to any of the land,
were often unable to prove that they had a right to participate in this system.
Some of them became either landless farm laborers, they worked for some of the enclosing farmers,
or they migrated out to the new industrial towns.
These were the people who actually provided the labor force which was going to make the industrial revolution work.
Now the depopulation of the British countryside was much remarked upon at the time in the mid and late 1700s.
A famous poem by Oliver Goldsmith is called The Deserted Village,
and it's the description of a village which once had a thriving farm life but no longer,
because one or two enclosing landlords have driven away the poor farmers who lived there.
A couple of lines from it.
Ill fares the land to hastening ills a prey where wealth accumulates and men decay.
Well historians, one of the great debates among British historians is,
why did the industrial revolution take place and why did it take place first in Britain?
It's an immensely complicated debate and I can't really hope to do justice to it in a course of this time.
So just like me, it enumerates some of the principal factors on which nearly all the historians agree.
First of all, this matter of political stability.
It's very difficult to overestimate its importance.
Nobody's going to take the risk of building a factory because of the enormous expenditure it entails.
If he isn't confident that it's going to stay there,
if it's going to be burnt down by an incendiary mob,
or if a dramatic change of regime is going to lead to it being taken out of his hands,
the businessmen had to feel confident that their investment was not going to be destroyed
and that their right to it would be widely honoured in the society.
Over the preceding 100 years really, in the late 16 and early and mid 1700s,
Britain had already got a worldwide commercial interest.
British traders have been sailing across the world.
This is at a time when America was a British colony, when India was being conquered and so on.
These merchants and traders had started accumulating capital.
Now they had the money available to put to work in big new projects.
In other words, the money itself was available.
It had already developed the sophisticated banking and insurance institutions,
which are necessary if you're going to have an industrial society.
Insurance, at first it was regarded with horror.
The idea, particularly life insurance,
the idea that you'd bet against the possibility of somebody's death,
it seemed to be almost sacrilegious.
But it wasn't long before the pioneers of insurance, people like Lloyds in London,
had overcome that idea and started to make a regular business of it.
Now Britain itself had a rapidly growing population.
That itself meant that there were going to be more customers available for the produce of the new factories.
The population of England was about 6 million in 1750.
But by 1830 it was about 13 million.
In other words, it more than doubled in that 80 year period with the rate of growth accelerating after 1800.
The whole British population is rapidly getting much bigger.
That's another thing which is the source of much dispute among historians
because there are so many conflicting factors.
Obviously the population will rise if the death rate falls or life expectancy increases.
Although there are other factors, for example, the falling age of marriage.
More and more British women were marrying younger.
That meant of course that they had more years of fertility
and the possibility of giving birth to more children.
More of these children tended to survive.
It was still an extremely anxious prospect, but slightly more.
There were slight improvements in food.
The yield of British agriculture was going up steadily in the face of these improvements.
There were also some primitive medical improvements such as the introduction of smallpox inoculations at the end of the 18th century.
About 16% of all the people who died in Britain in 1750 died of smallpox.
But by 1850 only about 1% did.
So smallpox traditionally had been one of the great killers and it was becoming decreasingly so.
Certainly the net effect was a rising population.
Now obviously industrialization presupposed certain machines, inventions
and generations of practical, industrious, ingenious men made the stuff which made it happen.
Already before mechanization the subdivision of labor had started to take place in workshops.
The subdivision of labor is important.
One of the great books written in this period is called, it's Adam Smith's book,
An Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations, published in 1776.
Just think about the title for a second, An Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations.
Adam Smith's great puzzle was this.
Why are some nations wealthy?
Where does wealth come from?
You see, we now live in a world where we say things like, why is there still so much poverty?
But it's only because we're very rich that we can even ask that question.
Throughout the whole history of the world poverty had been almost universal.
Still is in many places.
But now some nations were becoming wealthy and Britain obviously was first among them.
And that's what drew Smith's attention.
And he pointed out that one of the ways in which you became more efficient and more productive
was through the subdivision of labor.
If you have one man making a pair of shoes from start to finish,
he won't produce shoes as rapidly.
In other words, he'll produce one shoe.
But if you have 20 men doing it, they'll produce far more than 20 shoes
in the same period that he's produced one.
In other words, you get economies of scale doing it in that way.
And Smith had worked on this puzzle, particularly with reference to the nail making industry,
which is the example he uses.
Well, so once work had been brought together in workshops,
the next stage was to mechanize it.
The very earliest factories relied on water power.
For example, Richard Arkwright, who was one of the pioneers,
built a water-powered factory at Cromford in Derbyshire.
This is very close to my hometown.
And the water in the fast-flowing river Derwent turned water wheels,
which were connected to machinery inside the factory,
which made cotton thread at very high speed,
where previously it had just been done individually by usually ladies with spinning wheels.
The cotton came from the British West Indies.
But then after 1790, it came mainly from the American South.
It was in 1793 that Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin,
which made it possible for American cotton to be used commercially in the development of cotton cloth.
Very, very rapidly after the American Revolution,
Britain and America resumed close commercial relations,
particularly in this matter of cotton,
because cotton was the commodity on which the industrial revolution developed,
and it nearly all came from the American South, the slave South.
Well, after the threat had been made, then handloom weavers would turn it into cloth.
The spinning machines were invented first.
So between about 1780 and 1820, there was a great boom in handloom weaving.
But then, when machines were invented to do the weaving instead,
the handloom weavers went into a great depression,
because they couldn't compete adequately with the factories.
We've got a lovely picture of a handloom weaver.
In George Eliot's novel Silas Marner,
I know it's been assigned to generations of American schoolchildren,
a fabulous book if you don't read it too early in life.
It's about a handloom weaver. He's a miser,
and the way in which his life is transformed by his discovery of a lovely orphan girl.
Well, power looms developed after 1815 made machine weaving possible, too.
And then the application of steam power to these processes of spinning and weaving
made it more dependable.
The problem with relying on water power is that rivers flow at different rates,
depending on rainfall upstream.
There are seasons when the river tends to flow high and be reliable.
But then if it's dry for a long spell, especially in the summer and early fall,
you can't get as much power, and so the factory would tend to slow down.
Steam engines aren't constrained in the same way.
They can run at whatever rate you set for them.
Now, that means that having begun in the countryside,
the Industrial Revolution could then move to town.
See, at first, the factories had to be sited beside fast-flowing rivers,
usually in rural areas.
But once they'd become adapted to steam, they could move into town,
where they'd have the advantage of all being close together
and near port authorities and so on,
so that Manchester particularly became the centre of the cotton textile industry.
This is in the northwest of England,
about 15 miles inland from the port of Liverpool.
And by 1830, Manchester contained hundreds of steam-powered cotton factories,
enough to make cotton cloth for the whole nation and plenty for exports as well.
Now, when historians talk about the Manchester School,
what they're talking about is the economic theory of the Manchester Cotton Factory owners.
They were people who were enthusiastic for free trade.
They said, let's get rid of all tariff barriers
so that we can trade freely with our commodities throughout the world,
and that way we're going to be far more profitable
than if we're confined by customs and excise duties
to having our product being expensive abroad.
One of the most successful of these Lancashire cotton owners
was Sir Robert Peale, who lived from 1750 to 1830,
and he was the father of the man
who became Queen Victoria's second Prime Minister, Robert Peale, Jr.
He made a fortune primarily in cotton manufacture
and left his son about a million pounds
so that the son didn't have to go into business.
The son could become a landowner, a gentleman,
he could even join the Tory party
and become Prime Minister in his generation.
Well, steam power is absolutely crucial,
so a word now about steam itself.
Britain had already been a mining country for centuries,
ever since it was part of the Roman Empire.
Tin mines, iron ore mines, coal, clay, lead, and silver.
But the great problem with mining in Britain
is that we've only got to dig down to the earth a few feet
before the mine starts to flood.
Underwater aquifers are chronically flooding the mines,
and the very first steam engines were developed
to pump water out of mines.
The first ones were built by Thomas Savery
and Thomas Newcomen in the early 18th century,
and they were absolutely vast.
They were as big as a four-story building.
Huge, great things.
There are just two or three of them still operating.
One of the best places to go to visit in Britain,
especially if you're interested in Victorian artefacts,
is the live steam museum in Kew.
This is near Kew Gardens, but it's a wonderful old water work,
so they've got some of these ancient steam engines still operating.
They only rotate about once, well, maybe twice a minute.
They're very, very slow, but each stroke of the engine
with these colossal cylinders could bring up
100 or 200 gallons of water for draining the mines.
Crucial improvements to steam engines were made by James Watt,
and he's the man who's often credited with inventing the steam engine.
That's not really true.
He was perfecting a technology which already existed,
but certainly made them much more efficient
with the result that eventually they could then be miniaturized
to be placed ultimately on moving locomotives.
Now, the steam engines in turn needed a source of fuel,
and coal was the fuel.
There was a lot of coal mining in Britain already,
particularly in Newcastle-on-Tine.
This is in the northeast of England, near the Scottish border.
And there was plenty of it.
Already by 1800, a million tonnes a year of coal was being mined
in the Northumberland cold fields.
The result was that everything was covered in soot,
or at least everything in urban areas.
Coal in huge quantities was shipped from Newcastle-on-Tine
down the east coast of Britain to the port of London,
and London itself was a massive importer of coal.
Everybody had a coal fire for keeping warm,
and that's how cooking was done as well.
Very, very dirty.
Until 1952, London had awful fogs.
The London pea soup fog was a famous,
actually dangerous source of pollution.
The fog would form around gross smog particles in the air.
So that once legislation was passed in the 1950s
to get rid of the smoke, the fog disappeared as well.
London hasn't been a foggy place since the 1950s,
but it certainly was all through the 19th century.
There's an area near Birmingham called the Black Country,
and it's black because everything is covered in soot.
Now, Princess Victoria, when she was a 13-year-old,
travelled through this area in a carriage,
and this is what she wrote in her journal then.
This is the 13-year-old Victoria before she became Queen.
We just passed through a town where all coal mines are,
and you see the fire glimmer at a distance in engines in many places.
The men, women, children, country, and houses are all black.
But I cannot by any description give an idea
of its strange and extraordinary appearance.
The country is very desolate everywhere.
There are coals about, and the grass is quite blasted and black.
I just now see an extraordinary building flaming with fire.
The country continues black, engines flaming,
coals in abundance everywhere, smoking and burning coal heaps,
intermingled with wretched huts and carts and little children.
So, there we are.
The early industrial revolution was water-powered,
but then it moved into the cities,
and in doing so, it concentrated a lot of fire in the same place
to create levels of atmospheric pollution,
which we regard as absolutely intolerable,
quite apart from all the other sanitary problems they had.
Another very important component of this industrialization
was the iron and steel industry.
Now, again, iron and steel have been made for, well, several thousand years.
We know that the Romans, for example, were good at iron technology,
but it was put onto a completely different scale in the 18th and early 19th centuries.
One of the great pioneers here was a man called Abraham Darby.
One of the few cases, actually, where there is a dynasty from father to son to grandson,
passing on the factory.
This was in a place called Colbrookedale in Shropshire.
It's near the border of England and Wales,
and now the whole area has been converted into a museum of industrial archeology.
So, again, if you're minded to do such things when you're in Britain,
go and have a look at Colbrookedale.
It was there that the Darby family discovered how to create coke,
to smelt iron with coke.
This is a very important invention because, until then,
the only way of making good quality iron and steel, particularly,
was by burning charcoal.
But Britain had been so heavily populated for so long
that there wasn't very much forest, and you needed a lot of wood to make charcoal.
Wood was a scarce commodity.
Darby discovered that by preheating coal,
you could drive off a lot of the sulfur compounds
and actually convert it into coke,
which could then be used for steel smelting.
And that discovery meant that the steel industry,
far from being in danger of becoming extinct,
as some people said it was in 1730,
started to thrive as never before.
It was there, in Colbrookedale,
that the world's first iron bridge was built.
And again, you can go and see it.
It's still there now.
The town where it was built has been renamed Iron Bridge.
And it's lovely.
It's a delicate span, a single span across the River Severn.
Until about 20 years ago, cars were still driving across it after 200 years.
Now it's been closed off, but it's still there to see.
One of the Darby family's great rivals was a man called John Wilkinson.
His nickname was Mad Iron,
because he was keen on building everything out of iron.
Apparently, he'd say to his wife,
great news, I've got some new plates,
and instead of being China, they were all made of iron
and the knives and forks.
He was the first man in the history of the world to build a boat out of iron.
Now all his friends and neighbors thought this was a hilarious idea
because they were familiar with the fact that if you take a piece of wood
and throw it in the water, it will float.
But if you take a piece of iron and throw it in the water, it will sink.
They all said, this is bound to sink.
But Wilkinson himself understood Archimedes' principle.
The important matter was that if a boat is hollow,
the weight of the water it displaces will be greater than the weight of the boat
plus the air inside it combined.
And so bets were held and everyone was waiting for the great day of the launching
and there were jokes, a carnival atmosphere,
and it was a barge, it wasn't an elegant boat, it was just a barge,
but it floated and that had immense significance as well
because from then on, the superior qualities of an iron ship
over a wooden one became clear.
They rocked much more slowly, they're less infested and so on.
When he died, he was buried in an iron coffin.
He was a man whose whole life was dedicated to the possibilities of iron.
Well, the final component of the early industrial revolution
was improvements in transportation.
Road transport was difficult before the mid-18th century
because the roads were so bad, there were now hard roads at all,
which meant that every time it rained, they tend to get swampy and heavily rutted.
Well, there were a handful of roads that the Romans had built.
The Roman roads were still by far the best ways of getting about,
nearly two millennia later.
But most of the roads were just what we'd call dirt tracks,
and there were very few bridges, which meant that every single little stream
that you came to, we'd flash across them in cars in an instant
and never think twice about them, but then every little stream was a problem.
You'd go lurching down into the valley, wade across and up the other side.
It meant that wagons couldn't carry very heavy loads because they'd become bogged down.
They'd have to stop altogether for bad weather.
And it also meant that long-distance haulage, which had to be done mainly by pack horses,
was extremely expensive.
If you carried a commodity a hundred miles,
you'd nearly always pay more for the transport costs
than you would for the actual value of the device itself.
There was some river traffic, but most of Britain's rivers
aren't very navigable for long distances
because of seasonal variations in the amount of water
and waterfalls and rapids and so on.
There was a coastal trade, like the coal trade from Newcastle down to London,
but it was always vulnerable to rough seas.
So the building of canals in Britain, really the first great leap forwards
in industrial transport technology, was vital.
The perfection of lock technology, whereby you could actually take a canal over a hill,
made it possible for a network of canals to be built throughout Britain.
They all went into decay after the completion of the railroad network,
but in the 20th century they were restored.
So now once again you can actually see Britain's canal network.
It's now a pleasure boat complex,
but it was one of the arteries along which the first industrial generation
conducted its business.
The early industrialists had to overcome some psychological problems,
as well as some technical ones,
and probably the hardest was to train people to become factory workers.
As I said, many people living in farmland weren't literate,
and what they certainly didn't have was a clock.
There weren't very many clocks.
They were difficult and complicated to make and very expensive.
If you look at the design of early factories,
they nearly always have a clock tower as one of their central features.
This is true of Archite Mills in Derbyshire, for example.
And one of the first things the boss would do was teach the worker how to tell time,
because he'd got to get it into their heads
that he wanted them to come to work at a certain clock time.
You see, the rhythm of agricultural life is quite different from that.
If you live in farming countries,
especially then, you got up when it got light,
and you went to bed when it got dark,
and you worked when it was light.
Now, because Britain's much further north than most of the United States,
that meant that you didn't work very much in the winter,
because it's mainly dark.
But conversely, in the summer, when it gets light at four in the morning,
when it gets light right till 10 at night,
you'd work very long hours.
But there'd be great differences.
Now, what the new industrialists were saying to their workers was,
we want you to work for 12 hours a day,
whether it's winter or summer.
That sounds like a common sense idea to us,
but to them it was a revolutionary idea.
And in fact, they found that.
If they'd say, right, you report for work at six in the morning,
and you'll work until six at night,
in the summer, they'd show up early.
But in the winter, you couldn't get them there.
They were converting from seasonal time to clock time,
and saying whether it's light or dark doesn't matter anymore.
These were the pioneers of things like gas-light illumination inside the factories.
So they teach the workers how to tell time
and give them some rudimentary sense of industrial discipline.
Very often also, workers' housing would be built close to the factory
so that workers could walk there.
And there'd be a series of whistles.
There'd be the getting up whistle,
and then five minutes before the factory was due to,
before the shift was due to start,
there'd be the ready whistle,
and then five minutes later, the start work whistle.
And they imposed severe fines on people who were late.
The fines had to be big,
else the workers wouldn't take it seriously.
Certainly, when we look at the accounts of the animals of the early factories,
a constant battle to try to get people to go there and work
for the regulated number of hours.
These early owners were very often non-conformists.
That is, they weren't members of the Church of England.
If you were an Anglican, you tended not to be interested in these things.
It's really the Congregationalists and the Quakers and the Baptists
who made the running in the early days of British industrialization.
And they were Puritans.
They were morally ascetic and severe.
They tried to impose a new discipline, an industrial discipline on their workers.
In the textile factories, the work wasn't particularly hard.
It was mainly a matter of machine-minding,
just watching to make sure that the threads didn't break
in both spinning and weaving,
so that they often had a greater need for female workers,
or even for children, than they did for men.
And this was a period where, the first half of the 19th century,
there was an immense rise in the number of children working in factories,
sometimes for very long hours under very harsh conditions.
It was extremely monotonous and deadening work, too.
Well, the low levels of skill and the low wages meant,
for many of these industrial workers, hardship, hard times.
And one of the most effective of Charles Dickens' novels is called Hard Times,
where he parodies the hard-hearted economic logic
of this first generation of industrialists.
Certainly, in their intolerance and zeal to transform these workers' way of life,
they were laying the seeds for a harvest of great bitterness later in the century,
as the trade union movement developed,
and as workers and employers became more and more alienated from one another,
each one thinking that the other one didn't take its needs sufficiently seriously.
Here's a German businessman called Harcourt,
visiting Manchester factories,
being astonished by what he sees in about 1825.
Mechanisation and the incredibly elaborate division of labour
diminish the strength and intelligence which is required among the masses,
and competition depresses their wages to a bare subsistence.
And he said,
every time there's a slump, an economic recession,
they're thrown temporarily out of work.
Quote,
then a mass of miserable humanity is exposed to hunger
and to all the tortures of want.
Now, these were also the circumstances in which
two famous revolutionaries were growing up, Karl Marx and Frederick Engels.
They were both German,
but they both spent most of their lives in Britain,
observing very closely.
In fact, Engels himself was sent to England to be a factory manager for his father,
who was an industrialist.
Engels became horrified by some of the sights he witnessed
in the rapidly growing industrial cities,
and with the help of his friend Marx,
both of them together became outspoken critics of this new industrial system,
and foresaw the days when, as they thought,
the workers would rise up and throw off the tyranny of the owners.
But from our point of view,
first of all, we know that Marx and Engels didn't get it right.
They thought there was going to be a socialist revolution in Britain,
which we know is not right.
We have to take seriously both sides of the equation.
Despite their hard-heartedness,
this first generation of industrialists were very brilliant people
to work out the techniques and the devices,
both financial and mechanical and psychological,
was an astonishing achievement,
and they did lay the foundations for Victorian commercial greatness.
