Lecture 4 Railways and Steamships
Railways built on the early technological achievements of the Industrial Revolution
and they literally accelerated the nation's economic life.
The very earliest railways in the world were primitive horse-drawn systems
in Northumberland, in the coal fields.
And it's no coincidence that the first great railroad builder
should himself be a mining technologist, George Stevenson.
He took advantage of the miniaturization of steam engines,
which had gone on during the preceding hundred years,
and with the help of his son, Robert, built two of the first great railways in the world,
the Stockton and Darlington Railway, and then the Liverpool and Manchester,
which was finished in 1829.
And these railways proved conclusively that it was a viable technology
and that it could be highly profitable, both as a carrier of people
and as a carrier of goods.
The Stevenson's were dominant particularly in the north of England
and their great rival, Isambard Kingdom Brunel,
perhaps the most prominent of the southern railway builders.
He built the Great Western Railway in the 1830s.
And by 1850, every major town in Britain was connected by railway line
and London had ready access to all points of the British provinces
so that the pace of transport all over the country had dramatically increased.
Parliament legislated to make sure that there were some elementary safety rules
for the early trains, though they were very dangerous,
and also to make sure that ordinary people had access to the trains.
And together, this entrepreneurial ingenuity and political supervision
ensured that the railways were going to be great stimulus to further economic growth
throughout the Victorian period.
Brunel, the southern railway builder, went on to create the first generation
of ocean-going steam ships.
The first ship, the Great Western, was the first steam-powered ship to cross the Atlantic Ocean.
Hit and its successors, the Great Britain and the Great Eastern,
made ocean crossings far faster and far safer and more predictable
than they'd ever been in the days of sailing ships.
Well, railways themselves predated steam technology.
The very earliest ones were extremely simple devices built in mining areas
where you had the problem of moving a bulk solid coal over short distances.
And the earliest ones had wooden rails and very simple horse-drawn wagons,
designed usually to take the coal from the pithead where it was brought up out of the ground
down to a loading wharf ready for shipment by sea.
The miners were familiar with the fact that there's so much less friction involved
in having the wagons running on a rail rather than on a road surface
that it's possible for a horse to pull a much greater weight of coal
if it's in rail wagons than if it's on the ground.
And that's the insight they were taking advantage of.
Now, in Cornwall, another mining area of Britain,
Cornwall in the extreme southwest and Northumberland in the extreme northeast,
mining engineers were constantly improving the quality of steam engines
and building them smaller until in the end it was possible to have them small enough
that they could be loaded onto a trolley and become self-moving.
That's what a locomotive is.
The first great name in this process is Richard Trevethick.
He was a Cornish mine-draining engineer and Tinkert experimented with these early locomotives.
One of his friends bet him that he couldn't build a steam locomotive
and he was confident that he could and finally built one, a self-moving locomotive
which ran on a mine railway in South Wales.
But it was so heavy that it broke the rails.
That's one of the early problems before they'd learned how to miniaturise them.
But in 1808 he built a more effective one.
The locomotive was called Catch Me Who Can.
And he went to an area of London which is called Euston.
It's the place where Euston Station is today.
And built a circle of track.
It's like the kind of thing that you have around a Christmas tree.
And built a fence around that.
And the Catch Me Who Can just had two little wagons and it ran around in a circle
and you had to pay out a few pennies to go through the fence
and have a ride in the train if you dared.
And it regarded as a great sensation.
But Travethic, although he was an extremely capable technologist,
didn't really have the staying power to develop it into a practical technology.
In fact he spent most of his life wandering around the world
working briefly in different mining projects in different places
and died penniless.
Now his northern contemporary George Stevenson was different from that.
He was a mining engineer as well.
And it was he to whom the credit usually goes
of building the world's first viable railway, the Stockton and Darlington,
begun in 1821 and finished in 1825.
This was a railway which used iron rails throughout its distance.
Now Stevenson himself was self-taught.
This was in the days before there was any technical education in Britain.
He'd become an apprentice at the mine and he'd become familiar with how the engines worked.
And he'd be in and out of the blacksmith shop tinkering with metal devices.
And so the early railway was built by trial and error.
It wasn't at all a matter of engineering graduates putting it together.
There was no such thing.
One of the locomotives on the Stockton and Darlington railway was called the locomotion.
And its average speed was about two miles an hour.
It was very slow.
A great, ugly, hefty, wheezy thing pouring out smoke and sparks.
And every now and again it would have to stop altogether to gather up its energy before it could carry on.
So it was no express.
But nevertheless, it was very powerful.
It could pull a long train of coal wagons.
And so as he watched it and as people who understood these things watched it,
they recognized the possibilities inherent in the technology.
The coaches at first were very simple, open-air wagons.
In fact, on this railway, the very first passenger trains weren't entrusted to the locomotive.
They're given to the horses.
So the first passenger trains would be a horse going up and down the track.
But by 1826, 27, passengers were being pulled by the steam locomotive as well.
Now the gauge of the track, that is the distance between the two actual rails,
was four feet eight and a half inches.
That was the standard gauge in the Northumberland Collieries.
And it became the standard gauge on British railways.
And indeed, it became the standard gauge throughout almost all the world.
American railways have that gauge.
Why?
Well, it's partly because a lot of the expertise was originally brought from England
when Americans began building their own railways.
And they inherited a gauge which was familiar and wagons which were already done,
the early locomotives.
So from one place to the next, standard gauge was carried throughout most of the world.
When the Stockton and Darlington Railway opened in 1825,
the quarterly review, this is a journal, London Journal, editorialized,
quote, what can be more palpably absurd than the prospect held out by this railway
of locomotives traveling twice as fast as stagecoachers?
Nonsense.
Well, within five years they were.
I mean, the rate of improvement of the machines in the late 20s was astonishing.
Stevenson learned a lot from his experience in building the Stockton and Darlington Railway
with the result that when he got his next big commission,
which was to build the Liverpool and Manchester Railway,
he was able to do it better.
Now, Liverpool and Manchester were already important places.
Manchester, because that's where the cotton factories were.
And Liverpool, because that's the big port which had thrived on the Atlantic trade.
Cotton ships coming from Savannah or Charleston would come into Liverpool.
It had created its fortune, partly as a slavery port.
Ships would go out from Liverpool to Africa and then over to the West Indies
and to the American South.
So the idea that of linking Liverpool and Manchester by railway had enormous commercial possibilities.
It even crossed a swamp, which everyone had said until then was impossible,
but the Stevenson's worked out how to do it.
This is George and his son, Robert, working with him.
They decided to hold a competition to see who could build the best locomotive
and then to give the contract for building more locomotives to the winner of the competition.
And it was Robert Stevenson himself who built the best of the locomotives.
A trial was run called the Rainhill Trials at a section of this line.
And the rocket, which was the name of the locomotive that Robert Stevenson built,
proved it was able to run for long distances at 30 miles per hour.
Now, the rocket still exists.
If you go to the National Railway Museum in York, one of the most interesting places in the whole of Britain,
you can still see the rocket. It's a wonderful little thing.
But unfortunately, its early history was tainted by the fact that of the official opening of the railway,
it killed somebody in Britain's first railway accident,
it killed the President of the Board of Trade, a man called William Huskesson.
One thing that's hard for us to remember is this.
We think if you're going at 30 in your car, you think of it as rather slow and restrained.
We're familiar with much higher speeds than that.
But then 30 miles an hour was almost unimaginably fast.
Can the fastest galloping horse go at 30? I'm not sure, maybe only just.
Ordinary people certainly had never been that fast.
It was a terrifying rate.
And we know a lot from the history of early railway accidents
that people didn't realize how quickly the train was coming towards them.
Here's an account of what happened to poor old William Huskesson.
And it's taken from the biography of George Stevenson, written by Samuel Smiles.
Quote, the rocket engine was observed rapidly coming up.
At this moment, the Duke of Wellington, who was the Prime Minister,
the Duke of Wellington between whom and Mr. Huskesson some coolness had existed,
made a sign of recognition and held out his hand.
A hurried but friendly grasp was given.
But before it was loosened, there was a general cry from the bystanders of,
Get in! Get in!
Flurried and confused, Mr. Huskesson endeavoured to get around the open door of the carriage,
which projected over the opposite rail.
But in doing so, he was struck down by the rocket.
And falling with his leg doubled across the rail, the limb was instantly crushed.
His first words on being raised were,
I have met my death.
Which unhappily proved too true.
For he expired that same evening in the neighbouring parsonage of Eccles.
It was cited at the time as a remarkable fact that the Northumbrian,
that's another of the locomotives,
the Northumbrian conveyed the wounded body of the unfortunate gentleman,
a distance of about 15 miles in 25 minutes,
or at a rate of 36 miles per hour.
This incredible speed burst upon the world with the effect of a new and unlooked-for phenomenon.
So in other words, the ambulance train can go at 36 miles an hour.
That was a real sort of amazement.
So, not surprising, the railway became an instant success,
and it certainly contributed to the continuing development of Liverpool and Manchester.
The porotas had had in mind that it would carry goods,
but they found that it would carry passengers as well.
Very quickly, a thousand people a day were travelling back and forth on the line.
Now the Stephenson's father and son were the premier builders in the North.
Further south, Isambard Brunel was the great figure.
He was the son of a French immigrant,
who was also an engineer and an inventor.
And it was Brunel Sr. who got the contract to try to build the very first tunnel under the River Thames.
He made his son, Isambard, who wasn't yet 21, the project manager on the spot engineer.
And young Isambard was very nearly drowned when the tunnel caved in and flooded and had to be abandoned.
The work had been very, very difficult,
partly because the River Thames in those days was the only drain that the City of London had got.
Everything was poured into the river.
It was unbelievably filthy.
So the bed of the river was just a great mass of slime and sewage, 50 or 60 feet thick in some cases.
Even so, they were making fairly good progress with the tunnel
when they hit a place where the underwater quarrying had taken place.
A quarry man had tried to see whether he could get gravel from the river bed
and had dug much more deeply down into the river bed, in effect making a deep spot which they didn't know about.
So when they encountered this place, water started pouring in under very high pressure
and the builders just managed to get away in time to save their own lives.
Well, young Isambard, undeterred by this and many other escapades in his early engineering career,
built for himself a special stagecoach called a britchka.
And it had built into it a bedroom and an office.
It was like a miniature, I suppose it's a predecessor of the RV, something like that,
a vehicle which he could go around by horseback.
And he'd look for work which he thought suitable to his talents.
He's one of the most egotistical men in history who was convinced that he was always right.
He must have been very, very difficult to work with.
But along with that was a great genius.
One of his early projects was the Clifton Suspension Bridge in Bristol.
And again, it's something which you can still see.
It crosses a high gorge and a very precipitous place.
And it's a wonderful example of the daring and the beauty also of early Victorian building.
He competed for and won the contract for the building of a railway from Bristol to London.
Now, Liverpool was the premier port in the north of England
and Bristol was one of the premier ports in the south of England.
Again, it's facing westwards and it had grown mighty on the London trade,
sorry, on the America trade.
And the prospect of trains between London and Bristol, again,
would contribute to its further development.
It was a great battle to get the Bristol and London Railway built.
He called it the Great Western Railway.
That was his name for it.
Partly because there wasn't enough expertise in Britain in general
for the undertaking of work of that magnitude.
Building a railway is incredibly hard work and there's a lot of capital
because you, first of all, you have to acquire the land.
And then you have to level the land.
Trains can't run up or down steep hills.
They can't really go on gradients more than about one in 50.
In other words, one foot of rice for every 50 feet you've gone along.
So if you're crossing ordinary hilly country,
you have to make embankments and cuttings and sometimes tunnels
to create a more or less level track bed all the way.
And of course, over every single stream, you have to build a bridge.
There's an enormous amount of elementary preparation of the track bed to be done.
And Brunel had endless difficulties with subcontractors
who didn't realize the scale of the work they had to do
and very often went bankrupt while they were trying to do it.
So to read his account of the difficulties he endured
and getting the railway ready is very striking.
He budgeted it at about £2.5 million.
He said the whole thing could be done for £2.5 million.
But in the end, it came to more than three times that much.
We're all familiar with engineering cost overruns.
The buying of the land itself was very, very difficult.
The Great Western was spending £7,000 per mile just to buy the land.
And to get a comparable contemporary figure,
you'd probably have to multiply that by about a thousand
to get a sense of how much it was costing.
Now Brunel sometimes made matters worse for himself.
By believing that he alone understood the problems
that they were having to deal with.
He didn't always treat his contractors or his own assistants entirely fairly.
And he would browbeat even his most loyal supporters.
Such as his locomotive engineer.
The man who provided the locomotives was called Daniel Gooch
and he's credited as one of the great railway builders.
Gooch told him,
at the moment Mr Brunel, you're planning locomotives which aren't powerful enough.
Brunel said, no, no, I know better.
And actually created the first generation of underpowered locomotives for the railway,
even though Gooch could have told him that.
What really made the Great Western different from most of the other lines
was the fact that it was on a seven foot gauge.
He'd been for a ride on the Liverpool and Manchester railway,
Stevenson's railway, and found it very uncomfortable.
And he said, if we put the two pieces of line further apart,
we'll have broader carriages that'll be more luxurious inside
and the ride itself will be smoother.
Well that proved to be true.
Everybody who rode on both the Liverpool and Manchester and on the Great Western
agreed that the Great Western gave you a wonderful ride.
It was extremely well engineered track.
Very few steep bends, high speeds all the way.
They were soon going at 60 all the way along from Bristol to London and so on.
But of course, seven foot gauge was very impractical.
It would be like building computers where your keyboard didn't conform to the standard keyboard.
The fact that everybody did use it made a great incentive for everyone to carry on using it.
And it meant that everything had to be specially built for the Great Western
and couldn't be transferred onto any of the other lines.
Eventually in the 1890s it was changed.
They changed the gauge of the railway and had to gravely modify or abandon all their equipment.
But for a long time it went on as the great anomaly in the whole system.
Later on, Brunel also extended the Great Western railway,
taking it further and further into the west country of England.
This is the extreme southwest from Bristol down to Exeter and Plymouth and Cornwall.
And it crossed over the River Tamar on the Devon-Cornwall border
over a wonderful bridge called the Royal Albert Bridge, as usual named after Prince Albert.
Well the success of these early lines led to what was called railway fever.
The investors in these early lines made a great fortune.
And so the idea spread about, particularly in the City of London,
get into railways. Railways always make a profit.
Unfortunately, fail-safe schemes never are fail-safe, are they? They're nearly always too fail.
Some lines were planned and built which clearly ought not to have been
because they were between two minor places where there wasn't any particular trading need.
So for every successful railway there were quite a lot of failures.
One of the things which made it so difficult to build them was that they were being built
through very, very heavily populated country, especially the ones in the urban areas.
Now that meant that before you could begin building, you had to have an act of parliament for each line
because you had to get the right of eminent domain.
That is the right to compulsorily buy the land on which the railway was going to run.
Parliament would grant these acts, but the lobbying was time consuming
and very often bribes changed hands to make sure that you'd get the right combination
of members of parliament voting for your line.
Some members of the Houses of Commons and particularly the House of Lords
would only vote for these lines if they were going to go near to their own estates
if they were given a promise that they themselves wouldn't be able to see the line.
Now the place where I went to school, this is in a village called Atwall in Derbyshire,
my school was built on the estate of a local gentleman called Sir John Port,
he's called the John Port School.
And a railway line ran near to the school, but between the school playing fields
which had once been part of the Lord's Park, there was a big embankment
and it didn't go anyway, it just went up one side and down the other.
And I learned that the reason it was there was so that Sir John Port, looking out of his windows,
wouldn't have to see the trains.
You'd see a column of smoke, but that would be it.
This kind of deal had to be made, one of the many difficulties in getting them done.
Farmers were terrified that having a great roaring locomotive rush past
that sparks from the chimney would set fire to the crops
or that the cows would be so traumatized that they'd no longer give milk as sort of anxiety
which also had to be overcome by the first generation.
Now as I say, lines in minor countryside districts very often never did make any money.
They went bankrupt, didn't live up to the speculators' hopes.
Here's a description by Charles Dickens of a bankrupt railway.
He was the editor of a journal called Household Words,
and this is from a story written in 1858 about a bankrupt railway.
The long, silent panorama of the direct Berrygold railway passes before me.
The whole line in chancery choked and stiffened by the icy, relentless hand of legal death.
The Berrygold station, once so full of life, is now an echoing and deserted cavern.
Its crystal roof is an arch of broken glass, its rails torn away,
its rooms and offices are empty and boarded up,
and its walls are defaced with old ghastly time bills,
the mocking records of its formal wealth and activity.
The railways had to overcome numerous critics, the farmers, sometimes the gentry,
but also of course the people who were going to be put out of business by them,
the stagecoach operators, the stage owners battled as hard as they could to prevent these things from being built.
So did the people who had invested heavily in canals.
Between 1780 and about 1830, that was the golden age of the canal operators.
Now they could see that although their technology worked,
it was much slower that the canal boats went at one or two miles per hour.
The trains were going at 30.
So they lobbied hard against railways.
Nevertheless, the sheer potency of the technology meant that very quickly it displaced all its rivals.
Now the government recognized that it should regulate railways to make sure that they had some elementary degree of safety,
but also it quickly saw that it could take advantage of the existence of the railways for its own uses.
So in 1838, the post office, the Royal Mail, decided that it would send its letters on the trains.
That of course had the effect of greatly accelerating the postal service.
And in 1840, one of the post offices senior officers, Roland Hill,
decided that they were going to experiment with a revolutionary new way of sending mail.
That is that the sender was going to pay for it.
Always until then it was the recipient who paid for the letter.
Or it could be more sensible than that.
You're the person getting the letter, you should pay for it.
And apparently there are stories that the letter would be brought and presented and the person would read it and say,
I don't want this.
And they were declined to pay for it.
Roland Hill said, let's do this.
Let's make it much, much cheaper than it's ever been before.
And let's make the sender pay.
And so he introduced really what was in effect the first modern postage stamp.
It cost one penny.
It was begun in 1840 and then you'd send it that way.
He was right too.
Sure enough, bulk mailing began at exactly that time.
A businessman could start writing to people working for his concern all over the country,
cheaply and quickly.
The letter could get anywhere in Britain in one day already by the 1850s.
Now in 1842 the Houses of Parliament passed a law requiring that the Board of Trade
should certify railways for safety before they opened.
The safety standards weren't very strict and accidents were still very common.
But nevertheless there was some elementary regulation there.
In 1844 Parliament specified that all railways had to run at least one train every day for passengers
and that the price of travelling on that train couldn't be more than one penny per mile.
That had the effect of opening up railway travel to large sections of the population.
It was still a lot, still a lot of money for people, many of them were very poor.
And nevertheless it created the circumstances in which vacations by railway for ordinary working people
could become possible.
These were called the parliamentary trains.
Some of the companies resented it.
They didn't like the idea of having intrusions from the government.
This is also the period of intense belief in laissez-faire that businessmen should be left alone
to run their business however they wanted.
So by 1850 a network 6,500 miles long had been completed,
linking up all the major places in Britain.
And that made possible all sorts of things.
It made nationwide marketing possible.
It created national professional sports leagues.
It meant businessmen could travel rapidly from one place to the next
while keeping closely in touch with their headquarters.
And in fact it shrank the nation.
It made places which had once been weeks away in the north of Scotland
the space of a day or a day and a half away.
And of course they were an immense stimulus to other industries, iron and steel,
for the actual building of the trains and the coal mining industry
because the fuel which fueled the trains was also in great demand.
The experience which Brunel got in railway building,
he put to good use in building ships as well.
He built the Great Western in 1838.
That was his first great steamer and the ship was named after the railway company.
Now for once in his life he admitted that he didn't know very much about this technology
and so was actually willing to take help and the project benefited from it
because it was better for his collaboration.
Now skeptics said it's hopeless to try to build a steam powered ship to go across the ocean.
There were already boats which should go up and down rivers like Robert Fulton's boats
on the Hudson earlier that century.
But people said to go 3,000 miles across the ocean
needs such a lot of fuel that the whole cargo space of the ship
will be full of the fuel to get you there.
But Brunel said that's not true because with iron building
we're no longer confined in the size the ships can be.
They can be immensely bigger than the biggest wooden ships.
We can build them as long as we want.
And the longer a ship is the faster it can go.
I don't understand the physics of this, I just know it to be true.
So he said we'll build long ships which will have plenty of storage capacity
in addition to their fuel and they'll be faster.
They'll make the crossing more quickly.
Well the Great Western was built in 1838
and caught fire on its trial cruises.
So at first there were some difficulties.
And Brunel was almost killed in the fire on the Great Western's trials.
He was running down a ladder into the engine room to help put out the fire.
When he fell through the rungs of a ladder which had burnt through
and he crashed down 20 feet on top of another man
and then fell face down unconscious in the water there.
But luckily the other man wasn't knocked out and was able to pick him up
and drag him back to the deck.
So again his life was providentially saved to carry on working.
The Great Western was launched and set sail from Bristol to New York.
This is in 1838 and it got there just ahead of another steamship
which was also trying to get the honour of being the first one.
This was a ship called the Sirius, a much smaller ship
which had the misfortune of running aground as it approached New York
because it hadn't taken a pilot on board.
So it was the Great Western which finally steamed in
and has the honour of being the first transatlantic steamer.
Well they had endless problems with the paddle wheels.
They were constantly failing and most of the early steamers had masts as well
so that if the engines and the paddle wheels broke down
then they'd revert to sailing in the old way.
But even so they were a massive advance on sailing ships
because so long as you were sailing
you were completely at the mercy of the wind and the currents.
A good Atlantic crossing by sailing ship took six weeks
but the steamers were doing it in three or four, much much less.
It could go direct.
If you went in a sailing ship you had to begin by sailing south-west
to pick up the prevailing winds blowing from east to west across the Atlantic
and when you were coming back you had to go far to the north
to pick up the trade winds going home again.
That was no longer necessary with the steamship.
It could go directly back and forth.
It became possible to actually schedule the times at which they'd leave and arrive
and they would do so with increasing degrees of reliability
so that regular emigration ships, steerage ships became possible
in the 50s and 60s and so on.
All sorts of advantages to the steam technology.
Well, Brunel made another great series of advantages with his next ship, the Great Britain.
It was the first liner built with propellers instead of paddle wheels.
The propeller technology had been perfected about 1840
and straight away he said, yeah, we should use that.
It's going to be better.
He'd planned it originally as a paddle wheeler
and when he commissioned a man called Francis Humphreys to build the engines
and he said to Humphreys, when the job was half done,
we're switching the entire thing.
We're going over to propeller screws instead of paddle wheels.
Humphreys were so horrified after doing all this work
for this dreadful boss that he collapsed and died.
Just to give you an idea of the changing scale of these ships,
the Great Britain had a hull of 3,000 tons
and that was the time when the biggest sailing ships were about 600.
So it was an enormous leap in magnitude in the scale of the ship itself.
It was so big it couldn't even get out of Bristol dockyards
except on the day of the highest tide of the year, the Great Spring tide
and even then Brunel had to dismantle the locks to get the ship out into the estuary.
On its maiden voyage to New York in 1845,
it broke the record by arriving in just 14 days.
When it ran aground a year later, everyone said,
oh, it's lost, we'll never get it off.
But Brunel also worked out some ingenious salvage techniques
to get it back afloat and carry on working.
The biggest ship Brunel built was called the Great Eastern
and this was designed to go all the way from England to Australia without refuelling.
Again, an apparently impossible task, that's something like 8,000 miles.
It was so big that no other ship was built of similar scale for the next 40 years.
That's how far ahead of its time it was.
It was built entirely in watertight sections,
which again has become the standard way of building ships from then right up to the present.
But Brunel, as usual, made difficulties for himself.
He feuded ceaselessly with the builder, Russell,
who was himself a brilliant marine technologist
and finally forced Russell out of the business altogether,
even though he ought to have been kept.
The first attempt to launch the ship failed and it had to be done again
and man was killed on those slipways and so on.
And finally in 1859 Brunel himself became sick.
He witnessed the ship being launched and he witnessed its first cruises
but never saw it actually go on its own maiden voyage because he died in 1859.
Having worked himself to death, he was still a young man but had worn himself down.
There was incredible daring and ingenuity.
So there we are.
The Stephensons and Brunel were a generation of incredibly brilliant and adventurous and daring engineers,
larger than life figures, who left a very vivid imprint on Victorian Britain
by creating these great technical advances on which the whole society was going to continue to build
for the rest of the century.
