Lecture 5 Parliamentary Reform and Chartism
Britain was not a democracy in the 1830s.
Supreme power rested with the Prime Minister rather than the monarch,
and the Prime Minister was the leader of a parliamentary majority.
Only about 5% of the British people voted for members of parliament MPs,
and they did it in public rather than by secret ballot,
which meant that every election day was an opportunity for intimidation and bribery,
which had become integral parts of public political life.
Constituences for the members of parliament no longer corresponded with actual clusters of population in Britain,
because so many changes had taken place over the last 200 years.
The big industrial cities had no representation at all.
To correct that situation, in 1832 a Whig government under Lord Grey introduced the Reform Act,
and in the face of bitter opposition from the Tory party, it abolished many of the old constituencies,
created some new ones, particularly for the industrial cities, and guardedly expanded the franchise.
Working class men were still excluded from the vote, as were all women.
But nevertheless, there was an expansion in the scope and size of the political nation.
Working class people disgruntled at being excluded became recruits for the Chartist movement,
under the leadership of William Lovett and Fergus O'Connor.
And a series of great rallies by the Chartists enabled them to win a lot of support among the working classes,
although they were never able to convert their people's charter, their plan for a more democratic political society into political reality.
Well, the British Constitution has never been a written document.
It's very unlike the American Constitution.
Instead, it's a system which has evolved over the generations.
Parliament has its origins back in the Middle Ages as a council of advisers to the medieval kings.
At first, the House of Lords was clearly the senior of the two branches,
because the Lords were more nearly the king's equals as landowners and warriors.
But the House of Commons became progressively more important,
and in the 17th century asserted itself, particularly during the Civil Wars of the 1640s,
trying to ensure for itself a permanent place in the British Constitution.
And its members comprised the wealthy merchants from the City of London and the smaller landowners,
who in the localities were essential because their cooperation with the king made it possible for taxes to be raised.
The Glorious Revolution of 1688-89 had established the supremacy of the Commons and the subordination of the monarchy to Parliament.
It was clear after 1689 that Parliament was always going to have a permanent role in the Constitution, and in fact, the dominant role.
But as I said, by the early 19th century, so many shifts in population had taken place,
and so many shifts in the nature of wealth and influence,
that the representation in Parliament didn't at all represent the actual condition of the British nation.
And there were various notorious inequities.
One of them was places called the Rotten Burrows.
Rotten burrows were depopulated places, areas whose populations had dwindled over the last 200 years,
but which still had two seats in Parliament.
A famous example was a place called Old Serum.
This is just outside the city of Salisbury.
It only had seven electors by 1832, and yet it had two members of Parliament.
Another abuse, or what was perceived to be abuse, was the pocket burrows.
These were burrows where no real election took place,
because a local big landowner was able, in effect, to nominate a candidate of his own and say,
I'll give you this seat in Parliament.
In other words, the constituency was in his pocket.
It wasn't really open to a free election of any kind.
The big new manufacturing cities, particularly in the north of England,
Manchester and Liverpool and Birmingham and Sheffield,
had very large populations, but no members of Parliament at all.
Now, there's an enormous patchwork of local custom dictating who got to vote and who did not.
There was no standard principle governing the whole country.
For example, in the constituency of Preston in Lancashire, all the men could vote.
It was a very unusual constituency.
In many others, hardly anybody was allowed to vote,
and there were usually particular property qualifications.
But in any case, a wide variety of rules governing who got to vote.
And as I said at the beginning, nobody had a secret vote.
When county elections took place, it was usually in the counties that the ballots were most fiercely contested.
The candidates would have to bribe the voters, sometimes just by giving them drinks or dinners or treats.
Or if the voters were the tenant farmers of a landlord and that landlord or his nominee was running for office,
you'd be very rash not to vote for your landlord's candidates.
Let me read you a little passage from George Eliot's novel, Felix Holt,
where she describes an election and the way it used to go on in the days before the Reform Act.
Mr. Transom is one of the landowners.
Mr. Transom's tenants come together to vote.
And his opponent is called DeBarry.
But DeBarry's supporters have created a kind of gauntlet that the voters have to run as they approach the balloting place.
And one of Mr. Transom's tenants is a rather simple-minded man called Mr. Goff.
Here's what she says.
Mr. Goff was cut off from his companions and hemmed in,
asked by voices with hot breath close to his ear how many horses he had, how many cows, how many fat pigs,
then jostled from one to another who made trumpets with their hands and deafened him by telling him to vote for DeBarry.
In this way, the melancholy Goff was hustled on till he was out the polling booth filled with confused alarms,
the immediate alarm being that of having to go back in still worse fashion than he had come.
Arriving in this way after the other tenants had left,
he astonished all hearers who knew him for a tenant of the Transoms by saying,
DeBarry, and was jostled back trembling amid shouts of laughter.
In other words, he's so rattled he votes for the wrong man.
Well, now this eccentric system did have its defenders.
One of them was Edmund Burke, the late 18th century theorist,
one of the great conservative theorists who said,
it may be true that in the abstract this system has got imperfections,
but nevertheless it's an organic growth that's developed naturally over the course of centuries,
and it's far better to keep it than to wrench it asunder on behalf of some new abstraction.
Other people, like the radical writer William Cobbett,
said it's a disgraceful system and it's corrupt from top to bottom.
He called it old corruption, and he argued for a rationalised representative alternative
in which the various groups of the population in Britain really were properly represented in Parliament.
Another group of critics were the new manufacturers, the industrial manufacturers,
because they were now in a situation where their wealth was growing very rapidly,
but they still didn't have political representation commensurate with it.
The Prime Minister in the early 1830s was Lord Gray,
and he recognised that reform of Parliament was necessary.
He was subjected to more and more pressure from around the country,
particularly from clubs called political unions,
which were arguing that political reform was necessary.
Gray himself was a Whig, a member of a political faction which combined very wealthy aristocrats,
the Whig aristocracy, with the merchant elite and most of the political intellectuals of the day.
They claimed to be the adherents of a far more enlightened and rational approach to political life,
although sometimes it was a slightly hollow claim.
Let me read you a very sharp remark about that from Karl Marx,
who lived in Britain from the 1840s onwards and was a very shrewd observer of British political life.
Marx says,
I think that's a very accurate summary of the paradoxical quality of the Whig party.
Their opponents, the Tories, represented the smaller aristocrats and landlords,
the country gentry, the backwoods gentlemen.
They were opposed to the idea of reforming Parliament because they sensed that they'd be weakened by it,
but they'd drawn into their ranks some very influential and effective men.
One of them was the Duke of Wellington, the great hero of the Napoleonic Wars,
and another was Sir Robert Peale, whom I've mentioned on various occasions already in the course.
There was the son of a manufacturer that had now gone over to the Tory interest.
Now it's impossible to overestimate the fact that the members of the British governing classes
were afraid that something like the French Revolution might happen in Britain as well.
The French Revolution had guillotined the aristocracy and the King,
and then it had raised up Napoleon, against whom Britain had fought a desperate war for 20 years.
In 1830 there was a new French Revolution, and it revived fears among the gentry in the aristocracy
that the common people might try to seize power if they weren't mollified by judicious reforms first.
I'd like to read you a fragment now of a speech made by Thomas Babington Macaulay in Parliament
during the great debate which took place over whether Parliament should be reformed.
He said, we need to give more parliamentary representation to London,
which is one of the underrepresented places.
The city, he said, is in more danger of mob rule if it's not politically represented than if it is.
Listen to what he says.
By refusing to let eight or nine hundred thousand people express their opinions and wishes in a legal and constitutional way,
you increase the risk of disaffection and tumult.
Why is it that the population of unrepresented London,
though physically far more powerful than the population of Madrid or Constantinople,
has been far more peaceable?
Why but because they have other means of giving vent to their feelings,
because they enjoy the liberty of unlicensed printing and the liberty of holding public meetings.
Just as the people of unrepresented London are more orderly than the people of Constantinople and Madrid,
so will the people of represented London be more orderly than the people of unrepresented London.
In other words, give them legitimate outlets in addition to freedom of meeting and freedom of the press,
give them proper political representation, draw them into the nation rather than freeze them out.
Now the debates over the Reform Act aroused intense interest throughout Britain.
For example, William Gladstone, who later on was to be a Liberal Prime Minister himself,
was then an undergraduate at Oxford, but he took five days off from his studies and went down to London
and sat and listened to the debate in the House of Lords, 50 hours of debate.
When he got back to Oxford, he gave a speech at the Oxford Union, the Students' Debating Society at Oxford,
and spoke so eloquently against the Reform Act in those days he was a young Tory.
The Duke of Newcastle at once offered him one of his pocket boroughs, in other words said,
as you leave Oxford, we'd be glad to have you representing our interest in Parliament.
And that was his first seat, in fact, for the City of Newark.
Well, Lord Grey, the Prime Minister, was able to persuade the King, King William IV,
this is all just before Victoria became Queen, that it was better to offer moderate reforms first
than to be forced into violent reforms later.
But when the legislation was introduced, there were chaotic scenes in Parliament.
This is in the years 1831 and 1832.
When the proposed bill was read aloud for the first time, the Tory members of the House hooted and jeered
as each of the 60 rotten boroughs which they proposed to abolish was read out.
There were great cries of dismay and shouts of horror from the Tories.
And the House of Commons refused to pass the bill.
Some of the wigs also were reluctant to go along with changes of this kind.
So the Prime Minister, Lord Grey, resigned and asked for the holding of a general election.
The way it worked in those days was that there had to be an election at least once every seven years.
The Septennial Act governed that.
But there could be a reform more frequently.
The system is similar today, incidentally.
There has to be an election every five years.
But there can be one more frequently if in the judgment of the Prime Minister, he's well placed to win a victory.
Or if a vote of no confidence has led to the Prime Minister being defeated inside Parliament itself.
So Grey dissolved Parliament and called for an election.
And again, there was a very vigorous campaign with intense interest all around Britain.
In places demonstrations, too.
The Duke of Wellington, who was one of the Tory leaders, had the windows of his house smashed in the centre of London.
Grey had been right in his estimate that there was widespread public support for reform in the nation.
And the result was that in the ensuing election, a pro-reform majority was elected.
The new House of Commons passed the Act.
But the House of Lords, through which legislation also has to pass, still refused to do it.
Now, when news got around England that the House of Lords had rejected the Reform Act, again, there was a wave of rioting in Derby and in Nottingham.
There were great riots in the street.
In the city of Bristol, the jail was burned to the ground.
In some cities, newspapers with black edges were published to say the nation itself is in mourning over the rejection of this legislation.
Lord Grey asked the King to create some new Lords, if necessary, to outnumber the current members.
Now, this is one of the interesting aspects of British political life.
The King has the right to create peerages, to make new people Lords.
And so periodically, when the House of Lords has felt threatened in one of its most intimate interests, the Prime Minister has been able to say to the King or Queen,
we'd like you to make more people into Lords.
Because by doing and obviously then listing who they want to be ennobled.
So in the end, you'll have a majority of Lords made who can then pass the legislation.
Now, of course, that's the kind of action which is likely to make the current Lords rethink.
Because obviously, if suddenly a lot more people get made into Lords, the title itself loses some of its prestige.
If you are a Lord, you'd probably rather have less other Lords in the nation than more.
And so this is the threat which can be held over the heads of the currently sitting Lords.
Well, at first the King refused to do it.
This is at a time when, although the King's prerogatives are clearly declining,
nevertheless, if he refuses to cooperate, a political deadlock can then see you.
So when the King refused to make more Lords, Lord Grey resigned.
The King said to the Duke of Wellington, will you make a ministry?
Will you make a ministry which will carry on according to the old system?
But the Duke of Wellington had a good grasp on certain realities and he said,
it's impossible for us to continue to hold out in the face of this kind of popular enthusiasm for reform.
Briefly, for about a week between May the 8th and May the 15th of 1832, Britain didn't really have a government.
But meanwhile, the Duke of Wellington was trying to persuade the King and trying to persuade various of his colleagues in the House of Lords
that they'd got to make the necessary concessions.
He was able to persuade the Anglican bishops who sat in the House of Lords that they should vote for the legislation rather than against it.
Otherwise, they'd put the church itself in the position of seeming to be opposed to what was widely being construed as necessary national reforms.
And finally, he was able to persuade all the sitting Lords either to abstain from voting altogether or to vote for the Reform Act.
So finally, only 22 of the Lords went to the war right to the bitter end and refused to endorse the Act.
Now from our vantage point, when we look back on the Reform Act, the great Reform Act as it's called,
what strikes us is how mild and incremental the reforms really were.
They don't have a particularly radical look from our vantage point, but obviously we're looking at it from the point of view of a universal democracy.
Many of the rotten boroughs and many of the pocket boroughs were abolished.
Many of the industrial cities got members of parliament for the first time.
41 new towns, boroughs, were given members of parliament for the first time.
And this meant that the northern industrialists in particular were now given the opportunity to have direct representation in parliament.
And in the ensuing decades between the 30s and the 70s, a great many of the industrialists actually became members of parliament.
And they tended to have very strong links with the constituencies from which they'd come so that the interests of Manchester and the interests of Liverpool and Sheffield
could be directly represented in parliament rather than simply virtually as previously.
Even so, they were still relatively underrepresented as the urbanization of Britain continued and as the industrialization of the nation intensified.
There was still a relative overrepresentation of the rural counties and a relative underrepresentation of the cities.
The criterion for voting was standardized throughout the nation in place of this great hodgepodge of qualifications which had existed previously.
Now a uniform system was established, specifying ownership of property which was either a 40-shillings annual rent in the countryside or 10 pounds value in town.
But even after the Reform Act, only about 20% of the whole male population could vote, about one man in five, so that the rise in the electorate was still less than 100%.
Voting also, the franchise was in effect biased towards the south of England because it was in the south that property values were higher and therefore it was more likely that you'd qualify for the 40-shilling freehold vote.
And one of the reforms which didn't take place was the idea of the secret ballot.
Balloting remained public and therefore it remained subject to all the abuses which had beset it previously.
And a lot of representatives of both parties thought that a public ballot was right.
They thought that if you were going to vote for somebody, you should be fully willing to say in public who you were going to vote for.
Here's Lord John Russell, who himself later on was Prime Minister.
He says, what pitiful figures we should cut sneaking up to the ballot box, looking with fear to the right and to the left,
and dropping in our paper the contents of which we are afraid or ashamed to acknowledge.
In other words, how dreadful that would be to vote secretly.
Secret voting was already taking place in America, but regularly news came from America about ballot box stuffing.
The fact it is done secretly, it's very easy to get control of the balloting machinery and vote for your own candidate.
And so the English defenders of the old system said, much better to do it our way, less abuse.
The place where the Great Reform Act had the biggest effects was probably in Scotland.
There, the total number of voters rose from about 4,000 in the whole country to about 64,000, a big increase.
Well, after 1832, landowners and landowners retainers continued to dominate Parliament.
They did have a larger mix of commercial members than previously.
And observers noticed a rise in the quality of the debates in Parliament in the ensuing decades,
and particularly a rise in the quality of what were called the Blue Books.
That is the reports that members of Parliament wrote about various pressing issues of social equity and urban reform, reform of the church, and so on.
And of course, the Reform Act established a principle that reformers of Parliament can be undertaken.
And this is always the case. Once reform has been undertaken once, it establishes the principle that reform is something that Parliament does,
and made it that much more likely that subsequent reforms were going to take place thereafter, which has remained true right up to the present,
at the very beginning of the 21st century now, the House of Lords is again going through a period of reform.
Lord John Russell, who I mentioned a moment ago, was nicknamed Finality John because he'd said quite wrongly
that these reforms were going to be the very last reforms ever to take place in Parliament.
The London Times editorialized very enthusiastically about the Reform Act.
It said, now this is an editorial,
a race of usurpers have been ousted from the field of their usurpation and a great empire reconquered by its own people
without the shedding of one drop of blood or the disturbance of any one right of person or property,
which the common consent of civilized men holds sacred.
Congratulating themselves on having done it peacefully rather than through the violence which was endemic in France.
Now the limits to these reforms were enraging to working-class advocates of a much wider franchise.
And working-class people were the principal recruits for the Chartist movement,
which in the late 30s and early 40s was the biggest expression of working-class dissatisfaction with political life as it was.
They'd gained nothing from the Act at all.
And some working-class people even said, if anything, we're in a weaker position than before
because now our bosses, our industrial bosses are in Parliament,
our interests are much less likely to be represented even than before.
The two leaders were William Lovett, a cabinet maker, and Fergus O'Connor, a barrister and a newspaper editor, both very talented orators.
The Chartists had a manifesto, the People's Charter, and it had six reforms,
most of which already obtained in America.
America to the Chartists was an inspiring example.
It showed that democracy was possible and that its principles could operate if it had already been going for about 50 years.
Here's what they wanted.
First of all, universal manhood suffrage, one man, one vote, no matter whether he owned property or not.
Second, election by secret ballot.
Third, the payment of members of Parliament.
This was important at that time.
Members of Parliament weren't paid.
It was regarded as service to the nation.
But that meant that if you didn't have an income of your own, if you didn't have a fortune, you couldn't afford to be an MP.
One of the things the Chartists hoped for was salaried politicians so that working men could go into Parliament and manage to keep body and soul together while they were there.
They also wanted annual parliaments, this is another of their reforms, so that as the interests and ideas of the population changed,
so would the composition of Parliament be more representative of those changes.
They wanted an abolition of property qualifications for MPs, again so that working men could go to Parliament,
and they wanted equal-sized electoral districts so that the same number of people was voting in every constituency.
Now, recurrently in the late 30s and early 40s, there were vast assemblies of Chartists, big political demonstrations, particularly in 1839 and again in 1842.
But Parliament itself refused to accept the People's Charter as the basis for a new round of political reforms.
I read to you previously one of Thomas Macaulay's speeches on behalf of the Reform Act.
Now let me read you one of his speeches on behalf of opposing the People's Charter.
He said he was opposed to it because of the Universal Suffrage Clause.
He couldn't justify giving the vote to uneducated men, and many of the working-class people were very undereducated.
And it seemed to him madness for men of property to give the vote to unpropertyed men,
because he said the first thing that will happen is that they'll vote to take away the property from those who've got it.
Here's what he said.
The Chartists have been taken in by demagogues.
But you say it is not the fault of the labourer that he is not well educated.
Most true. It is not his fault.
But though he has no share in the fault, he will, if you are foolish enough to give him supreme power in the state,
have a very large share in the punishment.
You say that if the government had not culpably omitted to establish a good system of public education,
the petitioners would have been fit for the elective franchise.
But is that a reason for giving them the franchise, when their own petition proves that they are not fit for it?
When they give us fair notice that, if we let them have it, they will use it to their own ruin and ours.
In other words, it'll be bad for everybody.
That's why we must oppose it.
And sure enough, Parliament did reject it each time these great petitions were presented.
A minority of Chartists actually favoured revolutionary action under the leadership of a man called John Frost in Newport in South Wales.
There was an uprising, but it was very easily defeated because the government itself had mobilised the army.
However, now this is at a time when the railway system is gradually being extended over the nation and the telegraph system.
So the government was able to take control of both the railways and the telegraph and send rapid messages back and forth to coordinate its response to the perceived threat of Chartist uprisings.
The Chartists themselves didn't have access to this kind of advantageous communication
and therefore could be isolated and relatively easily confined or repressed.
But what's so striking, several historians who've studied it have said,
what we should be particularly attentive to is the restraint which the British government showed in putting down the Chartist demonstrations and Chartist uprisings.
Demonstrations of this kind in continental Europe often led to the killing of 100 or more people.
In Britain it was very, very restrained. That's partly a measure of the government's confidence that it's not going to lose control of the situation altogether.
Perhaps one of the great problems that the Chartist movement suffered, not only was it undereducated and mostly very poor,
it wasn't clear to most working men that what they most needed was a change in the political system.
After all, if you get the vote and if you vote for a sympathetic candidate,
and if that candidate lobbies for sympathetic legislation, it's all going to take a very, very long time.
An enormous amount of energy can be devoted to very slight returns.
What most working people needed was higher pay, job security and higher pay, much more simple and direct things to which they tended to devote their energy.
Alumni of the Chartist movement often became leaders of the trade union movement
because it was more directly relevant to the things which seemed to concern them most.
There was a Chartist revival in 1848, which again coincided with the outbreak of new revolutions in much of Europe.
Once again, the army was called out in case the threat got out of hand.
But a providential, well, what the governing class thought of as a providential thunderstorm,
torrential rain broke up the big demonstration at the centre of London,
and it fizzled out without any great harm being done.
Over the next century, five out of the six points on the people's charter were in fact brought about.
The only one which wasn't was annual parliaments.
Britain shifted to a system of five-year parliaments, but has never moved to an annual parliament system.
But as I said, the principle of parliamentary reform had been established,
and there were to be further reform acts.
In 1867, the vote was expanded further, again in 1884.
And in 1872, the secret ballot was introduced for the first time.
When those reforms had come about, the working class was more fully represented,
and that laid the foundations for the creation of the Labour Party,
which was to play such a big role in 20th-century British politics.
Thank you.
