Lecture 6, The Upper and Middle Class Woman
Today, we emphasize the similarities of men and women.
But the Victorians emphasize the differences between them.
And they believe that men and women have different and complementary roles to play.
According to the Victorian ideal, men were physical, rational and sexually domineering.
The very opposite of the emotional, spiritual and sexually passive woman.
Now for upper and middle class women who are the subject of this lecture, most of them didn't work.
And so the center of their life and their principal interest was courtship, marriage and motherhood.
Marriage was a business. There were marriage contracts.
Love wasn't excluded from marriage, but there was often a very distinct business element involved in marriages as well,
especially the higher up in society you got as families jocked for prestige and for financially advantageous matches.
And the marriage of the upper classes was arranged through an event, an annual event called the London Season,
which was an environment in which eligible young women and eligible young men were brought together
in chaperone settings in which their marriages might take place.
The debutante season was designed to make sure that women got appropriate husbands.
Once they were married, women had to face the hazard of childbirth and it was very hazardous.
And the few middle and upper class women who wanted to have careers found it very, very difficult to get them
because they had to overcome large social objections, principal objections to the idea that women should work.
Nevertheless, there were clearly some working women who had very interesting careers in Victoria and Britain.
The Queen herself is obviously one, but also people like Florence Nightingale who created nursing as a respectable career for women.
The Bronte sisters and George Eliot, great novelists, and even Lord Byron's daughter, Ada Lovelace, who was a theoretical mathematician.
Well now, there are always books being written about men and women and the proper relations between the two sexes and how they ought to be.
But most of the Victorian books about gender relations emphasized the inferiority of women and this is true equally of books written by men and women.
Women's inferiority and submissiveness. For example, a clergyman's wife called Sarah Ellis who wrote a great string of these advice books about what men and women are like.
She sent one of her, a typical quotation from her, quote, the first thing of importance is to be content to be inferior to men, inferior in mental power in the same proportion that you are inferior in bodily strength.
And it was widely believed again by both men and women that this inferiority was not just a social or cultural thing. It was biological.
It was rooted in nature itself. Here's an influential physiologist and writer called Alexander Walker writing in 1840.
It is evident that the man possessing reasoning faculties, muscular power, and the courage to employ it is qualified for being a protector.
That woman being little capable of reasoning, feeble and timid requires protection. Under such circumstances, the man naturally governs the woman as naturally obeys.
And this kind of dichotomy was underlined by a lavish use of biblical texts. Eve was an afterthought. She was made out of Adam's rib.
I think Paul's letters constantly emphasize the theme, wives submit to your husbands. So the idea of submission and inferiority was, it was abroad in the land and it was being reinforced by both men and women.
But on the other hand, women had a special and very dignified role to play because they were the guardians of the home and the home was idealized in Victorian literature as an almost religious place in its own right.
That's an area which is morally more elevated and more dignified than the harsh outside world.
Another advice writer, Sarah Lewis, wrote a book called Woman's Mission in 1839 and it says, the woman's job is to make the home into a sanctuary.
And she must take the man who's naturally a kind of wild beast and learn how to tame him and domesticate him and subordinate him.
So although in a way she's inferior, in another way she's clearly superior. She's the one who's naturally more religious. She's the one who's naturally got more moral qualities.
And it's her job to tame the tiger.
Well, as I said, the upper and middle class women who could afford it and could afford not to work were intensely preoccupied with the question of getting the right husband.
One of the early English feminists, a woman called Mona Caird, remembered her own girlhood as a period of great stress and misery because of this assumption which was foisted upon her.
And she said, people think women who do not want to marry, unfeminine. People think women who do want to marry, immodest.
People combine both opinions by regarding it as unfeminine for women not to look forward longingly to lifehood as the hope and purpose of their lives.
And ridiculing and condemning any individual woman of their acquaintance whom they suspect of entertaining such a longing.
They must wish and not wish. They must by no means give and they must certainly not withhold encouragement.
And so it goes on. Each precept cancelling the last and most of them negative.
Well, now when it came time for a marriage to be arranged, very often a contract was drawn up. These days we'd call it a prenuptial agreement.
It was a business transaction as well as a personal one. And it was quite common for the bride's father to give an allowance of money to the bridegroom.
Very often what would happen is that families who should make money in trade, one of the ways in which they'd get enhanced social status would be by marrying their daughters to impoverished members of the aristocracy who'd got the titles and the prestige but no longer had the money.
So each each half got something out of the deal. And the wife would be given sometimes an allowance, pin money so that her own financial security would be assured even in the event that the husband turned out to be a complete waste roll.
Or if the husband died suddenly or if he became a drunkard, she'd have some residual property which would protect her against destitution.
Now that's why in these upper classes, if a young man wanted to marry, the protocol was not for him to ask the girl but to ask the girl's father to go first to her father to ask for permission.
And then if he granted it, they'd haggle over the terms and then he could propose his suit to the daughter herself.
And there are lots of scenes in Victorian literature underlining that point.
Once the marriage had taken place, the husband gained control of all the wife's assets and property and even her legal interests.
Here's another of those advice booklets. This one's called The Lady's Handbook and it was published in 1859.
Once a woman has accepted an offer of marriage, all she has or expects to have becomes virtually the property of the man she has accepted as a husband.
And no gift or deed executed by her is held to be valid, for were she permitted to give away or otherwise settle her property between the period of acceptance and the marriage,
he might be disappointed in the wealth he looked to in making the offer. They're very frank about it.
Well, under these circumstances, heiresses, that is women who had access to large sums of money, were intensely sought after on the London marriage market.
The most famous of the Victorian heiresses was a woman called Angela Burdett-Cutz because she's inherited two million pounds from her father, a banker, when he died in 1837.
You need to multiply that by something like a thousand to get a sense of what a gigantic fortune two million pounds was then.
And she kept diaries and wrote letters, she was a great friend of Charles Dickens, and she received dozens of marriage proposals.
Nearly every young man in London had a go at proposing to Angela Burdett-Cutz.
There's one famous example of a bankrupt Irish lawyer named Richard Dunn who proposed to her repeatedly.
Every few months, he'd be after her constantly. In fact, he was something like a stalker.
For 18 years, he constantly renewed his suit, always unsuccessfully.
Lord Houghton, a gentleman in London, wrote to one of his friends,
This cut likes me because I have never proposed to her.
Almost all the young men of family did. Those who did their duty by their families always did.
A little bit later, in 1872, Anthony Trollop wrote a magnificent novel called The Way We Live Now.
It's a thousand page masterpiece, in my opinion.
And one of the central issues in the story is the daughter of a rather disreputable businessman called Melmont.
Marie Melmont, she's herself rather plain and unprepossessing, but all the degenerate young aristocrats who've gambled away their fortunes
are competing with one another to try to get her to marry them.
Well, now, because the wife's property became legally the husband's, wives tended to be in a very vulnerable legal position.
When things went wrong in the marriage, the wife didn't have very much independent legal recourse against the husband.
It was even legal, for example, for her husband to have his wife locked up or put into an asylum if in his judgment she was disobedient
or he could allege that she was mad.
A legal reform in 1882 finally permitted women to retain control of their own property after marriage.
Now, when a marriage was being prepared, the bands of marriage would be read out in the parish church to which she belonged
and to which he belonged, the rector or the vicar would say,
I published the bands of marriage between James Smith of this parish and Robert Bloggs of the parish of St. Jude's.
If any of you know any just cause or impediment why these persons should not be joined together in holy matrimony, you do now declare it.
And then when the actual marriage service itself was taking place, he'd renew this request if this was a safeguard against bigamy.
And of course, there's a famous example of this in literature as well.
When Jane Eyre goes to the altar with Mr. Rochester, there is an impediment.
He's already married.
In fact, his other wife is locked up in the attic.
You remember the mad woman in the attic, one of the most dramatic scenes of Jane Eyre.
If you weren't a member of the state church, if you weren't an Anglican, that is, if you belong to one of the dissenting Protestant sects,
or were a Catholic or a Jew, you could get a civil license from the government and be married outside of the state religion.
Well, the marriage market in London was organized around the London season.
As a young girl from these classes, when you were 17 or 18, you were brought out of the schoolroom and had your debut.
This was an official meeting with the Queen.
And there were rules governing exactly what would happen at the Royal Levy where you met the Queen.
You had to wear a dress which had bare neck and shoulders.
It had to have a train at least three feet long.
And when the moment came, you went to the Royal Palace and were introduced to the Queen and kissed her hand,
unless you were yourself the holder of a title, in which case the Queen kissed you on the forehead.
And then as you retreated from the Queen's presence, you did so walking backwards while continuing to hold her in view.
So it was highly ritualized.
And these levies would take place usually early in the year, March, April and May.
The beginning of the London season coincided with the beginning of the parliamentary session,
because very often the girls' fathers were members of parliament.
And so they'd come to London in December or January.
And then the climax of the season came between April and July,
where the series of spring events, some of which would be outdoors if the weather was good enough,
culminating in horse race meetings like Royal Heskett.
And the language then, what was this?
Coming out, obviously now it makes, if you say someone's come out,
it's a reference to being homosexual publicly, but then it meant coming out of the schoolroom,
having had your debut with the Queen, and therefore being eligible to be proposed to in marriage.
And a series of very well chaperoned parties would take place,
where the young men of the season and the young ladies would mingle together.
And ideally, a young girl would make a brilliant match in her first season,
or failing that in her second season.
As British prosperity increased, and as more and more commercial families made the money
to buy their way into landed society, the London season swelled,
and by the mid and late Victorian period, about 4,000 families were involved.
So it's still only a tiny minority of the whole British population,
but far bigger than it had been at the beginning of the century.
Now if you failed to get married, if you had your debut and went through one season after the next
and failed to get a proposal of marriage, or one you regarded as appropriate,
you'd be regarded as one of the great losers in this game,
become the maiden aunt, or the lifelong spinster,
a figure of sorrow, and sometimes a figure of jokes.
Women from this class were expected to be virgins when they got married,
and to have very little knowledge of sex.
But they were also, by law, required to be sexually available at their husband's demand thereafter.
And this was an ideal which was very, very tenaciously adhered to.
Clearly the loss of virginity was a catastrophic event,
particularly if it became public for a girl who wasn't married.
Here's a little letter written by a lady called Mrs. Layton in the 1870s.
And she said that the man to whom she'd been engaged had made improper suggestions to her,
presumably they should have sex before they married.
They'd been engaged for two years.
She wrote,
From that moment I lost all respect for him,
and in spite of all his protestations of regret and promises that it should not occur again,
I told him I would never forgive him and broke off the engagement there and then.
And later on she married somebody else, Mr. Layton.
Well, the ladies of this class would have very little knowledge of contraception,
and very often would have a religious or moral objection to contraceptives in any case.
And so that meant that childbearing was extremely common,
that it was quite normal for a Victorian lady to have 10 or 15 children.
Now there were people who recognized that this switch from being a maidenly girl
to suddenly being a wife was going to be a jarring shock and change.
And some people actually anticipated or looked the ways to make it a little bit less of a surprise.
For example, Charles Kingsley, who was one of the most delightful Victorian writers
and a social reformer, a clergyman,
he got married to a woman called Frances Grenfell,
and they planned their wedding night ahead of time.
They planned to have it as a tribute to God himself.
And it was in their view, there wouldn't be just two of them there in the bedroom,
there'd be three, the two of them and God,
and it would be a kind of act of collective prayer.
It was a celibate wedding night.
And here's a letter that she wrote to him outlining her idea
of what they ought to do that evening when they were alone.
After dinner, I shall perhaps feel worn out.
So I shall just lie on your bosom and say nothing,
but feel a great deal,
and you will be very loving and call me your poor child.
And then you will perhaps show me your life of St. Elizabeth, your wedding gift.
After tea, we will go up and rest.
We will undress and bathe.
And then you will come to my room,
and we will kiss and love very much and read the Psalms together.
And then we will kneel down and pray in our night dresses.
Oh, what solemn bliss! How hallowing!
And then you will take me up in your arms, will you not,
and lay me down in bed.
And then you will extinguish our light and come to me.
How I will open my arms to you and sink into yours.
And you will kiss me and clasp me,
and we will praise God alone in the dark night
with his eyes shining down upon us and his love enclosing us.
After a time, we shall sleep.
And yet I fear you will yearn so for fuller communion
that you will not be so happy as me,
and I too perhaps shall yearn, frightened as I am.
But every yearning will remind me of our self-denial,
your sorrow for your sin, your strength of repentance,
and I shall glory in my yearning, please God.
A lovely letter, isn't it,
in which he confesses her hopes and fears for the night.
And apparently this is more or less what they did do that evening.
Now, death in childbirth was very common in every class, including the highest.
You've only got to go and visit an English country churchyard to see that,
the graves of women who died in childbirth are very, very common.
I have a friend called Jeffrey Clark who's written a history of the British insurance industry.
At first glance, that doesn't sound too promising, but actually it's fascinating.
One of the things he discovered was this.
You know how today when you get an insurance policy,
the older you are when you get the policy, the higher the premium you have to pay.
In those days, for men that was true, but for women it wasn't.
Women paid high premiums in their 20s and 30s,
and then the premiums began to fall off,
because the insurance companies were familiar with the fact that
a woman was more likely to die in childbirth when she was in her mid-20s or early 30s
than she was to die in her 40s from other causes.
So when she reached menopause, the premiums went down.
She was more likely to live after that.
Victorian writers, this is in fiction and in non-fiction, as I said earlier,
attributed great moral and spiritual power to mothers and sanctified the role of motherhood.
They'd constantly say, although you're inferior to your husband and they are subordinate to him,
behind the scenes you're the one with the real power.
It certainly is true that women played a more active role in religious life than men.
On almost any Sunday more women than men would be in church.
Although women were denied leadership roles.
Divorce was extremely unusual.
Before 1857 it required an act of parliament,
any divorce required an act of parliament and therefore was vanishingly unlikely to come about.
Now women in the elite classes were dressed in such a way as to underline the point that they didn't work.
If you think of paintings or drawings of Victorian women,
they're incredibly elaborate dresses with the whalebone corsets and the great crinolines
and a little bit later the bustles and so on.
They were all clothes which demonstrated by their appearance that they belonged to people who didn't work.
It was a sign of high status because leisure was a more high status thing than work, especially for a woman.
The cage crinolines, the ones which had a massive train both to the side and to the front and back,
were very difficult to live with apparently.
Unless you walked in one with tiny steps and very, very slowly,
the whole thing would begin to bounce up and down like an immense balloon.
And so ladies had to learn how to walk when wearing a cage crinoline.
And of course they were very likely to sweep objects off tables.
Victorian tables would be covered in knick-knacks.
So you had to walk very, very delicately and carefully to do it.
It was hard to sit down wearing one and it was even hard to get through doorways.
Eventually they became so massive they were dysfunctional in the very best way.
But of course by wearing clothes of this kind you were declaring,
I've got servants because you couldn't put on such clothes without the help of a team of servants.
There were great numbers of cartoons and jokes about them, even at the time.
Punch, which was a London humorous magazine, was constantly having crinoline jokes.
So even in their own day they were regarded as a bit ridiculous.
But there were elaborate rituals governing who should wear what, under what circumstances.
Ladies out of doors would always wear a hat or a bonnet and always wear gloves.
And on formal occasions would even wear gloves inside.
There were elaborate rituals governing mourning after a death, the wearing of black clothes and so on.
Now when women were out in the streets, particularly the town streets,
they were vulnerable to enormous quantities of horse manure which was very common in the streets then
because transportation was run by horses.
So they wore special things called patterns which were like wooden stilts
to elevate them up above the level of the street to keep them out of the muck in the roads.
Periodically there were attempts at dress reform.
One of the most famous was undertaken by an American lady, Amelia Bloomer.
That was early trousers for women, nicknamed bloomers.
But they also were ruthlessly parodied at the time they first appeared in the middle of the century.
Now as I said, careers for women were not unknown but they were difficult to achieve
because for a woman who didn't need to work, who could be supported by her own income or her husband's,
it was regarded as degrading to the man to have his wife at work.
So the Victorian women certainly were hemmed in by social expectations,
but on the other hand they were far less hemmed in than women in many other parts of the world,
in a way even than some women are today.
British upper class women have always had an imperious manner and plenty of self-assurance
and if you look at the life of Queen Victoria or Florence Nightingale,
there's nothing shy and retiring about them at all.
They're big and powerful and capable and effective people.
If you came from a genteel family but were impoverished,
the classic career would be as a governess.
And again Jane Eyre is the obvious example of that.
The governess, she didn't quite become a member of the family,
but she was clearly a big step above the servants in the family to which she went.
Most governesses weren't expected to be particularly intellectually rigorous.
Again, Punch gives us a lovely insight into that.
There's a Punch cartoon which shows a governess reproaching her young pupil, a little girl.
The governess says,
I wonder what your mother would say if she knew how backward you are in geography?
And the little girl answers,
Oh, my mother says she never learned any geography and she's married.
And Aunt Sally says she never learned any geography and she's married and you did and you ain't.
In other words, if it's this education for a girl,
she has to learn some accomplishments and French and drawings and playing of the piano and so on.
But whether she learned geography or not didn't particularly matter.
Well, some of the greatest of the Victorian novelists were women.
The three Bronti sisters, Charlotte Ann and Emily.
Mary Ann Evans wrote under the name George Elliott.
That's the greatest of all the Victorian novelists.
And a woman called Rachel Beer was the editor of two London Sunday newspapers in the 1890s,
the Sunday Times and the Observer.
Admittedly, her husband was the owner,
so it isn't as though she'd followed a conventional career path to get to that point.
But nevertheless, she was a very effective journalist
and it was she who broke the story that the documents convicting Dreyfus in the Great Dreyfus scandal were forged.
Mary Somerville, after whom one of the Oxford Colleges for Women is named,
was an astronomer and the author of several books on the sciences,
particularly pointing out the connections between the various sciences.
Ada Lovelace, Lord Byron's daughter, was an outstanding theoretical mathematician
whose work anticipated in various ways a binary numbers theory.
So in all these ways, there were scattered examples of women having responsible
and intellectually stimulating careers.
Women played an important part in reform projects.
Florence Nightingale created nursing as a respectable option for young women.
And a few women in the later Victorian period began to campaign for women's votes.
In 1865, a woman called Barbara Bodichan gave a speech on votes for women to a group of her friends.
She knew John Stuart Mill, who himself wrote a book called On the Subjection of Women in 1869,
criticising the legal asymmetry of the British situation whereby a wife could so easily be tyrannised by her husband.
Harriet Martino, and this woman I mentioned a second ago, Mary Somerville,
signed petitions in favour of votes for women.
But when John Stuart Mill introduced the idea in Parliament,
the legislation was left down almost at once.
There was no serious attempt to introduce it.
In 1867, the Second Reform Act had expanded the electorate to a lot of working-class men.
And upper-class women said, it's outrageous that these men should have the vote.
When we, much more highly educated, don't have the vote, it's inappropriate.
The same kind of thing was going on in America at the same time.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Antony were saying just then,
look, the freed slaves are being given the vote,
even though many of them can't read and write, through no fault of their own,
but we're highly educated women.
We ought to be part of the political nation as well.
So on both sides of the Atlantic, there's the beginnings of a women's suffrage movement.
And it was the leadership of two widows, Millicent Fawcett and Emmeline Pankhurst,
who intensified the campaign and the work for women to get the vote.
Millicent Fawcett was studiously moderate,
and Emmeline Pankhurst later on became the leader of the suffragettes,
the most militant of the pro-suffrage groups.
Millicent Fawcett began speaking on the issue in 1869,
and she saw the vote as a way of bringing the feminine virtues out into the world.
She said, in other words, it's true that we're morally and religiously more superior.
So if we can bring these virtues into the public world,
how much better and more elevated it will be.
She was supported by Bertrand Russell's mother, Lady Amberley.
But most of the members of parliament thought this was all nonsense.
One liberal MP says, quoting the common view, says,
We regard women as something to admire, to reverence, to love,
and while we share with her the happiness of life,
we will shield her as far as possible from its harsher and sterner duties.
A radical MP, Henry Laboucher, says,
intellectually, women have not the gifts which fit them for being elected.
They've got a certain amount of what I might call instinct rather than reason,
but they're impulsive, emotional, and have got absolutely no sense of proportion.
Well, now nobody was more emphatic in their rejection of the idea of votes for women
than Queen Victoria herself.
And here she is talking about herself in the third person again.
The Queen is anxious to enlist everyone who can speak or write
to join in checking this mad, wicked folly of women's rights
with all its attendant horrors on which her poor feeble sex is bent
for getting every sense of womanly feeling and propriety.
Lady Amberley ought to get a good whipping.
That's the Queen.
I mean, so carried away, it makes you wonder, doesn't it,
whether actually secretly she thought maybe there is something to this.
Certainly in her own life she was leading a very active political career.
Well, you can imagine that for the intellectually ambitious minority of women
it was galling to be so constricted.
Harriet Martinot said, another writer of the time,
when I was young it was not thought proper for young ladies to study very conspicuously
and especially with pen in hand.
Young ladies, at least in the provincial towns,
were expected to sit down in a parlour to sow,
during which reading aloud was permitted.
Or to practice their music,
but so as to be fit to receive callers without any signs of blue stockingism.
A blue stocking is a studious lady and it was so, it's a slur.
And Harriet Martinot goes on to say,
Jane Austen herself, the Queen of Novelists,
was compelled by the feelings of her family to cover up her manuscripts
with a piece of muslin work kept on the table for that purpose
whenever any genteel people came in.
So it was with other young ladies.
And thus my first studies in philosophy were carried on with great care and reserve.
So you can see from these examples that although,
in other words, it would be wrong to say that middle class and upper class women
had no opportunities.
If they wanted to pursue opportunities,
they had to be very, very tough-minded indeed
and had to overcome the expectations of their families and friends,
which collectively could be a very great moral pressure.
So that when you read about the minority of women who did break into careers,
and who, for example, in the 1870s, the very first women doctors in Britain,
in almost every case they had an intense struggle
against the expectations and the shocked sense of disappointment of their own men folk.
And many of them even took the further snap of saying,
because I want to have a career, I ought never to marry,
and in many cases never did.
