Lecture 8 The State Church and Evangelical Revival
Britain had an established church, the Anglican Church, or Church of England, to which the majority of the people nominally belonged.
It ministered to respectable people every Sunday, and to nearly everybody at crucial moments of the life cycle, birth, marriage, and death.
It was run by a hierarchy of officials, stretching from the archbishops of Canterbury and York at the very top, all the way down to the humblest vicar and curates at the bottom.
The right to appoint a man to become the vicar or parson or curate of a parish church often lay not in the hands of other church officials, but in the hands of a local landlord,
and very often the landlords favored members of their own families, or the members of families of their friends, to become the members of the clergy, who tended to be younger sons of gentry families.
The Victorian period witnessed a series of reforms of some of the most glaring abuses of the Church of England, because just as the political system had become corrupt and inappropriate with age, so had the church in many ways.
A great evangelical revival was sweeping through the Church of England, gathering force in the late 18th century, particularly with the influence of Methodism,
and entering the Church of England itself with great force in the first three or four decades of the 19th century.
Its advocates were the people who worked hard to abolish slavery in the British Empire, and who tried to abolish brutal working conditions in the factories and coal mines.
But they also tried to stamp out what they regarded as unpardonable breaches of the Sabbath.
They were Sabotarians who wanted Sunday to be devoted solely to religious worship.
The working class people, who often only had Sunday off as the only day of the week they didn't have to work, reacted by abandoning the church in large numbers, until eventually,
evangelical groups like the Salvation Army began to look for new ways to try to keep people living active religious lives, even if they were working class people.
Well, because it was a state church, you're assumed to be a member unless you actually specify that you're not.
For example, in those days, if you joined the British Army and you were asked what's your religion and you said non, they'd write down C of E, Church of England.
Most British people were at least nominally Christians. They assumed that the Bible contained God's revealed truth, and that by living virtuous lives, eventually they would go to heaven.
Queen Victoria, like most respectable people, went to church every Sunday.
The liturgy was governed by the Book of Common Prayer. This is a book which enshrined the standard liturgy for the whole country.
And it had Sunday services for Holy Communion, for Matins, and for Evensong, the three standard Sunday services.
It also contained the baptism ceremony, the marriage service, and the funeral service.
And the Church of England was based upon the 39 articles. These were 39 principles which had been drawn up when Queen Elizabeth I came to the throne back in the late 1550s,
when she decisively separated the English church from Roman Catholicism.
The history of the English Reformation in the 1500s is itself very complicated.
Her father, Henry VIII, had first separated the church from Rome, but Elizabeth's older sister, Mary, had tried to reintegrate Britain into the Catholic Christendom.
Elizabeth once again took it out, and from Elizabeth's accession right up into the 19th century, the Anglican church was distinct from Rome.
So the 39 articles were the basis of Anglicanism, and they blended conventional Christian assertions which Catholics could agree with, with various declarations condemning the papacy and Catholic practices.
Well, Queen Victoria is a good example. She's a typical Christian of her time in some ways. She comforted herself after Albert's death with the thought that she was going to meet him again in heaven.
And later on in life, she told one of her granddaughters,
Do you know, my dear, I sometimes feel that when I die, I should be just a little bit nervous about meeting grand-papa,
for I have taken to doing a good many things that he would not quite approve of.
There's a very literal and direct sense of her destiny in heaven.
And her biographer, Christopher Hibbert, has some lovely passages where she talks about who she's going to meet in heaven.
King David, for one, other kings, you see, from throughout the ages.
She didn't quite like the idea of meeting King David because he treated Uriah so badly.
This was the man whom he sent off into the army to be killed so that he could seduce Bathsheba, Uriah's wife.
She disapproved of that and didn't think it was quite right to meet him.
And she flatly refused to meet Abraham. She thought that Abraham just wasn't up to the mark.
So she had ideas about what life or life, post-life, was going to be like in heaven.
Now, the bishops, that is, the senior churchmen, were appointed by the prime minister, again, because it's a state church.
And they governed a hierarchy of lesser officials in their own areas called the diocese.
At the very top of the pyramid were the two Archbishop's of Canterbury, who was the senior one,
and the Archbishop of York, who was the junior one, and then a series of bishoprics below them.
There was a great variation in the quality of the income which you'd get from being a bishop.
If you are the bishop of Durham, you can enjoy an income of 19,000 pounds per year.
It was a very, very wealthy diocese.
By contrast, if you are the bishop of Landaff in Wales, you could look forward to an income of only 900 pounds.
There's an enormous difference there.
The cathedrals themselves, which were the seats of the bishops, had a whole succession of staff positions,
archdeacons, deans, cannons, prebenderies, and parochial clergy,
which was one fulfilling various positions and functions within the administration of the diocese.
Now, all this was paid for through tithes, and a tithe was a tenth of the income
which every subject of the queen was expected to give to the church.
And these tithe exactions made the church wealthy, but of course also made it unpopular.
It's a heavy tax to pay a tenth of your income to the church.
It also meant that, depending on the economic prosperity of the parish,
your income as the minister would vary widely.
If you lived in a wealthy parish, particularly in some of the southeastern counties of Britain,
which tended to be very prosperous areas, you could get a very, very good living indeed from the tithes
coming in from all the wealthy farms in the area.
But by contrast, if you lived in a remote hill farm district, the tithes might not amount to very much.
Traditionally, they'd always been paid in kind.
You'd actually physically give wheat and chickens and pigs to the minister.
But as Britain was becoming a more and more commercial society,
in 1840, commutation of tithes to a cash payment was substituted,
so it became more of a money transaction.
Most parish churches also carried with them what was called a gleeb.
The gleeb was farmland, and the right to farm this land went to the holder of the living,
that is, to the man who was actually the vicar.
Although, in many cases, the vicar rather than do his own farming would rent it out to a local farmer,
so it would give that farmer more land on which to do his own work.
Now, the 24 senior bishops and the archbishops of Canterbury and York
were themselves members of the House of Lords.
That is, they played a direct role in the political life of the nation.
And the bishops switching their votes in 1832 was one of the moments which led to the reform act being passed.
To become a minister, a man of the cloth, as it was called, was a highly respectable profession.
If you came from the middle classes, it was an avenue of upward social mobility,
because it was one of the very few jobs you could do, which actually had a great deal of leisure time.
You had duties on Sundays, and you were certainly expected to visit members of your parish,
but there was plenty of time left over for intellectual pursuits.
And a great many of early 19th century, early and mid 19th century British intellectuals
were clergymen who had the time to do it.
The church also provided a birth for younger sons of the gentry in aristocracy.
The land-owning classes had the principle of primogeniture,
which is that the oldest son inherits the whole estate.
That meant that the younger sons had to find alternative occupations.
So it's quite common for the oldest to inherit the title,
for the second to become an army or navy officer, and for the third son to go into the church.
Land-owners themselves often had the right of appointments to the living.
In other words, when the old minister died, the landlord could decide who he was going to have next.
And so it was common for him to choose his own third son, William Gladstone,
and we've mentioned him many times, he appointed his own son to the living of Howardan.
And that meant that the members of the clergy often were closely connected to the land-owning families.
Think of the novels of Jane Austen for a moment.
Very often, the only eligible man in the area that one of the young ladies can marry,
apart from the gentry, is the vicar.
In Emma, for example, Mr. Elton, he's not quite good enough, but he's half suitable to be a potential husband.
Or Mr. Collins in Pride and Prejudice, the man who's going to inherit the Bennet's family house.
And at the moment he's working as the minister to Lady Catherine de Berg.
And the same is true, if you think of the novels of Anthony Trollope or Mrs. Gaskell or the Brontes,
it recurs again and again.
The clergyman, the local parish priest, is a gentleman.
Now, some appointees to these livings only got a minority of the tithes.
That is, they were curates rather than rectors.
If you're the rector, it means you get all of the tithing come from the parish.
If you get only part, it means you're a curate.
The Brontes sisters' father was a curate, a Howard in Yorkshire.
And some curates were desperately poor because the income attached to the curacy wasn't really sufficient.
In Anthony Trollope's book, Barchester Towers, there's a very, very poor curate, Mr. Quiverful.
It's a lovely name because he's got about, I think he says he's got 13 children living.
His income is tiny.
He's desperate to get a better income if he can find it somewhere.
Now, the right to appoint the clergyman to the parish church, what was called the living,
was actually a commodity which could be traded.
Sometimes you'd find advertisements in the times where a gentleman was selling the right of appointment
to a parish church.
When a new rector or curate was chosen, he would read himself into the parish.
That's what it was called.
That is, he'd mount the pulpit and he'd recite the 39 articles, the principles according to which the church was conducted.
In the early 19th century, it was still quite common for plural livings to be held.
That is, for one clergyman to have more than one parish church in his control.
And you can imagine that if you were appointed to five or six and got the tithes from all of them,
that again could make you very, very prosperous.
People who were well connected in the aristocracy and who were already slated as likely bishops of the future
could often enjoy plural livings of this kind.
The cathedrals themselves, which were the centers of the diocese, were often very rich,
sometimes enjoying profits from ancient bequests.
Now, probably the single best place to study this, or at least to study the emotional mood of it all,
is in the fiction of Anthony Trollop and the Chronicles of Barchester is a marvelous series of novels he wrote
about clergy life in one of the county towns.
It's based on probably Salisbury or Winchester, one of the south-west towns of England,
with a prosperous cathedral town.
In the first of this series, The Warden,
it's all about an old man called Mr. Harding, who's the beneficiary of a medieval bequest.
He takes care of an arms house in which some old gentlemen live.
They're all men who've been disabled.
They've had accidents of various kinds, or they're simply too old to work.
And the old gentlemen live there, and Mr. Harding, The Warden, looks after them.
Now, they get a little income, but they're secure.
Whereas Mr. Harding enjoys a very big income.
He's the clergyman who overlooks them, and he's a member of the gentry, and they're not.
But eventually, a reformer comes to town, a man called Mr. Bold.
Incidentally, he's in love with Mr. Harding's daughter, which provides the romantic interest of the book.
And Mr. Bold starts investigating this bequest and says,
the land wasn't left for the welfare of The Warden.
No, no, it was left for the welfare of the poor, broken-down men who live there.
They're the ones who are entitled to this money, and with the passage of the centuries,
the value of this thing has accumulated and accumulated.
So Mr. Harding gets a good living from it.
But Bold says, the old men should be getting that.
And he stirs up the old men and tells them, this should be yours, you know.
So then they start clamouring for this income.
And poor Mr. Harding himself, he's a good man, and he's stricken in conscience and realizes,
yes, I'm taking away good things that they should have.
Anyway, it all goes catastrophically wrong.
And Trollop's point is that sometimes you can do an act which in the abstract is good,
but which has horrible practical consequences.
Trollop's got a rather conservative outlook on life and doesn't like intemperate reforms to take place.
Well, there were many cases where the inequities were genuine,
and the 1830s and 40s was a period of vigorous reform within the Church of England.
And Ecclesiastical Commission was founded, first temporary, but then becoming permanent,
which, for example, abolished plural livings.
After 1838, you weren't allowed to hold more than one living,
yet in those you had to actually live and work in the parish to which you were appointed, and only one each.
The income of the bishops was standardized at £4,000 each, still a very handsome son,
but no longer the enormous disparities which had existed previously.
Part of the energy for reformers of this kind came from the great evangelical revival, the evangelical movement.
Again, this was taking place on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean.
The early 19th century is a period of enormous evangelical vigor in America, and so it is in Britain as well.
It emphasized personal conversion and individual turning away from a life of sin towards putting one's trust in Jesus.
And with that, adherence to very exacting moral standards and a biblical literalism,
the belief that the Bible is an absolutely trustworthy guide in all your life,
what these days we call fundamentalism, although that term didn't begin until the 20th century.
A lot of the energy for the evangelical revival came from John Wesley and the Methodists,
who were a 19th century reform movement within the Church of England.
One of the most famous preachers in both America and Britain was George Whitfield,
a galvanizing speaker who electrified audiences on both sides of the Atlantic, very charismatic.
He preached a religion of personal transformation, turning to Jesus,
from fear that if you don't, you're threatened with eternal hellfire.
One of the things which made Whitfield so extraordinary was his willingness to hold open air services.
Rather than confining religious life just into the Church, it would be taken outside.
Now, the Methodists, the early Wesleyans, made the most progress in the new industrial towns.
As they grew very rapidly, the Methodists were better at keeping pace than the Church of England itself was,
which tended to move at a slightly more stately pace.
But Wesley himself never was a Methodist.
He always remained inside the Church of England and he was politically very conservative
and so was horrified at some of what he regarded as the emotional excesses of some of his own followers.
When they transformed their lives in this absolute turning to faith in Jesus,
for some of them it brought with it a radical political message.
Wesley wanted none of that. He was socially very conservative.
And some historians speculate that the reason Britain didn't have a revolutionary tradition
in the late 18th and early 19th century was because of the widespread
of socially and politically conservative Methodism.
Evangelicalism became very influential within the Church of England
as well as outside its doors, particularly through the influence of a group called the Clapham Sect.
Clapham then is now a suburb of London. Then it was a village.
And a group of prosperous men living there got together to practice or steer religious habits
and methodical Bible reading.
They pledged themselves to a series of good works, the abolition of slavery in the British Empire,
the improvement of education, and the elimination of brutal public spectacles
like sports in which animals were killed and public executions.
The most famous representative of the Clapham Sect was William Wilberforce.
And it was he who led the campaign for the abolition of the first of the slave trade,
which was achieved by legislation in 1807, and then for the abolition of slavery in the British Empire.
Now, there was no slavery in Britain itself, but slavery was practiced in the West Indies.
Many of the West Indian islands were British colonies, sugar plantations for the most part,
and slaves worked there just as they worked on the cotton plantations in the American South.
But in 1833, Wilberforce was able to accomplish legislation to outlaw slavery in the British Empire.
It was a very big moment because it meant for the American slave owners
that suddenly they became more exposed.
They were now slaveholders in a world much of whose opinion was turning against slaveholding.
The second generation of these evangelical reformers was best represented by Lord Shaftesbury.
I mentioned him previously. He was the man who condemned the working-class girls' social clubs.
He was a great campaigner for improvements of conditions in factories and coal mines
and for ending child labor.
And under his enthusiastic lobbying, Parliament did begin to pass acts intervening
to prevent abuse of child labor in factories.
He came from a long line of English aristocrats, had a miserable childhood neglected by his parents,
and went through a traumatic religious conversion experience when he was in his early 20s.
And like many evangelicals, he believed very strongly in what were called special providences.
That is, nothing happened without God particularly intending it.
If there was a terrific thunderstorm, he wouldn't regard it as a naturalistic occurrence.
He'd say, God send this thunderstorm as a reminder to me of my sins.
And so he'd speculate a lot on the exact meaning of events which were taking place around him.
He certainly believed in the reality of hellfire and the reality of an angry God.
But at the same time, he was a devoted family man.
He had a very sympathetic wife called Minnie, and they had 10 children together.
And he attempted to embody the benevolent, high-minded Victorian father.
A little bit comparable to Prince Albert, but homegrown.
Well, most of the Church of England was rather suspicious of outdoor preaching.
But Lord Shaftesbury thought it was okay, especially if you could bring together large numbers of people
who weren't members of the church, working-class people particularly,
and by using revival techniques, generate the enthusiasm which would bring them back into religious life.
He even would do things like, he approved the hiring of theaters or music halls,
places usually given up to secular entertainment, and said,
let's have religious worship in these places.
Sometimes he became so carried away by religious raptures,
that his wife used to urge him to calm down as she'd mock him in a very good-natured way.
Let me redo an entry from his diary.
This is in the year 1843, and he and his wife Minnie and the children have gone to the seaside.
Minnie and I, through God's mercy, took the sacrament together.
Had afterwards, towards evening, a solitary walk on the seashore,
while our blessed children ran about the sands,
and we recalled the past and anticipated the future in faith and fear and fervent prayer.
That's the way his diary runs.
He and many of his evangelical contemporaries campaigned hard for temperance,
that is, the abolition of alcoholic drinks, and also for sabbatarianism.
In the early days of the temperance movement, beer was regarded as a temperance drink,
because it was so much less alcoholic than gin.
Later on, obviously, especially in America, but also in Britain,
beer itself became regarded as part of the problem rather than part of the solution.
It's an important issue, because in those days, there were so few uncontaminated drinking water sources
that drinking water wasn't even safe.
No wonder the consumption of alcohol was so high.
Well, sabbatarianism, this is devoting the day, Sunday, exclusively to worship.
And the ideal was that you'd go to church in the morning,
and that you'd go again in the afternoon or early evening,
and that at both of these services, you'd listen to a long sermon,
serious, elevated preaching, taking biblical text with great seriousness
and elucidating their significance for everyday life.
In addition to two services on Sunday, a long lecture, usually on a Wednesday evening.
One Scottish evangelical, a man called John Henderson,
bought the Glasgow and Edinburgh Railway, probably the busiest railway line in Scotland,
so that he could close it down on Sundays.
He was shocked by the fact that the trains continued to run, and he tried, and he was able to prevent it.
Now, a visitor from Switzerland, who was in London in 1851,
was astonished to find that everything closed down on Sunday.
He says, I walked down Cheepside, which is quite a long street.
I would have liked to go into a coffee house for a glass of ale or claret.
But all the shops were hermetically sealed.
Even the front door of my own hotel was locked.
On returning there, I asked for my bill, as I've been accustomed to settle my account every day,
but the innkeeper politely asked me to wait until Monday.
I didn't like to do business on the Lord's Day.
There were also evangelicals, both inside and outside the Church of England,
were also instrumental in suppressing some of the rougher, rural amusements.
Here's William Howe at one of them, writing in 1838.
In the manufacturing districts where the Methodists have gained most influence,
it is true enough that they have helped to expel an immense quantity of dogfighting,
cockfighting, ball-baiting, badger-baiting, boxing, and other such blaggered amusements.
Rough blood sports.
The evangelicals were shocked at the idea that people would take pleasure from witnessing such scenes.
Now, as I said earlier, the Queen herself was a regular churchgoer,
although her diary is absolutely full of long comments about how dull and tedious and long the sermons were.
But she was opposed to Sabotarianism.
She really never did become fully converted to the evangelical enthusiasm of the day.
And she said on one occasion,
I am not at all an admirer or a prover of our very dull Sundays,
for I think the absence of innocent amusements for the poor people
is a misfortune and an encouragement of vice.
That was the argument against Sabotarianism, the respectable argument against it.
If people have nothing to do, they're more likely to become involved in vicious activities.
Now, throughout the 19th century, as we'll see later on in one of the later lectures in the course,
there was a movement to spread education, to get more and more of the working-class people literate.
But it was always compromised and complicated by the fact that
people disagreed exactly what sort of religious education was going to take place within the schools.
Many of the evangelicals thought the purpose of education is to enable people to study their own Bibles.
That's what education is for.
And therefore, they didn't regard the religious component of the education as peripheral,
they regarded it as central.
Meanwhile, so they set up Sunday schools to try to get more working-class children,
at least some elementary literacy.
And they also did things like this.
They went to railway stations and were put up little lecterns with a Bible on,
so that as you were waiting for the train, you could browse the Bible.
In other words, make the Bible more and more central to everyday life.
Well, they encouraged a religious seriousness, which became very popular among Victorian artists,
even those who were themselves not members of the evangelical church.
You can see that very clearly by looking at the paintings of the pre-Raphaelite artists.
Some of the greatest of their paintings are themselves of religious themes.
Hulman hunts Jesus the light of the world, the picture of Jesus holding a lantern.
Or Dante Gabriel resetties the enunciation where the Virgin Mary is told by the angel
that she's going to bear the Messiah.
Or one of my favourites, Henry Alexander Bowlers,
the doubt can these dried bones live.
It's a wonderful painting, rather sentimental.
It shows a young woman in a graveyard beside the church,
looking down at the grave, obviously, if someone she loves,
and meditating about the possibility of the resurrection.
There are various iconographic clues in the painting.
For example, there's a skull with a butterfly resting on it.
And the butterfly represents the regeneration of new life out of something dead.
And that's meant to be a clue from the artist that the answer about the resurrection is,
yes, it is possible.
Well, the evangelicals certainly didn't go unopposed.
A lot of the working class would have very little to do with them.
And they were widely satirized and parodied by Victorian novelists,
particularly for their zeal and intolerance.
And once again, Antonin Trollop gives us absolutely the classic example.
This is in Barchester Towers.
And it's the Reverend Obadiah Slope.
Here's a little description of what the Reverend Slope is like.
He is gifted with a certain kind of pulpit eloquence,
not likely indeed to be persuasive with men,
but powerful with the softer sex.
In his sermons, he deals greatly in denunciations,
excites the minds of his weaker hearers with a not unpleasant terror,
and leaves an impression on their minds that all mankind are in a perilous state,
and all womankind too, except those who attend regularly to the evening lectures in Baker Street.
His looks and tones are extremely severe,
so much so that one cannot not fancy that he regards the greater part of the world
as being infinitely too bad for his care.
As he walks through the streets, his very face denotes his horror of the world's wickedness,
and there is always an anathema lurking in the corner of his eye.
Charles Dickens also was very scornful about evangelical excesses,
and he was another critic of Sabaterianism.
He found legislation that was proposed in 1836 to make all work and all recreation on Sundays
legally punishable offenses, and this is what Dickens wrote about it.
The constables are invested with arbitrary, extensive, and vexatious powers,
and all this in a bill which sets out with a hypocritical and counting declaration that,
and then quoting,
nothing is more acceptable to God than the true and sincere worship of him according to his holy will,
and that it is the bound and duty of parliament to promote the observance of the Lord's Day
by protecting every class of society against being required to sacrifice their comfort,
health, religious privileges, and conscience for the convenience, enjoyment,
or supposed advantage of any other class on the Lord's Day.
And Dickens says,
the idea of making a man truly moral through the ministry of constables
and sincerely religious under the influence of penalties,
that's worthy of the mind which could form such a massive monstrous absurdity as this bill is composed of.
So although there were Sunday closing laws and limitations on Sunday activities,
particularly Sunday business activities,
the Sabaterians were never successful in completely closing down all forms of entertainment on the weekend.
Some of the other hostile depictions of them in the literature would be somebody like Mr. Brocklehurst,
the horrible man who runs the school in Jane Eyre,
or David Copperfield's stepfather, the man who woos David's mother,
and in effect turns David out, humilous zealous evangelicals.
Now as I mentioned earlier,
the evangelical movement certainly did have working class recruits,
but not all that many.
Increasingly, members of the working class were staying away from church altogether.
By 1850, only about half the British population went to any kind of church every week.
More and more particularly of the working class were staying away completely.
Partly because they felt that the church represented the state,
and sometimes it represented the state in its most odious aspect,
as the forces of surveillance and repression.
Charles Kingsley himself sympathized with many aspects of the evangelical revival said,
we have used the Bible as if it were a mere special constables handbook,
or an opium dose for keeping beasts of burden patient while they were being overloaded,
a mere book to keep the poor in order.
He understood it's got to be more than that to attract working class people.
Meanwhile, ordinary working people had religious ideas of their own.
They certainly believed that it was important to be christened in church,
and to be married in church,
and to be buried with a proper funeral service.
But otherwise, their theology was much more heterodox.
They didn't believe in salvation by faith alone.
No, their view was a much more pragmatic one.
If you act right and live a decent and generous life,
and are kind to your family and friends,
that's what your salvation depends upon.
These were the kinds of insights upon which William Booth built
when he created the Salvation Army in the 1870s.
It was an attempt to dress up evangelical religion in a bright uniform
and attach a brass band to it,
and make it fun and joyful and celebratory,
rather than oppressive and narrow and puritanical,
as it had so often been in the early part of the evangelical revival.
Thank you.
