Let your knife, the Oxford Movement and Kapolices.
The Oxford Movement of the 1830s and 40s.
Try to emphasize the supernatural as opposed to the political character of the Church of England.
But the defection of two of its most luminous members, John Henry Newman and Henry Manning,
to the Roman Catholic Church, damaged its reputation in the late 40s and early 50s.
But the Oxford Movement, like the evangelical revival,
have the effect of reviving the vigor of Christianity in England.
Meanwhile, the Roman Catholic Church itself made up mainly of Irish immigrants
but also consisting of a handful of old families,
which ever since the Reformation had never converted to Anglicanism, the Church of England.
Weathered a storm of criticism as it began to recover its energy in British life more generally.
But British Christianity of all forms, evangelical and Anglican and Catholic and non-conformist alike,
all the churches were under pressure from new developments in science,
particularly the revolution in scientific thought,
which was carried out through the work of Darwin in biology and Charles Lyell in geology,
and also from new developments in German biblical criticism.
So the mid-Victorian period witnessed a whole succession of religious crises.
One man affected by all this was Thomas Huxley,
himself a leading scientist who invented the term agnosticism
to describe his own condition, one of increasing religious doubt and uncertainty.
Well, the Oxford Movement, it wanted to emphasize the supernatural aspects of the Church of England.
Like the evangelical movement, with which it was contemporaneous or a little bit later,
it emphasized the importance of the liveliness and warmth and vitality
of the individual's relationship with God and with Jesus.
But it was also culturally richer and tended to be a little bit less puritanical.
One of the great phrases that comes from the Oxford Movement is the beauty of holiness,
the idea that religious life should be beautified
and that worship should take place in glorious surroundings.
In this version of Christianity, the Church itself is a very important institution.
The evangelicals tended to emphasize the individual's relationship with God,
that it's a direct encounter.
The Oxford Movement view is that the Church itself is a mediating institution,
that the individual belongs to the Church and through the Church receives God's blessings.
Well, it's called the Oxford Movement because a series of Oxford dons,
that is Oxford scholars, began the work.
In the early 1830s, the work of John Henry Newman,
Herald Frude and John Keeble, all talented writers,
they began to write a series of what were called the Tracts for the Times,
pamphlets about religious controversy.
Another of the names of this movement is the Tractarians,
because they're the people whose names were associated with the tracts.
And between 1833 and 1841,
they published a long succession of these things, critical of the condition of the Anglican Church.
One of the things they particularly deplored was the fact that it was too obvious
that the Church of England was subordinate to the state,
that because it was an established religion,
it was very often political motives which led to church actions.
They were opposed to Catholic emancipation, the legislation of 1829,
whereby Roman Catholics were permitted to sit in Parliament.
Because it made it all too obvious that
religious considerations rather than religious...
political considerations rather than religious truth
had been the decisive factor.
Political expediency was going to guide the church rather than divine truth.
Now, the Tractarians wanted to emphasize
that the church itself was a supernatural society.
It had been founded by Jesus.
And one of the Christian doctrines they emphasized particularly powerfully
was the idea of apostolic succession.
That is that Jesus had entrusted St. Peter with the keys of the faith
and charged him to create the church,
and that St. Peter had created bishops,
and that each generation of bishops right down through the history of the Church
had passed on the succession from the Apostles.
In other words, there's a direct lineage from Jesus
right down to the church leaders of the 19th century, apostolic succession.
This was the kind of question which the evangelicals were less interested in.
So, the Church of England, according to the Tractarians,
was founded by Jesus himself.
A paradoxical claim on the face here, but one they tried very hard to assert.
The church historian Alec Viddler writes this.
It was as if the Tractarians were declaring
that on the drab, dirty, distempered walls
within which English churchmen were accustomed to worship or doze,
there were wonderful pictures that, when uncovered,
would transform the whole building into something mysterious and sublime.
Well, Newman, in particular, of these three writers,
found that his respect for the 16th century reformers was diminishing.
Everybody attached to Protestantism tended to think very highly indeed
of the great Protestant reformers of the 1500s.
But Newman, the more he studied them and thought about it,
the more he became inclined to see them as rather crude and as iconoclastic.
He began to develop a greater appreciation for the church fathers,
that is, the very early Christian writers, people like St. Gregory,
and St. Ambrose, and to recognize a continuity in their work,
more than a sharp fracture at the time of the Reformation.
And the really explosive tract was Tract 90.
When Newman argued that it was possible to read the 39 articles,
the principles upon which the Church of England was based,
in a way which was compatible with Catholic doctrine.
When you read the 39 articles and then read Tract 90,
it's very hard to be convinced by the tract,
because, in fact, some of the 39 articles are very explicitly anti-popish.
But, nevertheless, that's the direction of Newman's argumentation.
And he was interested in working out what exactly was the
juridical status of the Anglican church.
He argued in the late 1830s and early 40s for what he called the via media,
the middle way.
He said, the Church of England is the one Christian group
which has steered a middle course between the eras of the Catholic church
on the one side, eras which were notorious at the time of the Reformation,
and the equal eras of the radical Protestant churches on the other side.
And so, for a while, this was Newman's position, the via media.
But he read a rejoinder which had been made by Nicholas Wiseman,
the leader of the Catholics in England.
And Wiseman said, is it really likely
that God would single out this one little offshore island of England
and make it alone the repository of Christian truth?
Of course, many British people, especially the English,
were sufficiently xenophobic to think this was a reasonable proposition.
But Newman himself gradually became reconciled to the idea that probably it was not.
Wiseman, the Catholic apologist's point was,
the Catholic church appears all over.
I mean, this actually is largely confined to Europe,
but nevertheless, it's far less parochial than England.
Newman in the early 1840s was studying the church fathers very intensively.
And finally, after three or four years of very, very intense anguish
during which period he retired from many of his public services at Oxford University,
he converted to Roman Catholicism.
He'd reached the conclusion that the Catholics were right after all.
He was a morbid and obsessive man, deeply troubled by the problems of faith,
agonizing over the question of whether his soul was going to be saved.
And he certainly believed, as all the members of the Oxford movement did,
that you've got to get the doctrines right.
The doctrines really matter.
It isn't sufficient to have a good mood or a good attitude
or a loving relationship with Jesus.
You've got to get the details right.
His very last work as an Anglican was a book called
An Essay on the Development of Doctrine,
in which he worried about the question of
whether the Catholic church in its claim always to be right, to be infallible,
was justifiable.
And he concluded that it was because he said,
although the church clearly teaches things today,
which it didn't teach in the days of the early Christians,
nevertheless, the seeds of those doctrines were already in place
in the work of the early church and have just flowered.
Just as a seed contains the material from which the flower will come,
so did the early church contain the implicit doctrines,
which is now making explicit.
Well, there's an enormous scandal at Oxford University
and, in fact, throughout the whole nation,
because Newman had been regarded as one of the most promising
divine religious writers in the whole country.
The movement as a whole suddenly fell under a great cloud
because its other leaders, that is,
those who were trying to reinvigorate Anglicanism,
didn't want to be vulnerable to the accusation
that they were latently Roman Catholics as well.
They'd certainly tried to bring out some of the Catholic
with a little C qualities in Anglicanism,
but they were emphatic that the Oxford movement was an Anglican movement.
Well, the name given to this group from then onwards
is the Anglo-Catholics or the High Churchmen.
Now, one of the Anglicans who was horrified by Newman's conversion to Rome
was Henry Manning,
and, in fact, he preached against Newman's conversion
very sharply saying that he'd been seduced by the papists.
He was the Archdeacon of Chichester Cathedral,
a rising star of the Anglican Church also, Henry Manning.
But five or six years later,
he also converted to Roman Catholicism.
The trigger for his conversion was the Gorham decision,
and it's interesting to follow through what happened
in the case of G.C. Gorham.
He was the man who was appointed to be the vicar,
the parish vicar in a village called Bramford Speak.
Now, the local bishop,
Bishop Phil Potts of Exeter,
refused to accept Gorham on a doctrinal point.
He said,
Gorham is a Calvinist who believes in absolute human depravity
and denies the regeneration of the soul in baptism.
So the bishop said,
I refuse to have him installed in this parish church.
Now, in those days, the Church of England
had an elaborate structure of church courts,
and so the case was taken to the church courts to arbitrate
was Gorham entitled to the living at Bramford Speak,
or should the bishop's view prevail?
Well, the church courts upheld the bishop and said,
yes, the bishop was justified in rejecting Gorham from the living,
but then Gorham appealed to the Privy Council,
that is, to a political body,
and the Privy Council, after hearing the case,
overturned the bishop and overturned the verdict of the church courts
with the result that Gorham was installed after all.
Now, Henry Manning hearing news of this was horrified
because, once again, it showed all too clearly
the fact that the Church of England was not a supernatural society,
it was a branch of the state.
When it came to the point, the politicians were going to decide.
One of the reasons that some Anglicans were so horrified
by Catholic emancipation was that it meant that,
conceivably, a Roman Catholic could become Prime Minister,
and then he'd have the responsibility for appointing the Anglican bishops.
You see, that kind of paradox.
And again, when Jewish emancipation was brought into Parliament
in the late 50s, same quick question came up again.
Oh, we're really going to have Catholic and Jewish people
deciding who are the nominees of the Church of England.
So Manning also converted to Roman Catholicism.
These two men, Newman and Manning,
had a transformative effect on Roman Catholicism in Britain
for the rest of the century, as we'll see in a minute.
Well, the other leaders of the Oxford movement
remained ostentatiously loyal to the state church.
In Anglo-Catholicism, the High Church movement began to reach out,
particularly into urban slum districts,
in the hope of being able to recapture the working people,
many of whom weren't going to church at all.
The mid-Victorian period was a very vigorous era of church building.
Between 1840 and 1876,
the Church of England built 1,700 new churches,
mainly in the industrial towns,
and they restored about 7,000 more,
so an enormous quantity of resources were devoted to improving church buildings.
Some of the ones they made, nearly all of which are still there,
were very beautiful.
They were built according to the principles of neogothic architecture,
made to look as though they were much older,
emphasizing the continuity from the Middle Ages into their own day.
And they were much more beautifully decked out
than had been the tradition for the previous 300 years ever since the Reformation.
They tended to be elaborately painted inside.
The pulpits would be moved to one side,
and the congregation's attention focused on the altar.
There was an emphasis on sacraments,
on the clergy wearing brilliant liturgical clothes,
introduction of church choirs,
the singing of great hymns,
vestments, rituals, candles,
genuflection before the altar,
even the sprinkling of holy water in some cases.
Activities which might be construed as Catholic,
but all taking place within the Anglican church.
There was a de-emphasis on preaching,
which was so central to the evangelical side of the Anglican church.
Now, the dismissive word for all these kinds of things is,
smells and bells.
There was the idea that there was lots of ritual activity going on inside the church.
But the high churchmen were right to think that
they'd get a bigger working-class audience with this kind of display,
than they would have got if they were going to have
two-hour sermons on theological points,
on close Biblical exegesis.
It's not that they weren't interested in Biblical matters, they were,
but the relative emphasis had moved over
to these more liturgical and sacramental activities.
Now let's look at what was happening in the Catholic church in Britain.
It gained its recruits mainly from Ireland,
and there was a steady stream of Irish immigration into Britain
all through the 19th century,
but suddenly intensified after the terrible Irish famine of 1846 to 8.
A smaller supply of recruits was coming in from conversions,
people like Newman and Manning, and people who were influenced by them.
Now it's important to understand just how intense
anti-Catholic prejudice really was among the Anglican majority.
Ever since the Reformation,
the ordinary British view had been that Catholicism
was practically synonymous with treason,
because certainly all through the 16th and 17th centuries,
Britain's enemies had been Catholic nations,
Spain at the time of the Armada,
France through generations of wars.
So the assumption was if you were a Catholic,
that might very well mean that you're an enemy spy or an enemy agent,
or that you'd secretly hope that the Catholic enemy was going to prevail
and overthrow the rights of Protestant England.
One of the annual festivals in England on every November the 5th,
it still persists right up to the present, was Guy Fawkes Day.
This is the day in England when the children have fireworks,
and it's to commemorate the time when a conspiracy to blow up the houses of Parliament
by a group of Catholics was discovered just in time,
and so kids right up to the present burn a model figure called a guy on a bonfire
and let our fireworks. It's an anti-Catholic festival of rejoicing,
because in my day the Catholic kids loved it just as much as everybody else,
by then its origins had largely been forgotten.
One of the great books read by members of the Church of England was
Fox's Book of Martyrs, published in 1559,
to commemorate the suffering of the early Protestant bishops
in the face of Queen Mary of England,
who tried to drag England back into the Catholic fold.
There was the idea that to be a Catholic meant that you were the follower
of a foreign monarch, an Italian, an Italian king in Rome,
that you had necessarily divided loyalties between Britain and Italy.
And there were lots of stories about how convents were really brothels
in which the priests and the nuns had frenzied sex,
and so on, flagellation, infanticide, all sorts of lurid stories.
There were even some ex-priests, there was a man called Giacinto Achilli,
an ex-Dominican priest who was on the English lecture circuit,
and he'd pay a few pennies to go in and listen to him,
and he'd describe the horrors of Catholic life.
It provided the same kind of function then that the tabloid newspapers do now,
lurid wild stories, but it's all alleged to be true.
Well, there were a handful of traditionally Catholic families in England
who we remember as the recusants.
Recusancy meant not going to the Church of England,
and of course Catholics wouldn't.
They'd had to pay recusancy fines throughout the centuries since the Reformation.
But now, as I say, the Catholic population is swelling,
particularly because of Catholic immigration from Ireland.
There were about 500 Catholic priests in England in 1840,
but about 2,500 by 1890, so a very rapid growth.
And the Catholics were more successful in keeping the loyalty of working-class members
than the Anglican Church was.
Now, at the same time, converts are coming in, people like Newman.
They were a source of pleasure to the Catholic bishops.
Obviously, it was pleasing to see that some Anglicans were finally waking up to the truth,
as they saw it, but it was also a source of anxiety
because they tended to be very intellectually adventurous.
That's how they'd come to Catholicism in the first place,
and they remained intellectually adventurous when they got there.
There were several cases where converts got into trouble with the authorities
because of their ideas.
One was an evolutionary biologist called Saint George Mivart,
and another was a theologian called George Tyrrell.
Both of them continued to elaborate their ideas
in a way which the Catholic authorities found very jarring,
and each of them was ultimately excommunicated.
I'd like to read you a little passage from Newman's book,
the Apollosia Provita Sua.
In the early 60s, he was criticized by Charles Kingsley, the novelists,
who was himself an Anglican clergyman.
Kingsley couldn't believe that Newman could have converted in good faith,
and Newman's Apollosia is a spiritual autobiography
in which he asserts that he was dead serious in his conversion
and that it was based upon a lifetime of religious study.
It was quickly recognized as a masterpiece by Anglicans and Catholics alike,
although you have to be very interested in these religious matters
to read it attentively from end to end.
But here's a little glimpse of how Newman's life was spent.
He's talking about his reading as a child or as a teenager.
Now I come to two works which produced a deep impression on me,
each contrary to each,
and planting in me the seeds of an intellectual inconsistency
which disabled me for a long course of years.
I read Joseph Milner's Church History
and was nothing short of enamored of the long extracts from St. Augustine,
St. Ambrose, and the other church fathers which I found there.
I read them as being the religion of the primitive Christians.
But simultaneously with Milner, I read Newton on the prophecies,
and in consequence became most firmly convinced
that the Pope was the Antichrist predicted by Daniel, St. Paul, and St. John.
My imagination was stained by the effects of this doctrine
up to the year 1843.
It had been obliterated from my reason and judgment at an earlier date
that the thought remained upon me as a sort of false conscience.
Hence came that conflict of mind which so many have felt besides myself,
leading some men to make a compromise between two ideas
so inconsistent with each other,
driving others to beat out one idea or other from their minds,
and ending in my own case after many years of intellectual unrest
in the gradual decay and extinction of one of them.
I do not say it's a violent death.
But why should I not have murdered it sooner if I murdered it at all?
Well, that's a typical passage. It's very involuted,
and he's agonizing one by one over the history of his treatment of the doctrines.
He was a great thinker about the process of thought.
He wrote some interesting work on religious psychology later on.
How is it that we come to an appreciation of faith itself?
What's the connection between faith and reason?
Well, in 1850, the Catholic Church decided that it was going to re-institute a national hierarchy.
It was going to set up its own system of bishops inside Britain.
Ever since the Reformation, there hadn't been any legally recognized Catholic hierarchy in Britain.
And in doing so, it set off a great fury of anti-Catholicism.
In several places, particularly in the Liverpool area, there were anti-Catholic riots in the streets.
And Lord John Russell himself, the Prime Minister,
wrote a furious letter to the Times denouncing what he called the papal aggression.
See, it's very, very widespread at the highest levels of society
that Catholics are a terrible threat to the nation.
Parliament passed legislation prohibiting the Catholics from duplicating any Anglican titles.
In other words, because the head of the English Church was the Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Catholics weren't allowed to have a bishop in Canterbury,
so their head became the Archbishop of Westminster and so on.
Now, the second of the converts I mentioned earlier, Henry Manning,
eventually became the Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster.
That is, 14 or 15 years after converting, he became the head of the English Catholics
and went on to become a luminous figure in English public life,
widely loved, particularly in the Catholic working classes,
for his sympathetic attention to the needs of the Irish working-class people in England.
And when he died in 1892, tens of thousands of Londoners,
Irish and Catholic and Protestant sometimes alike, lined the streets.
He managed to create once more for Catholicism the idea that it was a component of British life.
While all these things were going on, there were new intellectual trends
disturbing the Christian sense of assurance.
And Darwin's publication of The Origin of Species in 1859
is the single most important one of these.
Because Darwin's version of human origins was, of course, quite different
from the idea presented in the book of Genesis,
and it raised the possibility that Genesis wasn't reliable as history.
Huxley was one of Darwin's most enthusiastic supporters.
One of his nicknames was Darwin's Bulldog.
He'd very often go and argue that Darwin himself was a shy and retiring man
who suffered from bad health.
But Huxley was a great, healthy, enthusiastic, controversialist,
often out in public defending Darwin's ideas.
He had a famous meeting in 1860 with the Bishop of Oxford, Samuel Wilberforce.
They met in the New Oxford Museum of Science to debate the rights and wrongs of the theory.
Wilberforce said it was degrading to humanity to trace its descent to the apes,
a point which has often been made since by critics of evolution.
But Huxley answered him,
if I had to choose, I would prefer to be a descendant of a humble monkey
than of a man who employs his knowledge and eloquence
in misrepresenting those who are wearing out their lives in the search for truth.
In other words, much better to face up to the shocking realities
than act as though it wasn't true in the face of accumulating evidence.
Many Anglicans, rather than posing a stark opposition to evolutionary theory,
found ways to adapt it to their faith to say that Christianity is itself
an evolving process and that the two are compatible.
Here's an Anglican Darwinist called Stuart Hedlum preaching in 1879.
And he says,
Thank God that the scientific men have shattered the idol of an infallible book,
broken the fetters of a supposed divine code of rules.
But so they have helped to reveal Jesus Christ in his majesty.
He, we say, is the Word of God.
He is inspiring you, encouraging you, strengthening you in your scientific studies.
He is the wisdom in Liel or Darwin.
In other words, he's abandoning biblical literalism
and saying rather it's God's spirit which infuses the work of the modern scientists.
Another great furory developed in the Anglican Church in 1861
with the publication of a book called Essays and Reviews.
It was a set of essays of critical study on the Bible,
picking up techniques which were already becoming common in Germany.
That is particularly looking at biblical texts,
not with a lot of doctrinal preconceptions,
but simply saying, let's investigate these things in the way that we'd investigate any other historical text.
Let's be attentive to the fact that all the ancient religions of the Near East had a creation story.
They all had a flood myth.
Let's not assume that the story of Noah's flood is true and that all the others aren't.
Let's just do a comparison of each of them in turn.
And the Spirit of Intellectual Inquirer which governed this book, Essays and Reviews,
again set off a lot of controversy.
One contributor C.W. Goodwin at Don at Cambridge said
that the Genesis creation story shouldn't be regarded as history at all.
It should be regarded as an old Hebrew myth.
Well, several of the contributors, those who were clergymen,
were put on trial in the church courts for heresy.
That is for writing in a way which violated the spirit and the traditions of the church.
But as one lay critic of these trials said in a letter to the Times,
quote, what we all want is, briefly, not a condemnation, but a refutation.
The age when ecclesiastical censures were sufficient in such cases has passed away.
A large portion of the laity now, though unqualified for abstruse theological investigations,
are yet competent to hear and decide on theological arguments.
These men will not be satisfied by an ex-cathedra shelving of the question,
nor terrified by a deduction of awful consequences.
Philosophy and history have taught them to seek not what is safe, but what is true.
Well, this is the atmosphere in which Thomas Huxley gives the name to agnosticism.
He and growing numbers of Victorians, another famous example would be the novelist George Eliot,
had become doubtful about Christianity not only because of the new critical methods
and not only because of the Darwinian Revolution, but also because of ethical objections.
When they re-read the Old Testament, they were horrified by God's brutality.
Those of you who are familiar with it will know that God very often acts in what seems like an extremely high-handed way.
King Saul, for example, loses God's favor because he's not sufficiently ruthless in exterminating his prisoners.
George Eliot and Huxley and others began to say,
do we really want to regard as absolutely reliable for our guidance a book which teaches us lessons of such a ruthless God as that?
Huxley himself wasn't a defined atheist.
He admitted that all these religious questions were very much up in the air.
He said we've got no definite empirical evidence to support the idea of an afterlife or of an all-powerful God,
but we've got no evidence against it either.
He told one of his friends that the idea of eternal life, quote,
is not half so wonderful as the idea of the conservation of force or the indestructibility of matter.
Whosoever clearly appreciates all that is implied in the falling of a stone
can have no difficulty about any doctrine simply on account of its marvelousness.
So there we are, critical of theologians who are asserting the faith,
but critical also of positives who are asserting the denial of God.
Another craze of the period which Queen Victoria herself became involved in
was spiritualism, the holding of seances.
She was very enthusiastic partly because she hoped to be able to communicate with Prince Albert after his death.
Now as the British Empire expanded around the world,
it brought into its possessions more and more people from different religions.
And that also was a motive for the development of comparative religion.
And I'd like to end this lecture by giving you an example of a Victorian family
which had got representatives of several religions in it.
And this is an anecdote from Bertrand Russell's autobiography.
He's talking about his grandmother, Lady Stanley of Alderley.
Quote, her eldest son was a Mohammedan and almost stone deaf.
Her second son Lylef was a free thinker and spent his time fighting the church on the London school board.
Her third son Alginon was a Roman Catholic priest, a papal chamberlain.
Lylef was a witty, encyclopedic and caustic man.
Alginon was witty, fat and greedy.
Henry the Mohammedan was devoid of all the family merits
and was, I think, the greatest bore I have ever known.
At Sunday luncheons there would be vehement arguments for,
among the daughters and sons-in-law, there were also representatives of the Church of England,
Unitarianism and Positivism to be added to the religions represented by the sons.
A favorite trick of my uncle Lylef at these luncheons was to ask,
Who is there here who believes in the literal truth of the story of Adam and Eve?
His object in asking the question was to compel the Mohammedan and the Catholic priest
to agree with each other, which they hated doing.
Well, there we are. That's a little glimpse of the growing religious complexity
of Britain as the 19th century progressed.
