Lecture 10 Work and Working Class Life
The Industrial Revolution continued to accelerate in the Victorian period, but not everywhere
and not all at once. There were big regional variations of the type of work that people
did. And there was a great deal of un-mechanized, non-factory work persisting far into the
Victorian period, even as the factories became a more and more important component of the
industrial landscape. It's impossible to exaggerate the intense regionalism of British
life. People living in different areas of the country rarely encountered one another.
The regional accents were very, very strong and distinct. Their mutual suspicions were
strong and distinct as well. There was an intense localism about life, and even though
the railways were beginning to break it down, still, to understand a subject like work,
which is the issue in this lecture, you need to tour around Britain a good deal to look
at the sample work in different places. Pre-industrial working conditions were also highly varied.
For example, if you didn't have a factory, you tended to have a great variation in the
number of hours people would work and how they'd use those hours over the course of
the week. They were extremely irregular. And most trades before they were subjected to
factory discipline tended to alternate between bouts of intensely pressurized work and long
periods of idleness. From preference, people would work in that way. For example, among
the cutlers, people who made knives and forks, coopers, barrel makers and shipbuilders, there
was a well-established tradition called Saint Monday. Money wasn't really a saint, but the
idea was that if it's a saint's day, you take the day off. So Saint Monday was a day when
routinely people didn't come into work. It was common, for example, in the shipbuilding
yards for work to knock off on Saturday afternoon, maybe for the boss to bring in a barrel of
beer, for the men to sit around drinking, for them to take the whole of Sunday off, and
sometimes the whole of Monday as well, but then to work with accelerating determination
and energy for the rest of the week.
Joseph Matthew wrote a song called The Jovial Cutlers, and this is about the men of Sheffield
at Yorkshire Cutlery Town enjoying Saint Monday.
Brother workmen, cease your labor, lay your files and hammers by. Listen while a brother
neighbor sings a Cutler's destiny, how upon a good Saint Monday, sitting by the smithy
fire, tellin' what's been done at Sunday, and in cheerful mirth conspire.
It was very much like the way in which college students live today, picture yourself as a
college student, only a very tiny minority worker systematic eight hours or ten hours
every day. Most, for example, only do a writing project when they've absolutely got to, they
respond to last minute deadlines, something I'm very familiar with.
So, the rhythm of work was irregular, and as I mentioned in one of the earlier lectures,
one of the stresses of switching over to a more mechanized system was having to learn
a new kind of factory discipline of going at the same clock time every day, rather than
according to the season and the day of the week. It was common for every trade to have
its own traditions for days off, not only Saint Monday, but also particular Saint's
days, especially if it was the patron saint of the trade in question. The shoemaker's
patron was Saint Crispin, the iron worker's patron was Saint Clement. Dockyard workers
wouldn't go to work on the King's or Queen's birthday.
Coal miners had a tradition called Gordy Day, and one of them heard a cuckoo for the first
time in spring. It denounced it's Gordy Day, and nobody would go to work. Things like that,
these are the kinds of customs which the first duer generation of factory owners were trying
to break.
Access to work was also highly irregular in many trades. A good example here would be
the Dockyard workers. Before the invention of steamships, the sailing ships were obviously
at the mercy of the wind, and that meant that regularly ships would be unable to get into
harbour until they had favorable wind conditions. So, it was often a condition of feast or famine.
There'd be no ships coming in because of the wind, then suddenly a whole lot would come
in all at once and would need to be unloaded and relayed and so on. So, the workers were
alternating between bouts of idleness and bouts of intense work.
Farm labour was highly seasonal. As the number of landless farm labourers increased, there
would be times when there was abundant work for everybody, particularly harvest time in
the early autumn, and other times when there was very little farm work to be done, particularly
during the winter. Shipbuilders were very often idle between contracts that have a contract
to make a ship, and when it was done, they'd then have to wait for another one.
In 1849, one of the London newspapers, The Morning Chronicle, began to do a nationwide
survey of the kinds of work that were being done all around the country. Its readership
was middle class, and the paper was telling its middle class readership, here's what
the English working classes are doing. It's a very valuable source to historians as well
because we can still read these reports.
And a boat builder told the journalist who was going around. He said, I'm not employed,
very few of us are, three quarters of the time. And taking the year through as a whole,
I don't earn more than a guinea a week, that's slightly more than one pound. I'm
only hard at work this month, but have nothing to do for the next fortnight, but go from
yard to yard, only to be told that I'm not wanted. So again, fluctuation between idleness
and intense work.
In Cornwall, that's in the extreme southwest of England, the lead miners had regular work,
but they didn't have regular pay. That was because they were only paid for the, actually
for the lead ore which they brought up. All the time that they were digging tunnels and
passages or the shafts to get to the lead ore, they had to do the work, but they weren't
paid for it. So again, it was very undependable when money was going to come in and when not.
Once they encountered a good load, they might be able to generate a hundred pounds per month
per man, but that might only happen for two or three weeks in the entire year.
So many, many occupations suffered from chronic underemployment and chronic uncertainty about
whether money was going to be coming in. It was common also in many jobs for payment
to be made, not in money, but in kind. It was becoming less common, but the tradition
of payment in kind remained tenacious.
In the county of Dorset, for example, the county about which Thomas Hardy fictionalized
as Wessex, the quarrymen there were actually paid in stone. They dug out, they dug stone
out of the ground and they were paid in stone. Sometimes if they, if they had to, if they
were owed a small amount, they'd be paid in bread, but usually, but those are the two
mediums of exchange, stone and bread.
Fishermen, the usual, the usual technique among the fishermen in all the coastal towns
was to be paid not money, even if you were an employee, but to be paid a share of the
catch. There was actually, to be actually physically given a lot of fish, which you could then
use as currency in bartering in the local community for other things you needed.
There were great status differences within the working class. I mentioned this previously
in talking about working class women. It's certainly equally true of the men. In lots
of trades, the, the aristocracy of labor, the men with the highest levels of skill also
have the, the steadiest work and were allowed to give themselves as and graces. For example,
carriage makers, the people who, who made horse drawn carriages. There was a rigid hierarchy.
The body makers, people actually made the body of the carriage with the most skilled.
Below them were the trimers, below them were the smiths and the spring makers, blacksmiths.
Below them were the wheelwrights, then the painters, then the brace makers. And the carriage
makers at the top, wouldn't dream of even speaking to the brace makers except to order
them around within the works.
Payment itself, it's something we're familiar with now, but the idea of payment according
to market value was itself only beginning to catch on. Rather, most commodities, the
idea was that there was a just price. The payment for the creation of a commodity was
sometimes fixed for decades and decades. And the workmen would say, that's the just price
for this commodity. They didn't have the idea of market fluctuation with which we're so
familiar now. And the notion of a wage rate, which was commensurate with the number of
hours of work done, only developed gradually.
Each occupation had its own characteristic dress. If you're a shepherd, you'd have a very
distinctive smock frock. There's an interesting scene in Hardy's novel, Far From the Madding
Crowd. Gabriel Oak, looking for work as a shepherd, buys a smock frock and then goes
to stand in the market. And prospective employers, by looking at him, can say, oh, he's a shepherd.
He can tell from the dress. And sure enough, he gets hired in that way.
Now one of the shocking aspects of this is that most working people had no change of
clothes. They'd have the clothes that they'd got. And that would be it. Here's the report.
Again, the morning Chronicle reports from 1849. It noted, quote, farm laborers wear flannel
whilst at work. But few have a change, even of that. The consequence is that they wear
the same garment next to the skin day and night. Although for many hours of the day,
it may have been soaked with perspiration. They'd often sleep in their clothes as well.
You remember in My Fair Lady, Eliza Doolittle hates the idea of being undressed to be given
a bath because she's got no experience of it. Now as late as the 1930s, George Orwell
commented that one of the reasons the English middle classes hated the working classes was
because the working class smelt so bad. We have to take seriously the fact that it was
probably true. The distinctive clothing of fishermen, hard weather gear. Here's the morning
Chronicle again. The fisherman's enormous boots form an expensive as well as a prominent
item in his attire. The poor fellows have generally their names marked upon the breast
of their jersey jackets so that they may be recognized in cases of casualty. Because the
fishermen were often drowned, it was a way you could instantly tell who it was. Now all
these kinds of, all the irregular ways of work have to be abandoned once men began to
go into the factories. And as one by one, industries switched over to factory work,
they had to develop the new industrial discipline, which I've mentioned on several occasions.
And it was Adam Smith who'd realized back in the 1770s that the more you broke down
the components of a job, the more efficiently it was going to be done, even though the price
paid for that was of intensified boredom in the work itself.
A common metaphor used by writers, or used by working people themselves and also by writers
watching work in the way it was becoming familiar, was comparing people with machines, saying
the workers have been ground down until they just like the machines. Here's an observer
of a Manchester factory. Whilst the engine runs, the people must work. Men, women and
children are yoked together with iron and steam. The animal machine, breakable in the
best case, subject to a thousand sources of suffering, is chained fast to the iron machine,
which knows no suffering and no weariness. This idea that the machines are absolutely
implacable and that the people have been chained to them. There's a horrible destiny.
And inside the towns, particularly smoky places like Manchester, a grinding sense of monotony
and squalor. The one novel of Charles Dickens, which is set in the north, is Hard Times,
where he takes up some of the issues of industrial work. And the town that is a fictional town
called Coke Town, but is reminiscent of many of the northern manufacturing cities. And
here's Dickens' description of it. It had a black canal in it and a river that ran
purple with ill-smelling dye and vast piles of buildings full of windows where there was
a rattling and a trembling all day long, and where the pistons of the steam engine worked
monotonously up and down, like the head of an elephant in a state of melancholy madness.
It contained several large streets, all very like one another, and many small streets still
more like one another, inhabited by people equally like one another, who all went in
and out at the same hours with the same sound upon the same pavements to do the same work,
and to whom every day was the same as yesterday and tomorrow and every year the counterpart
of the last year and the next. It's a wonderful bravura passage which goes on about this awful
feeling of blackness, monotony, repetition, and anonymity. One of the ways in which the
factory owners tried to ensure discipline was by finding people very heavily for arriving
late or stopping early. Sometimes you could lose half a day's pay for being a few minutes
late at the factory. And of course the pay was very low. In factories which paid according
to peace rates, there was a constant squabble before and certainly after the creation of
trade unions. What the boss wanted to do obviously was to speed up the machinery as much as possible
and make the peace rate low, in other words make the workers make a lot of them to get
paid for it. What the workers always tried to do was to slow down the machinery and get
a high peace rate to claim, we can't make very many, so you've got to pay us a good wage
for each one that we make. This is the tension within the pacing of factories. And we've
got lots of stories about workers intimidating one of their own brethren who was too enthusiastic.
If a young man came to the factory and said, oh I can make 100 of these in the hour, his
older colleagues would say, no, no, you can make 25. And we'll force you if necessary.
Well, I mentioned again talking about the women that each occupation had its characteristic
illnesses. Coal miners were, coal mining was the single most dangerous job in Britain,
and that remains true right up to the present. They suffered particularly from silicosis
and lung cancer. If they even reached old age, if they weren't killed first in mines
caving in or explosions or asphyxiation from methane gas or from fires, they were very
likely to die prematurely from lung diseases because the inhalation of coal dust all the
time was so intense. Another of the jobs which caused a great scandal in the mid-Victorian
period was the work of the sweeps boys. Now, you have to imagine that every household in
the country had a fireplace that were used for heating and also for cooking. And because
the coal that they were burning had a very, very high soot content, the soot would accumulate
in the chimneys and they'd have to be cleaned fairly regularly two or three times a year
if the fire was constantly in use. And because very often they were labyrinths, the chimneys,
it was very difficult to clean them except by sending a small person up the chimney to
clean out the soot. And the sweeps boys, there's a book about it by Charles Kingsley, The Water
Babies. The sweeps boys are one of the most unfortunate groups of working English people.
They had to start the job very young because they were the littlest ones, the ones who
could get into the tight corners in the chimneys. Repeatedly, Parliament passed laws to prevent
the sweeps boys, but the fact that they kept having to pass such laws shows us that they
weren't being enforced. Obviously, you don't pass a law against an activity which isn't
going on. So the recurrence of the legislation shows us that it was going on even when it
was technically illegal. And regularly the sweeps boys died. They'd get stuck in awkward
parts of the chimneys and be unable to get down. They'd become asphyxiated from smoke
and fumes still in the chimneys. They'd have broken bones. Very often what the master sweep
would do would be to tie a rope around the boys' ankle. So he'd go up the chimney and
if he got stuck the boss would pull on the rope to get him down again. And there were
stories of reluctant sweeps boys having a fire lit under them to force them to go up
the chimney more quickly to get rid of the soot. So horrible, horrible working conditions
and an extremely high death rate. Here's a master sweep giving evidence to a Parliamentary
Commission in 1863. He admitted that it was a horrible way of life. But he said, I have
lost a great amount of custom which I should otherwise have. I've been sent away even from
magistrates' houses and even in some cases by ladies who've professed to pity the boys
for refusing to use them. In other words, if you're a sweep and you said, no, I'm not
going to use the climbing boys. I'm going to use brushes with long attachments instead.
The prevailing wisdom among the customers was, you're not going to do a very good job. You're
only going to get a good job if you send the sweeps boys up there. So this master is claiming,
well, I've got to do it because my customers are insisting upon it. And the same man described
the way in which he'd prepare the boys by rubbing brine, that is, salt water, into the
boys' joints to try to roughen the skin there and then holding them against the fire to
make thick scabbed skin, which was a bit more resistant to the abrasions of the work in
the chimneys. Clearly impossible to exaggerate the horrors of that way of life.
Clearly everybody doing industrial work was in a highly polluted environment and a highly
dangerous one too because of the size and scale and power of the machinery with which
they were working. There were virtually no health and safety regulations governing the
way in which workplaces should be run. Because there was a tradition that, that's not the
role of the government. Although the government was gradually becoming involved in regulation
of some of these activities, the presumption was very strongly against it.
Now we have a wonderful book by a railway worker called Alfred Williams. He lived in
Swindon, which was the place where the locomotives and the carriages and the wagons were actually
made to run on his and Bard Brunel's Great Western Railway, Swindon. And he wrote a book
about his life as a working man, very, very unusual, of course, to have a working man's
autobiography. Here's a little description of his working conditions.
Sickness and accidents are a frequent occurrence in the sheds. The first named may be attributed
to the foul air prevailing, the dense smoke and fumes from the oil forges, and the thick
sharp dust and ashes from the coke fires. The tremendous noise of the hammers and machinery
and the priming of the boilers have a most injurious effect upon the body as well as
upon the nervous system. It's all intensely painful and wearisome to the workmen. As soon
as you enter into the smoke and fumes, you're sure to begin sniffing and sneezing. The black
dust and filth is being breathed into the chest and lungs at every moment. The percentage
of sickness and accidents is higher at the stamping shed than in any other workshop in
the factory. The accidents are of many kinds, though they are chiefly scalds and burns,
broken and crushed limbs, and injuries to the eyes. When the workman is not feeling
well, he's liable to meet with an accident at any moment. He has not been the keen sense
of danger necessary under such conditions, or if he has this, he has not the power in
himself to guard against it. He has a vague idea that he is running risks, but he's too
dazed or ill fully to realize it. He is thus often guilty of great self-neglect, amounting
to madness that was ignorant of it at the time. In other words, it actually impairs your
mental capacities altogether when you're in this incredible smoky, rickety environment.
He says in another passage that so much oily smoke gets into your body that your skin is
saturated by it. He says that however thoroughly he washes, whenever he wakes up, there are
black residues on the pillow because it's under his eyelids and at the backs of his
eyeballs and so on, and that only by stopping work altogether over the space of several
weeks can you eventually work all the soot and smoke out of your bodily cavities.
The Cornhill Magazine, again a magazine designed for middle-class readers, reported in 1862
on the life of coal miners in Tyneside. This is in the extreme northeast, Newcastle on
Tynes. The real getters of coal are the so-called hewers. In a small, corner-like recess,
full of floating coal dust and noisome with bad air and miscellaneous refuse and garbage,
glimmer three or four candles stuck in clay which adheres to the wall and the roof. Close
and deliberate scrutiny will discover one hewer, nearly naked, lying upon his back, elevating
his small, sharp pickaxe a little above his nose and picking into the coal seam with might
and mane. If it is too horribly embedded, gunpowder is employed and the mineral is blasted
free. The dull, muffled, roof-shaking boom that follows each blast startling the air
over the novice. And again, he says, after these explosions, an enormous cloud of dust
and acrid smoke pours through the mineshafts, choking and making it almost impossible, certainly
for the observer who was not used to it, to breathe at all, all this accompanied by the
constant threat that the explosions will actually bring down the roof altogether.
Out of the scandals over which there was a great deal of literary protest was coal mining
and particularly the use of women and children in coal mines. Here's Harriet Martino writing
about it.
Women were employed as beasts of burden. Children were stunted and diseased, beaten, overworked,
oppressed in every way. Women and children were made to crawl on all thaws in low passages
of the pits, dragging carts by a chain passing from the waist between the legs and all lived
in an atmosphere of filth and profligacy which could hardly leave a thought or a feeling
untainted by vice. She describes also the work of one set of children, again usually
between the ages of about five and nine in the mines, whose job was as trappers. And
a trapper just was a child who sat by a door, an underground door, and opened it to let
through the carts being dragged by the older children and the women. The reason for these
doors was to make sure that adequate air from the top could go through the ventilation systems
to the appropriate area of the mine, depending on which area was being used at the time.
But the trapper children would have to, they'd do 12 hour shifts and let it in complete darkness
because candles were a luxury which they were entitled to bring in but they didn't want
to spend the money on it. Candles themselves were quite expensive.
Well, workers struggle in the face of these kinds of hardships, always to keep some control
over working conditions if they could. The Durham coal miners, for example, used a daily
lottery to allocate workplaces. Some workplaces were more profitable than others, some were
more dangerous than others. So every day they'd have an event called cavilling. And one of
the miners says, this lottery gives everyone the same chance of good and bad places and
prevents union men and agitators from being victimized with bad and dangerous workplaces
and crawlers and gaffers men, that is collaborators with the boss, from getting the good places
as a reward for their collaboration. Sometimes in the factory system, for example, in the
iron and steel system, skilled forge operators retain some autonomy over their own work even
though they're now integrated into the factory. In other words, the boss would say to them,
here's what's got to get made, you can make it on your own schedule. They try to keep
up the tradition of St. Monday even though they're now working in the factory. But it
was the dream of many people, many working people, to get out of the factories if they
could and become entrepreneurs in their own right. Penny capitalists. Again, I mentioned
women working as street peddlers or running cabs around the city streets or buying shares
in a fishing boat. That's a way of beginning, at least beginning to feel that they've got
some autonomy economically. Now, a historian called John Benson says, when we're studying
people's work, we've got to take seriously the fact that a lot of people worked, he puts
the word in quotes, he says, we need to think about things like begging in the countryside,
poaching and stealing fruit, scavenging, shoplifting, prostitution and theft. These are all forms
of work in the sense that they're activities to which people devoted a lot of time and energy.
That we can't be solely content with looking at wage work. And it's certainly true that,
for example, shoplifting and petty theft was very widespread. Here's an Edinburgh man
talking to an interviewer just after the turn of the century and recalling his childhood
in Victorian Edinburgh. My mother used to send Jimmy or me for a couple of half loaves,
a tin of milk, something like that, you know. Well, Jimmy and me would work out a plan of
action and go into the shop to see if we could skim something off it. And my mother, she'd
said, get two apples. I've seen me coming back with four. She said, get a pound of tatty's
potatoes. I've seen me coming back with a pack, seven pounds. Things like that, see,
we used to nab it, steal them in the shop. And it's quite clear from the way in which
he describes it that if you can get away with it, that's fine. There's no moral objection
in his description of his shoplifting. In coal mining districts, an activity called picking
was the children's duty. That is to go to the slag heaps, the waste heaps at the mines,
to look for little fragments of coal. And in rural districts, children were required,
if they could, to steal fruit from the orchards of the big farmers nearby. So scavenging and
picking and petty theft, really. There were severe laws to try to prevent poaching, but
nevertheless it went on all the time, particularly against game birds.
Working class neighborhoods were densely populated, smoky, neighborly, and gossipy. They weren't
private at all. There was far too many people living in a concentrated place. And sometimes
they could be amicable and quite open. Here's the morning chronicle again from 1849, talking
about a Lancashire mill town in summer. In most cases, the doors of the houses stand
hospitably open, and younger children cluster over the thresholds and swarm out upon the
pavement. Every evening after mill hours, these streets present a scene of considerable
quiet enjoyment. The people all appear to be on the best of terms with each other and
laugh and gossip from window to window and from door to door. The women in particular
are fond of sitting in groups upon their thresholds, sowing and knitting. The children sprawl
about besides them. And there is an amount of sweet-hearting going forward which is naturally
to be looked for under such circumstances. So there we are at a glance on one of the
few nice days in the summer that Lancashire is blessed with. Things can look pretty good,
but it's quite clear that behind the scenes there's an enormous amount of stress and
tension, particularly when the men drank. Drink really was a great evil in Victorian Britain.
And although temperance crusades have now themselves got a rather rickety look, it's
very easy to understand why temperance should have generated so much enthusiasm at the time.
A woman from St. Helens in Lancashire recalled, quote, men were tyrants. There was an awful
lot of wife beating and women were the underdogs. My mother slept in the outside lavatory at
times to get away from him. The men that didn't drink and behaved like that were the worst
of all. When it happened women went to the neighbors' houses, then the husband would
come and kick the door down to get the wife out. It was just a way of life. It's a very,
very high degree of domestic violence. But the amount of drinking, of working-class drinking
does seem to have been declining during the Victorian period. Among the shipbuilders,
for example, an observer said, within these 20 years the shipbuilders generally were hard
drinkers, but now I'm assured that are 50 steady men to one tipler, in other words it's
becoming rarer. Or among the coopers, the barrel makers, they'd had a very hard drinking
reputation in 1830, but decreasingly so as the century went on. There has been a great
reformation in the drinking habits of the men. There are two causes for this, in my opinion.
One is the closing of the public houses at 12 o'clock on Saturday night and not allowing
them to be opened until after church time on Sunday. And the other is the cheapness of
railway travelling, so that the men are induced to go a little way into the countryside on
a Sunday instead of wasting their money and ruining their health in taverns.
Among the Birmingham brass workers, again, and here it seems to be, from the evidence
we've got, it seems to be a generational shift. The younger ones who've grown up with the
industrial system aren't such hard drinkers as the older generation who went through the
switch from the old system to the new. And the observer here says, the habits of intemperance,
carelessness and irregularity, which are stated formally to have prevailed among them, only
linger among the older race of workmen, and are fast disappearing among the younger men.
The observance of St. Monday in all such holidays is stated to be almost entirely confined to
the older hands. And it not unfrequently happens, said an intelligent journeyman, that if one
of the workmen absents himself for drunkenness, he returns to the manufacturer amidst the ridicule
and hootings of his comrades. For there we are, the younger men who've adapted themselves
to industrial work discipline tend to be more sober and more regular in their habits than
the older ones. And this is perhaps particularly true about those who'd been impressed by the
evangelical revival, only a minority in the working class, but nevertheless an influential
one. So let me finish you with a remark from a study of the Tyneside miners in 1862, which
says that more and more of the men are becoming methodists. Quote, many may at any hour be
buried alive in a dark pit which shall prove their tomb, may well think of that other world,
into which two of the men entered recently without warning.
Well there we are, when you think about Victorian Britain, don't be distracted by visions of
masterpiece theatre, although what it depicts isn't wrong, the vast majority of Victorian
people were people who had to work very hard for low pay in very bad conditions.
