Poverty has been a common condition throughout British history, and poverty could be just
as acute in the countryside as it was in the new industrial towns, and as we saw last time,
it was the threat of falling into poverty was a constant possibility among a large part
of the working class.
Now urbanization and industrialization brought lots of people together in the cities, and
therefore tended to make poverty more visible than it had been previously, and sometimes
to make its effects more shocking.
The new spirit of utilitarianism, on the one hand, that is the philosophy that a society
ought to be geared towards creating the maximum happiness for the greatest number of people.
And the evangelical reform impulse on the other side in the churches, combined to make poverty
seem more scandalous than it had done previously, as the society is getting wealthier, the idea
that a part of it is still so poor seems more objectionable than it had done previously.
So the hard business conditions of the 1840s, but also the amount of attention given to
the problem of poverty by writers and politicians, made it more visible and more controversial
than ever before.
Academic historians have a continuing debate about the question of whether, with the industrial
revolution, poverty was getting worse, or whether actually economic conditions overall
were being alleviated.
Everybody agrees that in the long run, by the mid-20th century, poverty was far less
acute than it had been 100 years earlier, but did it get worse for a while and then
get better, or were conditions actually becoming steadily better throughout the period?
The evidence is very complicated, the nature of the debate is convoluted.
So without trying to get too deeply into the arcane aspects of that, let's just look at
some of the evidence of poverty and its character and its consequences.
First of all, it was still common that rural poverty was still very common in the countryside.
The enclosure movement had created a class of landless laborers, many of whom were paid
just daily wages when work was available, and very, very close to starvation levels.
Benjamin Disraeli, the man who eventually became a conservative prime minister, in his
early life was a successful novelist, and here's a quotation from one of his novels
called Sibyl, published in 1845, in the middle of this decade, which is remembered as the
Hungry Forties, and it's a description of a thatched cottage in the countryside, which
at first glance is picturesque, but within which conditions of terrible poverty prevail.
With the water streaming down the walls, the light distinguished through the roof, with
no hearth even in the winter, the virtuous mother in the sacred pangs of childbirth gives
forth another victim to our thoughtless civilization.
These swarming walls had neither windows nor doors sufficient to keep out the weather,
or admit the sun, or supply the means of ventilation.
The humid and putrid roof of thatch, exhaling malaria, like all other decaying vegetable
matter, beside the door might be observed the dung heap, on which every kind of filth
was accumulated, for the purpose of being disposed of for manure, so that when the poor man opened
his narrow habitation, in the hope of refreshing it with the breeze of summer, he was met with
a mixture of gases from reeking dung hills.
Well, that's an important insight for us.
Today, if you go to England, especially if you go as a visitor, one of the attractions
you might see is thatched cottages.
Well, certainly when the thatch is new, it looks very picturesque, but of course, thatch
wasn't used for picturesqueries, as it was used as an available material, and as it
decayed, it was in fact not very weatherproof, and potentially dangerous, certainly the home
of vermin and fleas.
Well, it was bad in the cities as well as in the countryside, of course, and as I said
last time, fluctuations in the business cycle and irregularity of work meant that periodically
large numbers of people were thrown out of work with no obvious alternative source of
income.
They no longer had little vegetable plots of their own, on which they could at least
grow some vegetables.
There was no adequate welfare system to compensate the unemployed.
And in trades like mining, there was a lot of seasonal variation depending on what demand
for the product was like.
In the factory system, the businessmen themselves believe very strongly in the in the philosophy
of laissez-faire, which really just means leave us alone.
The businessman's claim was that he was making an individual contract with each workman,
and the workman was free to accept or reject the contract depending on his judgment of
its terms.
Of course, it was a fiction, because really, workmen were in no position to bargain, especially
against someone with the enormous economic power of the employer.
But certainly the belief was widespread that the government ought not to be involved in
matters of that kind.
That's why, although legislation regulating things like ours and eventually wages did
begin, it began haltingly and uncertain and certainly.
And employers who were chastised for paying excessively low wages would say, it's all
very well for you to say that I should pay more wages.
And sure, if it was just up to me, I'd be glad to do so.
But of course, if I paid bigger wages, I'd have to put up the price of the commodity
I'm selling.
And if I did that, my competitors would all undersell me, because they're still paying
low wages.
Therefore, it wouldn't be long before I went out of business.
If I'm making the same stuff and charging more for it, I'm lost.
So in other words, they could say that structural factors compelled them to pay very, very low
wages.
Now until the mid 19th century, the legal situation made it very difficult for working
people to create trade unions.
They were illegal altogether until 1824 because of the Combination Acts.
And even after that, when those acts had been repealed, the legal obstacles against which
a union worked are still very great.
So every family, or nearly every working family, was just a sickness away from absolute poverty.
If the breadwinner was too sick to work, the family could rapidly fall into destitution.
And because working conditions were so insanitary, as we saw last time, and because work was
so undependable, and because public health conditions were so bad, typhoid and typhus
and cholera swept repeatedly through the cities, people chronically suffered from dysentery
and so on, you were always on the brink.
Cholera first appeared in 1831, apparently coming from Asia.
And there were recurrent epidemics in 1849 and 53 and 64.
Now in those days, the theory was that cholera was caused by what's called a miasma, bad
air.
You remember that in that quotation from Disraeli, he says, miasmatic fumes.
The germ theory of disease didn't develop until the 1880s.
Now it was true that the public health conditions were so bad that disease was encouraged.
Contaminated places, standing cesspools, contaminated wells and so on.
One of the worst areas in the London area was a place just south of the River Thames
called Jacobs Island.
And an observer called Henry Mayhew called it the capital of cholera.
Here's his description of the area.
One who ventured to visit the last-name district would not have wondered at the ravages of
the pestilence in that malaria's quarter, bounded as it was on the north and east by
filth and fever, and on the south and west by want, squalor, rags and pestilence.
Spared by the Great Fire of London, the houses and comforts of the people in this loathsome
place had scarcely known any improvement since that time.
The Great Fire of London was way back in 1666.
In the days of Henry II, the foul stagnant ditch that to this day makes an island of
the pestilential spot was a running stream.
But at this date, the running brook was changed into a tidal sewer.
And he says, every time the tide goes out, the sewage is carried away, and when the tide
comes in, most of it comes back again.
Houses were built actually over the river on pilings because a building property space
was at such a premium.
So he says, at some parts of the stream, whole rooms have been built out so that the houses
on opposite sides of the river nearly touched one another.
And there, with the very stench of death arising through the floorboards, human beings slept
night after night until the last sleep of all came upon them years before its time.
He watches people emptying their toilet buckets into this river.
And at the same time, he sees a group of the local neighborhood boys swimming in the river,
not very far away.
And then, to make matters even worse, he sees another kid lowering the drinking water bucket
down into the river.
He says, and yet, as we stood gazing in horror at this fluvial sewer, we saw a child from
one of the galleries opposite lower a tin can with a rope to fill a large bucket that
stood beside her.
And he realizes that she's getting drinking water.
In each of the rude and rotten balconies, indeed, that hung over the stream, the self-same
bucket was to be seen, in which the inhabitants were wont to put the mucky liquid to stand,
so that they might, after it had been left to settle for a day or two, skim the fluid
from the solid particles of filth and pollution which constituted the sediment.
Well, listen to that gruesome.
Again, one of the reforms which was gradually brought about, I'll talk more about this later
on in the course when we deal with issues of public health, is the great problem of
getting adequate drainage and adequate drinking water supplies.
These are matters so basic, which, as they think about them, of course, this society
didn't have them.
Now the working poor, that is people who were periodically on the brink of poverty, found
various ways to cope.
One of them was to get credit at the local shops.
I mentioned previously that a lot of working people, if they could, would become petty
shopkeepers.
To run a shop, you had to be willing to give credit, because you'd know that periodically
the people in your neighborhood would be out of work.
From humane concern, you'd have to give them credit.
And if you didn't, periodically, the shop would simply stop business altogether.
And if you were known in the neighborhood, often the neighborhoods were very gossipy
and local, you'd be familiar with some of these, oh yes, we'll give you tick, tick meant
getting credit.
Pawn brokers were also very, very common.
The whole of every city was covered in pawn brokerages.
Periodically, you'd have to take one of your few possessions to the pawn broker and get
a little bit of money for it, and then when you've got some money, you'd pay a bit more
to get your property back again.
A study made in 1870 showed that the average working class family went to the pawn brokers
30 times every year.
That's not far short of once a week.
And it was regularly to be paid on Saturday, and to make it through part of the week, but
then eventually to run out of money, go to the pawn brokers on Thursday.
You know, the song Pop Goes the Weasel, that's a song about going to the pawn broker.
Popping means paunting.
And the weasel is the iron.
In other words, you can do without the iron for a day or two.
So, Pop Goes the Weasel, down to the pawn brokers to give them the iron and raise a little
bit of money.
Now, the very poorest people of all were the ones who tended to move most often.
They couldn't afford the rent, so they were thrown out, so they went to a new district.
But because of that, they weren't known in the new district, and so it would be much
harder for them to get credit at the local shop.
So those are the poorest people who are that much more likely to become criminals or prostitutes,
because it's become impossible for them to stay on the fair side of the law.
Well, the persistence of poverty was widely studied at the time, and it was widely condemned
as well by all sorts of different groups.
One group were the novelists.
Mrs. Gaskell, who wrote Mary Barton, this is one of the great classic novels of industrial
life, again published in the middle of the 40s in 1848.
She talks about how the Davenport family had first been laid off because of a drop in trade,
and then Mr. Davenport has got sick with typhoid fever.
No dog would have chosen it in preference to the flagstones.
Over it was a piece of sacking coming next to his worn skeleton of a body.
Above him was clustered every article of clothing that could be spared by mother or children
in this bitter weather.
And in addition to his own, these might have given as much warmth as one blanket could they
have been kept on him, but as he restlessly tossed to and fro, they fell off and left
him shivering in spite of the burning heat of his fevered skin.
Every now and then he started up in his naked madness, looking like the prophet of woe in
the fearful plague picture, but soon fell again in exhaustion.
Wilson appeared, this is one of his friends, Wilson appeared carrying in both hands a jug
of steaming tea intended for the poor wife.
But when the delirious husband saw drink he snatched at it with an animal instinct, with
a selfishness he had never shown in health.
A journalist called Henry Mayhew was fascinated by the techniques poor people found for staying
alive in the face of the most desperate circumstances.
And he wrote a classic book called London Labour and the London Poor in 1849.
One of the groups of poverty-stricken individuals that particularly fascinated him were the
orphan children of London.
There were swarms of them, children had been abandoned or whose parents had died in epidemics
and had now lived throughout the city and lots of them appear in Oliver Twist as well.
But Henry Mayhew and Charles Dickens were friends and they compared notes about their
investigations of the life of the poor.
One group who Henry Mayhew found were the mudlarks and these were children whose way
of life was to wait till the tide went out in the river Thames and then to wade out into
the muddy bed of the river to pick up anything of value that was in the river.
Because it was a very busy shipping lane a lot of stuff tended to get thrown out of the
ships and now and again they find stuff of value.
Although not very much value little particles of coal, iron nails which had been used to
hammer the copper cladding onto the sides of ships, bones which you could sell to a
rag and bone man and very often bits of glass.
He said they wade out barefoot because then their feet will detect things.
They're often knee or thigh deep in this mud which is itself just sewage, you know it's
just slimy sewage which has all been tipped into the river and sometimes they cut their
feet on these pieces of glass but then they grovel down into the mud to pick them up and
bring them ashore and they can make a few pennies every day just to keep themselves alive.
And here's Mayhew's description of them.
I collected about a dozen of these unfortunate children.
It was not one of them over twelve years of age and many of them were but six.
It would be almost impossible to describe the wretched group so motley was their appearance,
so extraordinary their dress and so stolid and inexpressive their countenances.
Some carried baskets filled with the produce of their morning's work and others old tin
kettles with iron handles.
Others more needy still had actually taken the caps from their own heads and filled them
with what they had happened to find.
The muddy slush was dripping from their clothes and utensils and forming a puddle in which
they stood.
So here's Mayhew surrounded by this crowd of people who are literally just dripping
with festering mud.
And here I had to chapter about another group, the London Dust Men.
People who because they never washed were always absolutely coated with dust and grime.
Now Mayhew was a good victor.
One of the things the Victorians really loved was statistics, especially these social researchers.
He worked out that every year about 3,500,000 tons of coal was brought into London and that
after it had been burned, it left a residue of about 900,000 tons of ash and the dust
men were the people who dealt with the ash, taking it away from domestic and commercial
properties and selling the particulate ash to the brick makers who could actually recycle
it.
This was a recycling conscious society, incidentally, because nearly everything had got some value,
the stuff that the mudlarks picked up.
It's amazing, isn't it, that there was somebody there to buy it, but there was.
Well he found that entire communities of the dust men actually lived in the ash pits and
that they spent their time sifting through the ashes, just as the mudlarks sifted the
mud so the ash people sifted through the ashes.
And he's a very good observer of the different habits and the different appearances of the
people.
Here's a description of the dust men.
The dust men, in their appearance, very much resemble the wagoners of the coal merchants.
They generally wear knee britches with ankle boots or gaiters, short dirty smockfrocks
or coarse grey jackets and fantail hats.
In one particular, however, they are at first sight distinguishable from the coal merchants
men.
For the latter are invariably black from coal, while the dust men, on the contrary, are grey
with ashes.
So, you could see these black people moving around, they were the coal men, and the grey
people were the ash men.
Another group who may have met were the sweepers.
Again, it was very often orphan boys.
Now, in those days, only some of the city streets were paved, some of them were still
what we call dirt tracks, but all of them were covered in horse manure because horses
were the standard form of transportation.
There were tens of thousands of tons of horse manure all over the city streets.
So, every little street corner, every intersection, would have its crossing sweepers, and little
boys who defended their own little patch of turf very tenaciously against others who tried
to come in.
They'd sweep the mess off the roads, and very often they'd run errands for the families
which lived in that street, or if one of the gentlemen came out of his townhouse, they'd
hurry to open the carriage door in the hope of a little tip.
Mayhew was doing this, he was still doing the research part of it in the 50s, and during
the Crimean War, he said the sweeping boys will draw patriotic pictures in the dirt.
No pictures of the Union Jack or of one of the soldiers in the dirt in the hope of getting
tips from passersby.
Well now, radical observers, people like Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, who lived in England,
describe these conditions, these conditions of incredible poverty as part of their indictment
of capitalism.
They believe that the inequities of capitalism were so great that the system couldn't possibly
exist, and sooner or later the working people would rise up to overthrow their oppressors,
what they called the bourgeoisie.
Engels was a factory manager in Manchester, fascinated and appalled by what he found, and
his book, The Condition of the Working Class in England, also published in 1845, a decade
which is very rich in these things, became one of the classic indictments of early British
capitalism.
He talked about the very, very poor quality of the housing in which poor people had to
live, and here's his description of a cluster of these houses on the banks of the River Urk.
The worst courts are those leading down to the River Urk, which contain unquestionably
the most dreadful dwellings I have ever seen.
In one of these courts, just at the entrance where the covered passage ends, there is a
privy without a door.
This privy is so dirty that the inhabitants of the court can only enter or leave it if
they are prepared to wade through puddles of stale urine and excrement.
It was the scene of a cholera outbreak in 1832.
Thereby is the river.
It is a narrow, cold black, stinking river full of filth and rubbish, which it deposits
on the more low-lying, right bank.
In dry weather, this bank presents the spectacle of a series of the most revolting, blackish
green puddles of slime, from the depths of which bubbles of miasmatic gases constantly
rise, and create a stench which is unbearable, even though standing on the bridge 40 or 50
feet above the level of the water.
And he says, everybody uses the river as a drain, and alongside the river are the tanneries,
always very smelly places, the bone mills, and the gasworks.
So again, it's a great reeking trench.
Obviously, we live in a world where pollution is an issue, but we've never had to deal
with pollution on these kinds of levels.
It's a completely qualitatively different thing.
The political response to poverty in the Victorian period was never adequate.
The new poor law of 1834, passed just before Victoria became Queen, created the workhouses.
And the idea of the workhouse was that it was meant to be an intimidating place.
It was meant to be somewhere where you'd only go reluctantly when you're in the last extremity
of poverty.
In other words, what the government wanted was a poor relief scheme which cost as little
as possible to the taxpayers, and which people would be deterred from entering unless conditions
have reached the absolute breaking point.
If you went into the workhouse as a family, the family would be broken up because men
and women were placed in different areas.
You had to put on a uniform which was very much like a prisoner's uniform, which regarded
as humiliating.
The places were rife with rumours.
One of them was that if you died while you were there, your body would be cut up and
served in pies which were fed to the other inmates.
There was a terrible scandal at Andover, a town just south of Oxford, when the inmates
were given bones to grind, but they were so hungry that they began chewing on the bones
instead.
They really were horrible places.
And, of course, it's in the workhouse that Oliver Twist is brought up and where he makes
his famous request for more, do you remember?
And the whole place is more.
It was really Dickens who made the workhouse a byword for privation and misery.
If you were mentally ill, especially if you didn't have relatives who could look after
you, or if you're chronically sick, you were very likely to end up in the workhouse.
Now, when I was a child in the town of Derby in the English Midlands, I lived about three
miles from a hospital called the Manor Hospital.
And I found out that it had been the workhouse.
Now, I was born in 1956, and so people who were old in my childhood could remember the
days when the workhouses had been in operation, and the elderly people in my community dreaded
that hospital.
Even though it was no longer a workhouse, they wouldn't go there under any circumstances.
That's the kind of terror and dread it inspired in people.
And regularly, the press in the Victorian period would report cases of people dying
from want rather than going to the workhouse.
Now, ironically, more recently, some historians have said, well, actually, there were places
where the workhouses weren't quite that bad.
For example, in Liverpool and Manchester, two of the big Northern cities, they were
run by sensible committees and were quite effective.
They had schools to give the children some elementary education and literacy, and they
even had hospitals.
So conditions clearly varied depending on the humane attitudes of the local overseers
of the poverty.
Sometimes the central authority in London tried to, well, the central authority was
always trying to enforce uniform regulations throughout the country, but they were never
able to do so.
Local custom proved too strong.
For example, again, in some Northern counties, particularly in Northumberland and parts of
Yorkshire, the poor commissioners were supposed to require people to come into the workhouse,
but didn't.
Instead, they gave them what was called outdoor relief.
They'd pay them some money to tide them over hard times in the knowledge that it would
be so degrading and humiliating if they did have to come into the workhouse, and also
for the very pragmatic reason that it was usually a bit cheaper to pay outdoor relief
than to bring them into the workhouse.
Well, civic reformers became increasingly concerned with this range of poverty problems.
One of the most influential was Edwin Chadwick.
He'd been instrumental in the passage of the poor law legislation, and then later on he
became very preoccupied with public health regulation.
He was a great collector of statistics and a believer in the systematic application of
efficient principles to the regulation of poverty.
The historian GM Young, writing just at the end of the Victorian period, says this, joking
remark about him.
Born in 1800 in a Lancashire farmhouse where the children were washed all over every day,
the mainspring of Chadwick's career seems to have been a desire to wash the people of
England all over every day by administrative order.
Now, if you look at the history of the British death rate, you have to be struck by the fact
that Chadwick's one of the great heroes.
He clearly undertook the kinds of reforms which did diminish the death rate, but nevertheless
he was bitterly hated and resented.
Working class people didn't want to wash, they wanted not to because they were so unfamiliar
with it.
It may very well be that the legislation he helped to shepherd through Parliament was
as contributory as anything else to gradual improvements in the lives of working people.
Well, wages began to rise after 1850, and that made downright death from starvation increasingly
uncommon in Britain, but aggravated poverty remained widespread right up to the end of
the Victorian period.
Another source of relief for poor people was philanthropy, that is the generosity of the
upper and middle class people, and there was a great deal of Victorian philanthropy.
But it was often accompanied by religious attitudes which the recipients found rather
annoying, or even more by a moralizing attitude which they found particularly hard to deal
with.
They believed among the Victorian middle classes that they were prosperous because they were
more virtuous, and that the poor were poor because they were less virtuous than an attitude
that we still sometimes encounter today.
As usual Charles Dickens has got a wonderfully acute eye for this kind of thing.
Here's a passage from Bleak House where the narrator goes to a poor brick worker's house,
and he goes with Mrs. Pardigal.
Mrs. Pardigal is a philanthropist, but she's a terrible busybody, and she's visited this
family before and given them some improving evangelical tracts, and so on.
Anyway, when they go in they find it's a disgustingly dirty house, and there's no furniture, and
the man's lying on the floor smoking, and as soon as they come in, this is what the
man says.
I once an end of these liberties took with my place, I once an end of being drawed like
a badger, now you're going to pull pry and question according to custom, I know what
you're going to be up to, well you haven't got no occasion to be up to it, I'll save
you the trouble.
Is my daughter a washing, yes she's a washing, look at the water, smell it, that's what we
drinks, how do you like it, and what do you think about gin instead?
Ain't my place dirty, yes it's dirty, it's naturally dirty, and it's naturally unwholesome,
and we've had five dirty and unwholesome children, as is all dead infants, and so much
better for them, and for us besides.
Have I read that little book what you left, no I ain't read that little book what you
left.
I don't think nobody here knows how to read it, and if there was it wouldn't be suitable
to me.
How have I been conducting myself, I've been drunk for three days, and I've been drunk
for four if I'd had the money, and how did my wife get that black eye, why I give it
to her, and she's a liar if she says I didn't, so here's the recipient of philanthropy hating
and resenting the intrusion of the charity giver.
Another sophisticated investigator of poverty was a man called Seabone Roundtree, he was
a chocolate manufacturer from York, and he was philanthropically inclined, and again
statistically minded, he wanted to investigate what it was that caused poverty, not only
from moment to moment, but over the course of the life cycle, and he was one of the
first people to say we need to do longitudinal studies of poverty to find out the nature
of how it occurs within families, and he created a sort of five-part picture of the
life cycle.
He said poverty is very likely during early childhood because young children who can't
work have got parents who are overtaxed by the number of children they need to bring
up.
When a child's old enough to work, poverty tends to become a little bit less acute.
When a young man is first married and hasn't got children, he's least likely to be sick
and is least likely to have too many mouths to feed, but then as his family starts having
children, the probability of poverty starts to increase again, it lessens when his children
can help him, and it increases again in old age, especially if he isn't well kept by
members of his own family.
So Roundtree concludes in this way, the proportion of the community who at one period or other
of their lives suffer from poverty to the point of physical privation is therefore much
greater than would appear from a consideration of the number who can be shown to be below
the poverty line at any given moment.
In other words, overall it's worse as an affliction for working class people than a look at any
one moment might make you think.
Another investigator in the late Victorian period was William Booth, the founder of the
Salvation Army.
He found that about three million English people were living chronic lives of poverty.
In those days, Africa was often referred to as darkest Africa, the mysterious continent.
He wrote a book called In Darkest England published in 1890, a sort of expose of the
continuation of extreme aggravated poverty.
We can conclude by saying that although the percentage of the British people who were
poor was declining slightly as the Victorian period persisted, the sheer number of poor
people remained extremely high and that the best avenues out of it, regular work and high
wages, were still only accessible to a minority of people.
