Lecture 12, Ireland, famine and Robert Peale
Britain had a large colonial empire in the 19th century and administered it better than
most of its colonial rivals ran theirs. But its closest and oldest colony, Ireland, was
a standing challenge to the idea that Britain was a benign and enlightened master. The historian
Paul Johnson in a very memorable quote says that Ireland was like Banquet's ghost at
Macbeth's Banquet, a standing refutation of the idea that Britain was good at governing
other peoples. It was a source of perpetual unrest at a very poor and resentful and alienated
peasant population and social antagonisms which were intensified by a sharp religious
divide because the majority of the Irish people were Roman Catholics. In 1846 it suffered
a catastrophic harvest failure in its one principal crop, potatoes, which threatened
millions of people with starvation. British government aided to Ireland rose sharply in
response to this crisis but still didn't rise sharply enough and couldn't prevent a very
high death toll and also a high rate of emigration to Britain and America and the consequences
of this catastrophe continued to be felt right up to the present. It was one of the things
which contributed to the Tory Prime Minister Robert Peale deciding that it was necessary
for him to repeal the government's protectionist policy as a way of encouraging importation
of cheap food. But in taking this decision he split his own political party, most of
those members were desperately opposed to that kind of measure. Well British involvement
in Ireland had always been a source of friction and no matter how far back in history you
go you find recurrent as severe tensions. The earliest English intervention in Ireland
begins back in the reign of Henry II in the 12th century and it intensified after the
Reformation, particularly in the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, when a series of expeditions
under Sir Walter Raleigh and others tried to bring more of the island of Ireland under
the direct control of the British crown. Until then the city of Dublin and the area immediately
surrounding it was called the Pale, the Pale of Settlement. That was the area in which Britain
was really in control and you probably know the saying beyond the Pale, that means going
out beyond the place where effective British administration in Ireland ceased. But Elizabeth
was one of the people, one of the rulers who tried to extend that rule. Probably the most
dramatic Anglo-Irish confrontations came during the period of the British Civil Wars of the
1640s and 1650s. Oliver Cromwell who was one of the leaders of the parliamentary armies
in the British Civil Wars suppressed an Irish rebellion between 1649 and 1651 and he did
it with terrifying thoroughness. Probably the most notorious episode of this war is
his massacre of the inhabitants of Droheda when they refused to surrender. Cromwell said
to the people you can surrender now and I'll spare you but if you continue to hold out
I'll kill a lot of you and he claimed that this was in accordance with the rules of warfare
at the time. It was simultaneous with the Thirty Years War in Europe. The city refused
to surrender and when it was captured he massacred the inhabitants.
Now one of Oliver Cromwell's great problems in the British Civil Wars was that the army
he commanded, the new model army, probably one of the most effective fighting forces
in Europe at the time, it was impossible to pay it. Although it had won he couldn't persuade
Parliament to raise sufficient money to pay off the army. Instead Parliament paid them
in Irish lands. Now earlier in the 17th century in 1609 when King James I, the first of the
Stuart Kings was on the throne Protestant settlements in the Ulster Counties of North
Eastern Ireland had created a local Protestant majority there. Protestant numbers were now
increased in other parts of Ireland which laid the foundations for the inter-religious
antagonisms which are still not fully resolved there even today. Ireland had remained Catholic
at the Reformation and when in the 1680s King James II of England tried to bring the whole
of Britain back into the Catholic fold he failed catastrophically and was forced to
abdicate. But it was Ireland, Catholic Ireland was loyal to him and when he was, when James
II was replaced by King William III, William III had to fight a battle at the Boine in
Ireland against a Catholic army which had French assistance. And the fact that William
III I made the Battle of the Boine a symbolic moment of the triumph of Protestantism over
Roman Catholicism and that again is an event which is still commemorated in Ireland right
up to the present. And every year the orange parades which take place among the Ulster
Protestants in which they glory in the reminiscence of this battle is a source of community friction.
Well in the early 19th century the period we're concerned with here the Catholic majority
most of them very poor lived on lands most of which were owned by Protestant landlords
and many of whom didn't live there. It was very common for the Protestant landlords to
live in England rather than Ireland and simply to enjoy the rent which came to them from
their estates. An example of this would be Lord Palmerston who was one of the Whig prime
ministers in the middle of the century. Most of these landowners would have a local agent
who ran the estates for them and collected the rent and very often profited by subdividing
the farmland without notifying the owner of what was going on. So it was common for these
absentee owners not even to know how many tenants they'd actually got living and working
on lands which they owned. One absentee went in 1846 to investigate his own estate and
he thought he'd got 60 tenants. When he got there he found he'd got something like 600
and there was 10 times as many as his agent had let him know. Now this was a situation
in which rational agricultural improvement, scientific farming was very very difficult
to accomplish. The subdivisions of the lands made the plots too small. And besides if you
were a tenant farmer you were constantly in danger of being evicted by the landlord.
You could be evicted without getting any recourse and without being compensated for improvements
you might have made. So in that situation you're unlikely to invest very heavily in
improvements to the land whose benefits you'd never enjoy. Landlords who did attempt agricultural
improvements were also vulnerable to attack by secret societies. Throughout 19th century
Ireland there were secret societies which sometimes would attack landlords who tried
to evict their tenants. The white boys or the ribbon men. So most of these landlords
didn't bother. They accepted the rents which the estates would generate and lived in England
on the proceeds. So an enormous both social and economic and geographical distance between
landlords and tenants. Now the fact that the Church of Ireland that is the established
church was a Protestant church which had to be paid for through taxation on all the
Catholic people was a great grievance. If you're a Catholic you paid taxes to the state
church which you didn't belong to as well as to the Catholic church which you did belong
to. And in 1823 an association was founded called the Catholic Association led by a charismatic
lawyer a very eloquent courtroom lawyer called Daniel O'Connell. And he campaigned or he
led the campaign for Catholic emancipation. That is the right for Roman Catholics to sit
in Parliament. Some Catholics in Ireland had already had limited voting rights starting
in the 1790s but Catholics were prevented by law from sitting in Parliament. Members of
the Catholic Association would pay a weekly penny for their membership and this was called
the Catholic Rent. That meant that the association was well funded especially in view of the
poverty of much of the country at the time. And it campaigned very hard and very effectively
for the abolition of all laws restricting Catholics from participation in political
life. Now O'Connell himself was not a revolutionary figure. He was a great admirer of the British
Constitution in many of its aspects. He certainly believed in due process like all lawyers.
He simply said at the moment rules of exclusion are keeping us out when we ought to be admitted.
He put the political system to the test in 1828 by standing for a seat in Parliament.
You know that in America you run for office and in Britain you stand. Well he stood for
Parliament in County Clare and thousands of people turned out and voted for him with the
result that he won the seat even though he wasn't eligible to actually take it because
he was a Roman Catholic. So in other words he deliberately created a constitutional impasse.
So under these circumstances the Parliament in London had to decide how to respond. The
Prime Minister the Duke of Wellington although he wasn't any great enthusiast for Roman Catholics
realized it was necessary to yield because if not he was in danger of facing a Catholic
rebellion in Ireland itself. And so the Duke of Wellington guided through Parliament legislation
to remove these disabilities on Roman Catholics. One of the members of his own Tory party
Lord Winchelsea was so enraged that the Duke of Wellington should be doing this that he
challenged him to a duel. And this is just in the very last days of dueling among the
British aristocracy. It was already illegal but was still practiced. And so the Duke
of Wellington accepted the challenge and the two men met in a London field and we think
that they both deliberately missed. In other words they didn't make a serious attempt to
shoot one another but honour could be satisfied in that way and then the Duke could go back
to Parliament and resume his work. Now Tory anger, Conservative anger came from the belief
which I mentioned earlier in one of the lectures on religion that Catholicism was equivalent
to treason because the French and the Spanish, England's traditional Catholic enemies had
so often used the Irish Catholics against England. The Boyne for example was one of
many cases. Also of course the Tories recognised that if Catholics could sit in Parliament it
might mean that the Irish members of Parliament who until then had themselves all been Protestants
because of the law, instead the Irish MPs might start being Catholics instead and there
was the entire complexion of political life in Ireland would be changed. There was still
no secret ballot at this point but nevertheless the possibility of Catholic members now arose.
Well the legislation was passed, Catholic emancipation and this was one of the acts which also led
to the protest of the Oxford movement in the Church of England against the idea that Catholics
were now going to be participating potentially in the conduct of the Church of England.
Well only a minority of the more prosperous Catholics in Ireland had the right to vote
even after this but nevertheless it was symbolically an important victory. Historian Alvin Jackson
says that writes this about it. Emancipation was a Catholic victory planned by a Catholic
leadership and one on the playing field of the Protestant Constitution. The measure was
passed not out of the magnanimity of the Wellington government but because that government feared
and was seen to fear the consequences of resistance. In other words if you were a Catholic Irishman
you could easily learn from that experience that concentrated political pressure was effective.
Now Ireland was very different from England in this sense that while the industrialisation
of Great Britain, the island of Great Britain was roaring along in the early 19th century
Ireland was not going through an industrial revolution. Instead it remained overwhelmingly
agricultural. But its population was rising, in fact it was rising even faster than that of
England. By the early 1840s the population was over 8 million at a time when the population
of the rest of Britain was about 15 million. Population pressure meant that emigration from
Ireland was already quite common. A steady stream of Irish people had been going to America starting
in the 1820s because population pressure meant that people who stayed in Ireland tended to be
very poor living on these small plots which I mentioned earlier. Very often in houses which
amounted to little more than mud huts and often with the farm animals living inside the house with
the family. Their chief source of food was potatoes. Now before Christopher Columbus there weren't
any potatoes in Europe because the potato is a new world crop. It was discovered by Columbus's
generation and brought to Europe and was found in fact to thrive in European conditions particularly
in a place like Ireland which is never very hot and is very wet at a mild damp Atlantic climate.
And so potatoes have become the staple crop of the majority of the Irish people.
And from a purely nutritional point of view if your whole diet is going to be confined to one
thing, potatoes is actually quite a good thing for it to be confined to. They've got a lot of
nutritional value. But the great problem with growing just one crop, what's called a monoculture,
is that not only do you create ideal conditions for the crop to grow, you also create ideal
conditions for predators on that crop. In other words if a disease affecting the crop comes along
there isn't a diversity of crops to break the spread of this disease. And it was in 1843
that the potato blight was first discovered in America and spread very rapidly to Ireland
where it began to afflict the potato crop. It damaged the crop in 1845 and damaged it much
much worse in 1846. And then again in 1848. So that suddenly literally millions of the Irish
people were dramatically denied their one basic food staple. It's a fungus. Its scientific name
is phytophthora infestans. And it was something which because it had never previously been seen was
unpredictable, unforeseeable literally. Well the Irish suffering which ensued in 1846
through 1850 was unprecedented. And it greatly intensified Anglo-Irish bitterness. It's certainly
something which has never been forgotten. Visitors, even people who'd been hardened by scenes of
English poverty, which I've described to you recently, were absolutely horrified by the
scenes of death and starvation which they witnessed in many parts, particularly of western Ireland.
And then by the epidemic diseases which ravaged the weakened survivors. You're much more likely
to die from cholera or dysentery or typhoid if you've already been weakened by malnutrition.
Here's a magistrate visiting the village of Skibarine in County Cork. Being aware that I
should have to witness scenes of frightful hunger, I provided myself with as much bread as five men
could carry. And on reaching the spot, I was surprised to find the wretched hamlet apparently
deserted. I entered some of the hovels to ascertain the cause, and the scenes which presented
themselves were such as no tongue or pen can convey the slightest idea of. In the first,
six famished and ghastly skeletons, to all appearances dead, were huddled in a corner
on some filthy straw, their wretched legs hanging about naked above the knees. I approached with
horror and found by a low moaning that they were alive. In a few minutes, I was surrounded by at
least 200 such phantoms. Such frightful specters as no words can describe, either from famine or
from fever. Their demonic yells are still ringing in my ears, and their horrible images are fixed
upon my brain. Well, it was under these circumstances that anyone who could possibly afford to do so
tried to emigrate, and huge numbers of people left Ireland altogether. About a million people,
maybe even one and a half million, went to the United States of America. At least 300,000 went to
Canada, another 300,000 to England, and so on. There was a very, very rapid dispersal of refugees
from the famine. The British government itself, under the leadership of Robert Peale, the Tory
Prime Minister, and then after his fall in 1846 under Lord John Russell, quickly tried to escalate
public relief efforts. But this is only shortly after the passage of the legislation to create
the workhouses, and at first the government said, well, we've got a poverty relief scheme in place
already. The workhouse scheme, it will have to take care of the problem. It wasn't long before the
workhouses were completely swamped, and more drastic measures were necessary. But even so,
unsympathetic bureaucrats in England, unaware of the magnitude of the disaster,
and obedient to the prevailing economic and political theories, resisted the idea that they
should send massive quantities of food just to be distributed without reckoning to the suffering
Irish people. They injected the idea of giving it away, and they didn't really think that poverty
famine relief was the government's job. They never faced a crisis of such magnitude before,
and they were fumbling for an appropriate response. They set up public works schemes
with the idea that they'd pay men about 10 pence per day for their work. But of course,
many of the weakest sufferers were simply incapable of working. They were literally on the brink of
death from malnutrition and couldn't do vigorous manual labor of the kind that the government
was offering. And so a lot of these schemes, which ran for a few months, had to be abandoned
because they couldn't find sufficient people or sufficient appropriate people to work in them.
The Irish historian Roy Foster describes, quote, the celebrated peers where no boats could land,
the walls built around nothing, and the roads to nowhere. He says, these things are poignant
metaphors for a policy that was neither consistent nor effective, but which expressed economic
beliefs held by the governing classes in both countries. Well, gradually, the magnitude of
the disaster started to be more fully appreciated, and the case for direct aid became irresistible.
So in February 1847, Parliament passed an act called the Temporary Relief Act, and began
shipping food directly to areas of Ireland where it could be distributed. In early 1847,
three million Irish people, that's something close to half the population, was on direct
relief, and it was being fed directly with food distributed at soup kitchens.
If you're a landowner on any scale, you weren't eligible for food handouts, and there are cases
of people giving up their land, literally giving it away, so that they become eligible to get this
food relief to be able to survive at all. Well, there's a very intense historian's controversy
surrounding the British government's response to the famine. Some historians say
they were outrageously negligent. They could have done far more quickly and more effectively.
Other historians say, no, actually, what's striking isn't how little they did, but how
much they did. They'd never encountered an event like this before. They'd never faced
the potential starvation of millions. It's surprising that they did as much as they did,
and it's actually quite an administrative achievement. Well, I can't possibly sort out
the rights and wrongs of the controversy, which literally takes entire historians' careers only
to bring people still to different answers. Certainly, from our point of view, what's so
striking is how ghastly the whole situation was. And the recurrence of the crop failure in 1848,
the fact that the blight continued to afflict the crops, meant that there wasn't the opportunity
for a rapid recovery. Certainly, Irish nationalists themselves, that is, people who wanted to get
on it altogether out of the British Empire, reckoned that the British response was callously
indifferent. The editor of a newspaper called The United Irishman, a man named John Mitchell said,
the Almighty indeed sent the potato blight, but the English created the famine.
And Irish Americans, that is, an Irishman who'd already gone to America or who emigrated during
the famine, continued to recall it as a central element in their indictment of Great Britain.
As recently as 1996, the New York State Board of Regents required schools in the state of New
York to teach the episode of the Irish famine as an example of British genocide. Now, I think
that's grotesquely unfair. Nothing on that scale had ever happened before. Nobody was ready for it,
and certainly the intention of the British government was not to kill the Irish people.
There may have been negligence in reacting to the suffering, but at least the intention was
not one of mass extermination. So genocide is the wrong word for it. But nevertheless,
it's true that the officials didn't do as much as they might have done in view of an event of this
scale. The death toll altogether from famine and disease probably amounted to more than a million
people, depending on how the figures accounted. Well, the Irish famine coincided with a debate in
Britain over free trade or protectionism. And at that time, a set of laws was in place, the corn
laws, which protected British landowners against the import of cheap food from abroad. If you were
a landowner in England, this was ideal. What it meant was that food you grew, you could sell
at a good high price. It was only if the price became very high due to scarcity that imports
from abroad would come in. So if you were a Tory landowner, you thought the corn laws were marvellous.
Conversely, manufacturers whose growing influence had been demonstrated by the passage of the Great
Reform Act and other pieces of legislation, they wanted low tariff barriers or the elimination
of tariffs altogether to create a free trade policy. They could foresee that if Britain didn't
have import and export duties, they could manufacture, they could mass produce goods
and sell them cheaply abroad, and they'd be paid for with the cheap imports of foods.
That would mean that the price of food for their employees would go down. That would take pressure
off them to increase wages, and that it would generally increase the favorable conditions in
which trade would operate. So the manufacturers have got a free trade policy by and large,
and the farmers have got a protectionist policy. The Prime Minister, the Tory Prime Minister,
Robert Peale, was in a very awkward position. He was himself the son of a Lancashire textile
manufacturer, and he understood the appeal of the manufacturer's arguments. In fact,
probably privately, he'd already been converted to the belief that they were right. But he represents
the Tory party, he's the leader of that party, most of whose members are protectionists,
that is people who want to keep the import duties.
It was Peale, incidentally, who'd antagonized Queen Victoria for the bedchamber crisis. Do
you remember this a few years previously, when he'd wanted to substitute his officials for
Lord Melbourne's when the government changed? He was, in some ways, a stiff and rather
diffident man. The Irish leader O'Connell himself has a marvellous remark about him. He says,
Robert Peale's smile was like the silver plate on a coffin. No, no, it's not an
instantly likable man. Well, Peale was feeling the pressure from an organisation called the
Anti-Corn Law League, which had been founded back in 1839 by Richard Cobden and John Bright,
two of the most famous radical members of parliament of the mid-19th century.
They were both manufacturers, both interested in free trade, but partly because they thought
they would profit from it, but partly because they thought that everybody else would profit
from it as well. And they were bitter opponents of what looked to them like a special and
undeserved privilege for the landowners. Their rhetoric had a kind of evangelical intensity.
Why is it that the landowners, who don't themselves often do any work at all, should not
only live off rent, but should be, in addition, be given these special high prices for the food
that their tenants are generating. Their wealth is being bought at the cost of everyone else's poverty.
The Anti-Corn Law League was an early pressure group, a lobby, and its meetings had a kind
of evangelical intensity to them, particularly in the northern towns. John Bright himself was a
quaker, and he believed that free trade was not only good economic policy, it was also going to
ensure the peace of the world. The more closely the different nations were entangled in trading
with one another, the stronger their motives would be for not fighting. Unfortunately, we know,
after the experience of two world wars, that strong trade links aren't enough to forestall
international fighting. But certainly, one of John Bright's hopes was that close trading relations,
free trade, would make war that much less likely. He said, as long as we've got tariffs,
it's difficult for us to sell our manufacturers abroad, difficult for us to import
food from abroad cheaply, and that means that different countries are going to have to industrialize
themselves, and that instead of becoming nations with which we can have mutually advantageous trade,
they're going to become competitors in the long run. We'll suffer from it, which proved to be prophetic.
Well, in the end, the Irish crisis did convince Peel that the Corn Laws were indefensible. They'd
got to be repealed. On one occasion, he was listening to a very powerful speech by Richard
Cobden in the House of Commons, and we're getting ready to answer, but found that actually,
Cobden was expressing views which he himself believed, and he screwed up the notes he was holding
for his speech and said to Sidney Herbert, one of his ministers, you must answer this,
for I cannot. In other words, he'd lost all faith in the policy position of his own party.
And finally, he achieved the repeal of the Corn Laws with the help of Whig and radical votes.
Now, within the Tory party, the Tory party split over this issue. Benjamin Disraeli,
the rising star of some of the Conservatives, led Peel's opponents in speeches of venomous
brilliance, and this was one of the moments when Disraeli's future was assured as a Tory leader.
Disraeli accused him of betraying the interests of the men who had elected him.
But Peel himself resorted to arguments about the primacy of a member of parliament's conscience.
He said, however strongly I may be indebted to my party, in the end I can't do violence
to my own conscience. That must come first, even if it means that I'm going to be ejected
from office. He could foresee that that was going to happen. On two or three occasions,
the intensity of the vitriol poured upon him for his views made him absolutely stunned.
And on a couple of occasions, when everyone had left the chamber, he was left there with
his head in his hands. One of the great turning points of mid-19th century politics.
The House of Lords passed the repeal of the Corn Laws also, even though its membership
was predominantly Tory. And once again, it was the Duke of Wellington, this very level-headed man,
who pointed out to the other members of the Lords that although it seemed deplorable,
the consequences of not doing it were probably going to be even worse.
It was very shortly after that however, that Peel endured a vote of no confidence
and fell from office. And he'd foreseen it. He said, when I fall, I shall have the satisfaction
of reflecting, that I do not fall because I've shown subservience to a party. I shall not fall
because I prefer the interests of party to the general interests of the community.
Well, it had a shattering effect on the Conservative Party, which for about the next 20 years
remained factionalised and in disarray. The mid-decades of the 19th century was a period
of political realignment. Many people who'd originally been Peelite Tories, like Gladstone,
ended up in the Liberal Party. It wasn't really till the 1870s that an effective Tory government
once again came into office under the leadership of Disraeli, beginning in 1874. So it pitched the
Tories into the political wilderness, in effect. Ironically, Ireland itself didn't derive much
direct benefit from the repeal of the Corn Laws, partly because the Irish didn't eat wheat bread.
It wasn't something which they were familiar with in any case. Well, there we are. Throughout the
19th century, the British population as a whole rose rapidly. But the population of Ireland never
recovered from the famine. It was about 8 million in 1841, but it had fallen to 6 million by 1851,
and it continued to decline through the successive censuses until the end of the century,
partly because of reduced fertility, partly because of high emigration, which had the
combined effects of forestalling a population recovery. Even today, it's not as high as it was
in the early 1840s.
