These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Victorian Britain Part 2.
The English Victorians tended to minimize the significance of Scotland and Wales, the nation's Celtic fringes.
Whereas the Scots and the Welsh tended to exaggerate their own importance.
That's a dynamic throughout most of British history.
In many practical ways, Scotland and Wales followed the same kind of development that England was going through.
They both shared in the Industrial Revolution, the development of intense industry in some areas,
and a gradual rural depopulation of much of the countryside.
Clydeside Engineering became one of the centres of British engineering and shipbuilding.
South Wales coal mining was one of the most important of the coal fields in Britain.
Scotsmen like David Livingston and Welshmen like David Lloyd George played a vital role in British national and political life.
But at the same time, the two nations were very eager to hold on to their own distinctiveness.
They did everything they could to nurture traditions of their own to emphasize how different Scotland was from England and how different Wales was.
Sometimes the traditions they nurtured were bogus, or at least they were created and made to appear much older than they really were.
Partly for the sake of their own sense of national identity,
and partly as a way of piquing the interest of tourists from England and other foreign places.
Some of these surprisingly new traditions in Scotland were the tartan kilts and the bagpipes,
and in Wales, the cultural festival, the Eisteadford.
Queen Victoria and Prince Albert themselves at Balmoral Castle enjoyed what they thought of as a distinctive and ancient Scottish culture,
scarcely realizing how recently it had acquired its lineaments.
Both countries had languages of their own, the Scottish Gaelic and the Welsh language.
But while during the Victorian period Gaelic in Scotland declined steadily,
the Welsh language staged a comeback and remains in very wide use right up to the present.
Well, Scotland and Wales were both vital parts of the industrial economy.
Scotland was a shipbuilding center, particularly on the estuary of the River Clyde,
which is the river that flows through Glasgow.
And it was on Clyde's side that the world's very first steamship was built, the Charlotte Dundas,
launched there by three shipbuilders in 1802.
And it was also in Clyde's side that many of the later developments of iron and steel steamships were developed.
As in many other parts of Britain, it was heavily dependent upon child labor.
And there, as elsewhere, there were scandals associated with it.
Metal shipbuilding required the use of red-hot rivets and they'd be heated up in a stove
and then thrown by relays of children rapidly to the riveter who's working in the plates of the ship.
But you can imagine that the interior of a hollow metal hull is incredibly resonant
and the hammering, the intense hammering on the rivets, would often make the children deaf by the time they were in their teens.
In boom conditions during the 1840s, 50s and 60s, the shipyards had to compete very hard to get skilled laborers to work there
and they competed with one another to get the best workmen.
In doing so, they set up demarcation lines, agreements about which workmen was going to do which job on the ships.
In the short term, that improved working conditions.
Although in the long term, it set up problems which in the 20th century, the yards were going to inherit
as they became increasingly inefficient.
But from being an economically backward part of Britain in the 18th century,
Scotland and particularly the Edinburgh and Glasgow area very rapidly went through the industrial revolution
to become an area of world dominance in engineering.
And in fact, throughout the whole British Empire, all over the world really by the mid-Victorian period,
one of the standard figures was the Scottish engineer on board the ship.
I think it's significant that even in the mid-20th century, when the American TV show Star Trek was made,
the engineers called Scotty.
The Scottish engineers become a stock figure in fact and in fiction.
By 1900, three-quarters of all the ships built in Britain were built in Scotland,
more than half a million tons of shipping per year.
The railways came to Scotland a little bit later than they came to England,
but when they did, they gave rise to one of the most beautiful structures in the whole of Great Britain.
I take students there every year and tell them,
this is the single most interesting structure in Britain.
It's the fourth bridge, the railway bridge which crosses the estuary of the River Forth.
Now what happened is that on another of the river estuaries, a little bit further north, the Tay,
a railway bridge was built which fell into the sea during a storm.
A train was crossing the bridge and in a great storm,
the weight of the train and the force of the winds led to a great disaster.
So when the fourth bridge was built in the immediate aftermath of the Tay Bridge disaster,
the engineers were determined to build it of enormous superfluous strength
and the fourth bridge is built to many times the tolerance is necessary
for the actual conditions prevailing there.
Imagine three giant diamond shapes made of lattice steel,
laid sideways and stretched across the river hundreds of feet above the actual surface of the river
so that big ocean going ships can get underneath it.
It's one of the great things to see when you're in Britain,
especially if you're touring around in pursuit of Victorian things.
Well, Scotland and Wales were both coal mining districts.
Let's look at now the Welsh coal mines for a second.
A series of valleys runs from north to south,
just north of the southern coast of Wales.
And these were valleys very rich in coal.
One of them, again, can still be visited.
It's called the Big Pit at Blenaffen.
The owner of many of the mines there was called the Markey of Butte,
and he took the risk of building an enormous loading dock in the city of Cardiff,
that's the capital of Wales, thinking that and then helped to fund the building of a railway
which went into the valleys to a little town called Murther Tidville,
so that coal could rapidly be brought from the mining valleys,
the 20 or 25 miles down to Cardiff,
and then put onto ships and sent out to other parts of Britain
and, in fact, to many parts of the entire world.
Coal from Cardiff was produced so efficiently in the mid-19th century
that it was exported to as far away as Argentina and Egypt.
There was very long distances because it could be done so economically.
Now, the Markey of Butte, the owner of these mines,
became one of the richest men in the whole of Britain.
He bought an old castle, Cardiff Castle was then just a ruin
at the shell of an old medieval keep in the town of Cardiff itself,
and he rebuilt it according to his idea of what the Middle Ages had been like.
It's a highly idealized and romanticized vision,
and, in fact, it's a great classic of Victorian Gothic architecture.
And there's no place in Britain where you can see class lines drawn more starkly
than by going first to the mine and then straight down to Cardiff Castle,
because the squalor and grimy depressiveness of the mine itself
and the staggering magnificence of the palace nearby,
all based upon the profits of the mines themselves.
The coal itself, anthracite, was very good for ships and it was good for cooking
and it was good for home heating.
Anthracite burns very hot and is less smoky than the coal
which comes from most other parts of Britain.
That's one of the reasons why it was so widely used.
Now, in the 1860s and 70s, economists and geologists, too,
became anxious in case Britain's coal supplies were running out.
There was the kind of scare about coal then
that there was in the 1970s about the Earth's oil supplies running out.
In fact, it proved to be a completely false alarm.
Meanwhile, the mines continued to flourish
and population moving off the farms and into mining
concentrated in the two big mining counties of Glamorgan and Monmouthshire.
At the beginning of the Victorian period,
about 20% of the Welsh people lived in those counties,
but by the end, 63%, so it was a period of population concentration.
Rural districts in Scotland were also being depopulated
and the early 19th century is remembered in Scotland
as a period of what's called the Highland Clearances
when crofters, that is small farmers,
were forcibly evicted by their landlords
to make way instead for large-scale sheep farming areas
and for deer preserves.
As hunting and shooting and fishing became more and more popular,
as leisure pursuits for the British aristocracy,
Scottish landlords recognized the opportunity of using their land
as preserves on which the game could be developed
so that during the shooting season,
visitors from the other parts of Britain,
and eventually Americans and Germans as well,
would come to hunt there.
Poor Scots who stayed on the land, in effect,
became incorporated into the hunting business.
They became gamekeepers or game wardens
or ran hotels in the season.
Nevertheless, the overall effect was one of Scottish rural depopulation
and large numbers of Scots were emigrated to Canada
and to Australia and to the United States
in search of opportunities which they'd been denied
if they were to stay at home.
After the Irish famine in the late 1840s,
large numbers of Irish people went particularly to live
in the Scottish cities.
And because the Scottish people are overwhelmingly Presbyterian,
one of the more zealous forms of Protestantism,
and because the Irish on the other hand were overwhelmingly Roman Catholics,
very sharp ethnic and religious tensions developed inside the cities.
And to some extent, they've continued right down to the present,
not in so acute a form as they show up in Belfast.
But still, in Glasgow, for example, there are two soccer teams.
Glasgow Rangers, which is the Protestant team,
and Glasgow Celtic, which is the Catholic team.
And similarly in Edinburgh, Hibernian is the Catholic team
and Hearts of Midlovin is the Protestant team.
So these ethnic and religious memories have persisted.
Now, as I suggested at the beginning,
Scotland and Wales each had an idealized image of themselves.
And they created some new traditions
and then projected them back in time
to make it seem as though they were much more venerable
than was really the case.
A very brilliant historian called Eric Hobsbaum
brought together a group of historians
who studied various aspects of this
and are currently called the Invention of Tradition,
which shows how often things we think of as old British traditions
are Victorian or slightly earlier creations.
This is the period of Gothic architecture
when new buildings were built to make it look as though
they were 500 years older than they were in fact.
In Scotland, the little images you often think of
are things like tartan dress, the kilt, the haggis,
and the bagpipes and so on.
And then things got an enormous boost
from the fiction of Sir Walter Scott,
who was the most popular novelist in the very early 19th century
and a radiant figure to a generation
of English and American readers alike.
And Scott was largely responsible for transforming
the English idea of what Scotland is like.
He's been rewarded with an enormous monument.
If you go to Princess Street,
which is the principal shopping avenue in Edinburgh,
the Walter Scott Memorial is still there
in the Gothic monument.
Well, when King George IV went to visit Scotland in 1820,
Walter Scott was one of the people
who encouraged him to wear a kilt.
Now, that was an astonishing thing to suggest,
because he was trying to link the whole of Scotland,
and even the King, with a tradition
which until then had been explicitly
the dress of the Highlanders,
not the dress of Edinburgh,
which are part of the central lowlands of Scotland.
And, if he'd known it,
the tartans and the kilt were themselves
comparatively recent inventions.
One of Eric Hobbes-Berms contributors
is a historian called Hugh Trevor Roper,
and he says the tartan clothes were originally
an import from the Netherlands.
They came from Flanders in the late 17th century.
And he goes on to say,
so far from being a traditional Highland dress,
the kilt was invented by an Englishman
after the Union of England and Scotland in 1707.
And the differentiated clown tartans
are an even later invention,
owing their present form to two other Englishmen,
both of them younger than Sir Walter Scott.
The kilt, it turns out, was invented
by an Englishman called Thomas Rawlinson.
He was an English Quaker from Lancashire.
And in the 1720s, he ran a charcoal works as well,
and moved it to Scotland,
because charcoal supplies were more common
in this more heavily forested area.
And the local Scotsman he hired,
he thought that the dress they were wearing
was very impractical for factory work,
so he invented an alternative, the kilt.
And so Trevor Roper goes on to say,
we may thus conclude that the kilt is a purely modern costume,
first designed and first worn
by an English Quaker industrialist,
and that it was bestowed by him on the Highlanders
in order not to preserve their traditional way of life,
but to ease its transformation,
to bring them out of the heather and into the factory.
Well, nevertheless, it is true that the kilt caught on
very quickly in the Scottish Highland
in the early 18th century,
so that at the time of Bonny Prince Charlie's uprising
in 1745, a lot of the Highland soldiers who fought with him
on behalf of the Stuart Corps against the Hanoverians
were dressed in the kilt.
Now, after the defeat of Bonny Prince Charlie's army
at the Battle of Cullodenmore in 1746,
the British government attempting to break up the Highland clans
outlawed the wearing of the tartan kilt altogether.
Between 1746 and 1782, it was illegal
because it was regarded as potentially a threat
to the safety of the nation.
But by the 19th century,
all these events which then were barely or less than a century old
started to become covered with a romantic haze.
And it wasn't long before Bonny Prince Charlie himself
seemed like a romantic figure
rather than a politically threatening one.
And songs were written about Flora MacDonald,
the young woman who'd rode him in a boat to the Highlands
to get him away from capture by the army.
In 1881, a memorial was built at Cullodenmore
with the inscription to the brave clans
who fought for Scotland and Prince Charlie.
Something like that would have been unimaginable.
80 years or certainly 100 years previously.
So by then, things like the tartan kilt
and the memory of Bonny Prince Charlie
were taken as generically Scottish items.
They had been taken out of their original economic
and political contexts.
So when you see a film like Braveheart,
you need to be very careful not to be lured into
the idea that it's authentic.
It itself, in effect, falls for a whole succession
of these invented traditions.
Now Queen Victoria herself loved all this stuff.
She was a great enthusiast
for the romanticised, ideal Scotland.
And when she bought Balmoral
and built her much larger house there
than the one which had originally been there,
she decorated it in this way.
Again, if you're an untutored observer
and you look at Balmoral, you could think,
oh, well, it must be six, seven hundred years old.
Even though it's not, it's 140, 150 years old.
And it was decorated all over with tartan and with thistles.
The thistle is the plant which represents Scotland.
Here's one of Queen Victoria's recent biographers,
Christopher Hibbert.
Many visitors were by no means favourably impressed
by the general ambience of the place.
The tartan curtains and the tartan chair coverings,
the tartan wallpaper, the tartan carpets
and the thistle motifs which were in such abundance
that Lord Clarendon thought they would rejoice
the heart of a donkey if they happened to look
like his favourite ripast, which they don't.
Lord Rosebury was to say that he thought
that the drawing room at Osbourne,
that's Queen Victoria's house on the Isle of Wight,
the drawing room at Osbourne was the ugliest room in the world
until he saw the one at Balmoral.
Well, Queen Victoria herself, when she went to Balmoral,
which she did for part of every year,
adopted a mild fake Scottish accent
to talk to the retainers there.
And before dinner, she'd have a group of kilted bankpipers
march in and go around the table playing the pipes.
They're deafening, especially when you're indoors.
And the guests all complained that it was freezing cold there.
The Tsar of Russia went to visit her and he said,
Balmoral is as cold as Siberia in the winter.
Anyway, the point about this is, of course,
that by 1850, by the middle of the 19th century,
this has all become harmless fun, in effect.
And a lot of it's invented.
It's totally different, for example,
than the ghastly reality of Scotland,
where you get in Shakespeare's Macbeth,
cold brutality and absolute absence of sentimentality.
I'm not saying that Macbeth accurate history either,
but it's certainly a very different vision
of what Scotland is like.
Even the claims of an ancient bankpiping tradition
are mainly Victorian inventions.
The Queen's personal piper was a man named Angus McKay.
And in 1838, he wrote a book alleging that the tradition
of piping had been secretly kept alive
by a hidden piping school on the Isle of Skye.
But again, it's very hard to imagine, isn't it?
Because the pipes aren't something that you can play quietly.
And they would have been heard over a long area.
And anyone who investigated found there's no evidence
of this school actually existing.
McKay himself, the piper, suffered from cerebral syphilis,
went mad, claimed that he himself was Queen Victoria's husband,
and finally was forced to go into a lunatic asylum in Windsor.
He escaped and later on went back to Scotland
where he drowned himself, so obviously a disturbed figure.
Now all over Europe at this time,
romantic nationalism was a phenomenon of the time.
And one of the things that romantic nationalists did
was to look for indigenous heroes of their own.
So again, it's in the 1840s and 50s
that the idea of Robert the Bruce as a great Scottish hero
begins to develop.
Or similarly, William Wallace, the man around him,
Braveheart, is written.
William Wallace Memorial, an enormous stone tower,
was built at Sterling overlooking the site
of the battles of a Bannockburn and Sterling Bridge,
creating what had previously been thought of as an old brigand
into something like a national hero.
At the same time, the Scottish language itself
was falling into disuse.
And ironically, the upper classes of Scotland
were becoming more and more self-conscious
about the difference in their voices
by comparison with those of the English,
by bringing their sons to the English private schools,
Eaton and Harrow,
so that they could sound like the voices would be similar
to those of the rest of the British upper classes.
Something similar was going on in Wales,
the invention of the Eistedford.
It's a Welsh festival of poetry, song, harp, playing,
traditional crafts, and the making of speeches
in dancing, too.
But it was invented by a man called Iolo Morganwy
in about 1819 or 1820.
Still, the Welsh language itself did continue to flourish,
particularly among the Welsh lower classes.
In 1847, a group of English commissioners,
commissioners of education,
were sent to report on Welsh affairs.
And their report was very harsh
in its condemnation of the Welsh language,
and the fact that it was led to a great outcry.
The commissioners described the Welsh people
as lazy, dirty, dishonest,
and said, this language keeps them cut off
from the wider society, it's totally unproductive,
and it prevents people from being integrated
into this big society we're creating.
Here's a little quotation from the report.
His language keeps him under the hatches,
being one in which he can neither acquire
nor communicate necessary information.
It is a language of old-fashioned agriculture,
of theology, and of simple rustic life
when all the world about him is English.
Now, for a while there in the middle of the century,
in some places, school children were beaten
if they used the Welsh language.
They were trying to beat it out of them, literally,
and they'd have to wear a placard which said,
Welsh not until they stopped using the Welsh language.
Well, not surprisingly,
an English assault of this kind
was highly abrasive to Welsh pride,
and two Welsh leaders called Ewan Gwyneth
and Sir Thomas Phillips denounced it.
This episode, as you remember, is the treachery of the Blue Books.
The Blue Books was the name of the parliamentary reports.
It was responded by intensifying calls for preserving Welsh,
particularly in the schools,
so that it would be passed on from one generation to the next,
and also in the churches.
By the 1870s,
the heavy-handed English policy had been abandoned.
In fact, by then,
William Gladstone, the Liberal Prime Minister,
spoke respectfully of Welsh
and actually attended one of the Eistedfords in 1873.
He himself had a big estate called Howarden in Northern Wales,
and Gladstone approved the use of the Welsh language in schools.
So a new government report from Gladstone's Liberal government
confirmed that Wales was a distinctive nation
with its own language, its own pride,
and its own cultural heritage,
which should be incorporated into the schools.
College-level education in Welsh became possible in 1872
with the creation of University College Aberystwyth,
and it was officially written into the school curriculum in 1907.
This remains true right up to the present.
Children who go to school in Wales are educated in Welsh.
They cannot speak English as well,
but nevertheless it is the prevailing language.
So in 1900,
more than half of the people of Wales did speak Welsh,
whereas only about 5% of the Scots spoke Gaelic.
So Welsh nationalism was weaker than Scottish nationalism,
but the language was stronger.
The broadening of the franchise by the Second Reform Act of 1867
brought more working-class people into political life,
and for the first time Welsh-speaking men were elected to go to Parliament.
The very first was a man called Henry Richard,
and he came from the coal mining district of Merthyr Tydfil.
His meetings before he was elected were like evangelical revivals,
and here's a little bit of one of his speeches.
The nation of Wales has never yet been represented in the House of Commons.
The people who speak this language, who read this literature,
who own this history, who inherit these traditions,
who venerate these names,
who've created and sustained and worked these marvellous organisations.
Have they not a right to say we are the Welsh nation?
Probably the most famous Welsh member of Parliament in the late Victorian period
was David Lloyd George,
who went on to become the leader of the Liberal Party
and British Prime Minister during the First World War.
Well, Wales and Scotland were both religiously distinct from England as well.
Most of the Scots, as I mentioned, were Presbyterians.
The Reformation in Scotland, a ferocious affair, had been led by John Knox,
and he was one of the great foes of Mary Queen of Scots back in the 1560s and 70s.
He denounced her and her helpers as the monstrous regiment of women,
and that's been taken as one of the favourite phrases among misogynists ever since.
Well, now in the 1830s, a crisis developed in the Scottish Church
in some ways comparable to some of the issues that were embroiling the English Church.
A group called the Voluntaries were Scottish Presbyterians
who favoured disestablishment,
that is taking the church out of the hands of the government.
They thought that the church had been created, divinely created, by Jesus himself,
and they're afraid that it was becoming increasingly contaminated
by being a branch of the secular state.
And in 1843, this movement reached a crisis with an event called the Great Disruption,
which split the established Church of Scotland right down the middle.
It was led by Thomas Chalmers, a charismatic evangelical preacher from Glasgow,
and his Lord Coburn, a contemporary observer watching him, says,
The magic of Chalmers lies in the concentrated intensity which agitates every fibre of the man
and brings out his meaning by words and emphasis of significant force
and rolls his magnificent periods clearly and irresistibly along
and kindles the whole composition with living fire.
Another of his friends said,
In point of mere feature, it would not be difficult to find him ugly,
but he's saved from it and made interesting and lovable
by singular modesty, kindness and simplicity of manner,
a strong expression of calm thought and benevolence,
a forehead so broad that it seems to proclaim itself the seat of great intellect,
a love of humour and an indescribable love of drollery when anything ludicrous comes over him.
Well, now, ever since 1707, when England and Scotland had been politically unified,
the right to appoint clergymen, the livings,
had come more and more into the hands of laymen, which is also the case in England as well.
Chalmers and his followers protested against that because they said,
this means that we're getting as our clergy, not people whom the church has chosen,
but lackies of the landlords.
And there was a famous case, a man called Robert Young was appointed by a secular landlord
and unanimously rejected by the parishioners as unsuitable against their religious taste.
But the church courts found in his favour with the support of the civil courts.
So this is in 1843, and when the church's annual convention came together,
Chalmers led out his supporters, more than half of all the people there, about 500 of them,
and they went to a nearby hall which they had previously hired anticipating this event.
They staged this great walkout to create the free church
and great cheering crowds lined the streets as they went to set up a church of their own.
It wasn't that they objected to an establishment.
In other words, they weren't following the American model of complete separation.
But what they did object to was an established church which wasn't dominated by its own ministry.
In their view, it must be Presbyterians themselves, Presbyterian ministers who are making the decisions.
In various parts of the Highlands, the landlords tried to prevent them from running free church services
because they saw this as a threat to their own authority.
And in one famous example at Stronchin in the county of Argyle, the free church members bought a boat
and it was they weren't allowed to get a building, so everyone would climb onto the boat on Sunday
and they'd have services at sea instead as a way of circumventing the local landowners.
To get the free church members paid, obviously it's no longer a part of the state,
every member was asked to pay a penny a week.
But the intensity, the evangelical intensity of the free church members made them prosperous.
They raised £2 million in the first two years, an incredible sum of money in those days.
They had to multiply it by best part of a thousand to get a sense of its comparable value in today's money.
And this was called the Sustentation Fund, the money which would provide for the ministers.
Meanwhile, the majority of the Welsh people were Methodists.
The Methodist movement had developed in England in the late 18th century
and proliferated particularly in the new industrial towns and in Wales.
It was much more creative at adapting to new industrial conditions.
It was puritanical as well, early Methodism.
Here's the historian Theodore Hoppin describing the effects it had in the Welsh Valleys.
And he says, the kind of popular semi-magical religiosity that had long flourished in rural Wales
fell victim to a desire for biblical orthodoxy and prudish propriety.
Sunday fairs, holy wells, seasonal customs, indigenous games and sports were all denounced
in a determined clerical campaign against wantonness, drunkenness and lawlessness.
In the course of which Welsh dissenting ministers came to resemble not so much as the priests of Catholic Ireland
who zeal to replace popular religious traditions with new model orthodoxies was no less intense.
So again, these days one of the standard images of what Wales is like
incorporates things like male voice choirs.
And if you've seen films like How Green Was My Value, you'll be familiar with the male voice choir.
Well, that's a 19th century invention as well.
It was a Methodist temperance device.
One of the problems the temperance advocates always had was that there seemed to be no fun,
especially by comparison with life in the pub.
So they tried to compensate by creating things like brass bands and male voice choirs.
So they're distinctive creations of this new Methodist generation in Welsh life.
Whether Wales is or is not naturally a land of song as its own people claim, well, that's open to dispute.
Now, of course, by the mid-Victorian period, especially with the development of the Empire,
large numbers of Welsh and Scottish people were living in England
and the English, Scottish and Welsh people were living with one another in frequent contact.
That didn't always mean that their relations were harmonious.
And then, and still to some extent even today, there's a great deal of regional rivalry
and tension between the different populations, particularly when it's associated with sporting events
like soccer and rugby matches, which it often is.
It would be almost impossible to exaggerate the durability of British regionalism.
It's fierce now in the 21st century. It was certainly very fierce indeed in the 19th.
APPLAUSE
