The Chinese Empire under the Manchus was xenophobic.
It despised all foreigners as barbarians, and as far as possible tried to exclude them
from the country completely.
Nevertheless it did trade in tea and silks particularly and in other fabrics with British
merchants, but at first it confined them solely to the one port of Canton in South China.
But the British were smuggling Indian-grown opium into China, even though it was illegal
there, partly by bribing local officials to take it in, and taking advantage of a widespread
Chinese opium addiction.
When the Chinese government tried to eliminate the trade and exclude it altogether, it enraged
the British merchants, who regarded it as a hypocritical move on the Chinese government's
part.
Between 1839 and 1842 they enlisted British military power to force further trade concessions
from China, and in effect to force illegal opium into the Chinese market.
It's one of the most unscrupulous episodes in British imperial history.
Well, the British military and technological superiority was so great that the campaign
and subsequent campaigns in China were overwhelmingly successful, cost thousands of Chinese lives
and very very few of the British soldiers.
So between then and the end of the 19th century, Britain blended trade with force in subjecting
China to its will.
The British Empire haven't talked about it much yet, but it's going to become one of
the great themes of the course as well.
In the 18th century and the early 19th century, it was largely a practical affair dedicated
to trade, that's mainly why the empire had developed.
It wasn't at all like the bombastic nationalistic enterprise it became by the end of Victoria's
reign.
So it was quite typical, the Chinese situation was quite typical, Britain had trading stations
on the coast called factories, trading factories, and they were submitted to a very elaborate
regulation from the Chinese government itself.
They were officially confined to one site at the port of Canton, which is on the Pearl
River.
And Canton itself was a thriving city at the time, an immense array of junks, a very colorful
place to work.
The whole place was lubricated by bribes.
If you were attempting to import and export into China, you had to bribe the appropriate
officials, the merchants and the mandarins who oversaw them, and sometimes the emperor's
viceroy as well.
Now as I said at the beginning, the Chinese had intense national and racial pride and
were contentious of all foreigners whom they described as barbarians, but still they recognized
the profitable possibilities and it was clear to them that the British were very rich and
had access to things which they needed.
So increasingly it was opium that was coming in and cotton textile manufacturers and tea
and silk that was going out.
The Chinese emperor held the Chinese merchants responsible for the good behavior of the British
traders so the Chinese and the British merchants had motives to get along very well with each
other.
Now opium was an illegal drug inside China, but it was also a very popular drug inside
China.
The opium poppies grew mainly in Bengal, this is in northeastern India, and it was already
part of the British empire as well, and the East India Company which ran this part of
the world had an incredibly lucrative trade in shipping Bengal opium poppies to Canton.
They actually landed at Lintin Island just offshore and it was there that there was a
factory which refined the poppies into the drug itself.
The way it was usually used in China was to mix it with tobacco and smoke it, and opium
dens, obviously there are fixture and things like the Conan Doyle fiction, you know, China
men in London in the opium den and so on.
It was very addictive and it caught on so widely that it was unrepressible despite the
laws against it.
The situation in China in the 1830s was comparable to the situation in America in the 1920s when
alcohol was illegal, but you could get a drink wherever you wanted one.
And there's an estimated 2 million opium addicts in China by 1835.
Some people in the British East India Company are aware that they are profiting from this
illicit trade, felt a little bit uncomfortable about it, but on the other hand it was incredibly
lucrative of very, very high value trade, and the company after reviewing the situation
decided that they couldn't afford to stop it.
There was one particularly enterprising company, Jardine and Matheson, which pioneered the opening
up of China to opium, and they grew very, very rich from it.
They invested heavily in a new generation of ships, the Clipper ships, very, very sleek
fast sailing ships, which could get from India, the Bay of Bengal, to Canton in about three
weeks so that they would be the first ones to bring the new poppy supply each harvest
time the older sailing ships had taken about two months.
One of the people they used as an interpreter was a German missionary called Karl Gutzlaff,
and he, a fascinating figure, he was an evangelical missionary who was trying to bring Protestant
Christianity to the Chinese, but he financed his work mainly through collaboration with
the drug lords, the East India Company, and then he used his share of the profits to print
evangelical literature in Chinese in the hope of converting the people.
Well in 1834, the British government attempted to win concessions from the Chinese to make
the trade more above board and to increase the number of places in which the trade could
take place rather than confining it solely to this one spot, and the British government
sent along a Scottish aristocrat named Lord Napier as its representative as the chief
superintendent of trade.
Jardine and Matheson, this ambitious company on the spot, urged Napier to be as confrontational
as possible.
They said, if necessary, we've got the power to overwhelm the Chinese, let's be forceful,
and we'll be able to extort concessions out of them.
And so when a meeting was arranged between the local Chinese dignitaries and Napier,
he deliberately violated a lot of the principles of protocol upon which the Chinese prided
themselves.
For example, when he was meeting the mandarins, the mandarins' servants would come first
and arrange the chairs in a certain way which was propitious for them.
The chairs would be facing south, and the mandarins' chair would, he'd have his back
to the king's portrait, he'd be sitting in this way, and that was appropriate.
As soon as they'd gone, Napier deliberately rearranged all the chairs so that he had the
place of honour, and so that everybody was facing the king's portrait.
He thought that was a much more auspicious way of doing it.
It was a deliberate act of provocation.
Now according to Chinese court protocol, the more important you were, the later you came.
So if you were a mandarin and you arranged to come at 11 o'clock, it meant you'd actually
show around one, two hours late, and your lateness was a measure of your importance.
In other words, the other people showed their subservience by having to wait.
What Napier was enraged at this, he didn't think he should be made to wait, and he certainly
didn't regard himself as the inferior of the mandarin.
So when they arrived, instead of exchanging the usual guarded pleasantries, which are
the bread and butter of diplomats, Napier began to berate the mandarin, while the mandarin
and his staff were completely impassive, and so he didn't realise how severely he'd insulted
them both by the arrangement of the meeting and by the way in which he'd conducted it.
But a few days later, he found to his horror that the Chinese government had suspended
trade altogether, and that from now on, no Chinese goods were going to be shipped out,
and no more British goods were going to be allowed in.
Napier retaliated by sending English gunboats up the Pearl River, threatening the fortifications
which the Chinese had on the riverbanks.
So warfare seemed very, very close, they're on the brink of conflict.
But at this stage, the British government itself didn't have sufficient resources available
in Asia to fight a big war against China if it came to the point, although the British
certainly had technical superiority, they were vastly outnumbered.
And so to the fury of Lord Napier, the British government sent him messages to de-escalate
the crisis and to evacuate his gunboats and so on, and then to make matters worse, he
died of a fever before this challenge could mature into warfare.
Jardine and Matheson, the merchants were furious as well, in their view it was a disgraceful
lost opportunity for improved trade.
A few years later in 1838, the Chinese government decided it was really going to get tough in
cutting off the opium supply once and for all.
The Emperor Tao Kuang tried to stamp out its use inside China, he was a reforming emperor,
and he had a very ambitious administrator in the Canton district called Lin Xiu, he
identified who the opium wholesalers were and had them beheaded in public.
He found lesser officials who had accepted bribes from the traders and had some of them
strangled in public as well, this was a time and a place where demonstrative executions
were thought to have a vigorous effect, and they did.
If you're an opium addict in China, you were told by the government at that time that you'd
got 18 months to cure yourself of the habit, but that if you couldn't, you too would be
strangled to death.
And Lin, the administrator, wrote a letter to Queen Victoria, telling her that it was
her responsibility to bring this nefarious trade to an end.
Here's Lin's letter to the Queen.
Your Majesty must immediately search out and throw to the bottom of the sea and never
again allow such a poison as opium to exist.
You will be showing that you understand the principles of heaven by respectful obedience
to our commands.
Do not say that you have not been warned in time.
On receiving this, your Majesty will be so good as to report to me immediately on the
steps that have been taken at each of your ports.
You can see the very high-handed tone, I don't think the Queen actually read it, but nevertheless
we've still got it in the diplomatic archives.
Many soldiers besieged the English factory at Campton, besieged the merchants, until
eventually under instructions from their new commissioner, Charles Eliot, they agreed
to hand over the supplies of opium that they got, which they were waiting to push out onto
the Chinese market.
They were very reluctant to do so because it was incredibly valuable.
But Eliot said, you must do this now, otherwise we're going to be overrun by a Chinese invasion.
So once it had been handed over, Lin, the Chinese administrator, supervised the public
destruction by having two million pounds weight of opium trampled into a swamp, a swampy area
nearby Campton.
He had the bales broken open and trampled down into the mud so that it would be irrecoverable
and worthless.
Well, now what happens when a commodity suddenly becomes scarce?
The price goes up.
The addicted Chinese, where it intensified their enthusiasm to get hold of it, even if
they had to pay more, it certainly didn't bring the trade to an end.
But it made it much more difficult, and that meant that the bribes had to rise and the
risks involved in doing the trade had to rise as well.
So when Lin found that the trade was persisting despite this act, he pursued the traders.
Most of them got on board ship and sailed off to Macau, and they were forced to seek
shelter on board heavily armed British merchant ships.
And it was in Macau that a group of drunken British sailors killed a Chinese peasant
in a brawl in the street.
That further aggravated the administrator, Lin, who demanded that the perpetrators,
the English sailors, should be tried for murder in a Chinese court.
The British emphatically rejected this idea.
And so once again, 1838, 39, they're right on the brink of warfare.
A Royal Navy ship, the HMS Volage, needing to get fresh supplies of water, tried to land
in China, but was fired on by Chinese forts and a line of war junks, and he wasn't allowed
to land to replenish his supplies.
The captain retaliated by firing on them, and again his artillery was so much better that
he was able to sink four of these ships in the space of an hour.
Well in Britain, meanwhile, a debate was going on.
It was becoming increasingly aware, the news was becoming familiar in Britain that this
conflict over opium was going on in China.
And there were people in Britain who said, we're on the wrong side here, we are not to
be doing this, it's morally disgraceful.
William Gladstone, then a young Tory MP, called the opium, the opium business, a most infamous
and atrocious trade, another Tory MP, Sidney Herbert, he said, the conflict is a war without
a just cause, a disgrace to the British flag.
But there were many others in Britain who tried to justify it, and who were satisfied
that it was appropriate.
After all, they said, opium is perfectly legal in Britain, you could go into a chemist shop,
a pharmacist, and buy opium.
The way it was usually sold in Britain was as the drug Lordinum, which was a solution,
sometimes had an alcohol content as well, and you can imagine that it had a profound
effect on the users because it was very, very toxic.
Taken occasionally and in small doses, it was very useful as a painkiller, one of the
relatively few that they then had.
And the argument was made in Britain that it was less harmful and less socially destructive
than gin, which was indeed a great scourge in British cities.
Very much like the same kind of argument takes place in America today about marijuana, people
say, it's less toxic than a hard liquor.
Why not?
Well, the Foreign Secretary, Lord Palmerston, believed that the revenue generated by the
opium trade was too important to lose, a very practical argument for maintaining the pressure
on the Chinese government.
There was already in circulation in England a great classic book called The Confessions
of an Opium Eater by Thomas De Quincey, which he'd written back in 1821, and it made De
Quincey famous.
He'd first bought opium from a drugist in London when he'd had a toothache and had been
amazed at how it had transformed him.
So let me read you a little passage from The Confessions of an English Opium Eater.
He says after he took opium for his toothache, what an apocalypse of the world within me
that my pains had vanished was now a trifle in my eyes.
This negative effect was swallowed up in the immensity of those positive effects which had
opened before me.
In the abyss of divine enjoyment, thus suddenly revealed.
Here in opium was a panacea for all human woes.
Here was the secret of happiness about which philosophers had disputed for so many ages.
It was at once discovered.
Happiness might now be bought for a penny and carried in the waistcoat pocket.
Portable ecstasies might be had corked up in a pint bottle.
He says it was far better than getting drunk.
Thus wine disorders the mental faculties.
Opium introduced among them the most exquisite order, legislation and harmony.
Wine robs a man of his self-possession.
Opium greatly increases it.
So one thing he used to do, he was particularly enamoured of a particular operatic soprano
and he describes how he'd take a little bit of Lordenham and then go and listen to her
and the voice was all the more beautiful and rich because of it.
But as so often with drugs the original thrill eventually is replaced by a nagging dependency.
He became a very heavy user of it and it induced him, induced in him and in most opium users
an incredible lethargy in ability to act vigorously, procrastination along with a tortured knowledge
that he ought to be getting things done but just couldn't bring himself to do so.
He felt motionless, lethargic and ashamed and he said that even worse than that was
the dreams which came to him when he fell into an opium-induced sleep.
Everything which he'd been thinking about while he was awake appeared in tormented and
distorted form when he was asleep.
Here's another quotation from it.
All the changes in my dreams were accompanied by deep-seated anxiety and gloomy melancholy
such as are wholly incommunicable by words.
I seemed every night to descend, not metaphorically but literally to descend into chasms and sunless
abysses, depths below depths from which it seemed hopeless that I could ever re-ascend.
Nor did I by waking feel that I had re-ascended.
The state of gloom, amounting at last to utter darkness as of some suicidal despondency cannot
be approached by words and he said that what was even worse was that these dreadful dreams
seemed to go on, the time stretched out interminably.
I sometimes seemed to have lived for seventy years or a hundred years in one night.
Nay, sometimes I had feelings representative of a millennium past in that time or however
of a duration beyond the limits of any human experience.
It's also induced in him an agonized replaying of depressing and miserable scenes from earlier
in his life which would come back to him in lurid form.
Well, it's a wonderful book, The Confessions of an English Opium Eater, and it shines an
interesting light on the fact that this was currently part of British foreign policy.
Another opium user at the same time was Wilkie Collins, the man who wrote one of the very
first detective novels in Britain called The Moonstone.
Wilkie Collins also addicted to opium, he said there was a period where he didn't dare
to go up the stairs in his own house because he was convinced that a great giant green woman
with teeth like walrus' tusks was there waiting to bite him on the shoulder as he went up
the staircase, let induced hallucinations in him.
Well, war broke out between Britain and China and the British technological superior ensured
their victory.
Fifteen British ships bombarded Ting Hai on Chu San Island in July of 1840.
The bombardment only lasted for about ten minutes, but it had an absolutely shattering effect.
The survivors inside the city fled with the result of the British marines and soldiers
were able to go ashore and occupy the town, they looted it as well, got roaring drunk
on captured Chinese liquor, and for a day or two were absolutely incapacitated, but luckily
didn't have to suffer a counter attack.
Now what the British hoped to achieve by this was to gain access to a lot more ports
so that the trade could go on in more places more vigorously, and they wanted compensation
for the opium they had had to hand over in Canton.
So the bombarded Canton itself in January 1841 with the same effect, killing 500 Chinese
and suffering no losses at all of their own.
That was sufficient to induce the local Chinese authorities to offer a treaty, and for the
men on the spot, Charles Eliot, to accept it.
It was called the Convention of Twen P, a temporary end to the fighting, and it agreed
that an indemnity of six million pounds would be paid for the opium, and it also gave the
port of Hong Kong to Britain as a second entry point into the Chinese trade.
But although it was satisfactory to the people on the spot, it wasn't satisfactory to either
government.
The Chinese thought it was giving away far too much, and the British government thought
it wasn't gaining anything like enough.
Lord Palmerston, who was the foreign secretary, wrote an angry letter to the commissioner
Charles Eliot, chastising him for settling for so little, just for the sake of getting
the trade going again.
Here's a little quote from Palmerston's letter.
Throughout the whole course of your proceedings, you seem to have considered that my instructions
were waste paper, which you might treat with entire disregard, and that you were at full
liberty to deal with the interests of your country according to your own fancy, and notification
you're dismissed, and we're not going to accept the treaty.
So the fighting continued.
British troops at Ningpo shattered a relieving Chinese army, which was led by the Emperor's
cousin.
This is now in the month of March in 1841.
What happened at Ningpo was that the British played a trick.
They left the city gates wide open, so that the place at first glance seemed to be deserted,
and the Chinese attackers rushed in to the open gates, but in fact in the streets immediately
inside the gate, mines had been laid, which were triggered by the men running onto them,
and it killed hundreds of them straight away.
Then as the survivors began to retreat through the little suburbs outside the walls, British
soldiers appeared from both sides and caught these retreating Chinese soldiers in a withering
crossfire, while cannons that they'd mounted inside the walls also now opened up.
Here's a British army officer who was there, Lieutenant John Aftoloni.
The effect was terrific, for the street was perfectly straight, and the enemy's rear,
not aware of the miserable fate which was being dealt out to their comrades in front,
continued to press the mass forward, so as to force fresh victims upon the mound of dead
and dying which already barricaded the street.
Our infantry resumed their firing, and such a storm of balls was capped up upon the enemy,
that in a short time the street was choked up, and when for want of a living mark, our
men were ordered to advance, their steps fell upon a closely packed mass of dead and dying,
though again an overwhelming British victory through superior planning and superior technology.
Another English officer who was there, Alexander Murray, noted that as the British chased the
retreating Chinese army out of the city firing on them as they ran, he said, quote, the most
extraordinary part of the scene was the coolness with which the country people looked on, crowding
the bridges at every spot from which they could see in an amazing manner.
The circumstances of their assembling showed what confidence they had that we would not
injure them, but the little interest they took in their countrymen did not raise them
in my estimation, so a bizarre scene, a virtual massacre taking place of the Chinese army
with tourists watching around the edges.
The treaty which the British government finally signed, the Treaty of Nanking of August 1842,
was much harsher in its imposition of terms on the Chinese authorities.
Four new treaty ports were established in addition to Canton, Amoy, Fuchou, Ningpo and
Shanghai.
Britain retained Hong Kong and annexed it directly as part of the British Empire, which
they then kept right through until the year 1997, just very recently it was returned to
Chinese sovereignty.
An indemnity was paid for the opium, not of 6 million, but of 21 million, far more.
And ironically, but not surprisingly, opium itself was never mentioned in the treaty at
all.
The Chinese government still wasn't willing to say, all right, from now the trade can
go forward, the British weren't going to make a point of it, it was just one of the understood
things from now on the trade is going to continue, and in fact it was now going to continue on
far more favorable terms for the British merchants.
The treaty also established the point that British subjects were exempt from Chinese
laws.
What's so alarming about it all is not only is it a disgraceful episode in hypocritical
conduct, the British dressed it up in very, very high-minded terms.
They regarded this as a triumph of free trade.
As you know, free trade had been generating a lot of enthusiasm in Britain itself.
A few years from then, 1846, it was going to lead to the enormous upheaval when the
Corn Laws were going to be repealed.
Here's the man whom Britain installed as the first governor of Hong Kong, Sir John Bowering.
Jesus Christ is free trade, and free trade is Jesus Christ.
It wasn't said ironically, apparently it's sincere.
I think the idea being free trade is going to enable us to move into China, will bring
Christianity with us in the long run, it will be the salvation of everybody there.
Well, as the 19th century continued, the same story could be told over and over again.
China's technological inferiority to the West made it increasingly vulnerable to Western
exploitation, first from Britain, but then from many of the other European powers and
the United States too.
Western powers certainly knew how to exploit the Taiping rebellion of the 1850s.
The Taiping's were, they're called the Society of God-Worshippers, and they believed in a
strange variant of Christianity, a kind of garbled version of it, which some of their
leaders had got from missionaries.
Highly periodanical at first, and in part of the country, it overthrew the Manchu dynasty,
that further weakened China internally and gave further opportunities for the Western
powers to move in.
Recurrently there would be outbreaks of anti-foreigner hostility, to which the foreigners, led by
the British, would bombard the Chinese ports to kind of batter them into submission once
again.
And there's a lovely exchange of rhetoric which goes on in these conflicts.
For example, here's a Canton Manifesto from 1857, during another of these periods of great
tension between the two, well, a subsequent opium war in effect.
And the Chinese Manifesto says, we note that you English barbarians have formed the habits
and developed the nature of wolves, plundering and seizing things by force, except for your
ships being solid, your gunfire fierce, and your rockets powerful, what other abilities
have you got?
Our hatred is already at white heat.
If we do not completely exterminate you pigs and dogs, we will not be manly Chinese, able
to support the sky on our heads and stand firmly on the earth.
We are definitely going to kill you, cut your heads off and burn you to death.
We must strip off your skins and eat your flesh, and then you will know how tough we
are.
We ought really to use refined expressions, but since you beasts do not understand written
characters, therefore we use rough vulgar words to instruct you in simple terms.
And here's what Lord Palmerston says in reply, the time is fast coming when we shall be obliged
to strike another blow in China.
These half civilized governments, such as those in China, Portugal or Spanish America,
all require addressing every eight or ten years to keep them in order.
Their minds are too shallow to receive an impression that will last longer than some
such period, and warnings are of little use.
They care little for words, and they must not only see the stick, but actually feel
it on their shoulders before they yield.
Well, of course, when Palmerston talks about addressing, what he really means is a salientary
massacre, and it's a lot more than the stick on their shoulders.
Well, finally, by the Treaty of Chentsen, which was passed in 1858, China was forced
to legalize the opium trade.
Always until then they'd been able to resist it, but finally in 58 they had to yield even
on that one principle.
