Lecture 16, The Crimean War, 1854-56
The Crimean War began in 1854 and in it Britain went to war against the European enemy for
the first time since the Battle of Waterloo which had taken place back in 1815. In alliance
with France and Turkey, Britain fought against the Russians on the coast of the Black Sea
in the area of the Crimea. The British campaign was mishandled by an army that was riddled
with inefficiency, nepotism and corruption and yet Britain was on the winning side partly
because the enemy was even more badly managed than they were.
There were two things which made this war particularly memorable in the long run. One
was the nursing achievements of Florence Nightingale who had a transforming effect
on the British military hospitals there and the second was the investigative reporting of a Times
reporter, a correspondent called William Howard Russell, really the first time that a military
campaign had had reporters on the spot to describe exactly what was going on and to get their stories
back quickly to London. And it featured one of the most pointless exploits in British military
annals, the Charge of the Light Brigade. Well now, fear of Russian military power, Russian
political power, was a steady undercurrent of 19th century British politics. The Liberals thought
that that Tsarist Russia was the epitome of cruelty and arbitrary conduct, backwardness in
every way. Serfdom was still universal in Russia and life went on in conditions of great brutality.
Conservatives in Britain tended to fear Russia because it was seen as an ambitious expanding
power which was threatening in two directions. It threatened India, in other words, there was always
the danger or the perceived danger that Russian influence and power going to spread southwards
and threaten Britain's control of India. But also that it was going to spread westwards or
southwestwards so that the Russians would take over the eastern Mediterranean Sea. This is a
period when the Turkish Empire was in a prolonged decline. The Turkish Empire was called the Sick
Man of Europe and the fear was the Turkish Empire is going to continue to fade and the Russians
will take up the vacuum. That will threaten our strategic interests and particularly, again,
our communications between Britain and India. Well, in the early 1850s a Russian army occupied
the area which is west of the Black Sea, what today is part of Romania, and in doing so triggered
off a war against the Turks who also claimed it. What followed then was a long period of
diplomatic maneuvering in which more and more of the European powers became directly involved
The inability to resolve this issue peacefully led to the Anglo-French Declaration of War
in alliance with Turkey against the Russians in March of 1854. We could go into the diplomacy,
but you need a very, very good knowledge of Eastern European geography, and for our purposes
that's perhaps less important than the conflict itself. Now, the British army was mismanaged
in many ways. It had only fought minor campaigns since the Battle of Waterloo, so an entire
generation had gone by 35 or 40 years since they were last in conflict. They'd fought minor
campaigns in some of the colonies and in China and on the Indian frontier and so on, but not
against a big European field army. And in fact, even though Britain was very proud of its navy
and its army, they were surprisingly starved of funds. They were bargain basement military forces
for the times, so they weren't really big enough for a campaign of this kind. The officers who
commanded the British army didn't get their positions because of their skill as army officers.
They got them rather because of their social pedigree, their position in the aristocracy,
and through purchase you could actually buy your rank as an army officer, and each rank up the
hierarchy was more expensive. If you became a regimental commander, again through purchase,
you had the right to dress the soldiers in the way you wanted. You could actually design a uniform
for your own regiment. So one of the reasons that there was such a colorful array when the British
army turned out was because many of them were wearing, well, not do-it-yourself uniforms. I mean,
they were standardized within the regiment, but the officers had the opportunity to create it.
Senior commands were achieved partly through merit, but also partly through seniority,
and the result was, especially in peacetime, that the commanders tended to be very old men.
You can imagine that during the Napoleonic wars between the 1790s and 1815, the death rate had
been very high so that talented men had had the opportunity for rapid advancement if they'd
survived. Duke of Wellington himself is a good example of that, but in peacetime all that process
slowed down so that the commanders tended to be elderly. All the senior commanders in the Crimean
War on the British side were aged over 65, and the commander, Lord Raglan, was 66. As a young
man, he'd fought in the Napoleonic wars. That was his memory of warfare was now becoming rather
distant. And ironically, he always referred to the enemy as the French, even though in fact,
France was now one of Britain's allies. And there are stories that, for example, he'd come out of
his tent and you see a column of French cavalrymen charging by and have a momentary panic that the
enemy was in his camp and that his officers had reassured him. No, no, it's quite all right,
they're our ally now. The men who filled the ranks of the British army, the rankers,
were drawn from the most desperate reaches of the urban poor. Wellington himself had called them
the riffraff. The scum of the earth was Wellington's description of his own rankers. And they were
kept in order with very, very severe discipline indeed, brutal flogging. You could be flogged
a hundred lashes on the bare back for what seemed to us like very minor offenses. In fact,
there had been a debate in Parliament in the late 1820s about whether flogging was necessary.
And the consensus was, yes, the army itself would dissolve unless we beat our own soldiers into
submission. The British army was not suitably equipped for the campaigner to head to fight
in the Crimea. It's an area with a continental climate of extremes of heat and cold. So when
the British soldiers first went ashore at Varna, this is on the west coast of the western shore
of the Black Sea, this campaign took place in blistering heat. You know that the regiments of
guards wear great bare skin hats and they were wearing thick broadcloth uniforms and so on.
It wasn't long before an outbreak of dysentery had begun, cholera swept through the ranks and far
more of the British soldiers died of disease than died due to enemy action. But later on,
when the focus of the fighting switched to the Crimea, the Russian winter sat in and the Russian
winter obviously is legendary for its intense cold. It was the cold in 1812 which had defeated
Napoleon in his attempt to invade Russia. Now, incidentally, one of the people who was fighting
on the Russian side during the Crimean War was Leo Tolstoy. Tolstoy's war scenes in War and Peace
were based very much on his reminiscence of his experiences in the Crimea in the 1850s.
So he was talking about an earlier war but basing it on the hardships he endured in the Crimean.
Supply lines from England to the Black Sea are long and difficult and at first supply ships
arrived far too slowly and very often inappropriate to the conditions prevailing there. For example,
a shipload of boots arrived made by the cheapest bidder for the contract and it turned out that
all of them were too small for the soldiers to wear. Here's an eyewitness description.
The men lie down in their tents and to give ease to their feet take off their boots.
The frosts however are sharp and in the morning the boots are as hard as iron. There is no
getting them on nor is there any way to soften them. One of the effects of Britain's economising
on its military forces was that they didn't have proper intelligence about the area they were fighting
in. They had no maps of the area. They didn't have people who knew the local languages.
They didn't really understand the nature of the terrain in which they were going to be fighting
or and so on. Elementary mistakes which are a little bit more careful preparation might have
obviated. Well nevertheless there are about 25,000 British soldiers, about another 25,000
French ones and about 7,000 Turks. At first in the Crimean Peninsula they won a series of victories.
First at the Alma, then at Balaclava and then at the Battle of Inkerman. Three battles which
took place in quick succession in October of 1854 and then they besieged the great fortress of
Sebastopol. They could have seized Sebastopol at once but again they didn't have any information
about how heavily it was defended and whether an assault would take it at once. We now know that it
could have done but the delay which they permitted to take place and it gave the Russians time to
fortify it so it's a year-long siege developed instead. Now during one of these October battles
the charge of the Light Brigade took place in the Battle of Balaclava. You can imagine that with
armies 50,000 strong they they're spread over a big area. The commanders Lord Raglan and his staff
were on a hilltop and from where they were standing they're mounted and they're on a hilltop.
They could see that a line of British guns, cannons had been captured by the enemy and were
now being limbered up to be dragged away as captives. Lord Raglan said to Captain Nolan,
one of his aides, go and tell Lord Cardigan, the commander of the Light Brigade, to recapture those
guns of ours. So Captain Nolan set off but then he had to ride down into a valley which is where
Lord Cardigan and the Light Brigade were waiting and from the valley these guns were invisible.
Nolan himself apparently delivered an ambiguous order. My lord your commanded to capture the guns
so Cardigan looks around and says which gun and what he could see was that the other end of this
long valley were Russian batteries and at the sides of the valley as well it was a very heavily
armed area and Nolan apparently said there my lord there are your guns so rather than questioning
the the plausibility of these orders Cardigan himself a very lofty and snobbish man set off
to attack them, those are the only ones he could see. Well the result was the charge of the Light
Brigade, about 650 men in the brigade charging down this valley with the result that they're
being attacked, they're being fired on by artillery from three sides, a catastrophic thing to do
obviously. They reached the battery the survivors did and actually managed to put to death most of
the Russian gunners there but they'd only been there a minute or two before big Russian reinforcements
came running towards them. They recognized that they couldn't hold on there and so had to retreat
back down the valley still under crossfire from from both sides. Of the 650 slightly less than 200
returned unscathed, about 134 killed outright and many more subsequently died of wounds
and this was the event which led a French officer watching General Bosque to say
c'est magnifique mais c'est n'est pas la guerre, it's magnificent but it's not war.
Well Lord Cardigan himself the leader of the Light Brigade, he was 57 years old, he was no
young man and as a wealthy nobleman rather than submit to military discipline he'd gone to war
in his private yacht, he'd sailed his yacht through the Mediterranean and into the Black Sea
and his men nicknamed him the noble yachtsman. At the end of the day he left his horse in charge of
some aids and went back out to his boat and went to bed at sea as usual. He himself was one of those
army officers who manages to to go unscathed through conditions where men are being killed all around
him. Well of course this is the event which occasioned Alfred Lord Tennyson's famous poem
The Charge of the Light Brigade. There was a telegraph line enabling news of what had happened
in the war to get back to England quickly and so it's only a few days later that Tennyson was at
his breakfast table and opening the the London Times and read about The Charge of the Light Brigade
and the story in the paper included the line Someone Had Blundered and the the rhythm of the
line caught in his head and over the next day or two he actually wrote his poem which eventually
became one of his most famous works. I'll read you a couple of the verses from it.
Forward the Light Brigade. Was there a man dismayed? Not though the soldiers knew Someone Had Blundered.
There's not to make reply. There's not to ask the reason why. There's but to do and die.
Into the valley of death rode the 600. Flashed all their sabers bare. Flashed as they turned
in air. Sabering the gunners there. Charging an army while all the world wondered. Plunged in the
battery smoke right through the line they broke. Cossack and Russian reeled from the sabers stroke
and so on. It's got a lovely sort of thundering heavy rhyming cadence. Well when he heard that the
soldiers liked it he paid for a thousand extra copies to be printed and sent out to be distributed
among the soldiers. One thing that's happening in the Crimean War is that improved communications
are speeding everything up. News goes back and forwards quickly. Queen Victoria herself followed
the fortunes of the army very very closely. She created a decoration the Victoria Cross
which would be awarded to soldiers for conspicuous gallantry and from that day right down to the
present it's the highest medal for bravery that can be awarded to a British military person.
And she awarded it to officers and men alike. This was a break from tradition previously to
being given she would give medals only to the officers. And she certainly followed the news
of the campaigns very closely indeed. Here's one of her letters written to Princess Augusta of Prussia.
You will understand it when I assure you that I regret exceedingly not being a man
and not being able to fight in the war. My heart bleeds for the many fallen but I consider that
there is no finer death for a man than on the battlefield. And she contented herself meanwhile
with knitting scarves and socks that could be sent out to some of the soldiers. As wounded men came
back from campaign she went down to the dockyards to meet them. Here's a little passage from her
journal written on the 22nd of February in 1855. We saw 26 of the wounded of the cold stream
guards. One private Lanesbury with a patch over his eye and his face tied up had had his head
traversed by a bullet penetrating through the eye which was gone through the nose and coming out at
the neck. He looks dreadfully pale but was recovering well. Well and she goes on in that
passage of the diary to worry about the inadequacy of army pensions and the knowledge that the
disabled man won't have enough to live on from that. She contributed to a fund for
distributing artificial limbs among soldiers who'd suffered amputations. So throughout the war
was constantly excited when there was a victory fretting about the hardships of the soldiers
and like citizens in many subsequent wars being anxiously aware of what was going on there.
One thing which infuriated her was the fact that when the war began there was an enormous
outbreak of anti-foreigner sentiment. I mentioned earlier that British people tended to be very
xenophobic themselves and to dislike foreigners and stories went around that her husband Prince
Albert was a Russian spy. There were stories that at any moment now he was going to be arrested
and put in prison in the Tower of London and she even issued an indignant denial to rumors that
she and Prince Albert spoke German together at home. Actually they quite often did but because
she spoke German well and he was a German prince but no she wanted it to be known publicly that
they spoke in English and the government reacted to her anxiety over his over threats to him
by the government itself officially voted had a vote of confidence in the Prince in January of 1855.
When Lord Cardigan came home the leader of the charge of the Light Brigade she invited him to
come to the palace to tell her in person about the about the battle and she had the whole family
there Prince Albert and many of the kids who were then quite young and Lord Cardigan described what
had happened and she even ordered that a painting should be made of the scene so an artist was there
to record it but later on she learned that Lord Cardigan was a notorious adulterer with the result
that she ordered herself to be painted out of the picture so she was in it for a while but later on
she said I'm not going to appear in a portrait with him. All right now and as I said another
new thing is the speed of communications which is particularly being developed by the newspapers
and William Howard Russell the journalist of the London Times was out there and it was he who began
to criticize the inadequacy of the army and the poor preparation that the government had made to
fight a war of this magnitude. The telegraph lines meant that news could sometimes arrive the same day
or the next day rather than weeks later and in fact the press had got better arrangements than the
government so quite often the ministers would read about what had happened in the newspaper and only
later would their own official reports reach them. The editor of the Times John Delain was a very
innovative man realizing the possibilities of sending people onto the spot and although Britain
in some ways was a limited society it didn't have press censorship so it's quite possible to have
very open criticism of the government even then. Russell's own style the journalist on the spot
his style stripped away the romance and adventure from war and said it's actually a condition of
terrible suffering and hardship disease and bitter cold and malnutrition and poor medical
health that's the reality of this war there's nothing glorious about it. He exposed a lot of
the incompetence in provisioning and the mindless adherence to red tape there's one incident which
he recorded a desperately needed supply ship arrived at Malaclava but because some of its
paperwork wasn't properly in order it was turned away rather than being unloaded with supplies
that was needed and the soldiers said well you know we can't violate the protocols we've got to
stick with our orders. Of course soldiers had always suffered in this way it isn't as though
the suffering of the soldiers was worse than usual but previously the public hadn't had such ready
access to news about it that was really what was what was different and of course people at home
realized the press itself is now becoming an important component of public awareness potentially
it's quite powerful if the press mounts a campaign the government's got to respond his lord Greville
he writes the press with the times at its head is striving to throw everything into confusion
and running amok against the aristocratic elements of society and the constitution the intolerable
nonsense and the abominable falsehoods it flings out every day are nonetheless dangerous because
they are nonsense and falsehood and backed up as they are by all the vulgar radical press
they diffuse through the country a massive inflammatory matter the effect of which may
be more serious and arrive more quickly than anybody imagines well sure enough these stories
prompted a radical member of parliament called john roebuck to demand an official committee of inquiry
into the government's conduct of the war and the vote of this committee when it came in was so
strong in favor of an inquiry that it prompted the prime minister to resign the prime minister at
this point was lord abedin so abedin resigned this is in the early 1855 and lord palmston took his
place he was already a senior politician and finally he'd reached the the apex of a political career
and under lord palmston a lot of the chaos began to be sorted out and the army gradually improved
its techniques of administration queen victoria hated lord palmston along with glanston in her
view he was another very worst he was another of these he was a leftover from the regency period
already in his 70s by now but had had a very disreputable past a famous adulterer by now he was
a bit rickety he had false teeth and so on but in fact he was very very shrewd and capable
had a lot of political experience and was able when necessary to get things done on the basis of
nearly 50 years of political experience and the commission which which ran its course investigating
what was going on concluded that it was an antiquated system rather than rather than individual
wickedness or mendacity which had caused the early disasters here's a passage from the report
the sufferings of the army mainly resulted from the circumstances under which the expedition to
the Crimea was undertaken and executed the administration which ordered that expedition
had no adequate information as to the armament of the forces in the Crimea they were not acquainted
with the strength of the fortresses to be attacked nor with the resources of the country to be invaded
they hoped and expected the expedition to be immediately successful and as they did not foresee
the probability of a protracted struggle they made no preparations for a winter campaign
incidentally one of the things that's so extraordinary about the the the military at
this time is that in matters of dress they were almost defiantly illogical the royal navy had no
alternative uniforms for different circumstances so that if a ship was sent to an equatorial
station the sailors would just wear the regulation broadcloth but then if they went to search for
the northwest passage around the top of america they'd wear exactly the same thing they'd
didn't adapt their view was emphatic well now this will have to do sure it's in cold in some places
it's hot in others but we're not going to adapt another thing that's new about the the Crimean
War is that for the first time war photographers were there I mentioned last time that photography
is a developing art at this point and so the Crimean War is really the first war in the world's history
of which we've got photographs but in those days the the emulsions with which the glass plates
were coated weren't very photosensitive so you couldn't take action pictures the in fact they're
very similar to the photos that were taken of the american civil war just five or six years later
they tend to be static they can show a battlefield after the battle or a group of soldiers but you
can't get much of a sense from them of the of dynamic events unfolding before you even so Roger
Fenton the war photographer who was there made 360 photographs which were greatly admired because
for the first time it meant that people without ever leaving Britain could see what the Crimea
looked like that was something very new now back in Britain there was an anti-war movement it wasn't
very big but it was certainly eloquent because one of its leaders was Richard Cobden who in the
40s had been one of the leaders of the anti-corn law league a believer in peace and free trade
and in fact his old collaborator John Bright also joined in Bright was a devout Quaker obviously
committed for religious reasons to a position of absolute peace but Bright made this telling point
if we are going to fight in a conflict like that we should surely be on the side of the Russians
they're the Christians we're fighting on the same side as the Muhammedans how can that possibly be
in what way is this going to advance the gospel in the world of course it wasn't it was a power
politics thing John Bright made a very famous speech in Parliament called the angel of death
speech when he compare he brings to mind the passage in the book of Exodus about the the killing
of the firstborn of Egypt except where the angel of death has marked the doorways and he says the
angel of death has been abroad throughout the land you may almost hear the beating of his wings
there is no one as when the firstborn was slain of old to sprinkle with blood the lintel and the
two sideposts of our doors that he may spare and pass on he takes his victims from the castle of the
noble the mansion of the wealthy and the cottage of the poor and lowly everybody's suffering together
in this war well Florence Nightingale improved medical conditions for the wounded soldiers she
was she came from the upper classes of Britain's she was born in Florence and raised in Derbyshire
at a place called Leehurst and when she told her parents that she wanted a career as a nurse they
were absolutely horrified because nurses then there was virtually no position in society more
degraded mrs. Gamp in Dickens is the typical nurse she's sort of drunken and slovenly and thoroughly
disreputable and the idea that an aristocratic young woman should be a nurse they revolted from
the idea but nevertheless she was determined rather than marrying and settling down as women of her
class were expected to do she went to Germany where it was already possible to train as a nurse
and when news of the war came out she applied to one of her politically influential friends
Sydney Herbert and persuaded him to let her lead an expedition of nurses out to the Crimea
she took 30 38 nurses with her and a shipload of equipment and sailed to scutari which is a place
near Istanbul several hundred miles from where the actual battles were taking place but this was
the big British military hospital in the Black Sea as soon as she got there she was horrified by the
bad conditions in this military hospital and began at once a what's now a famous feud with the
man who ran the place Sir John Hall one thing which particularly shocked her was that cholera
victims of whom there were many were jostled into the same wards as the wounded men from the battles
they weren't properly segregated but depending on whether they were victims of illness or wounds
and there were so many of them that most were lying on the floor just lying on the floor in
the middle of this desperate winter rather than being in beds throughout the whole of the Crimean
War five times as many British soldiers died of disease as died of wounds that was typical actually
in virtually every war in history up to the first world war enemy action wasn't the most dangerous
thing bringing large numbers of men together in insanitary conditions that's what killed most of
them here's letting straight to description of what the hospital was like at scutari want neglect
confusion misery in every shape and in every degree of intensity fill the endless corridors
and the vast apartments of the gigantic barrack house which without forethought without without
forethought or preparation had been hurriedly set aside as the chief shelter for the victims of the
war the very building itself was radically defective huge sewers underlay it and cesspools loaded with
filth wafted their poison into the upper rooms the floors were in so rotten a condition that many of
them could not be scrubbed the walls were thick with dirt incredible multitudes of vermin swarmed
everywhere and enormous as the building was it was yet too small it contained four miles of
beds crushed together so close that there was but just room to pass between them under such conditions
a most elaborate system of ventilation might well have been at fault but here there was no
ventilation the stench was indescribable well this is the place in which Florence Nightingale went to
work with her eager volunteers gradually to try to clean the thing up and introduce some elementary
points of cleanliness and sanitation she certainly wasn't medically sophisticated what she believed
in essentially was regular eating regular washing and decent ventilation like most of her contemporary
she believed that miasmatic gases that is something in the air was what caused infection to spread
because the germ theory of disease was still 20 25 years in the future and she was effective by by
improving conditions in elementary ways particularly basic cleanliness and reasonable diet she was
able to increase the recovery rate so that the death rate among wounded and and diseased soldiers
began to diminish she certainly became a hero to the wounded soldiers themselves who recognized
that she was making changes in the way that the army doctors had not bothered with and of course
she was politically well connected so she could bring pressure to bear on them by claiming by
reminding them of her knowledge of the senior ministers had she been of a lower social class
none of this could have happened well publicity for her work spread rapidly in england and soon
voluntary help was pouring in offers of assistance and money and queen victoria honored
honored Florence Nightingale with a medal when she came home it was it was a brooch not a medal
and inside was the inscription blessed are the merciful so the queen herself recognized
nightingale as a great figure she spent the rest of her life as a behind the scenes lobbyist for
the improvement of hospitals most of her life was devoted to that she herself became a or she said
she was an invalid she wasn't allowed to give a testimony to political to parliamentary commissions
but she was certainly very unusual kind of invalid in the in the sense that she was incredibly
vigorous and hardworking and she surrounded herself with a group of of hardworking and dedicated
political men who would do the work on her behalf in public like this man sydney herbert who i've
mentioned several times she established a nursing school st thomas's hospital which is across the
river thames from parliament and had the effect of turning nursing into a reputable career for
ladies for the first time she didn't really keep up with medical developments she lived right on
into the 20th century and by her death she was a distinctly old-fashioned figure but nevertheless
a very luminous one in the history of of nursing and sanitation the crime in war itself ended in
1856 for the peace treaty that was signed in paris and it was a treaty which compelled the new
russian czar alexander the second to relinquish his territorial claims in the eastern danube area
that is in eastern europe and to demolish all his black sea navy bases so the british aim of
preventing rusher from taking over from turkey in that area had succeeded awareness of what had
happened inside the british army also led to a round of reforms at home and finally commissions
of inquiry um decided in 1871 that the purchase of military rank would have to come to an end
so from then on you could become an army officer it still tended to be restricted to the upper
classes but it was no longer solely a matter of purchase meanwhile the eastern question what's
going to happen as the turkish empire dissolves continued to be a perpetual policy anxiety for
the british right up to the end of the 19th century so it was a great surprise really when the first
world war began to find that britain and rusher were allies once again it would be more logical to
expect them to have been enemies
