Lecture 17, The Indian Mutiny, 1857
The British Empire in India was run by a handful of enterprising men.
In the 1850s, about 30,000 British people in India governed a population of about 200 million.
With beginnings in the 17th century, the British presence in India had increased steadily through the 18th,
until the British had become in effect the overlords of the whole of India by about 1860.
It had begun as a trading venture, but the British role in India changed,
particularly during the Victorian era, as a series of ambitious administrators
tried to govern the various provinces far more directly, began to encourage the work of Christian missionaries,
and to bring to an end native customs which they regarded as barbaric.
In 1857, accumulated resentments among the Indian people led to a sudden uprising,
which is remembered in British history as the Indian Mutiny,
and is usually remembered by Indian historians as the Revolt.
Well, the Empire, as I said, it began as a trading venture.
The reason that British traders were interested in the East Indies and India itself
was partly because of the importance of the spice trade.
In the days before the invention of refrigeration, spices were important,
because as soon as you'd killed an animal, the meat began to decay.
There was no way of preserving it, except in freezing weather, which is quite rare in Britain.
You may remember that Columbus' motive in sailing west was to find an alternative route to the Indies.
It was an area where the spice trade was incredibly lucrative.
The risks were very high, but if you could get a shipload of spices back to Europe,
the gains were also very high, and it could literally make you wealthy overnight.
Asian silk was also one of the highly desirable commodities in the India trade.
Well, in the year 1600, the Honourable East India Company was founded,
and it was granted a monopoly of English trade with India by Queen Elizabeth I.
It built coastal factories, that is places where trade goods would be stored
and where incoming ships would bring in either gold or imports,
and the outgoing trade would be used.
They had to be fortified, because periodically they were vulnerable to attack by local princes.
And in the 1600s and 1700s, they were also vulnerable to attack by the other colonial powers.
That long period witnessed the whole succession of colonial wars
between Britain, France, Portugal, and the Dutch.
But between 1740 and 1760, Britain finally ousted all the other European nations
and made itself the dominant power in India.
India as a nation had never existed.
The whole Indian subcontinent was made up of hundreds of little principalities.
The only earlier unification had been in the Mogul Empire,
which had unified much of northern India in the preceding 200 years.
One of its most famous vestiges is the Taj Mahal in Agra.
But otherwise, India itself was widely divided into all kinds of different things.
Climatically, and in terms of landscape, it's very different,
all the way from desert to jungle.
There were hundreds of languages, lots of different religions,
complicated caste systems with regional variations,
thousands of different particularistic traditions.
In other words, India was a concept that certainly wasn't yet a country.
The country of India was made, in effect, by the British.
Now, the reason they became gradually more involved in the interior workings of India
was because very often rival princes would try to get the British
to fight on their side in local conflicts
because of the great superiority of British weapons and British military discipline.
But a prince who took on British help often found after he defeated his rival
that he was so beholden to the British that in effect he'd become their vassal.
The most decisive British military victory had taken place in 1757,
exactly 100 years before the mutiny.
This was the battle of Plassi, an astonishing event,
fighting against an Indian prince called Siraj Udhwala.
Robert Clive, the British general, with about a thousand British troops
and about 2,000 seapoys, that is, Indian soldiers loyal to him,
defeated an army of about 50,000.
So, in other words, small British forces, highly armed and highly disciplined,
could overcome much larger native rivals.
This was in the 1700s.
In the early 1800s, a series of ambitious governors sent out from Britain
tried to bring more of India more directly under British control.
In the closing years of the 18th century, the British merchants and soldiers there
were called the Nabobs, and they had a reputation for enriching themselves
on a Wagnerian scale at the Indian's expense.
There was a famous corruption trial of one of them, Warren Hastings.
But the best of the East India Company's servants in the 19th century
were more high-minded.
If they could, they wanted to impose an equitable system of governance
on wide areas of India and bring into some sort of order
the chaotic variety of tax and land tenure systems.
Among them were men like Thomas Munro and John Malcolm and Montstuart Elphinstone.
These were people who took an intense interest in what was happening inside India.
They started to learn some of the Indian languages.
They became very interested in the religion.
They started to learn the inner logic of the Indian's system of government and rule.
And they were horrified at the oppression suffered by the Indian peasants
by the very, very acute poverty.
Even those of them who were familiar with British conditions of poverty,
which were horrible, were stunned by conditions in India.
And also, they revolted against what seemed to them the brutal, degrading
and superstitious religious customs of many of the Indian people.
Here's John Stuart Mill, the philosopher, expressing a fairly typical view.
He was an employee of the East India Company.
And he says,
By a system of priestcraft built upon the most enormous and tormenting superstition
that ever harnessed and degraded any portion of mankind,
their minds were enchained more intolerably than their bodies.
In short, despotism and priestcraft taken together,
the Hindus in mind and body were the most enslaved portion of the human race.
So the British administrators certainly regarded themselves as doing good work
in trying to bring these things to an end.
They continued to expand their territorial holdings in India as the 19th century continued.
They conquered Burma and the Punjab in northwest India and the area of Sindh.
And they were campaigning periodically in Afghanistan.
Because of their fear of the Russian threat from the north,
I mentioned when we talked about the Crimean War, the Great Game,
the great Anglo-Russian diplomatic maneuvering which went on throughout the 19th century
and which often reached a flashpoint in Afghanistan.
Well, following the Roman Empire's principle of divide and rule,
the British used native sepoys, Indian soldiers in British pay,
usually with the leadership of British officers in many of their campaigns,
because a group of Muslim soldiers from one area of India
would feel no particular Indian loyalty,
especially if their rivals were Hindus elsewhere.
So by 1857, Britain ruled half of India directly
and the other half through native princes who were closely allied to Britain
and who were permitted to continue so long as they governed their own provinces adequately.
The British Governor-General Lord Dalhousie, who was in India between 1848 and 56,
also decided that where possible he was going to bring more of the native states
directly under British administration.
So in the event that a prince died without a direct heir, the British would take it over.
Or in some cases, even when there was an heir, the death of one prince would be used as the occasion
for an assumption of direct British rule.
The state of Awad is a famous example.
It was very badly governed and so Dalhousie took over directly even though there was an heir.
Well, more and more of the Indian people resented British intrusions
because they didn't look at it at all in the same way.
And it seems surprising in retrospect that the British didn't realize
that they were about to inherit a whirlwind.
For one thing, the British soldiers, although they'd had a reputation for invincibility
ever since the Battle of Plassie, this reputation began to be dented
by a series of reversals they encountered.
For example, in the Afghan War between 1838 and 1841,
on several occasions British forces were repulsed during the Sikh Wars of the 1840s.
Although the British were victorious, they weren't victorious always and everywhere,
which had previously been their reputation.
And there were rumors among the Indian soldiers that British forces had lost in the Crimean War.
Again, it wasn't true, but nevertheless the rumor was percolating.
So the idea that the British could not be defeated was beginning to ebb.
Evangelical missionaries were moving into India as well,
trying to convert the people away from Islam and from Hinduism.
And this was different from earlier generations of imperial administrators
who had been perfectly happy to leave native religious customs untouched.
In fact, in the late 18th and early 19th centuries,
it had been quite common for the British army officers actually to attend Hindu ceremonies
as a way of reassuring their troops that they were sympathetic with them
in their everyday way of life.
But that begins to change as an evangelical generation affected by the revival back in Britain
starts to move into India.
For example, one officer, Colonel S.G. Wheeler of the 34th Native Infantry,
used to preach evangelical sermons to his native soldiers in the hope that they'd been converted.
There was an enormous optimism, well, throughout Victorian Britain,
but perhaps particularly among the evangelicals who believed,
anybody who hears about the Gospel in all its fullness is going to want to convert
because it's obviously true and all these other religions are so obviously false.
That was their view.
Here's Herbert Edwards, a British official in the Punjab,
and he said, God has given India to the English so that they can convert the people to Christianity.
Now, this is in the 1830s and 40s.
It's almost exactly the same time as the period of Manifest Destiny in American history,
where Americans have the same kind of attitude.
Of course, it's appropriate for us to take over the whole of what's now the United States,
particularly away from these heathens and savages.
God's designed it for us.
So on both sides of the Atlantic, this view prevails.
The development of steamships in the 1840s made it much easier and quicker to get to India,
and that in turn meant that more civilians were coming out to India, women.
It had been very unusual for British women to be in India before about 1820.
Now more of a soldier's wives start to come out, and so do missionaries.
If you've read Jane Eyre, you may remember that one of Jane's exploits,
or one of the instances where she meets up with her cousin, Sinjan Rivers,
and Sinjan Rivers is a very austere evangelical,
and he's planning to become a missionary in India,
and for a while Jane helps him to learn Hindustani.
They're still in the Yorkshire Moors, but she's helping him to learn Hindustani,
and he demands that she marry him so that she can go out to India with him,
and she finally rebels against that.
That's a little glimpse of the way in which evangelicals were preparing themselves for this mission.
Telegraph lines now linked Britain to India,
although British officials still weren't entirely sensitive to Indian realities,
leaving lots of initiative to people on the spot.
Nevertheless, there's a closening of contacts between the home country and the colony.
In the 1830s, the British officials began a campaign to try to prevent Sati,
and Sati was the Hindu custom of widow burning.
When a man died, especially a man of one of the higher castes,
the expectation was that his wife or wives would go on to the funeral pyre with the body and be burned with him.
There was a lot of spiritual honour associated with the practice.
Sometimes, high caste Hindu widows did this willingly,
but there were certainly many other occasions when they did it with profound reluctance.
There were stories circulating among the British of living widows being tied to the decaying body of the husband
and put on the funeral pyre,
and that when the ropes burned through, the wife would desperately try to escape
and would be pushed back onto the fire by relatives with sticks
who thought that there was a compromise of religious armour involved
if the Sati didn't go forwards.
When a prince called the Raja Bun Singh of the Principality of Bundy died,
84 of his wives were burned with him, with his body.
And this was a custom which horrified the British and which they tried very, very hard to suppress,
even though by doing so, they'd be in confrontation with some of the most influential people in India
who was helping other respects they still needed.
They also tried in the 1830s to suppress the cult of the thugs.
These were people who practiced ritual murder as a form of sacrifice to the goddess Kali.
Another of the sources of tension and conflict was the introduction of a new generation of rifles
among the CPOIs, that is, among the Indian soldiers in British service.
The Enfield rifle, when you were going into combat, you had to take the cartridges which you were going to fire
and you had to bite off the tip of them before loading them into the gun itself.
Now, British soldiers found this rifle much superior to all previous models.
It was more powerful.
But in order to waterproof them, these cartridges which had to be bitten were coated with grease.
Now, a rumor went around that the cartridges were covered with animal fat, that the grease was an animal fat.
For the Hindus, the cow is a sacred animal.
You've all heard about sacred cows.
And among Hindu soldiers, the rumor was that beef fat had been used
and therefore they'd be committing a horrible act of sacrilege by biting these cartridges.
Conversely, to the Muslims, pork is a taboo animal.
It's a filthy animal.
The rumor among them was that it was pork fat that had been smeared on these cartridges.
But the effect was the same.
They didn't want to use them.
They were horrified by it.
And they believed that it was part of a conspiracy by the British
to force them to surrender their own religious integrity.
There were also rumors that the bread that they were fed had been baked from flour
which was mixed up with ground animal bones
or that in their salt ration, a cow's blood had been mixed with it.
All sorts of rumors about the British deliberately trying to religiously degrade them.
As far as we know, none of this is true.
But certainly they were widely believed and of course that's effective with rumors.
Certainly the increasing presence of missionaries led to fears among the soldiers
that the British were trying to forcibly convert them to Christianity
and that the caste system was going to be abolished altogether.
Now there were also rumors which often happened in times of increased social stress
that a great deliverer was coming, a messianic figure.
And that's part of the mental background of the generation of soldiers who revolted.
Now the event which we call the Indian Mutiny began at Meerut in the Bengal Presidency in North India
in May of 1857.
It never made headway throughout the whole of India.
India was divided into three big areas, presidencies, Bengal, Bombay and Madras.
And the mutiny was confined really to the Bengal Presidency.
But nevertheless it's a huge area.
What happened was that a group of soldiers on parade were presented with these new rifles and cartridges
but refused to use them on religious grounds.
The result was that they were treated as mutineers for disobeying a direct order,
stripped of their uniforms on parade and sentenced to 10 years imprisonment.
They were put into the jail and with leg irons on to confine them.
Well that night their comrades burst into the jail, overwhelmed the guards and killed them,
liberated the arrested soldiers and then killed all the British people in the garrison and set fire to it.
Having done that they marched off to Delhi, the regional capital,
which at that point was almost devoid of British troops.
There were hardly any there.
They seized the city and declared that an old prince there, the Prince Bahadur Shah,
was now the restored Mogul Emperor.
They were still trying to roll back the clock and resume the conditions of the Mogul Empire.
But the Prince himself was 82 years old and an opium smoker.
So he certainly wasn't a very dynamic figure and never did take on any role of effective revolutionary leadership.
News of the uprising in Meirut and Delhi spread rapidly and led to similar outbreaks
among sepoys in other parts of the Bengal Presidency.
But what they never managed to get was a unified command.
They besieged various towns like Kornpur and Lucknow.
And for ordinary Indian people living in these areas where the rebellion had begun,
most of them had to decide very quickly what they were going to do.
As far as historians can reconstruct it, many of the Indian people would have remained loyal to the British Empire
but were intimidated into changing sides.
Obviously when a mutinous soldier is demanding that they change sides,
their sense of being unprotected if they don't leads many of them to join in.
Certainly mutineers used this occasion with a breakdown of everyday law and order to pursue vendettas.
Sometimes creditors were killed by their debtors and so on.
A lot of rich people were plundered with the allegation that they'd been complicit with the British regime.
But religious division among the mutineers and particularly poor communications
inhibited the prospect of a unified guerrilla campaign taking place or a unified political alternative.
In other words, if you compare it with the American Revolution,
the Americans quickly managed to get political unity or something close to it
and to have a unified military command and therefore taking advantage of the sympathy of the local population
were able to displace the British.
That's something which the Indians weren't able to do in comparable circumstances.
A series of notorious events followed, great brutalities on both sides,
particularly in the towns of Lucknow and Cornpore.
For example, in Cornpore a man called the Nanna Sahib who declared himself the local prince.
Having captured the remains of the British garrison promised them a safe conduct
but when they'd marched out and down to the riverside, massacred all of them, about 200.
In Cornpore also, the women and children of the garrison, about another 200 people,
were imprisoned in a little house called the Bibigarh.
This was the house in which formerly an army officer's mistress had been housed.
And they were all killed there as well.
Massacred by the local butchers, their bodies cut up and the remains thrown into a well.
Britain reacted slowly because the distance was so great
and the number of British soldiers in India at first was so small.
But once their counter campaign got going, under the leadership of General Colin Campbell,
a successful veteran of the Napoleonic and Crimean wars,
it quickly became very, very militarily effective.
And Campbell advancing against the mutineers didn't have to worry in the way that the Crimean generals did
about the presence of journalists who didn't get there until later.
Well, just as wild stories had been circulating in India before the mutiny began,
so stories began circulating in Britain, some of them also very wild,
about terrible Indian atrocities and great cries for merciless vengeance.
There are an enormous number of stories about the mass rape of British women,
most of which later proved to be untrue.
Charles Dickens himself, not normally a vengeful man, said,
I wish I were Commander-in-Chief in India.
I should do my utmost to exterminate the race upon whom the stain of the late cruelties rested,
not just the individuals, the race.
And the Victorian, the sentimental veneration of defenseless womanhood
made stories about the killing of the women at Cornpore particularly horrifying.
Here's a letter which one of the besieged ladies in Cornpore had written to her daughters
when she realized that the end was very close.
And this was a letter that was reprinted in a lot of the British press.
I write this, my dearest Henrietta, in the belief that our time of departure is come.
The whole of the troops here rose and we took refuge in a barrack.
We're so hemmed in by overpowering numbers that there seems no hope of escape.
This is an awful hour.
It is sad and painful to reflect on that our lives are to be sacrificed in such a condition.
Give my love to my sweet girls.
Connie, darling, your mama has longed for you to seek your God and savior in spirit.
Alice, my sweet child, serve and follow him and always hate whatever is sinful.
We hope to meet again where all imperfections are washed away.
Well, this is the farewell testament of one of the ladies who was killed there.
The British soldiers were also had an acute sense of betrayal.
They'd always trusted the native troops.
They'd lived among them.
They'd sometimes fought together in campaigns.
And that intensified their sense of righteous anger.
So as the British troops recaptured places, Delhi, Cornpour and Lucknow,
they killed all the defenders, took no prisoners and looted everything that they could move.
An absolutely ferocious counter-attack by the British.
They were campaigning in incredibly grueling conditions.
This is in the Indian summer, in July of 1858, for example, on a three-day march,
22 British soldiers collapsed and died from heat stroke.
That's how the temperatures were in the 110s and 120s.
At Delhi, the 52nd Light Infantry lost 400 out of its 600 effective soldiers.
Some to heat stroke and some to dysentery, which also was running rife through the troops.
The British dragoons went into battle at Lucknow wearing brass helmets.
And again, you can imagine wearing a metal hat when it's more than 100 degrees.
To touch it at all was instantly to be burned by it.
Another British commander, Sir Hugh Rose, led a campaign against a female rebel leader, the Rani of Jhansi.
She was another of these dispossessed princesses with an acute sense of grievance against the British.
She'd been denied her state by the Dalhousie reforms in the foregoing decades.
And she dressed as a man and was fighting hard, but was knocked from her horse by a British hussar.
She shot at him from the ground, missed, he fired back and killed her.
And when he jumped down to plunder her from of jewels that she was wearing, he realized that it was a woman.
She's since become a kind of feminist hero, a warrior queen.
But as I said, what they hadn't managed to do was to create an effective campaign to win over the hearts and minds of the Indian people.
India was such a particularistic place, it didn't yet have a general sense of Indian identity.
And so there was never an effective counter-government to which the various Indian rebels could give a shared allegiance.
So the British, once they'd won military victories and recaptured the cities, were able to undertake a policy of very brutal reprisals.
Suspected rebels in many places were rounded up and killed, often without trial.
And in Cornpole, this place where a particularly vivid atrocity had taken place,
the condemned Indian men were forced to clean up the blood of the women and children in the Bibigarh before being executed.
Here's the orders of Brigadier General James Neal after seeing the room in which this had happened.
He says,
Ladies and children's bloody torn dresses and shoes were lying about and locks of hair torn from their heads.
The floor of one room they were all dragged into and killed was saturated with blood.
Who could be merciful to one concerned?
I wish to show the natives of India that the punishment inflicted by us for such deeds will be the heaviest, the most revolting to their feelings and what they must ever remember.
Every stain of that innocent blood shall be cleared up and wiped out previous to their execution by such a miscreant as may be hereafter apprehended, who took an active part in the mutiny.
Each miscreant, after sentence of death is pronounced upon him, will be taken down to the house under a guard and will be forced into cleaning up a small portion of the blood stains.
The task will be made as revolting to his feelings as possible and the provost marshal will use the lash in forcing anyone objecting to complete his task.
After properly cleaning up his portion, the culprit is to be immediately hanged.
And he further ordered that in some cases these condemned men had to actually lick up the blood, that is to clean the floor with their tongs.
So you can tell here a kind of sadistic relish for vengeance.
And some of the Indians who were executed were blown from the mouths of cannons.
This is in the days when the cannons were mounted on a trolley so their arms would be tied to each of the wheels with their back against the muzzle of the gun and then fired from it and blown to pieces.
General Neal also ordered that they shouldn't be buried, that their body should rot, that the vultures should eat them.
This is counter-terror, obviously a way of making a most horrifying example possible to the local population.
Now when the Governor General of India, Lord Canning, hearing about reprisals of this kind, issued a clemency order saying,
we must be very scrupulous about isolating the people who were involved in the mutiny but not in permitting ourselves to get carried away into indiscriminate retribution.
It was derisively criticized in Britain and nicknamed clemency canning.
It wasn't meant to be a favorable effect, it was meant to be an insult because the citizens were out for blood.
Anyway, finally, William Howard Russell, a same journalist who'd done such important work in the Crimea, got to India and he also was horrified to see the arbitrary and capricious nature of British retaliation.
Here's one of his letters.
All these kinds of vindictive, unchristian Indian tortures, such as sowing Mohammedans in pig skins, smearing them with pork fat before execution and burning their bodies,
and forcing Hindus to defile themselves, these things are disgraceful and ultimately recoil on ourselves.
They are spiritual and mental tortures to which we have no right to resort and which we dare not perpetrate in the face of Europe.
In other words, he could foresee that this would have a profoundly negative effect on Britain's European neighbors who would remember it and say,
here are the British claiming to be the forces of civilization and yet they appear to be more barbaric than the people they're dominating.
Queen Victoria agreed with Lord Canning.
She said, punish the offenders, of course, but show the greatest kindness to the many kind and friendly natives who helped restore order.
Quote, they should know that there is no hatred for a brown skin, none, but the greatest wish on the Queen's part to see them happy, contented and flourishing.
Later on in her life, something I'll mention later in the course, Queen Victoria herself had an Indian servant, the Munshi,
and she was passionately attached to him even when he was subjected to an enormous amount of racial prejudice on the part of other British courtiers.
Well, after the mutiny had been suppressed, the British government took direct control of India away from the East India Company, which was abolished at that point.
So from then on, India became a crown authority.
Modernization of India continued, but now much more cautiously than before.
They carried on doing things like building railways and creating hydroelectric schemes a little bit later in the century and drainage control and so on, improved agricultural plans.
But they tended to leave the religious situation alone.
There's now much less encouragement of a religious conversion of the Indian people.
And many historians who studied this see that the aftermath of the mutiny is one of much greater mutual suspicion and probably an intensified racial separation.
Here's one late Victorian soldier in India called Sir George Young Husband, and his views are typical of many.
Quote, it is never wise to stand studied impertinent from any oriental.
The moment there is a sign of revolt, mutiny or treachery, of which the symptoms are not unusually a swollen head and a tendency to incivility,
it is wise to hit the oriental straight between the eyes and to keep on hitting him thus till he appreciates exactly what he is and who is who.
In other words, we're in charge and we'll show it by force if necessary.
Very similar to Lord Palmerston's comment about the Chinese which we saw earlier.
And these kinds of strained racial relations were brilliantly portrayed a bit later in the E.M. Forster's novel, A Passage to India.
Well, an elite minority of Indian people were given a British style education.
Gandhi himself, for example, came from the province of Gujarat and was trained in British techniques,
which he later used brilliantly in the early days of the Indian independence movement.
What was going to happen to India now?
As far as the Conservatives were concerned, people like Disraeli, India was going to become a permanent part of the British Empire.
Britain had demonstrated its authority, shown its superiority and was there to stay a little bit later.
He actually declared that Queen Victoria was the Empress of India.
On the other hand, the Liberals, particularly the Gladstonian Liberals in the 1867,
and 80s anticipated that eventually the Indian people would learn to be self-governing.
But certainly for the moment in the late Victorian period, the predominant view in Britain was that going out to rule India was a necessary duty for Britain.
It was called the white man's burden in Rudyard Kipling's poem of the same name.
From the Indian point of view, this became the first moment of Indian assertion,
which was to culminate 90 years later in 1947 with Indian independence.
Thank you.
