Lecture 18 – Victorian Britain and the American Civil War
British attitudes towards America varied during the Victorian era. Depending on an individual's
interests and their beliefs, British supporters of the idea of democracy tended to look to
America as an inspiring example and an ideal, and they were generally pro-American.
By contrast, defenders of social hierarchy who were afraid of democracy and egalitarianism
tended to denigrate it. You can see the two groups going back and forth throughout the
century.
The American Civil War, from 1861 to 1965, created difficulties for the British politicians.
Economic and diplomatic interests both suggested the benefits of an alliance with the Confederacy,
but religious and humanitarian interests suggested support for the Union side.
In the end, Britain pursued a very equivocal policy towards the Americans during the Civil War,
which caused something of a diplomatic rift in the mid- and late-1860s.
But it wasn't very long after the Civil War that this rift healed once again, while
the cultural links between the two nations continued to strengthen.
And throughout the Victorian period, there was a steady stream of British emigrants to
America, meaning that there were close contacts between the two nations for that reason as well.
Now, as I said, if you believed in democracy, you tend to look at America as a very inspiring
ideal. Certainly the Chartists, the group who favored a more extensive reform of the political
system after the Great Reform Act of 1832, in their view, America was the ideal.
And the People's Charter was based partly on an interpretation of what the American
Constitution already offered to American citizens.
And so, for them, America was the country of the future in a good sense.
But for British defenders of the idea of social hierarchy, America was the country of the future
in a bad sense. They were afraid that Britain would end up like America.
A good example here would be Francis Trollop. This is the mother of Anthony Trollop, the
novelist. When the family were very hard up, she had a slightly, well, in fact, a very
exotic, quicksotic scheme to go to America and create a big emporium, a fancy shop.
This is in the city of Cincinnati, which was then a frontier town.
And recover the family's fortunes by bringing a little bit of British fashionableness into
the American Western frontier.
Well, she had a really horrible time there. It would be hard to exaggerate how things went wrong.
People used to make ruthless fun of her. Her business founded. It wouldn't flourish.
She couldn't get good servants, or at least she couldn't get the kind of servants she regarded as suitable.
She hated the vulgarity of the town. It was a frontier community. It was a pork butcher's town.
She hated the democracy. She hated the luxuries. She hated the lack of good roads.
But what really enraged her was the fact that the servants were so uppity, that's how she saw it,
that they wanted to eat meals with the family at the table. They wouldn't keep in their place.
So one after the next, she'd hire maids, but very quickly they'd assert themselves in a way she thought totally inappropriate.
Well, she went back to Britain, disappointed in her hopes, but then wrote a book about it.
And it was an enormous bestseller in Britain. So it's really Mrs. Trollop's denunciation of the vulgarity
and crudity of the Americans, and generations of British supporters of social hierarchy would quote Mrs. Trollop.
There's a warning of what might happen to us if we go down the Democratic road.
All right, but the great majority of people in both countries had shared literary tastes,
that is the reading people in both countries. The most popular novelist in early 19th century America was Walter Scott.
And he was displaced then by Charles Dickens, and those of these two British writers were incredibly popular in America.
Mark Twain later said that the American Civil War was partly caused by Sir Walter Scott,
but the notions of loyalty and honor which he generated and which he romanticized inspired too many of the fighting men.
Charles Dickens had an incredibly successful lecturing tour of America in 1842.
He was lionized wherever he went, except when he brought up the question of copyright protection.
In those days there were no international copyright laws, and his work was being pirated in America,
so he didn't get royalties, even though his works were being printed very widely there.
If you're an American writer, the trick was to become popular and famous in Britain first,
and then once the British had validated you, then you become famous in America as well.
Although America obviously had broken away politically from Britain,
it still had a little bit of a feeling of intellectual inferiority and subordination.
So Longfellow and Ralph Waldo Emerson and Washington Irving, these early 19th century American writers,
were all famous in first, and then became famous in America as well.
A very important American cultural institution, the Smithsonian, was founded by an Englishman, a British scientist, James Smithson.
He lived from 1765 to 1829, and was the illegitimate son of the Duke of Northumberland.
He studied geology and mineralogy in Britain and in Europe.
But what's so lovely about science at this stage is it hasn't yet been closely compartmentalized,
and so there's a strange admixture of activities the scientists would do.
One of Smithson's studies was a chemical analysis of ladies' teardrops.
He never went to America, and yet he left his whole fortune, which was about half a million dollars,
an immense fortune at the time.
He left it to a nephew, but with the proviso that if the nephew died without any heirs,
the money must be sent to America and used to create, quote,
to found at Washington under the name of the Smithsonian Institution,
an establishment for the increase and diffusion of knowledge among men.
Well, the nephew did die without heirs.
With the result that, in 1835, the money was finally brought across to America in the form of gold sovereigns.
Then there was a long squabble in Congress, and finally the institution itself was founded in 1846,
and the buildings began to rise on the Mall in Washington.
Finally, and incidentally, Smithson himself died in Italy while he was on one of his travels.
And in 1904, Alexander Gray and Bell had his body disinterred and brought from Italy to Washington.
And if you now go into the old castle, the oldest building of the Smithsonian on the Mall,
his remains are interred there now, and there's a little statue of him.
Well, the American Civil War itself of the 60s, it posed a dilemma to British politicians.
In those days, Britain was the most powerful nation in the world,
and so both sides, the Union and the Confederacy, hoped to get an alliance with Britain.
Cotton from the slave south fed the industrial factories of Lancashire.
The trade had boomed ever since the invention of the cotton gin back in the 1790s,
which had made American short staple cotton suitable for use in the British textile factories.
And about three quarters of all American exports worldwide in the 1850s were of southern cotton to Lancashire.
So it was reasonable for the Confederacy to expect that this made an absolutely overwhelmingly compelling motive
for Britain to be allied with them, with the Confederacy.
But the British manufacturers had been foreseeing, as they watched the gathering storm in America,
they'd been stockpiling cotton supplies, anticipating that the war would cut off the supply or make it much less dependable.
With the result that they had reserves on hand when the war began,
and then gradually were able to switch over to using cotton grown in India instead,
which obviously over which they'd reasserted British control in the preceding three or four years.
So it didn't turn out to be quite the master factor that the Confederates had anticipated.
Meanwhile, many British companies were profiting from exporting manufacturers to the United States.
The USA was Britain's best customer for manufactured goods.
The early history of the American railways, for example, is mainly a matter of importing British locomotives and rails and expertise,
and then using them in America itself.
So buying British manufactured goods, that contact gives Britain a motive to be allied with the Union.
But there were political reasons for linking up with the Confederacy as well.
Palmerston, the Prime Minister, took the view,
we can always profit from our rival's weakness, and it's much better for Britain to deal with two weak Americas than with one strong one.
So that itself ought to make us favor the idea of the Confederate States becoming a permanent political entity.
Certainly he and the Foreign Secretary John Russell believed that the Confederacy was going to win,
and in the first year of the Civil War, that was a perfectly reasonable assumption.
The first battle of Bull Run, for example, was a Confederate victory.
The early Union generals were fairly hopelessly ineffective.
So it seemed reasonable to think the Confederacy would manage to establish its independence permanently.
And of course Britain was going to be better placed if it had recognized that independence early on.
Palmerston himself, the Prime Minister, was gleeful at the breakup of the Union.
He was a great detractor of the idea of democracy, and he believed in social hierarchy.
He sent British troops to Canada in case of the possibility of Britain going to war against the Union.
And in one of his letters to the Duke of Newcastle, he said this,
the only security for continued peace with men who have no sense of honor, the Americans in his view,
and who are swayed by the passions of irresponsible masses, the reason not to be a democracy,
and by a reckless desire to hold their positions by any means,
consistent being strong by sea on their coasts and respectable in our military force in our provinces in Canada.
And even some radical MPs like John Roebuck accepted the slave owner's argument
that slaves were treated better in the American South than industrial workers were treated in the North,
that of the two labor systems slavery was more benign and kindlier.
And he also used this argument, the Southerners are really Englishmen, the White Southerners are really Englishmen,
but the people living in the North of America are a great miscellaneous rabble of European immigrants and their descendants,
a very inaccurate view.
But certainly the fact that a lot of Irish immigrants lived in the North did nothing to endear the British upper classes with the Union.
There's a great deal of anti-Irish prejudice involved in those kinds of views.
William Gladstone, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, said at Newcastle on Tide in October 1862,
we may have our own opinions about slavery we know before or against the South,
but there is no doubt that Jefferson Davis and other leaders of the South have made an army.
They are making it appear as a navy and they have made what is more difficult than either, they have made a nation.
Well, in the Victorian period, there was a great deal of sympathy for nationalist movements.
For example, Gary Baldi and Maxini, two of the leaders of the Italian independence movement,
people who were trying to unify Italy and take it out of the hands of petty princes and particularly out of the hands of the Pope,
had been lionized in London.
And similarly, Kossuth, one of the leaders of the Hungarian independence movement over against the Austro-Hungarian Empire,
was also a very popular figure in Britain.
So it's easy to imagine why the leaders of the Confederacy could look like the plucky leaders of a group of people who just wanted to govern themselves.
It could be made to look like a respectable cause, in other words.
And this is particularly true in the first couple of years of the Civil War, when Lincoln declined to say that it was a war to end slavery.
You may recall that Maryland and Kentucky and Missouri, three slave states, had remained loyal to the Union.
And one of the things Lincoln had to be very careful about was to not say that the war was about ending slavery.
No, in his view, it was a war to prevent a rebellion of Southern states.
That's how he interpreted it.
And that was the Union's official position.
Even so, there were strong political, religious, and humanitarian reasons to support the Union.
Frederick Douglass, the escaped slave, had become one of the leaders in the abolitionist movement, had made a lecture tour of England and was very, very popular there.
So had Harriet Beecher Stowe, the author of Uncle Tom's Cabin.
And in fact, it was published in 1852 or three, and she went to Britain and met the Queen and was fated in London as a great heroine.
And people like Lord Palmerston had met her.
And the book had sold more copies in England by the time the Civil War broke out than it had sold in America.
Britain had abolished slavery in its own colonies back in 1833.
And in fact, between 1833 and 1861, one of the anxieties of American slave owners had been the feeling that, bit by bit, they were being abandoned in the whole world.
Also in the same period, Britain was working to try to stamp out the Arab slave trade in Africa.
And so the American Southerners' defense of their slave system took place partly in the face of the perception that they were becoming more and more isolated in the eyes of the world.
Well, ambiguity about the Union's aims in this conflict was largely dispelled in 1863 with the Emancipation Proclamation, which came into effect on the first day of that year.
And in Britain, there were demonstrations on behalf of the Union position, particularly among working men.
John Bright, one of the former leaders of the Anti-Corn Law League, helped to persuade northern factory workers, particularly in Manchester and Liverpool, to support the Union.
In fact, he and Richard Cobden, his fellow, his former collaborator in the Anti-Corn Law League, were so pro-Union, as in Parliament, their nickname was, the Honourable Members for the United States.
The view was these guys were really just flags for the Union position.
Workers in Manchester certainly wholeheartedly approved of Abraham Lincoln's rhetoric to the effect that this was a war to safeguard democracy.
Karl Marx, a shrewd commentator then living in London, he praised the British workers' pro-Union sentiment.
And he was delighted by the determination of the Lancashire and London workers not to support the Confederacy, even though many of them had been thrown out of work because of the dislocations caused by the naval blockades of the war years.
Here's what Marx wrote.
Unbelievable and daily increasing distress exists among workers in the northern manufacturing districts, caused by the mills being closed or put on part time.
The blockade of the slave states being the pretext.
Under these circumstances, one cannot but admire the obstinacy with which the working class keeps silent or breaks its silence only to raise its voice against intervention and for the United States, that was for the Union.
This is a new splendid proof of the indestructible thoroughness of the English popular masses.
That thoroughness, which is the secret of England's greatness and which, to speak in the hyperbolic language of Mazzini, made the English private soldier seem a demigod during the Crimean War and the Indian Insurrection.
Now there was a series of diplomatic incidents between the two nations during the war.
The first one was the Trent incident.
What happened was that the Confederacy sent two of its most talented diplomats, James Mason and John Slidel.
It sent them to Britain to negotiate with the British government in the hope that Britain would respond by granting official diplomatic recognition to the Confederate States of America.
They were traveling to Britain on an English ship called the Trent, but the Union ship, the San Jacinto, stopped this ship on the high seas, arrested the two diplomats and carried them off to America where they were imprisoned in New York.
It was great rejoicing in the Union cities over what was regarded as a terrific diplomatic coup.
But Lord Palmerston sent such a ferocious letter to Lincoln in response to this, the Trent incident, that Lincoln was forced to back down.
The letter threatened war as far as Palmerston was concerned.
This was an act of piracy on the high seas.
And he said to Lincoln in effect, if you don't now send those diplomats to us who were under the protection of the British flag, we'll regard that as a cause of war between us.
This was taking place in 61, just at the time that Prince Albert was on his deathbed.
And before the letter was sent, Palmerston actually had the Queen and Prince Albert read it for their approval.
And Prince Albert dragged himself up from his, what will turn that to be his deathbed, to make a very crucial amendment in the language.
He said, let's include a line in the letter saying to Lincoln, we're sure that the captain of the San Jacinto acted without your authority.
In other words, to give him a loophole.
And sure enough, Lincoln actually went through that loophole and much humiliated had to release the diplomats and send them over in an American ship to Britain.
Well, of course, the Union sent some talented diplomats of its own to London.
It wanted its own position to be fully represented at the Court of St. James.
And their job was to prevent an Anglo-Confederate alliance and as far as possible ensure benevolent neutrality for the United States.
The ambassador was Charles Francis Adams.
He was the grandson of President John Adams and the son of President John Quincy Adams.
And his son also went there as his private secretary.
This is Henry Adams, one of the great American writers of the late 19th century, who was then just in his early 20s, early 20s.
And Henry, the son, was also a secret journalist.
Before he left, he talked with Henry Raymond, who was the editor of the New York Times, without letting his father know about it,
and agreed to send a series of anonymous letters about life at the centre of British power.
Obviously, a great coup for the Times itself.
And while he was there, he met John Stuart Mill and Darwin and Lyell and some of the great intellectual luminaries of mid-19th century Britain.
Henry Adams went to one of these great workers' rallies to hear speeches in favour of the Union position.
And he was delighted and very impressed at the fervour shown by working men on behalf of the Union cause.
He wrote to his brother, who was then fighting in the Union army.
I can assure you that this sort of movement is as alarming here as a slave insurrection would be in the South.
I never quite appreciated the moral influence of American democracy, nor the cause that the privileged classes in Europe have to fear us.
I feel proud to represent that great republic which, though wounded itself, can yet threaten to tear down the rulers of the civilised world
by merely assuming her place at the head of the March of Democracy.
In other words, he's very impressed to see the fervency which the idea of America is inspiring among British workers.
While the very skillful and patient negotiations of Charles Francis Adams certainly went far towards restraining the British temptation ever to give official recognition to the Confederacy.
Abraham Lincoln was widely admired in Britain and when he was assassinated just a few days after the war had ended,
Queen Victoria sent his widow a letter in which she, actually it's very typical of Queen Victoria because while saying how much she grieves for Mrs. Lincoln,
she's actually very preoccupied with her own grieving for Albert which by then was four years old but which was still uppermost in her mind.
Here's her letter to Mrs. Lincoln.
Though a stranger to you, I cannot remain silent when so terrible a calamity has fallen upon you and your country.
And I must express personally my deep and heartfelt sympathy with you under the shocking circumstances of your present dreadful misfortune.
No one can better appreciate than I can who am myself utterly broken hearted by the loss of my own beloved husband,
who was the light of my life, my stay, my all, what your sufferings must be.
And I earnestly pray that you may be supported by him to whom alone the sorely stricken can look for comfort in this hour of heavy affliction.
There we are.
It's a heartfelt letter but it's full of her own sorrow as well as that of Mrs. Lincoln.
Another of the great points of diplomatic tension in the war arose over a ship called the Alabama.
Now, so long as Britain was a neutral in the war, one of the international principles of neutrality is that you don't help either side by contributing armaments, for example.
But the Alabama was a gunboat which the Confederate Navy ordered to be built in Liverpool, which is one of the British shipbuilding centers.
And as it was prepared and got ready for launching, Charles Francis Adams, the Union Ambassador, made a strenuous protest to Lord Palmerston saying,
this ship ought not to be permitted to leave Britain because it's going to become a Confederate raider and it'll be a violation of the rules of neutrality.
Well, Palmerston referred the question to his legal advisors who, and while they were equivocating, the ship set sail.
Technically, the builders tried to get around the neutrality laws by not putting the guns onto the ship.
But it sailed off to the Azores and there the armament was all loaded on and it had previously been prepared in Britain as well.
So then it was a fully functioning warship.
It was named the Alabama and it cruised throughout the war, causing a huge amount of destruction to Union shipping and killing many Union sailors.
It certainly violated the spirit of the neutrality laws, even if Britain could claim that technically it hadn't violated the letter.
And this was one of the most persistent problems after the war which had to be sorted out between the two nations.
Eventually, the case went for arbitration in Geneva and when Gladstone was the Prime Minister in 1872,
Gladstone finally agreed that the British government would pay an indemnity of $15.5 million, a very, very large figure at the time for the damage which had been wrought by the Alabama.
By then you could see that it was certainly worthwhile recovering the good favour of the Americans in view of the thriving trade between the two nations.
Emigration from Britain to America accelerated, particularly once the war had finished.
Before the war, emigration had always been a sign of either that you were a convict who had been sent off to Australia, which was a prison colony,
or a sign that you were a pauper, the Irish immigration particularly after the famine and mainly being the migration of desperately poor people.
But in the second half of the 19th century, quite a lot of Britons went to America not because they were pushed out by factors at home,
so much as that they were pulled by opportunities which they perceived they'd have in America better than those they enjoyed at home.
Although there were still cases of migration as a push, particularly from the Highland clearances in Scotland.
Now, it was in the 1860s, 70s and 80s that the Great Transcontinental Railroads were finished in the United States.
In 1869, the first one, the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific, was completed.
What the railroad companies wanted, if possible, was to have the whole length of the lines fully populated.
And the Northern Pacific Railroad in the 70s and 80s did this.
They actually sent, the railroad company sent agents to Liverpool and Manchester trying to attract potential immigrants.
And they're always said, we will help you cross the Atlantic Ocean and move out to the Dakotas and to Eastern Montana.
And we'll help you get started on a farm, on land which at the moment the Railroad Company owns.
And then gradually you can repay us this kind of a low interest loan by the crops you'll raise on prairie farms or on the high plains.
And quite a lot of migration took place from Britain also from Scandinavia out onto the high plains, facilitated by the railroad companies.
Obviously from their point of view, it was much better to have the lines populated so that there'd be a busy trade along the length of the line,
rather than having it crossing long empty expanses of land.
Industrial workers and coal miners also went to America in large numbers.
For example, when the Gold Rush took place, quite a lot of miners from South Wales and Cornwall went there.
And travelers in the Gold Rush camps reported meeting Welshmen and Cornishmen and people from Newcastle and Tyne, British mining districts,
whose expertise has become very valuable in these different mining communities.
Similarly, with the large scale opening up of the Pennsylvania coal mines, again in the mid and late 19th century,
it was very often English and Welsh miners who provided an elite of working men and expertise to the American entrepreneurs.
American bosses would be specialized in a kind of ethnic divide and conquer technique.
They'd hire Slavic miners and Swedish ones and Welsh ones because they knew that ethnic tensions between these groups would make it unlikely
that they'd readily create a consolidated trade union against the bosses' own interest.
And if you're a British immigrant, you arrive with far more advantages than somebody from Italy, for example,
because you're already near the language and very often you are bringing a valuable skill into America as well,
so they tended to be slightly better paid than those of most other ethnic origins.
But it's also true that as the British trade union movement was thriving, something I'll talk about more later on,
British union men also emigrated to America and played a big role in the development of the American trade union movement.
The first man to be the head of the American Federation of Labor was Samuel Gompers,
who was an English worker and English Jew.
He emigrated to America, became the head of the Cigarmakers Union in America, and then became head of the AFL.
Some migrants played a very important role in American history.
Perhaps the best example here would be Andrew Carnegie, who lived from 1835 to 1919
and became possibly the richest man in the world, certainly one of the richest, as a very, very successful steel manufacturer.
Now, he was born in Dunfermline in Scotland, and his father was a poor handloom weaver.
The handloom weavers were squeezed very hard by the mechanization of the weaving trade,
so when the family left, they were close to destitution.
As a young man, he became involved in the railroad business,
and then during the Civil War got involved in the iron and steel trade.
He was an incredibly hard-working man, very, very self-disciplined,
very skillful at manipulation of the business system,
and rapidly became the owner of steel factories and then started bringing in more and more of the business to his own hands.
He was good at both vertical integration, that is getting hold of the mines and the smelters and the railroads and the distribution points,
and also horizontal integration, taking over rival businesses.
Under his leadership, the United States surpassed Britain in iron and steel production already by the 1890s,
and when Carnegie went back to Britain, he was astonished at the backwardness of the British manufacturers,
by comparison with his own technique, which is one of remorseless and continual modernization.
He sold out in the end to a great new combine in 1901, the United States Steel Corporation,
the world's first corporation with assets of a billion dollars,
and with the enormous amount of money he'd got, he became a great philanthropist.
He wrote an article called The Gospel of Wealth, in other words, his idea was that God had entrusted him with a lot of money,
and he must do a lot of good with it, so he endowed 2,800 libraries.
He was a great believer in the spread of literacy, and in both America and Britain today, all over the place,
you can still see Carnegie's libraries, and of course he endowed higher education in both countries, too.
He built a great castle back in Scotland for himself.
Now, he raised hackles in Britain, not only because he'd become a very successful foreign competitor,
but also because he was a passionate believer in democracy.
He wrote a book called Triumphant Democracy, in which he advocated the abolition of the monarchy.
His family were all Scotch radicals, for whom there was no love at all for the monarchy.
Another famous British migrant to America was Alexander Graham Bell,
who played a very important role in the development of telephones, and also in the education of the deaf.
Now, by the late 19th century, there was a growing belief, on both sides of the Atlantic,
in the supremacy of the Anglo-Saxon peoples.
This is a kind of racial development out of social Darwinism.
The Anglo-Saxon peoples have been chosen either by God or by nature, or by some combination of the two,
to dominate the earth, and that's what they're going to do.
Americans like Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt, obviously both presidents, were both terrific anglophiles.
Wilson's work as a political scientist before he became a politician was mainly about the merits of the British political system
and the way in which it could appropriately be provided in America too, or applied in America too.
And Roosevelt also was a great lover of what he saw as the manly virtues of the Anglo-Saxon race.
So here's a common identity which is bringing them together.
The late 19th century was also a period where American heiresses were marrying impoverished British aristocrats,
and it was a trade in which both sides had something to gain.
The aristocracy got some money after losing much of it, and of course the Americans got the titles and the status which went with them.
Perhaps the most famous example of this would be the marriage of Lord Randolph Churchill to Jenny Jerome,
who was a famous beauty and a very rich woman.
Their son was Winston Churchill, who became really the embodiment of Anglo-American friendship in the 20th century.
