Lecture 20, Victorian Literature, Part 1.
Several of the greatest British writers in history lived in the Victorian era and remained
popular right up to the present, including Charles Dickens, George Eliot, Anthony Trollop,
Charlotte and Anne and Emily Bronte, Thomas Carlisle and John Ruskin, and many more.
Their work still gives us a very vivid picture of Victorian life, and it shows us not only
what the world looked like, but also a lot more about people's hopes and dreams and
fears and their ideas about the past and future.
There were sometimes outrageously melodramatic, but at other times sharply realistic in their
depiction of contemporary social reality and the rapid changes that the world was undergoing
around them.
Many of them were very keen social critics as well, with Dickens and Carlisle leading
the way in their condemnation of corruption and hypocrisy and official folly and poverty.
There were moralists as well, generally arguing the superiority of middle class values by
comparison with those of the parasitic aristocracy and those of the profligate working class.
And their work was influenced by the utilitarians, not directly, but certainly there's a this
worldliness to their work, rather than a preoccupation, for the most part, with Christian doctrine.
Now in the Victorian era, it became possible for growing numbers of people to actually
make a living as writers.
In earlier centuries, many great writers had had patrons, but now it became possible
the reading public was becoming big enough that it was possible to be in effect a freelance
writer.
A lot of writers made only poor livings at it, working as journalists or writing books
which are called penny dreadfuls, simple melodramatic stories, or hack work of various kinds, but
a handful of authors actually became rich through their work as writers.
The three most successful were Dickens, George Eliot, and Anthony Trollope, and all three
of them were very, very shrewd business people in addition to being good writers.
There's a great passage in Anthony Trollope's autobiography where he says that for him,
writing was always a business-like matter. He had no romantic illusions about it, and
towards the end he actually has a list of exactly how much money he made from every
book he ever wrote. He kept a very close tally of it all, and it's only a shame to put his
list there in the book.
Novels were, including those of Dickens and Eliot, were often serialized and reached
recurrent climaxes to keep the readers guessing, so they'd come out sometimes over the space
of a year or even 18 months, and as each episode came to a conclusion, there'd be some great
dramatic point to be resolved the next time so that readers would buy the journal to keep
the thing going.
And certainly in the case of Charles Dickens, he started writing the novel and started publishing
it before he'd finished it, and that meant that as letters from readers came pouring
into the journals, sometimes there'd be a kind of running dialogue between the readers
and the author while the book was being done. For example, when he found that the book Martin
Chuzzlewit wasn't as popular as some of his previous ones had been, but that a character
within the book called Mrs. Gamp was regarded as a great hero, he increased her role in
the book and suppressed certain other elements of the story as a way of appealing to the
public and giving it what it wanted. Thackeray had the same technique. Not all of them did
this. Anthony Trollop, for example, and George Eliot both would write the whole novel first
and then cut it up into segments, but Dickens had the supreme confidence to write the book
while it was going along. And he'd discuss it with his friends as well. He was a close
friend of the novelist Bulwer Lytton, and when Bulwer Lytton read the conclusion of
Great Expectations, Bulwer Lytton said to Dickens, oh no, this is far too bleak, far
too uncompromising. You've got to end up with Pip marrying Estella after all. So Dickens
said, oh yeah, alright. So he rewrote the end of the story. And it's quite common now
for the book to be published with both endings available. So this is part of the social process
of the writing of the novel. You can imagine that it's invigorating to some, it would
have been terrifying to others. Now when a book, when a novel like this had been finished,
it was then usually published as what was called a triple decker. That is, published
in three volumes. And they were expensive as well. They would often cost 30 shillings,
a huge sum of money. Only prosperous people would actually buy them in the, in the hard
back form. It was much more common to go to the circulating library, usually pay a penny
or two to borrow the book and do it that way. And a man called Charles Moody had a very
successful array of circulating libraries. And sometimes he'd also specify to the authors,
you've got to make the book a bit longer so that we can publish it in three volumes.
So again, that's another of the economic pressures which is working on the authors to influence
the way in which the book actually gets written. So it's important to guard ourselves against
thinking of these books as things which grew solely in the author's minds and were put
down. No, they're part of an economic and social context. Less successful writers worked
very hard for smaller returns. For example, the novelist James Payne wrote 160 books, including
46 novels, but never earned as much as an ordinary lawyer. And a lady called Mrs. Oliphant,
famous in her day although now largely forgotten, produced 100 novels, at least 100 other books
and more than a thousand articles in a career spanning 50 years, but never prospered. Of
course, they prospered in the sense that they were earning far more money than people in
the working class. But by the middle class standards they aspired to, they lived very
threadbare existence. So it's not surprising to find that many other people had careers
outside of being writers, including some of the most successful. Anthony Trollop was a
post office inspector. The British post office was expanding, particularly after their decision,
to make the sender pay the penny postage and their utilization of the railway network to
spread the post nationwide. And one of Trollop's jobs was to travel around the country to make
sure that the post office was operating efficiently in all its different branches. So he got to
know Britain very well as he did it and would spend his time on the trains writing the stories.
His novels are enormous and there are lots of them. And he said, oh, well, I just used
my time wisely. I'm traveling on the train. And so I write the books. He only gave that
up and turned to being a full time writer when he was very well established. Matthew Arnold
and Thomas Macaulay, two of the great essayists of the day, were both government officials.
Charles Kingsley and John Henry Newman, who I've mentioned several times, were both churchmen
and had incomes from those ways of life. Due to the Victorian period, fiction novels
particularly were gradually becoming more and more central to British literary life.
In the 18th century, the poets had been much more significant than the novelists. That's
no longer true. Certainly people like Dickens and George Elliott were lionized as guardians
of the middle class conscience. And Thomas Carlisle and John Ruskin prose writers were
at least as influential as Browning and Tennyson, the great poets of the same time.
Authors didn't have any of the conveniences which their successes in the 20th and 21st
have enjoyed. There were no Xerox machines. There were no typewriters or computers throughout
most of this period so that the work had to be written by hand. And if you wanted a second
copy of it, you'd have to hand write a second copy. In fact, lawyer's offices employed
scriveners whose job was essentially to copy documents. Now, there's a wonderful story
or a dreadful story. Thomas Carlisle, after years of hard labor, finally finished his
great book on the French Revolution. And he took it around to his great friend John
Stuart Mill, asking for Mill's advice. He wanted Mill to read the finished manuscript
before taking it off to the publishers. But when the Mills were out, their illiterate
maid, thinking it was waste paper, threw it on the fire. And it was all consumed in the
fire. Can you imagine what a dreadful moment it must have been for the Mills to have to
go around and tell Carlisle the book has gone? Well, their friendship survived this very
traumatic incident. And indeed, Carlisle sat down and rewrote it. Although, of course,
it can't be the same as it was previously. It is a wonder... The rewritten French Revolution,
which is the only one we know, is a magnificent book in its own right. And Carlisle's style,
although it's ostensibly history, is full of fictional devices. He gets into the frame
of mind of the various characters. And there are wonderful rhapsodic passages, imaginative
reconstructions of the events and scenes and characters of the time. Now, many of these
writers, even though they posed as guardians of moral conventions, lived rather unconventional
lives themselves. And that's as true of Dickens as of some of the others. Dickens was born
in 1812 and died in 1870. And he drew extensively on the events of his life, particularly his
own early life, in writing his great novels. He was the son of a Navy paymaster, an official
working for the Navy. But the family became more and more impoverished during Dickens'
childhood. And finally, his father was sent to debtor's prison. These were in the days
when you could be in prison for debt. And Charles himself, the young son at the age
of 12, had to go to work in a shoe polish factory, the blacking factory. It was absolutely
mortifying to him because he'd had great hopes and he found the family sinking in further
and further down the social scale. Well, luckily, after his father had been in jail for a while,
he got an inheritance which enabled him to pay his creditors and come out of jail and
resume a life of fragile respectability. Charles, the son, became a reporter, a court reporter.
He started out by following trials and then he became a parliamentary reporter. And in
fact, he was in the parliamentary gallery taking notes for the press at the time of
the Great Reform Act in 1832 when he was 20 years old. He began writing fiction and
he was prolific. And he enjoyed a great success with his first novel, Pickwick Papers. It
made him a celebrity in 1837, which was the year of Queen Victoria's accession to the
throne. One thing that makes his novel so beautiful is his power of sympathizing with
children and his way of empathizing with how they look out on the world and how the adults
misunderstand them and sometimes how they misapprehend the nature of the world around
them. Certainly, that's one of the great themes in Oliver Twist and Great Expectations
and David Copperfield. Queen Victoria herself, when she was just coming to the throne, she
was an 18 or 19-year-old girl and she read Oliver Twist and then its successor, Nicholas
Nickelby and thought they were absolutely wonderful. And she tried to persuade Lord
Melbourne, the prime minister, to read them. He was already in his late 50s and early 60s
by then. And Melbourne was unusually not liking this stuff. He told the Queen and she wrote
this down in her diary. It's all among workhouses and coffin makers and pickpockets. I don't
like that low debasing style. Victoria says, we defended Oliver very much, but in vain.
Lord Melbourne then said, I don't like these things in reality and therefore I don't wish
to see them represented. Well, she remained loyal to Dickens and read all of his books
during the main part of her reign. And when he died in 1870, she wrote, he had a large
loving mind and the strongest sympathy with the poorer classes. He felt sure that a better
feeling and much greater union of the classes would take place in time. And I pray earnestly
that it may. Well, people completely unknown to him solicited his advice. He became known
as a wise man, a sage whose advice could be, could be asked. He befriended Angela Bird
at Cutts. This was the heiress who was regularly being proposed to by all the Impecunius aristocrats
in London. And he helped her make anonymous bequests to many of her different charities.
He certainly believed in the Samuel Smiles virtues of self-help and hard work and discipline
and sobriety. But very often he did have delightful endings. Nearly all the novels, one way or
another, are about the British class system and about money and who's got it and what
they're going to do with it. And they nearly always end happily with the characters getting
sufficient money, but they don't have to work anymore. That's how even Oliver Twist ends
up that way. Now, the conventions of the day in Britain, at least, not in France, but in
Britain, prevented the novelists from talking about sex. But they had to compensate and
they often did it with lurid melodrama or what seems to us like excessive sentimentality.
But there were some sensational events in Dickens' own life. He suffered from what these days
we'd call a severe midlife crisis. When he was a young man, he'd been madly in love with
a young woman called Maria Biednall. And she'd flirted with him. Apparently what had happened
was that periodically she'd encourage him with flirtatious advances. But then when he got too
keen, she'd back off again and chill him out. Anyway, it hadn't worked out and so they'd
separate it. But then, when he was married to Catherine Dickens and they'd had 10 children
together, she wrote him a letter saying how much she admired his stories and how she
remembered that they'd known each other as teenagers. And he became infatuated with the
idea of renewing his acquaintance with the bewitching Maria Biednall. And so they arranged
a meeting. But when they met, it was a terrible, shocking disappointment to him because she
was very fat, very plain and very dull. And he found it almost unendurable to be in her
company. And it once started thinking, what a blessing I escaped to this. This was at the
time that he was writing Little Dorot. And he wrote a merciless caricature of her. Mrs. Winter
was now her name. She got married Mr. Winter, obviously. And the character of Flora Finching
is a satirical rendering of Mrs. Winter in Little Dorot. But then the next manifestation
of this midlife crisis was that he began to have a love affair with an actress. He was
keen on amateur dramatics. And on several occasions put on plays, usually just at home,
but sometimes even traveling around the British provinces. And Ellen Ternan was one of the
young actresses in this group. She was 27 years younger than Dickens. But he fell madly in love
with her. And they began to have a love affair. Now then he did an incredible thing, which was
he wrote a justification of this affair to his whole reading public in Household World,
words the journal he edited. If he kept it entirely to himself and been discreet about it,
the vast majority of people would probably never have known. But of course in justifying
his own conduct, he made the affair much more widely known. And by some people was bitterly
criticized for it. Ironically, he was widely believed to be having an affair with his wife's
sister. His wife, Catherine, was not a very effective household manager. So her sister Georgina
had come into the household and looked after the Dickens, isn't there, 10 children. And she was
regarded as the likely candidate for a love affair. Well, he kept Ellen Ternan in a little house,
and she was his secret mistress, although not very secret, obviously. But it's secret in the
sense that he never acknowledged her in public. He never actually said, I'm now living with Miss
Ternan instead. And they were alleged even to have had a baby together. Another very unconventional
menage was that of George Elliott. George Elliott, her real name was Mary Ann Evans,
even though she published under a man's name. And she lived for many years with George Henry
Lewis, who was a philosopher and writer. Between 1854 and 1879, they lived together,
even though he was married to someone else. Now, they certainly weren't the type of people to
deliberately outrage public feelings or public respectability. And they regarded themselves
as being married and were absolute paragons of respectability. Certainly, George Elliott's
own novels, those of you who know them, will know that they're didactic, morally exacting,
in the very highest sense. Finally, after Lewis's death in 1879, she married a much younger man,
John Walter Cross. And by then, she had friends who were a little bit disappointed that she'd
now taken such a conventional step, having lived for so long, in a way, at variance with the
social norms of the time. Well, Victorian fiction is brilliantly inventive and imaginative.
And what's so great about it, I think, is that it was written in the days when the authors had
no fear of rivals. There weren't any movies. There wasn't any radio. There wasn't any television.
There were no video games. And so the authors were perfectly willing to write a thousand pages
and let you, the reader, sing into the book. And if you can, it's still possible, obviously,
to sing into them for days at a time and be completely engrossed by the world which they drew.
Contemporary fiction tends to be a bit, obviously, there's a lot of brilliant fiction still being
written, but it doesn't have the same sense of leisure and assurance as it had then.
Many of them aimed for larger than life effects, particularly things like incredible coincidences
or situations which, in real life, were obviously impossible.
Another of my great favourites is Jane Eyre. I've mentioned it at various times during the course.
And here's a moment to just reflect on the sheer impossibility of the plot.
It's ludicrous, really, isn't it, that Mrs. Reed, with whom she lives as a child,
should be so horrible to a child she'd adopted and niece. Surely it's even more
unlike that Mr. Rochester should keep his mad first wife up in the attic and that,
despite her periodic attempts to set fire to the house,
could hope and expect that nobody would really know about the situation.
And it's even more ridiculous that when Jane runs away from the altar,
having almost become bigamously married to Mr. Rochester,
she should end up starving in the middle of a great moorland and find herself on the doorstep
of a little cottage and then to discover that inside the cottage are some of her long lost cousins
about whose existence she hadn't previously known. And then at the end of the story,
that she should inherit a big fortune from another relative she'd never previously known she'd had.
Well, the melodrama's completely out of hand in that one,
and it's no less out of hand in Wuthering Heights by her sister. But you forgive them all this,
because it's so compelling and it sweeps you along in such a wave of enthusiasm.
They specialised in giving characters impossible names, and again Dickens is probably the leader in
this, Mr. Pexniff, Mr. Pumblechuk, Mr. McCorber. And they're two of my favourites in hard times,
Mr. Gradgrind, a wonderful feeling of the spiritual barrenness of industrialisation,
or the schoolteacher, Mr. Machokham Child. And they created wonderful, impossible settings
in great expectations. The young boy Pip goes to Ms. Haversham's house. Ms. Haversham is an old
lady who, in her youth, was left at the altar, jilted at the altar, and her whole way of life
has stood still ever since that day. So she lives in a room with the wedding cake, and the clock stopped
at the moment, and this terrible thing had happened. And everything's infested with cobwebs,
and has fallen into a hideous decay, including Ms. Haversham herself. Marvellous stuff, magical.
They were also very good at depicting human qualities, which is otherwise rather difficult
to get at through more conventional forms of historical study, wonderful in depicting hypocrisy
and complacency. Let me read you a little passage from our mutual friend, again, by Dickens. This
is Mr. Podsnap. Mr. Podsnap was well-to-do, and stood very high in Mr. Podsnap's opinion.
Beginning with a good inheritance, he had married a good inheritance, and had
proven exceedingly in the marine insurance way, and was quite satisfied. He never could make out
why everybody was not quite satisfied, and he felt conscious that he set a brilliant social
example in being particularly well-satisfied with most things, and above all other things,
with himself. Thus happily acquainted with his own merit and his own importance,
Mr. Podsnap settled that whatever he put behind him, he put out of existence. There was a dignified
conclusiveness, not to add a grand convenience, in this way of getting rid of disagreeables,
which had done much towards establishing Mr. Podsnap in his lofty place in Mr. Podsnap's
satisfaction. Well, we all know characters like that, and there's never been a finer description
of what complacency is like. Now, these writers were portraying a rapidly changing society,
as Britain shifted from a predominantly agricultural to a mainly industrial society.
In hard times, Dickens drew a vivid picture of one of the northern industrial towns,
and the struggle of the working people for respectability and living wages and self-respect.
Perhaps even more effective in depicting industrial life was Mrs. Gaskell. She lived there,
she lived in Manchester, and she makes a marvelous comparison of industrial life
in Mary Barton, with country life in her little novel, Cranford, which is another little miniature
masterpiece of Victorian writing. Now, they, particularly people like Dickens, and to some
extent to Mrs. Gaskell, tended to idealize sentimental home life, the life of the home.
When I was talking earlier in the course about ideas about women, very strong in the middle
classes was this idea that women were naturally more virtuous than men, naturally more religious,
and that they converted home into a little spiritual sanctuary that rough, tough outside
world goes on. The home is exempt from all that. Here's a famous poet by Coventry Patmore,
called The Angel in the House, written in the 1850s, and this personifies the mood very well,
I think, and this idea that women create these little temples of the home. So, for something about
that abode, endued with temple-like repose, an air of life's kind purposes pursued, with ordered
freedom, sweet and fair, a tent pitched in a world not right, it seemed, whose inmates,
everyone, on tranquil faces, bore the light of duties beautifully done. That's lovely, isn't it?
Duties beautifully done. Another great household scene comes in, a Christmas carol,
in Bob Cratchit's household. Remember, Bob Cratchit is the beaten-down clerk in Mr. Scrooge's employment,
and he's got a disabled son, Tiny Tim, who's terribly sick. But what finally melts Scrooge's
heart is the fact that he's taken by one of the ghosts to go and have a glimpse into the Scrooge
household, and then by the ghost of Christmas past, a glimpse into his now largely forgotten,
wonderful home of his own childhood. While Dickens called his own journal,
Household Words, and was very self-conscious about cultivating the family and the fireside,
these kinds of virtues, one reviewer in Fraser's Magazine wrote,
The very mention of Dickens's last number, and it was the last number of these serials,
in any social gathering, is sure to be the signal for a chorus of eager admiration.
Go where you will, it is the same. There is not a fireside in the kingdom
where the cunning fellow has not contrived to secure a corner for himself as one of the dearest,
and by this time one of the oldest friends of the family.
While these novels are nearly all preoccupied by social class and marriage,
and they warn against the assumption that it's always good to marry a wealthy spouse,
there's certainly a lot of wealthy spouse hunting going on, but they're warning you against it.
For example, in Middlemarch, which is George Eliot's masterpiece,
Fred Vincy, although he comes from a higher social class, is clearly not worthy morally
of marrying Mary Garth, who comes from a subordinate social position, but is his moral
superior, and that little part of the plot plays out, with Fred realizing that his social position
is something he's got to recover from rather than something he can take advantage of
before he's entitled to marry Mary. And the novelists appear satisfied with the
what to us is the incongruity that a happy ending means a marriage,
just as much for Dickens as it had done for Shakespeare.
But if the captors are already married when the story starts, they're usually not happily married.
In Barchester Towers by Trollop, the bishop and Mrs. Proudy, a wonderful depiction there
of a family always at odds, and Trollop shows brilliantly there how the woman,
nominally in the inferior position, actually lords it over the bishop,
and virtually always gets her own way, because he hasn't got the moral strength to stand up to
his wife's bullying. In David Copperfield, the fact that he marries Dora Spenlo in the middle
of the book, rather than at the end of it, is a sure signal to you, the reader, that it's a poor
choice, it's the wrong kind of marriage. Again in Middlemarch, Dorothea Casubon marries Mr. Casubon
far too soon, and that's a sign to you again that the marriage is a mistake and ought not to have
happened. Well, the French writer and critic, Hippolyta Tain, often used to come visit England
and kept in touch with what was going on in British affairs, and he made a very interesting
comparison between Dickens and George Sand. This was a French woman writing under a man's name,
and Tain said, reading George Sand's novels makes the reader want to be in love. Dickens
makes the reader want to be married. Very important difference, I think there, isn't it?
Well, they were, they were busily involved in the humanitarian protest against social cruelty.
Child labour was one of the great issues of the time, as we've seen in various places along the
way, and Charles Kingsley's book, The Water Babies, was part of the literary protest against
the suffering particularly of the sweeps boys, introducing middle-class readers to the ghastly
reality that the climbing boys had to endure. Dickens' Oliver Twist is part of the protest
against the workhouse system and the exploitation of children, which was still so very widespread.
And earlier in the course, I read to you a little passage from Sibyl by Disraeli.
The subtitle of the novel is The Two Nations, and here's a crucial passage from, from that one.
Two, two characters are discussing, two upper-class characters. Our queen reigns over the greatest
nation that ever existed. Which nation? asked the young stranger, for she reigns over two.
The stranger paused. Egremont was silent but looked inquiringly.
Yes, resumed the young stranger after a moment's interval. Two nations,
between whom there is no intercourse and no sympathy, who are ignorant of each other's habits,
thoughts, and feelings, as if they were dwellers in different zones or inhabitants of different
planets, who are formed by a different breeding, are fed by a different food, and are ordered by
different manners. They are not governed by the same laws.
You speak of, said Egremont hesitatingly, the rich and the poor. And it's a great playing
out of this great social gulf, which consumes Britain in a way which Disraeli also thought
was very undesirable. Well, now there was a lot of Victorian literature about children,
and for the first time really, a growing literature for children, until then they'd
been expected to learn the Bible, to read the Bible, and then to pick up as best they could
on literature that was already available. Dickens and others made great use of children
in their own stories, and very often children, particularly little girls, although not only
they, are depicted as the moral superiors of the grown-ups, women are morally superior to men,
children sometimes even holier still. They tend not to be the little bundles of original sin
that earlier writers had written about. Now they're little miracles of virtue. Little now in
the old Curiosity Shop is a classic case about this. Now the old Curiosity Shop came out in
installments, and in the middle of one of the installments, little now, she's so pure and good,
she's actually too good to live, and one of the episodes ends with her desperately sick,
and all the readers had to wait for a month to see what was going to happen to little now.
And there's a story that when ships carrying the next installment approached America,
boats rode out in Boston Harbor to meet the ships coming in, and the sailors shouted to the captain,
did little now survive? And the captain writes, no, she's died. And the sailors raised black flags
on the masts of their ships, and the bells in Boston tolled, grieving for this fictional character,
little now. Although there's plenty of real suffering and premature death going on around them,
the sentimental and pathetic way in which this story had been told had a greater effect on them.
In Silas Marner, another George Eliot's great books, the miserly handloom weaver Silas Marner,
his life transformed by his discovery of the wonderful golden-haired orphan, Epi.
And finally, it was in the mid-Victorian period in the 60s that Lewis Carroll,
really Charles Dodgson, a mathematics professor at Oxford University, wrote the Alice in Wonderland
books, books clearly designed for a children's audience. And it's full of nonsense verse and
strange inversions of reality, and making fun of the improving tone of more conventional
Victorian literature. There's a great deal of talking animals in these books, the rabbit and
the doormouse and so on, and the March Hare. And this became common in Victorian children's fiction,
Beatrix Potter a little bit later on, obviously writing about the mice and so on.
And one of the great end of the century books, Radio Kipling's The Jungle Books,
where again it's the animals who make the running. So anthropomorphized literature of
animals for children is one of the great characteristics of this Victorian children's
literature.
