Lecture 21 Art and Music
Admirations for the work of Victorian artists, especially the pre-Raphaelites, revived in
the late 20th century. Victorian painters, like the writers, were more likely to be able
to live independent lives, no longer depending on aristocratic patronage, but instead depending
upon a growing middle-class sector, an audience which was interested in buying paintings,
and who sometimes were in the position to be able to dictate the subject matter.
Victorian art criticism, led by the towering figure of John Ruskin, argued for a very close
connection between art and morality, and he approved of the pre-Raphaelites' didactic
style and helped them to become famous in their own lifetimes. Later on in the Victorian
period, Walter Pater was a critic who led a reaction against this emphasis, and his preference
was art for art's sake. He was one of the theorists of the aesthetic movement, and one
of his favourite artists was James McNeill Whistler. At the same time, a British musical
revival was taking place, not in the sense of the development of great composers, but
in the sense of participation in music by more people than ever previously, and particularly
inside the Church of England. The most famous composers of that period were Gilbert and
Sullivan, light opera writers, and then at the very end of the period, Edward Elgar,
and they made music more respectable, particularly opera, more respectable than it had been on
the continent, especially in France, opera was closely associated with vice.
Well, first of all, the artists. Art was becoming a middle-class profession, like so many other
things in middle-class England. Businessmen in the North, people who made fortunes in
the textile and mining trade, wanted to buy pictures depicting contemporary life. They
weren't interested in this sort of obscure allegories, which had been the subject matter
of so much art in the 18th century. They wanted scenes glorifying hard work and family life,
and they valued accurate representation of detail. Here's the novelist Wilkie Collins.
I mentioned him earlier, sir, an opium addict. He said, these rough and ready customers were
not to be led by rules or frightened by precedents. Sturdily holding to their own opinions, they
thought incessant repetitions of the saints, martyrs, and holy families, monotonous and
uninteresting, and they said so. They wanted interesting subjects, variety, resemblance
to nature, genuineness of the article, and fresh paint. They had no ancestors whose feelings
as founders of galleries it was necessary to consult. They turned their backs valiantly
on the old masters, and marched off in a body to the living men.
Another favorite artist among the new entrepreneurs was William Powell Frith, and he did a series
of paintings on a massive scale, the same scale as the great grandmasters. But not on
historical or allegorical or religious subjects, but on everyday life in Victorian Britain.
One of his most famous is called The Railway Station, painted in 1862, and it's a picture
showing people of all different social classes mingling in the busy atmosphere of an English
railway station, obviously the kind of building that had just very recently come into existence,
and where for almost the first time people of many different social types would get together.
Well it was extremely popular, even though it didn't have a particularly elevated moral
tone. The critics scorned it, but the public loved it, particularly in the north of England.
And Frith himself made a massive fortune by doing paintings. He could command sometimes
a thousand pounds for a painting, at a time when that was, well it was the equivalent of
more than a hundred thousand pounds today, very, very big sums indeed. Another enormously popular
one, much favored by Queen Victoria herself, was Edwin Landseer, who specialized in scenes
of the Highland Mountains, and very often the stags, the stag in the Highlands.
The Royal Academy in London had hitherto been the arbiter, the national arbiter of artistic
taste, but increasingly it was supplemented as throughout the provinces of England and within
London itself a bigger art scene developed, more dealers, more galleries, and more variety and
competition of styles. John Ruskin, who was the leading Victorian art critic, believed very strongly
that art should embody ideas, and one of his characteristic ideas was that art isn't simply
a matter of appealing to the senses. After all, the animals have senses, but what we have is
ideas. We share ideas with God, that's what makes us superior to the animals and better than them.
So art is an intellectual experience, it's an intellectual and moral experience, and not
simply an aesthetic one. And it was he who championed the work of Turner, Turner was much
caricatured and laughed at in the early 19th century, but Ruskin's authority was sufficient to
elevate Turner to a serious position in the pantheon of contemporary artists.
Well now the pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood challenged the Royal Academy's prevailing style,
and they began a movement of long lasting significance. It was founded by three art students
who met in 1848 when all three of them were trying to exhibit their own work at the Royal Academy,
Holman Hunt, John Milleus, and Dante Gabriel Rossetti. 1848, the year that they met, was a year
of revolutions throughout Europe. It was the last year of the great Chartist upheavals,
and all three of them were caught up in the ferment of the moment.
Now they believe that art had reached its greatest purity and its greatest integrity
in the Italian Renaissance before Raphael. They didn't like the contemporary style represented
by Lancia, which they referred to as slosh. Here's a typical declaration from the pre-Raphaelites,
young undergraduate men. The naive traits of frank expression and unaffected grace
were what had made Italian art so essentially vigorous and progressive, until the showy
followers of Michelangelo grafted their dead sea fruit onto the vital tree. In other words,
it had begun to deteriorate in the 16th century. Their first exhibited work, they're all successful
in getting their work exhibited at the Royal Academy, and in each case it carried their signatures,
and then the unexplained initials, PRB, stood for pre-Raphaelite brotherhood.
And in creating this little secret society, they're amuleting a group of German artists called
the Nazarenes. This is a group of Germans working in Italy who also have the idea of reviving the
religious intensity of earlier generations of painting. Rossetti's first pre-Raphaelite pictures
were of the Virgin Mary, first as a young girl, and then at the Annunciation when the angel Gabriel
tells her that she is to become the bearer of the messiah. This was the kind of subject which
artists before Raphael had painted, although later on in life most of his painting was not going to
be on comparable subjects. The pre-Raphaelites were very attentive to the exact depiction of
the natural world, and to matters of historical and scientific and naturalistic fact. So every leaf
and every bird and every flower and every butterfly is meticulously painted in great detail,
in sharp focus even if it's far away. This of course is the exact opposite of the style of the
impressionists from later in the century. They also published four issues of a journal called
The Germ. They're all great literature enthusiasts as well, particularly lovers of Shakespeare and
Dante and Keats and Shelley and Tennyson, and they often painted scenes from this literature.
Their two favorites, which recur constantly in their work, was the relationship of Dante and Beatrice
and the suicide of Ophelia in Hamlet, although they were also very enthusiastic about scenes from
the Arthurian legends. The Germ, that journal, was full of high quality etchings and the stories
and poems that the group wrote. These three were the leaders, but they also had a surrounding of
slightly less well-known enthusiastic followers. Well, they weren't very good at keeping a secret,
and in 1850, the meaning of the initials PRB leaked out, and many reviewers were rather shocked at
the presumptuousness of these young men to claim to be passing judgment on the great figures of
art history in such a high-handed way. So when Millaus exhibited another painting at the Royal
Academy called Christ in the House of His Parents, it was very harshly criticized. It was
shocking to critics, partly because it was a naturalistic depiction of the Holy Family. Very
often scenes of Jesus at home would have the figures in halos and wearing not the simple
clothes of a Carpenters family, but magnificent royal dress. This painting shows a little boy,
the boy Jesus, with a cut on his hand from a Carpenters tool, obviously prefiguring the cuts
in his hands from the crucifixion from the nails. Well, one of the people who didn't like it was
Charles Dickens, and here's his review of that painting. You behold the interior of a Carpenters
shop. In the foreground is a hideous, rye-necked, blubbering, red-headed boy in a bed gown who
appears to have received a probe in the hand from the stick of another boy with whom he's been playing
in the adjacent gutter, and to be holding it up for the contemplation of a kneeling woman so hideous
in her ugliness that she would stand out from the rest of the company as a monster in the vilest
cabaret in France or the lowest gin shop in England. Well, it was an age of tough art critics,
as you can tell, wildly opinionated. Millaus, he'd had a privileged upbringing, was shocked to be
abused in such a full-blooded way, and he appealed to Ruskin, the great critic of the time, and much
to his pleasure, Ruskin went along and saw the paintings and was in favor of them. He liked the
style, and so Ruskin wrote a couple of letters to the London Times, and his authority was sufficient
that there was a reaction back in favor of Millaus in particular, and the pre-Raphaelites more
generally. Ruskin had been warmed by Holman Hunt's remark, art must be a handmaid in the cause of
justice and truth, very much the kind of remark Ruskin might have made himself.
Well, the pre-Raphaelites, their own personal, their colorful personalities have provided a very
rich fund of anecdotes, but also insights into the nature, into the relationship between art and
society in the Victorian world. Holman Hunt, for example, he was the son of lower middle class
parents who were horrified at the idea of their son becoming an artist. In their view, this was a
terrible waste of talents which ought to have been put to more sober uses. He always complained
about being desperately poor, although actually he made big sums from the paintings he did sell.
He complained constantly about having the artist's equivalent of writer's block,
a sort of painter, an inability to get works finished, even though he much needed to get
them finished to make some money because he had no other income, and he worked exhaustingly hard on
them. He was almost fanatical about very similitude, and twice went to the Holy Land so that he could
be accurate in his depiction of the Palestine landscape in his religious paintings. He claimed
that his vision was so sharp that he could see the moons of Jupiter with a naked eye, and that
his ability to gaze in a concentrated way could disclose things in the natural world,
which were shut off from modernary people. One of his best known paintings is called The
Hiling Shepard, and it shows a shepherd wooing a shepherd girl, and in the background,
the sheep are escaping because he's not paying attention to the flock. Now, he meant this
painting as an allegory for the neglect that the Anglican church showed for its flock. In other
words, the shepherd boy is meant to be the Anglican church, but it wasn't long before
Anglican Sunday schools had picked up this painting and reproduced it in much of their own literature
as a way of saying, here are some of the hazards that beset Christians. So a painting directed
against them, they put to good use themselves. Another of his best known paintings is called
Christ the Light of the World, and it shows Jesus in a nighttime scene holding a lantern,
and he's knocking on a door, and the door is overgrown with ivy, and the idea is Jesus is
trying to get into your life, but he isn't very often admitted, that's why ivy is growing over,
so the idea there is the neglect, even though Christ is coming to you, you neglect him.
Well, this is another of the paintings which despite his complaint, sold for a massive price.
Dante Gabriel Rossetti, he had an Italian father, as his name suggests, and an English mother.
Despite his intense interest in the art of the early Italian Renaissance, he hadn't even been to
Italy at the time of the early days of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, none of them had been to
Italy yet. Now, Rossetti met Elizabeth Siddle, she was a 15-year-old millionaire's apprentice working
in a London hat shop, and he was absolutely stunned by her appearance, she was very beautiful,
because it coincided exactly with his idealized image of what a Pre-Raphaelite woman should look
like, and in fact, if you look today at Pre-Raphaelite paintings, she's one of the women whose faces
occurs repeatedly, because they all did lots of pictures of her, and she became the group's
favorite model. If you can picture Milaeus' painting of the Drowned Ophelia, she's the model for that,
that painting. Well, she became Rossetti's mistress, and eventually he married her,
even though by doing so he had to cross class lines, she was of much lower social status than he was.
Inic named her Guggums, and the other artists would say that sometimes they'd go to visit Rossetti,
and he would just spend all day every day drawing and painting her again and again,
and she shows up in a lot of his pictures from Arthurian legend and so on.
But the Pre-Raphaelites have difficulties with women, on the one hand they idealized them as
figures like Guinevere and Ophelia, but apparently in practice they tended to be rather negligent of
them. Although Rossetti married Elizabeth Siddl, she committed suicide just two years later at the age
of 28 by taking an overdose of Lordinum, the opium compound. Well, he was absolutely traumatized by
her death, and at the funeral he threw into her coffin all the poems he'd written to her,
and then she was buried. It wasn't long after us that, inspired by one of his rather unscrupulous
friends, he thought, we should have got copies of all those poems, but because he didn't have,
they dug the coffin up again, and he took out the manuscripts to regain them.
Later on, another of his girlfriends was another of the famous models of the Pre-Raphaelites,
Jane Burden. Now, his affair with her was complicated by the fact that she'd got married to one of his
friends, William Morris. William Morris is another very interesting person in the art history of
this period. He was the man who led a revival of the arts and crafts of Old England. In other words,
he didn't like industrial manufacturing styles, he didn't like aniline dyes, so he wanted to recover
the use of vegetable dyes, and recover the use of hand craftsmanship, and so on. He himself had
got a private income, and could live very well, and undertake various entrepreneurial excursions
in making this craft stuff. He lived a rather paradoxical life, Morris, because he was a
middle-class businessman, but also an idealistic socialist in full revolt against what he thought
of as the horrors of the industrial age. Now, Morris' wooing of Jane Burden had also been
rather incongruous. She was a working-class girl as well, the daughter of a stable owner,
and apparently he wooed her by reading long passages from Dickens' Barnaby Rudge, which she
found rather hard-going. He liked the idea of her as Beatrice or Guinevere as well,
but didn't know how to get on in everyday life with her. Rosetti's sister, Christina, was a
well-known poet. She had a romance with James Collinson, who was another of the young artists in
the pre-Raphaelite brotherhood, and they became engaged. Now, the group was widely suspected
because of its artistic style of being pro-Roman Catholic, and this is the period when some
English Anglicans, like Newman and Manning, were converting to Catholicism and scandalizing the
church by doing so. But in fact, when Collinson did declare that he was going to become a Roman
Catholic, Christina Rosetti broke off the engagement. She was so shocked at what to her
seemed like a dreadful step to take. He did become a Catholic, and later on became a monk.
Now, another amazing marriage among this group was that of Ruskin with Effie Gray,
a high-spirited young Scots girl, which ended in one of the art world's great scandals.
Ruskin, the critic, had been coddled by his parents, and he expected that Effie, once he married her,
would fall in entirely with his wishes, which were still the wishes of his parents with whom
he'd been living until then. But she'd had an easy time of it in early life, and she assumed
that he'd fallen with her wishes, so it wasn't long before an absolute incongruity in their
styles and tastes developed. And in fact, some of the greatest mother-in-law stories in the
history of the world come from this marriage, particularly the unreasonableness of Ruskin's
mother towards Effie. Well, the marriage was a failure right from the start. It was never
consummated, because when Ruskin saw Effie naked, he found her rather off-putting. There's been
lots of speculation about exactly why, possibly because she had pubic hair, which was so different
from what Ruskin had seen in the classical statues until then. Anyway, for one reason or another,
it didn't work. Now, later on, Ruskin asked Melaus, his pre-Raphaelite friend, to paint his portrait,
and sure enough, this portrait exists, of Ruskin standing by a Scottish stream.
They were in Scotland together, the three of them living in a little house, Melaus and then
Ruskin and Ruskin's wife. In this tight little enclosure, Melaus and Effie fell madly in love
with each other, and it wasn't long before Effie had abandoned Ruskin altogether and arranged for
an annulment of the marriage on the grounds of his non-consumption. Later on, she married Melaus,
and they had eight children together, so it worked out much better in that respect.
Although, of course, it's caused an intense strain between the two men, but the portrait
wasn't finished, and so there are stories of the two of them getting together, and without either of
them speaking a word and really bristling with indignation, nevertheless, the work on the painting
continued. Ruskin was very high-minded. He continued to praise Melaus' painting, even in the face of
having taken away his wife. As he got older, Melaus' work lost the intensity of his early style,
and he became more of a Victorian sentimentalist, still very beautifully accomplished, polished
work, but not quite so dramatic as in the early days, and he also became very wealthy and widely
loved by Victorian society. Perhaps his single most famous painting is called Bubbles, and it
shows a little boy sitting on a low-stooled, blowing soap bubbles from a pipe. This was actually
picked up by a soap manufacturer, a Peer's Soap, and became their advertising picture.
Now, just to give you an idea of his success, in his own lifetime, his paintings sold for four or
five times as much as old masters on the market at the same time. If a Titian and a Melaus went on
sale, the Titian would only sell for about a fifth the price of the Melaus, quite different from
today, obviously, when the old masters reach astronomical values. The Pre-Raphaelite brotherhood
broke up in the fifties, mid-fifties, although by then its influence had become very widespread.
Melaus was admitted to the Royal Academy, having once been a critic of it from the outside,
and other artists like Morris and Edward Byrne-Jones picked up many of the stylistic
characteristics of the movement. The reaction against the Pre-Raphaelites came from the aesthetic
movement, particularly in the writings of Walter Pater, who didn't like the Ruskin's idea of the
centrality of morality to art. He thought that art was completely exempt from morality, that it
should be more like, that the painting should be more like pure music, and the artist he championed,
James McNeil Whistler, often called his paintings symphonies or nocturnes, that is bringing to
my musical terms, for paintings. There was a famous lawsuit about it in 1877. Whistler did a
painting called The Falling Rocket, and Ruskin said, Whistler has flung a pot of paint into the
public's face. He was furious about it, particularly by the fact he'd only worked on it for two days
and charged 200 guineas for it. Well, Whistler was indignant and sued for libel. There was a big
court case, and Whistler won, but was awarded damages of only one farthing, that is a quarter
of an English penny, the smallest possible amount of money he could have been given. This is really
the beginning of the period, which is so characteristic of the late 19th and early 20th
centuries, when the artist is ahead of the public in his work, very characteristic of the age of
Picasso, the idea of the artistic avant-garde, which delights in being misunderstood by the
general public, who regarded as not quite good enough for the artists. Whistler, incidentally,
thought that the Pre-Raphaelites' principle of absolute fidelity was ridiculous, and he played
a cruel practical joke on one of the lesser Pre-Raphaelites called John Bunny. John Bunny was
doing a painting in Venice in St. Mark's Square, and on one occasion took six years to finish one
painting. Just to give you an idea of the meticulous detail, Whistler crapped up behind him and stuck
on his back, a placard which read, I am totally blind. Well, there was also a musical revival
in Victorian Britain. Britain didn't have very many composers, certainly nobody to rival the
continental giants of the same time, like Mendelssohn and Tchaikovsky and Dvorak and Brahms.
And in fact, British musicians tended to have a feeling of rather acute inferiority,
when they compared themselves to their continental contemporaries, and even more to their 18th
century predecessors, like Handel and Haydn. But still, the Church of England did go through
a revival, a musical revival in the mid-Victorian period, particularly the writing of a lot more
anthems and hymns, and a lot more attention to the music inside churches.
The cathedrals began to organize choir schools, that is schools where the boys would learn,
but sing the services every day. And gradually, organ building underwent a revival. What was
normal in most village parish churches until then, was that anybody who could play a musical
instrument would gather together in the musicians loft and honk out the tunes as well as they could.
They'd sometimes play in the malt house, the pub, on Saturday, and then go into church and
play again on Sunday. But in the 1840s and 50s, there was a great organ building movement in
England. Previously rare, the church organ became common. Here's a little article from the Church
of England Review, published in 1857. And the author says, the days are happily numbered,
in which a fiddle and a bassoon were looked upon as the appropriate accompaniments to a church choir.
Few churches are now without an organ. And the wives and sisters of the clergy
form an excellent staff of organists, where there are no funds to secure professional help.
Interesting there, the assumption that the wives and daughters of the clergy will be able to play.
This was, in other words, it was a quite normal middle class accomplishment for girls,
particularly, to learn how to play the piano. If necessary, they could transfer the technique
to the organ and fill in if you couldn't afford to hire an organist. The Oxford movement inside
the Church of England, the revival of the beauty of holiness, was very enthusiastic about music,
elaborate polyphony, Gregorian chant, and so on. The evangelical side of the Church of England
tended to want to keep things simple, maybe the unison singing of hearty hymns or psalms,
but the Oxford movement had a much more elaborate design. That's been an argument in the Church
of England ever since, in fact. Five London churches had choral services in 1858,
but 38 churches had them by 1882, so rapidly the idea of choral liturgy was becoming established,
and in 1860 hymns ancient and modern, the Great Anglican hymn book, was published to create
a nationwide standard. Now the most famous, or probably the most famous composers of the
mid-Victorian period, are Gilbert and Sullivan, light opera writers. They went into partnership
together in 1875 and kept their partnership going right through until 1896. Gilbert was
formerly a lawyer who'd become a London playwright, and Sullivan was a young professor at the Royal
Academy of Music. He hoped to be remembered as a great symphonist, a grand and serious composer,
but he's not. He's remembered as the author of the music for these light operas.
Their first success was trial by jury, a satire on the British legal system,
and Doiley Cart, the owner of the opera company which sang these performances,
was also a very talented manipulator of difficult personalities, and kept them together despite
their temperamental conflicts. Opera had a moral taint, and a lot of the European
operas were regarded as too scandalous for the British stage because it was too obvious that
they involved matters of sex. Here's Gilbert writing about what he and Sullivan tried to do.
When Sullivan and I began to collaborate, English comic opera had practically ceased to exist.
Such musical entertainments as held the stage were adaptations of the plots of the operas of
Offenbach, Audraire, and Le Coq. The plots had generally been so bodlerized, that is the naughty
bits removed, so bodlerized as to be almost unintelligible. When they had not been subjected
to this treatment, they were frankly improper. Sullivan and I set out with the determination
to prove that these elements were not essential to the success of humorous opera. We resolved that
our plots, however ridiculous, should be coherent, that the dialogue should be void of offense,
that on artistic principles no man should play a woman's part, and that no lady of the company
should be required to wear a dress that she could not wear with perfect propriety to a
private fancy ball, in other words, no near nudity on stage. And what they did was to
satirize contemporary life, often by dressing it up in comical costumes. In the Pirates of
Penzance, for example, they were satirizing the Royal Navy. And one of the central figures is the
man who in the opera is called The Father of the Sea, the ruler of the Queen's Navy. This was a satire
on W. H. Smith, a man who made a fortune in Britain selling newspapers and books,
usually on railroad stations, and who then became a Conservative member of Parliament
and was appointed by Disraeli as the First Lord of the Admiralty for political reasons,
even though he'd got no experience at all of going to sea. And so the solo he sings,
his little biographical solo, explains how he rose to this position. Of legal knowledge,
I acquired such a grip that they took me into the partnership. And that junior partnership,
I wean, was the only ship I ever had seen. But that kind of ship so suited me that now I am the
ruler of the Queen's Navy. And the song ends like this. Now, landsmen all, whoever you may be,
if you want to rise to the top of the tree, if your soul isn't fettered to an office stool,
be careful to be guided by this golden rule. Stay close to your desks and never go to sea,
and you all may be rulers of the Queen's Navy. And then from that time on, W. H. Smith himself
was nicknamed Pinafore Smith, because the satire was so transparent. Anyway, it was all decent,
none of it was wicked or below the belt. Piano ownership became increasingly common in Britain
at this time. About 23,000 pianos per year were manufactured in 1850, 75,000 a year by 1910,
as the middle class spread, so did the numbers of people within it who could play.
But the social status of professional musicians remained very low, and so did their incomes.
Even very famous ones, like Edward Elgar, who by the turn of the century was being recognized as
the one truly outstanding genius as a British composer. Even he, in his early years, had a
difficult time of it. He was the bandmaster in a lunatic asylum throughout most of his 20s.
And it was common for people to have to mix musicianship with other skills. The historian
Theodore Hoppen, for example, quotes this advertisement from 1868. Quote, Gloucester
County Asylum, assistant carpenter wanted, wages, £30 per annum, with board lodging and washing.
He must be a musician and able to play at sight. In other words, he had to mix it up with other
things as well. So, to conclude, there was no great revival of compositional brilliance in
British music. But there was a gradual democratization. The Salvation Army created bands. The Welsh
male voice choirs, whom I mentioned earlier, Northern factories would often create a brass
band of their own. More and more people were becoming involved in the performance of music,
even though it wasn't until the early 20th century that a great generation of British composers
emerged.
