Lecture 23 Medicine and Public Health
Medicine became a middle-class profession in the Victorian era.
At the start of the period, there was a three-tier medical system
divided between classically trained physicians at the top
and beneath them the surgeons and beneath them the apothecaries
who took care of the practical aspects of medical care and learned their trade through apprenticeships.
Now to learn to become a doctor, you needed to dissect corpses.
And the official source of corpses was the gallows,
hanged criminals were dissected by medical students.
But by the 1830s there weren't enough bodies that way
and so the official supply was supplemented by grave robbers
and they were controversial figures in the early 19th century, very controversial.
Medical advances in the Victorian period included the application of anesthetics
and antiseptics by Lister who was one of the great medical heroes of the century
and many others and by the unification of the medical profession in legislation of 1858.
But medicine was still a primitive craft in many ways.
More important in gradually reducing the Victorian death rate
was the taking of elementary steps in public health and sanitation
and probably the most famous moment here came in 1854
when John Snow performed the classic public health experiment.
He isolated a particular pump as the source of a cholera epidemic
and took the handle off the pump so that it couldn't be used.
Eventually as the Victorian period continued
cities began to look for ways to drain themselves and to get fresh water supplies.
This was crucial in improving public health.
Meanwhile women were struggling for admission to the medical profession having been excluded
but many male doctors very fiercely discouraged them from doing so
from fear that it would upset their delicate reproductive systems.
Perhaps the place to begin is by emphasizing that sickness and death
were universal companions in the Victorian period.
You could die at any age and people did.
You only have to glance in a Victorian churchyard to see the point
that the age at death is continuous.
Now dying has become a kind of specialized activity of old people
but it certainly wasn't then and death is now sequestered in hospitals
but then it was a social event.
In fact if you were in hospital and you were clearly going to die
sometimes you'd go home in order to die at home
where you could be surrounded by your friends and family.
A lot of Victorian novels have got great deathbed scenes
and certainly in reality deathbeds like that of Prince Albert
were public events.
No one had public events in the sense that anybody could go
but certainly events in the sense that people who were known to
and related to the dying person were all there
and the person's last words would have great moral significance
binding on their survivors.
Well this is a period when the medical profession was divided into different ranks.
The physicians were the most eminent.
To be a physician in those days you had to be a graduate of Oxford and Cambridge
and that in turn meant that you had to be a member of the Church of England
because if you weren't you weren't eligible to go to Oxford or Cambridge
and their curriculum consisted partly of ancient medical texts
and partly the study of classics and mathematics.
Physicians were licensed by the Royal College of Physicians
and the Royal College had two different examinations
in order to qualify for the work.
One was called the extra license
which entitled the holder to practice anywhere in the British provinces
and one was the full license which entitled the holder to practice medicine in London.
The most important qualities in a physician
were not the ability to help patients to recover
but rather character and breeding.
They weren't particularly successful in making recoveries
because their knowledge was so very limited.
So medical outcomes weren't deemed the most important factors
and in fact that persisted right through the 19th century.
Surgeons were men of intermediate rank.
They have the status of skilled technicians
or something like skilled artisans
and to be a successful surgeon you need to be physically robust
and not in the least bit squeamish
because one big part of your job would consist of amputations
which often had to be done without any kind of anaesthetic except possibly alcohol.
It was a mechanical job.
Now can you picture that outside barbershops
it's not common to have a red and white pole.
Originally the barbers and the surgeons were the same people.
It was only in 1753 that the two trades had diverged
and the red and white represents the blood and the bandages
which are used to try to stem the flow of blood
which the barbers have maintained.
If you're a surgeon the prevailing wisdom was
that you didn't need to know anything much about medicine
and conversely that physicians didn't need to know much about surgery.
The surgeon's work was with the exterior of the body
amputations, sometimes bone setting, skin disorders
and a little bit of elementary gynecology.
You needed to be physically strong, dexterous
and very resilient, determined.
And so you learned to be a surgeon by apprenticeship
after which you could be licensed by the Royal College of Surgeons.
The people at the bottom rank of the medical profession
were the apothecaries.
They were shopkeepers, dispensers of medicines
and many of them sold commodities which we regard as poisons.
A lot of medicines were mercury based
and we've thought several times during the course about lordenum, the opium extracts.
Sometimes the apothecaries would also do primitive dentistry,
pulling out teeth and sometimes they would bleed a patient
because it was widely believed into the 19th century
that bad blood was the cause of nilness
and that by taking away some of the patient's blood
you could help them recover.
There were also numerous unlicensed medical practitioners,
unlicensed healers.
Altogether there were 19 different bodies
which would register medical practitioners of various kinds
but you didn't have to be licensed at all.
In little villages often medical care simply meant
going to the local wise woman who had a tradition
of knowing about herbal remedies
or visiting one of the traveling medical salesmen,
people who had got some specific patent medicine or remedy.
Very often these remedy salesmen had one great theory
which purported to explain medical conditions in general.
One of them was a man called James Morrison
who in the 1830s made a big fortune selling a medicine
called Morrison's Vegetable Universal Pills.
It was a single patent medicine and it was a compound of vegetables
which he said could cure any ailment
and he had a great list of the things which it would cure.
Why? Because all ailments were traceable to banned blood
and these were pills which refreshed the blood.
That was his claim.
They were very heavily laxative in effect apparently.
Well Morrison drove around London in a magnificent carriage
with liveried foot men.
He certainly made a great success of selling the potion
and he denounced the whole medical profession
as a set of frauds.
Now because the death rate was so high
and physicians were rarely able to bring about recovery
of seriously ill patients,
a claim like that was much more plausible then
than it would be today.
Very often patients who were left alone
were as likely to recover as those who were interfered with
because we certainly now recognize that the interference
could be more lethal than benign neglect.
That's why so many of these challenges prospered.
A medical journal called The Lancet,
which is now a very respected British medical journal,
was founded in 1823 by Thomas Wakeley MP,
a member of parliament.
It was founded originally to denounce the greed,
irresponsibility, nepotism and mummary of physicians
which Wakeley regarded as one of the most fraudulent
of all the professions.
Well in the middle of the 19th century,
parliament reformed the medical system
and created a situation of greater uniformity.
Legislation of 1858.
It ensured that all doctors were included
on a centralized list of practitioners,
the medical register.
And it set up a sharp dichotomy between people
who were qualified to be on the medical register
and those who were not.
The British Medical Association,
which is a kind of trade association of the practitioners,
did everything it could to elevate its own respectability
and decency as against those who weren't qualified
and weren't on the register, as it was called.
The old colleges which had mainly lobbied against this reform
were kept on as they were mollified by being retained
but no longer had the power to regulate
their own particular branch of medicine
that they had had previously.
So inclusion on or exclusion from the medical register
now marked an important divide
and that's a situation which has persisted up to the present.
The British Medical Association became interested in self-policing
and in making medicine, first of all,
a skilled and respected profession
and one which was relatively difficult to get into
through a period of rigorous training.
And one which was decent, unremarkable and decent.
They wanted very hard to be thought of
as first-class citizens, dependable people.
Here's Dr. McKenzie writing frankly on this issue in 1885.
He says, quote, in the breast of the ordinary middle-class John Bull
and it was the ordinary Englishman,
the ordinary middle-class John Bull,
no emotion is stronger than the desire to appear respectable.
In the heart of the medical body corporate,
this feeling is intensified almost to a passion.
The truth is that in this country, at least,
we're just a little doubtful as to our position on the social scale
and we are naturally therefore somewhat ticklish about the matter,
a striving for status.
It's the same impulse to be middle-class that we've already witnessed
in things like the literature and the music and so on.
Now, as I mentioned at the beginning,
one of the great problems in the early Victorian period
was the question of where you got bodies to do anatomy studies.
The death penalty was hung over the heads of criminals
for a large number of offenses
and although public executions took place regularly,
there weren't enough to supply the number of aspiring doctors
and that means that somehow the difference had to be made up
and it was made up by grave robbers whose nickname was the Resurrection Men
because they'd bring you up once more from the ground when you'd been put there.
Now, that meant that if you had a death in the family,
not only were you bereaved by the death,
you also then had to guard the place where your loved one was buried
because if you didn't, the body would be stolen and taken off to the anatomy clinics.
There was one more of the horrors attendant on death at that time.
That meant that there was a thriving trade in robber-proof burial devices.
There's a thing called a mortsafe, which is a kind of steel cage
that your coffin would be put inside the mortsafe before it was sunk in the ground
to make it that much more difficult to get at the body itself.
That led coffins, robber-proof vaults, special locks to go on the coffins.
There was a terrific interest in death in general among the Victorians.
Another thing they did was there was a fear of being buried prematurely
that you might fall into what we call a coma or a fit where you seem to be dead but really weren't.
So it was possible for a family with a dead member to buy a belfry coffin.
What happened here is that there was a little bell on top of the coffin
and it was attached to a rope so the rope was put into the hand of the dead person.
So as if they revived in the coffin, the hand would twitch and the bell would ring.
There's a lot of interest in all devices of this kind.
Now it was dangerous work being a resurrection man
because very often the discovery of resurrection men led to them being attacked and brutally beaten
and sometimes to the burning of the anatomy schools where the bodies were taken.
There was a famous series of murders in Edinburgh in 1828
and two men called Burke and Hare were convicted of grave robbery.
They'd be getting more bodies to provide to the medical practitioners.
Another case the next year, two Londoners, Bishop and Williams, went on trial
and they were convicted and sentenced to death and hanged
with the result that their own bodies were dissected legally
because this is the one legitimate source of the bodies.
Well in 1828, in another grave robbing case, an interesting legal development took place.
That is, the anatomy school was held criminally liable as well as the grave robbers
until then there'd been a legal anomaly that the anatomy schools
even though they were clearly getting supplied with illegal bodies
nevertheless hadn't been prosecuted.
Once they were vulnerable, they appealed for legislative relief
and they were given it with the passage of the new poor law in the early 1830s
with the decision that destitute people who died in the workhouse without relatives
their bodies would be given over for dissection as well.
That of course would have the effect of increasingly available supply
and diminishing the need for grave robbers.
Now I mentioned earlier that the workhouses were dreaded and feared.
One of the reasons for this dread was the fear that you'd die there
and that your body would be dissected.
People took the idea of the resurrection at the second coming of Jesus
very literally that you'd be resurrected in your flesh to meet God.
But of course if you were dissected and your body parts distributed
that would become impossible.
And so even the very poorest people would get burial insurance
if they could possibly afford it as a way of staving off the hazard
when they died their bodies would be cut up.
It was greeted with absolute horror and revulsion by nearly all the community
except the tiny minority of doctors themselves.
Well the economic and social status of the doctors continued to vary.
A minority of them became very rich and there's a street in London, Harley Street
which is the place on which the most successful doctors practiced.
But for many others it remained a rather marginal business
and it was difficult to keep up middle class appearances.
For example in the 1880s Arthur Conan Doyle was a young doctor
struggling to establish a decent practice in London
and not making very much of a success of it.
That's why he had time to turn to writing these Sherlock Holmes novels
because so few patients came in.
But for the first time in the mid-century doctors began to appear in literature
as sympathetic figures.
They were then regarded as mount-banks and quacks and villains of various sorts.
But now the doctor as hero starts to appear in stories
and that's itself a sign of changing times.
Harriet Martin Oro to novel called Dearbrook in 1838.
And the local community doctor Edward Hope,
you can see from his name that he's a good guy,
is the hero.
It's about a community that's been stricken by a cholera epidemic.
And Doctor Hope is the man who uses the best methods then available.
Quarantine of those already suffering, elementary hygiene,
provision of good food, clean clothes and so on to help his patients.
He's a model of gentility and Christian charity and purposefulness
the doctor as hero.
This vision that doctors were heroic figures became increasingly common
as the century progressed.
Medicine and science did make some achievements to make surgery in particular
a little bit more, a little bit safer.
There was a great disagreement about what the best way was
of trying to decrease the death rate.
One group of doctors and Joseph Lister is at the center of this group.
They emphasized surgical improvements.
And Lister's insight was the importance of antiseptics.
That is preventing wounds from becoming septic once the surgery had been done.
Very often the surgery itself would succeed,
but because it had been done with unsterilized instruments
without the doctors washing and the patients had been sewn up
with just ordinary thread and so on, infection would set in
and the patient would die from that or from gangrene.
Well, Lister learned about the experiments of Semmelweis.
This is a doctor in Vienna who had been struck by the fact
that in the maternity ward of the hospital where he, Semmelweis, was working,
large numbers of the pregnant women were dying of puerperal fever.
And eventually he was able to trace it to the fact that the medical students
who were studying in the hospital came to the maternity ward
straight from the dissecting clinic where sometimes there were dissecting patients
who themselves had been diseased.
And Semmelweis had ordered the medical students under his care
to wash very thoroughly using carbollic soap
and found that in doing so there was a sharp decrease
in the mortality rate among the pregnant women.
In other words, he began to establish a relationship
between cleanliness and survivability.
But he found it very, very difficult indeed to overcome a long tradition of not washing.
Washing wasn't something which people did,
especially not the kind of vigorous washing which is necessary
to achieve the condition of surgical sterility.
But Semmelweis and then Lister also discovered that if you used a carbollic spray
of diluted carbollic acid,
you could have the effect of creating an antiseptic environment
which would damage whatever it was that was causing the septicemia
without damaging the patient or herself.
So surgery under Lister's care would take place
and one man would be manning a device which would spray a thin mist
of carbollic acid into the air around the patient who was being operated on.
And sure enough, this did have the effect of reducing the incidence of septicemia.
He was the most famous British surgeon of the whole 19th century
and became a hero among doctors and also to the reading public.
He was appointed to an aristocratic rank of baron in 1900
and was regarded as an explorer in the same way that David Livingston was,
pushing back frontiers, a pioneer, this kind of thing.
Now hospitals, the function of hospitals was changing.
Originally there had been charity places mainly for the sick poor
but gradually under the influence of Lister and others,
they became places for the systematic study of sick people and care for them.
In other words, it took taking on more of their modern function
as places to be operated on and in which to recover and be closely watched
and in which medical students could learn their own trade
to pass it on to the next generation.
Lister championed the development of hospitals
even though some advice had been aware and Lister himself was aware
that sometimes hospitals actually spread infections rather than suppressing them
and when his contribution really to medical life was to claim that
we can make the hospital safer than home as places for sick people.
Another great advance in the Victorian period was the development of anesthetics
which made surgery far more endurable obviously
and reduced the shock suffered by patients undergoing it.
An Edinburgh surgeon called James Simpson,
pioneered the use of chloroform in Britain as an anesthetic
and Queen Victoria twice used chloroform for the birth of her last two children
and loved it.
Well on the one hand there were the surgical interventionists, people like Lister.
Another group believed that sanitation was more important than surgery in saving lives
and certainly statistically they were probably right.
The great London sanitary reformers were Edwin Chadwick who I've mentioned earlier,
John Simon and Edwin Lancaster and they were thoroughly supported by Florence Nightingale
in this work.
What they wanted to do was introduce elementary measures of public health.
In 1848 Parliament passed the Metropolis Local Management Act
and it authorised each parish to appoint medical officers
and medical officer of health in each district.
The duties were rather vague about exactly what this figure should do
and so Edwin Lancaster who became the first MOH in St. James's parish in London
in effect wrote his own job description.
This is an interesting area of London because it includes some of the most fashionable areas,
Piccadilly and Oxford Street and Regent Street.
There's also some of the Rookeries that is dense slum areas where the criminal poor lived
and Lancaster began to study this area in which he was the medical officer
to try to work out what caused morbidity and mortality and disease
and how he might set about preventing it.
Like many Victorians he was very statistically minded
and understood the importance of gathering systematic information about what was happening in the area
at a time when previously it hadn't been done.
So he had arranged to be notified of all births and deaths and illnesses in the area
and all sanitary nuisances.
A sanitary nuisance usually meant a big pile of manure on the street
or a leaking cesspool or piles of raw garbage being dumped in the street and never removed.
He created a standardized set of forms on which this information was being collated all the time
and by summarizing the information got a very accurate sense of what was happening in the various parts of this parish.
Now the people to whom he reported were the vestrymen of the parish
and very often they were the principal landowners in the district
and the owners of houses some of which he condemned as being in sanitary.
They were reluctant to make improvements because it was expensive
and so Lancaster had to appeal to them by saying
in the long run it's going to be economical for you to be running a house which is healthy
rather than one which is sick.
So long as you've got a high death rate in the houses you own
obviously you're losing from a situation like that.
Now here's something to keep in mind.
There's a type of animal which we call farm animals
but these farm animals were very common in town.
In the parish where he worked there were 1,057 horses in the parish
because all the wheeled vehicles were pulled by horses
so there were lots of them there behind every row of grand houses
would be the mews, the stables where the horses were kept.
And there were 205 cows in the parish as well.
A local supply of milk and there were lots of pigs
and there were tens of thousands of chickens
people keeping them to lay eggs and as a food supply.
In other words even in the most urbanized areas
there were lots and lots of animals living
and they're all producers of a lot of manure.
Massive manure piles were common in town.
Again we've got such a rigid segregation of the farm animals from the town
it's hard for us to remember that that's what it was like
and the smell inside cities must have been overpoweringly strong all the time.
Another thing Lancaster tried to do was to
well first of all he wanted to restrict the ways in which these animals were kept
and assure the regular removal of the manure.
He also wanted to establish morgues, death houses he called them
to get dead bodies out of houses more quickly.
There was a long tradition that if you died
about a week or a week and a half would pass before the funeral.
Perhaps because it gave time for the relatives to gather
but certainly the effect was especially when somebody died in summer
that you'd literally have a decaying body inside the house
for quite a long period after the death
and if they died of disease making it that much more likely
that the disease would spread to others.
Lancaster's work in that of all these medical examiners
was given much greater urgency because of the spread of cholera.
The first big cholera epidemic began in 1831
and then recurred throughout the century.
You could catch it very suddenly
and you could die from cholera in the same day that you contracted it.
It's what it was like, and Edimbra Surgeon George Bell says.
The eyes are surrounded by a dark circle
completely sunk in the sockets.
The whole countenance is collapsed.
The skin is livid.
The surface of the skin is now generally covered with cold sweat.
The nails are blue and the skins of the hand and feet are corrugated
as if they had long been steeped in water.
Cholera afflicted people of all classes.
They were living so closely together
and it had a kind of apocalyptic quality
because you could suddenly contract it and die from it
or endure a severe fever
and then go into a very gradual recovery process.
The Victorian period was a period of improvements in microscopy,
the making of microscopes.
A pair of doctors called John Snow and William Budd
were the first to identify living organisms in the water supply
as the probable cause of cholera.
Budd lived in Bristol
and he belonged to an organization called
the Microscopical Subcommittee
of the Bristol Medical and Chirological Society.
They would get together and study things in microscopes
which were then a relatively new instrument.
One occasion they were studying the vomit of cholera patients
and Budd noticed there similar objects
which he had not observed in the vomit of healthy patients
and he noticed the same objects
in contaminated drinking water supplies
but not in pure water.
So he pieced together the idea that it was this organism
which was actually creating the cholera.
It was John Snow who I mentioned at the beginning
who identified the Broad Street Pump as the source of cholera.
During an epidemic, it was in 1854,
he drew a map of the houses.
He put a cross in the house where somebody had died
and he noticed that the death rate was most intense
close to this pump and diminishing as he went away from it.
And sure enough, by going to the pump and removing the handle
he made the incidence of new cases much less prevalent
so he'd established a cause and effect again
in the water supply.
Well previously this well had been pure,
that's why people had confidence in it
but it turned out that there was leakage into the well
from an adjacent cesspool
into which had been poured all the contaminated water
from a house where a child had recently died of diarrhea.
Again, everybody's building cesspits
and they're tending to contaminate the wells.
Well the logic of preventive public health
seemed persuasive certainly to public health officials and doctors
who always went forward in the face of fierce popular opposition.
For example in 1853, smallpox vaccinations became compulsory
but poor people bitterly hated it
because they thought they were being given the disease
or they were being given a mild dose of it
and occasionally somebody would die from the vaccination.
No wonder that in an age where medical knowledge
was far less advanced than it is now
that many people should be afraid of that.
Another interesting aspect of Victorian medicine
is theorizing about sex.
One thing historians of medicine speculate that
the doctors were trying to establish authority
over many areas about which they didn't really know very much
and that this is one of the areas in which they did it.
This was the era in which a lot of books were written about
the way in which masturbation would make you blind and mad.
Let me read to you from Dr. William Acton writing in 1865
about people who suffered from the solitary vice.
The frame is stunted and weak.
The muscles undeveloped.
The eye is sunken and heavy.
The complexion is shallow, pasty or covered with spots.
The hands are damp and cold and the skin moist.
The boy shuns the society of others, creeps about alone,
joins with repugnance in the amusements of his school fellows.
He cannot look anybody in the face
and becomes careless in dress and uncleanly in person.
His intellect is often of the lowest class
and if his evil habits are persisted in,
he may end in becoming a driveling idiot
or a peevish valitudinarian.
Well, that was one side of it.
The other side was the idea that women are constitutionally frail
in the fact that they are at the mercy of their reproductive systems
and that therefore they ought not to do things like study too hard
or exercise too vigorously
for fear that it will send them over the edge into hysteria.
Many late Victorian doctors treated menstruation
and certainly pregnancy as forms of sickness
rather than as characteristic aspects of a perfectly healthy person.
Here's a doctor, Ryan, in the middle of the century.
Women are more sensitive, weak, influenced by moral and physical causes
and more liable to diseases than the other sex.
Their constitution is more feeble
and is peculiarly influenced by the mysterious processes
of reproduction, pregnancy, parturition
and the puerperal state and lactation
as well as by all the functions peculiar to it.
This was sometimes linked to evolutionary theory to say that
during the course of evolution
the functions of men and women
had evolved down different but complementary tracks
and therefore if you try to, for example,
give women higher education
or get women involved in athletics
you are violating the development of evolution itself.
You'd make them evolutionarily dysfunctional
or it's not only morally wrong to do that.
It was pointless.
This was the environment in which the first generation of women
tried to become doctors.
Eventually a few of them succeeded in the 1870s
but in the face of fierce opposition
from the orthodox male medical establishment.
Let me just end by quoting you an article from the Lancet
explaining why it's such a bad idea for women to become doctors.
Quote,
Female purity would inevitably be destroyed in women
learning anatomy and physiology
especially alongside male medical students.
Knowledge of the human body would destroy that fine gloss of innocence
which not only added to women's charm
but was an essential part of their real social role
to preserving tact some of the finer ideals and illusions of the race.
It's curious isn't it in a medical magazine
to have the argument that women ought to maintain illusions
and not to know about the workings of the human body.
But nevertheless despite this hostile environment
some very very hard headed and determined women
were able to break through into the medical profession
always a minority right into the middle of the 20th century.
But nevertheless they along with the women who were learning nursing
after the revolution of Florence Nightingale
together contributed to the leavening of British medicine
with a female presence.
applause
