Lecture 24, Architecture.
The last few lectures in this series have been about the professions in Victorian life,
and here's one more about the profession of architecture, which also became much more structured in that period.
The demand for buildings as the nation became urbanized was very great, and a lot of imaginative and very capable figures were drawn into architecture as a profession.
Several new types and new styles of building were necessary, including factories, department stores, railway buildings, hotels, libraries, banks, warehouses and so on.
Many of these things had come up in small numbers previously, but a lot more of them all were needed.
And it's certainly still true today that the built landscape of Britain is extensively Victorian, and there's a lot of it to look at.
In this lecture I'm going to talk about some of the places you can still go to see today.
Well, the era's religious revivals meant there was also a great deal of church architecture going on, and in any one year there were literally hundreds of churches in various stages of production.
As early as 1846 there were 400 churches being built in Britain.
Working class housing as well, the houses that tended to surround the factories, the beginnings of suburbanization, once things like the London Underground were being developed,
enabling middle class people to live a little bit further away, a massive outpouring of architectural creativity.
A professional association was created among the architects as it had been among the doctors.
This was the Institute of British Architects founded in 1834 and given royal protection endorsement in 1866.
And it, like all the other Victorian professions, went through a series of stages.
First of all, trying to restrict entrance so there wouldn't be too many people competing in the work, imposing a code of professional ethics,
establishing internal regulations and examinations to qualify professional journals and a subdivision of tasks.
As more work was done, more people could specialize in particular elements of the trade.
That's comparable in all the professions and architecture is no exception.
One of the ways in which the Victorians tried to ensure the spirit of laissez-faire and fairness in exams was to have anonymous competitions.
When a big project was proposed, I mentioned earlier in the course the Great Exhibition when there were more than 200 designs proposed,
although eventually none of them was found to be quite satisfactory.
The great thing about the competitions was that they were anonymous so that the judges wouldn't know who presented a particular design,
but instead the most distinctive or the most admirable would be chosen.
Of course, the architects knew that sometimes the patrons weren't particularly knowledgeable.
In the case of the big northern cities which competed with one another to have the most magnificent town halls,
sometimes they themselves wouldn't be discriminating architectural critics,
so the designers would go for sensational effects in the knowledge that that might well tempt the client to give the contract to them.
The disadvantage with these competitions was that you could devote an enormous amount of energy to an unsuccessful bid
and have nothing to show for sometimes several months' work in getting it ready.
And, of course, there was always the fear that the judges had been fixed
and that certain crucial elements would give away which was really the design which was going to be favored.
Victorian architects could enjoy the use of more materials than any earlier generation.
They'd got iron and steel, plate glass, elevators after the 1860s, and these things also encouraged experimentation.
The aristocracy was no longer the biggest customer.
Now it was the big middle class, the manufacturers and their middle class surroundings.
One of the things the factory owners would often do is have factories built to look as though they were building from different eras.
I mentioned Titus Salt who created Salt Air, this model industrial community near Bradford.
The whole factory was built to look like an Italian palace,
although it was on a vastly larger scale than the buildings on which the original design was based.
The engine house chimney was designed as an obelisk.
The clock tower was copied from a 12th century tower, the Lambertini Tower in Verona.
It was a chimney as well but it didn't look like one.
Marshall's flax mill in Leeds nearby was based on the design for Egyptian temples
and the architect in this case was a man named Joseph Bonomy who'd been to study the antiquities in Egypt,
the pyramids and the remains of the great temples in the Valley of the Kings.
But it was Egyptian with a difference because the columns were made of iron
and it included very sophisticated heat and humidity regulators.
This is a linen manufacturer where the heat and humidity of the flax is vital to the product being of good quality.
Each of the different railway companies which competed very fiercely with each other
developed its own style, sometimes Gothic, sometimes classical, sometimes Italianate and sometimes Tudor.
That is going back into the whole of the architectural heritage of mankind to find distinctive styles of their own.
And an unwary railway traveler could be surprised to find that there were so many medieval or Tudor buildings along the route,
realizing of course that they were also built specially for the occasion.
Well, I want to single out one of these new styles, the Gothic revival and look at that a little bit more closely
because I think in some ways that's the most interesting of these Victorian styles.
It looked back to the Middle Ages and aspired to revive the most brilliant achievements of the medieval architects
which were embodied in the cathedrals.
And yet, paradoxically, although it did also lead to the building of great new churches,
probably its greatest achievements were in civic and railway building.
And the first great spokesman of the Gothic revival was Augustus Welby Pugin who lived from 1812 to 1852.
Statted examples of Gothic revival preceded Pugin, but it's he who really generates massive enthusiasm for it nationwide.
He was the son of a French immigrant, an architectural draftsman.
And Augustus as a boy showed enormous precocity as a designer.
Already when he was only 15, his father entrusted to him the making of some elaborate decorated chairs for King William IV.
He was such a good drawer and craftsman that the father was confident that this would work.
Now, it wasn't long before Pugin became completely infatuated by medieval architecture,
particularly that of the great churches and cathedrals.
And eventually it led to his conversion to Roman Catholicism,
like so many other influential people in British life of that time.
Touring Britain, he'd admired the old church buildings,
but of course they'd all been taken over by the Anglican church at the time of the Reformation.
He wrote,
Then did I discover that the service I had been accustomed to attend and admire
was but a cold and heartless remnant of past glories
and that those prayers which in my ignorance I had ascribed to reforming piety
were in reality only scraps plucked from the Solomon perfect offices of the ancient church.
In other words, this Anglicanism was a degraded and debased remnant of a beautiful Catholic past which had been more magnificent.
One of the sad things about becoming a Roman Catholic, of course, for him and for many of his generation,
was that you had to worship usually in much worse buildings.
Since the Catholics had lost the buildings they'd once built, they now have to put together new ones.
And because a lot of the Catholic population was poor Irish immigrants, it tended to be rather humble.
Here's another characteristic bit from Pugin.
Everything glorious about the English churches is Catholic.
Everything debased and hideous, Protestant.
A fine old Catholic church used for Protestant services is indeed a melancholy site.
But scarcely less melancholy is it to see modern Catholics with their own hands
polluting and disfiguring by Pagin emblems and theatrical trumpery,
the glorious structures raised by their ancestors in the faith.
Since Christ himself hung abandoned and bleeding on the cross of Calvary,
never has so sad a spectacle been exhibited to the afflicted Christian
as is presented in many modern Catholic chapels,
where the adorable victim is offered up by the priests of God's church,
disguised in miserable dresses intended for sacred vestments
and surrounded by a scoffing auditory of Protestant site seekers.
In other words, not only is it tragic that the Protestants have got our churches,
ones which were originally ours, even our own are being disfigured and debased by non-Gothic styles.
Well, he was determined to devote his life to the recovery of Gothic splendor
and he did have the opportunity of designing and building many new Gothic-style churches
for the British Catholics so that still today many of the best of their churches are Pugin's designs.
His masterpiece is St. Giles's in the little town of Cedal in Staffordshire
and again, if you have the opportunity to go to Britain, this is one of the buildings you must visit.
One of the constant tensions in Pugin's career was that his patrons, usually impoverished Catholics,
didn't have as much money as he would have really needed to make the buildings as finished
and as accomplished as he would have liked. He was terribly touchy as well.
My hometown, Derby, he built the Catholic Church there, St Mary's, and he came along for the dedication ceremonies
but when he found that they were going to use 19th-century operatic music
instead of the Gregorian chant which he had ordered, he left in disgust.
He wouldn't even stay for the ceremonies, so he must have been a difficult person to deal with.
He was a critic of the shallow commercial modern world.
He thought capitalism was trashy and vulgar and rubbishy.
And in 1836 he wrote a book called Contrasts, which is mainly a series of illustrations now and then,
very much in favour of then. For example, he'll show a town as it was in the Middle Ages and as it is now.
The modern one is covered in smoke and soot and it's got grimy utilitarian buildings
and a horrible workhouse in the foreground where cold-hearted charity distributors are at work
as opposed to the beauty of the medieval Gothic building
where kind-hearted nuns and monks used to distribute charity, this kind of thing.
Well, he believed in the unity of function and design and he hated gratuitous decoration.
He argued that Gothic buildings were honest because when you look at a Gothic building,
you can see how the design is related to the structure.
He said, by contrast, Renaissance and Baroque buildings were dishonest.
That is, you couldn't tell by looking at them how the roof stayed up
and how the actual structures, the stresses were taken by the building itself.
It's a little bit reminiscent of some of Ruskin's remarks about honesty in art.
That's one of Pugin's great theories, honesty in architecture.
Well, the building which reconciled the massive British establishment to Gothic
was the Houses of Parliament.
The old Houses of Parliament burnt down in 1834 and the fire was regarded as a great tragedy.
Turner, later did a painting of the event, Pugin was in London and actually witnessed the fire
and huge crowds gathered to oo and ar as the old building fell.
This was a period, of course, where fires were very, very common.
There were naked flames everywhere.
Every house had its own fires for heating and cooking.
A lot of the lighting was from naked flames, either candles or oil lamps or gas jets.
So buildings burned down continuously.
It was far more common then than it is now.
Well, there was a debate among the members of parliament what they should do about replacing the old building.
King William IV, this was just before Victoria came to the throne,
King William IV offered Buckingham Palace, which was then nearing completion,
saying this could become the new parliamentary chamber.
The parliament responded to a press campaign by deciding that it would stay on the original site.
Westminster Abbey across the road had survived and one part of the old parliament buildings, Westminster Hall,
had also survived the great conflagration.
Advocates for going somewhere else said, alongside the banks of the Thames is very unhealthy.
This is the time where the Thames is, in fact, a flowing sewer.
It was a stinking and degraded area.
And they said, the area has got absolutist connotations.
This is the place where the bad old kings of England ruled.
Now, of course, this is happening just about the same, just after the great reform act of 1832.
And so a lot of symbolic interest was devoted to the question of where parliament should be
and what the building was going to look like.
Some writers said, now that we're going to rebuild parliament, let's use a classical design,
because now we're moving towards a condition that's more representative.
Let's have classical models, something like the Roman Senate, for example,
to indicate the triumph of liberty over absolute monarchy.
But gothic advocates like Pugin answered, no, no, because the classical styles are pagan styles,
whereas gothic is a Christian form of architecture.
Britain's a Christian country, albeit not quite right.
We must have a Christian style.
At the same time, incidentally, the United States Congress was being built.
And, of course, it was built on classical lines, just about the same time.
Well, the competition for a new parliament was won by Charles Barry.
And he worked on parliament really for the rest of his life.
The reconstruction began in 1837, according to Barry's designs.
He himself was a very pragmatic, adaptable kind of architect.
And if his patrons wanted classical style buildings, he'd do those as well.
Architectural historians refer to this period as the battle of the styles,
but some people, certainly including Barry himself, were willing to be on both sides of the battle.
Pugin had done a lot of the draftsmanship for Barry.
They'd collaborated on this design.
And so the actual building, and particularly the decoration of the new houses of parliament,
is heavily indebted to Pugin as well.
It was one of 97 entries and was the successful one.
And the general style employed by Barry and Pugin was based on the perpendicular.
That is one of the very last stages of British medieval design, comparable to the style used in King Henry VII's chapel
in Westminster Abbey just across the road there.
So it was Pugin who'd helped with the drawings and who then worked on things like the tiles, the gilding, the floor,
the metal fittings, the wallpaper, and many other elements of the decoration of parliament.
It was immensely expensive.
If you've been to parliament, you'll recall that it's an incredibly highly decorated building.
Again, made to look as though it was centuries older, but of course, because it's relatively more recent,
it's in a far better state of preservation than it would be if it was actually medieval.
Very costly, and the members of parliament grumbled perpetually over what seemed to them the staggering price of it all,
but nevertheless they paid up.
And I think we're right to do so because it was a terrifically popular building from the very beginning.
Certainly the general impression among the public was that it was an enormously imposing and impressive site
of which the nation as a whole could be proud.
The House of Lords was opened in 1847 and the House of Commons in 1850,
even though work continued right through into the 60s on various elements of the design.
The special towers, shaped like a spire, was a ventilation chimney, as with tighter salts factory.
They're very good at disguising functional elements in a decorative way.
The great bell, Big Ben, was cast in 1856, but cracked almost at once and had to be recast.
It was installed in 1858 and has been there ever since, ringing out the hours in London with its very distinctive note.
Prince Albert was the head of a committee charged with designing the interior.
And he decided, well his committee decided that heroic scenes from British history should be the theme of the paintings inside.
He was always having to allay suspicions that he was favouring the Germans over at the English,
and one of the rumors he had to quell was the claim that he was going to give the commissions to German artists.
In fact, the committee had to specify that the artists must be British,
or at least must have lived in Britain for 10 years, before they were eligible to get any of the commissions to do the artwork inside.
Prince Albert actually had built in the grounds of Buckingham Palace a little pavilion,
and inside the commissioned artists could experiment with fresco work,
and when they were confident they'd got it right, they could then go to the Houses of Parliament and paint the frescoes there on the walls.
While most of the painting inside is in fact scenes from British history,
tends to be a little bit sentimental,
scenes like the death of Lord Nelson on the HMS victory at the climactic moment of the Battle of Trafalgar.
There's a big painting of the Duke of Wellington meeting Blucher at the Battle of Waterloo just before this decisive victory against Napoleon and so on.
Well, in 1852, when he was only 40, Pugin died.
He was an incredible workaholic and really drove himself to death.
But by the time of his death, he did have the satisfaction of seeing that Gothic had caught on in Britain,
not only among the Catholic minority, but also more widely among the whole population,
best embodied in the fact that the new parliament rising around him was now a Gothic work.
And here's a little bit of his obituary from the London Times.
With all his crotchets and with an absurd attachment not merely to the spirit but to the letter of medievalism,
he has perhaps done more for architecture than any of those who run him down.
He it was who first exposed the shams and concealments of modern architecture
and contrasted it with the heartiness and sincerity of medieval work.
It was he who first showed us that our architecture offended not only against the laws of beauty,
but also against the laws of morality, a very characteristic Victorian flourish there,
that there's something potentially immoral about a certain style of building.
Obviously, architecture remains a controversial subject,
but it's not usually discussed in moral language in quite the same way as it was then.
Now, earlier I mentioned in passing John Ruskin, the art critic.
He was a very important person in the discussion and consideration of architecture as well.
He condemned Pugin, but he praised the Gothic style,
and he was one of the writers who in effect made Gothic style safe for the Protestants, for the Anglicans.
Ruskin's comment on Pugin's conversion to Roman Catholicism was this.
He was blown into a change of religion by the whine of an organ pipe
and stitched into a new creed by the gold threads on the priest's petticoats, very dismissive of Pugin.
One of Ruskin's masterpieces is his book, The Stones of Venice,
and this was the book which was studied very attentively by generations of British neo-Gothic architects.
It's a labour of lovers, a close study of the architecture of Venice
with lots and lots of accurate drawings by him of medieval elements in Venetian architecture.
But he was anti-Catholic, clearly, and therefore he has this paradox that he wants to praise Italian buildings
without praising the Italians particularly, and quite often passages in the book
have rather jarring juxtapositions of the lovely Italian buildings with the rather dreadful Italian people.
Here's his description of St. Mark's in Venice, surrounded by modern Italian children.
Unregarded children, every heavy glance of their young eyes full of desperation and stony depravity
and their throats hoarse with cursing, they gamble and fight and snarl and sleep hour after hour,
clashing their bruised Santissimi upon the marble ledges of the church porch.
And the images of Christ and his angels look down upon it continually.
So the wonderful church in the midst of all this Italian degradation.
One of the buildings with whose construction Ruskin was involved was the Oxford Museum of Science,
built in the 1850s with his collaboration.
And it blended the most modern architectural elements, iron tracery and glass roofing,
with a generally gothic design, so it's one of these odd mixtures of the old and the new.
Money was provided by the profits of the Oxford University Press,
which had mainly been made through the sale of Bibles that they printed.
And some of the Oxford professors, the Dons, most of whom had very little interest in science,
were shocked at the idea of using this money for a science museum.
One of them ridiculed it as, quote, a receptacle for dried insects.
Oxford has always been very slow in picking up on the sciences.
But Ruskin himself and Edward Pusey, one of the leaders of the Oxford movement who hadn't become a Catholic,
were influential in getting the designs accepted and in beginning the building in the 50s.
And it's still there, and again, a building you must go to see if you possibly have the opportunity.
A strange mixture of the old and the new.
It's got a very beautiful interior.
One of its great features is a balcony which runs all the way around inside, around the four sides.
And every one of the pillars which holds up the roof from the balcony
is made of a different kind of English stone.
And the stones correspond to the area of the balcony you're on.
So when you're on the south side, it's stone from the south of England.
When you're on the north side, it's stone from the north of England.
In other words, the exhibit is built into the structure itself.
Two Irish brothers, the O'Shea brothers, both with big red beards,
used to come every morning bearing specimens from the Oxford Botanical Gardens
of different flowers from various parts of Britain.
And they were stone masons, and they'd carve into the capitals of these pillars
the different flowers from the regions of Britain as well.
This is the element of building in the natural history into the building itself.
And the cast iron branches which hold up the roof are designed as branches and leaves of trees.
The crystal powers at the beginning of the 50s had set off a great vogue for glass roofs,
and this is coming in the immediate aftermath of the great exhibition.
And this is the building in which Huxley confronted Wilberforce
for the first great discussion between Christianity and Darwinism.
Now, the outstanding commercial success as a high Gothic revival architect
was Sir George Gilbert Scott.
He was an immensely successful man who made a great fortune as a designer.
He designed more than 500 churches, 39 cathedrals, 25 universities and college buildings,
and hundreds more commercial buildings, had hundreds of employees,
an enormous concern and became a millionaire.
Well, I think, and there are people who agree with me,
that the Midland Hotel which he built at St. Pancras Station in London is his masterpiece.
St. Pancras itself is a fascinating place.
As the railway companies developed, each one of them servicing a different area of the country
but all having a terminus in London.
They competed with one another for spectacular places.
Euston Station, for example, had a great Doric arch built,
and although the station behind the arch was rather humdrum,
nevertheless passing through the arch gave you the appearance,
it was like going through the Victory Arch or the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
Then you'd go to the station, it was a way of saying,
we're going through the gateway to the whole of the rest of the nation
by the magic of these railways.
While the Midland Railway was rather late in getting its terminus into London,
St. Pancras, it wasn't until the 60s that they did it,
and so they decided that they'd go all out to make a big impression.
The train shed, the area into which the train comes,
over it was built an immense glass and iron arch by a man called W. H. Barlow,
a 240 feet wide and unsupported glass arch is still there
and is just a ravishing place.
Made possible, of course, by advances in the technology.
The hotel onto which it abuts and which faces the streets is made of red brick,
but in a highly elaborate Gothic style.
It's in total contrast with the modern engine shed
and is lavishly ornate.
It has a clock tower to rival Big Ben itself.
Now at first, when a competition for the design of St. Pancras was proposed,
Scott was reluctant to participate,
but eventually was persuaded that as one of the most distinguished architects of the day,
his design was wanted.
So he drew the basic plans for it while he was on holiday at the seaside
and ignored the specifications that the railway company had laid down for the building itself.
He put in 250 bedrooms where 150 had been asked for.
He charged 100,000 pounds more than the next nearest competitor,
but nevertheless he won because of the sheer splendor of the design
and later on in a marvelous little glimpse at his own snobbery,
it is possibly too good for its purpose.
As a building so magnificent, it ought not to be a railway hotel.
Well, when it was finished, it was the most luxurious and the most expensive hotel in the whole of Britain
and it became a place to stay when you were in London.
It was also one of the very first buildings in Britain to make use of the elevator.
Elisha Otis, an American, had patented elevators at the beginning of the 60s
and it was a very important step obviously
until then, buildings couldn't really be more than about four or five floors high
because it would be so difficult to get to the top floors.
But the safety elevator was such an important breakthrough
that from then on greater height became feasible in all sorts of buildings.
Well, St. Pancras Hotel, like everything else, didn't go by unchallenged.
Many critics didn't like it.
Here's one of them, JT Emmett, writing in the early 70s when it was new.
The eye is constantly troubled and tormented
and the mechanical patterns follow one another with such rapidity and perseverance
that the mind becomes irritated where it ought to be gratified
and goaded to criticism where it ought to be led to calmly approve.
Ruskin himself was a little bit disappointed
at the way in which the insights of his own scholarship and his encouragement for Gothic
had actually been put to commercial and practical uses.
As with painting, so with architecture, he had the idea that it ought to be attached to moral purity
and was disappointed about the fact that some of the great enthusiasts for Gothic
were these railway men and these tough, no-nonsense cotton manufacturers.
Here's a quotation from him in Later Life.
The architecture we endeavored to introduce is inconsistent,
with the reckless luxury and the deforming mechanism and squalid misery of modern cities.
Sometimes behind an engine furnace or a railroad bank,
you may detect the pathetic discord of its momentary grace
and with great toil decipher its floral carving choked with soot.
In other words, it deserved better than to be attached to industrialization.
Well, the reputation of Victorian architecture, as with many other things,
had gone through a cycle in the last century.
By the middle of the 20th century, it was regarded as just awful.
Here's the historian GM Trevelyan writing in 1942.
These grandfathers and great-grandfathers of ours,
though they compassed sea and land to admire Roman aqueducts and Gothic cathedrals,
themselves produced deplorable buildings.
The most refined and educated classes are as bad as any.
The monstrosities of architecture erected by order of the dons of Oxford and Cambridge
in the days of William Butterfield and Alfred Waterhouse,
two others of the great Gothic revival architects,
give daily pain to posterity.
During the Second World War, Britain was very heavily bombed by the Germans.
And so at the end of the war, there was a lot of urban clearance.
Many Victorian buildings were lost directly in the bombing raids
or in the subsequent clearances.
And there was a lot of influential architectural opinion
favoring the idea of destroying these great Gothic monuments.
The great Euston arch itself was pulled down at the beginning of the 1960s,
despite the protest of a handful of people who still loved Victoriania.
But luckily by now, by the late 20th century,
there was a revival in admiration for Victorian building.
So St. Pancras, which itself for a while was threatened with demolition, has survived.
Certainly as a child, a great lover of trains as a kid,
I thought it was the most marvelous place I'd ever seen,
perhaps that along with the Houses of Parliament.
And so I'm delighted to be able to report to you
that it survived a generation of hostile critics
and is still there for you to behold today.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-832-2412. Thank you very much.
