These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Victorian Britain Part 3.
Chapter 25. Education.
The Victorians were the first British generation to consider providing universal education,
until then most people in Britain had been illiterate.
The growing complexity of industrial society, and the need for an orderly and skillful and
educated workforce, and the recognition that, as the franchise broadened, so did the need
to give at least some educations to the people who were going to vote.
All these things contributed to support, political support, for the idea of universal education,
although there was also an attempt throughout the period to do it as economically as possible.
In the early Victorian period, education was highly localized, and as in so many aspects
of British life, depending on exactly where you were, you'd find a different pattern prevailing.
So occasionally, there were areas where schooling was reasonably good, but often it was very
amateurish or completely absent.
In the countryside, there was an institution called the Dame School, and these gave rural
children some rudiments of reading and writing.
The standard method in a time when books were very expensive would be to pass around the
book from one child to the next, and have the child learn a passage, and then recite
it back to the teacher, and very often the teacher was just one of the older children,
usually one of the girls, who'd gone through the lessons a few years previously and was
now helping out.
It was common in the Dame School for children of several different ages all to be sitting
together.
So the schoolroom was often extremely noisy, as children are reciting, and as people of
many different ages are all under the nominal control of one hard-pressed teacher, the Dame
herself.
Now as in nearly all British schools in those days, education was enforced by beating with
a stick.
Although it wasn't always intimidating, here's a little passage from Great Expectations from
Charles Dickens.
He describes the school run by Mr. Wapsall's great aunt.
She collected her energies and made an indiscriminate totter at them with a birch rod.
After receiving this charge with every mark of derision, the pupils formed in line and
buzzingly passed a book from hand to hand.
The book had an alphabet in it, some figures and tables, and a little spelling, that is
to say, it had had ones.
As soon as this volume began to circulate, Mr. Wapsall's great aunt fell into a state
of coma, arising either from sleep or from a rheumatic paroxysm, and we have lots of
descriptions of Dame schools seeming to be very half-hearted places.
Well in 1870, in the first big administration of William Gladstone, the Liberal government,
introduced legislation for universal education.
The idea was, let's try to make sure that everybody gets educated up to the age of 13.
It took advantage of all the previously existing schools, some of which were run in the localities,
some were run by religious denominations, and so on.
But they tried to create an elementary apparatus for filling in the gaps.
One of the incentives was the fact that the Second Reform Act had passed through Parliament
in 1867, extending the vote to much of the urban working class.
And another was the perception, which is probably accurate, that in recent conflicts,
more educated peoples appeared to have had the advantage.
This is just after the American Civil War, of course, where the Union had prevailed,
and it was widely believed that the superior educational attainments of the Union was one
of the contributory factors.
It's also in the immediate aftermath of the Austro-Prussian War, and also the Franco-Prussian
War.
It took place in 1870.
And again, the idea was, the Germans' educational superiority had made them a more effective
fighting force.
The soldiers were more responsive, and so on.
Gladstone's minister who introduced this legislation was called W. E. Forster, and it's called the
Forster Act.
Here's one of his speeches in Parliament justifying the legislation.
Civilized communities are massing themselves together, each mass being measured by its
force.
And if we are to hold our position among the nations of the world, we must make up the
smallness of our numbers by increasing the intellectual force of the individual.
So a perception there that Britain, because its population is relatively smaller than
that of the USA and Germany, is particularly needful of this education.
Well, now that more men have the vote, there was a pressure to make sure that they were
educated up to the vote.
One of the most irritable of the Liberal members of the government, Robert Lowe, was very skeptical
about democracy, but he pointed out also, well, if we are going to have something approaching
a democratic system, we're going to have to educate the voters.
And there's one of his speeches.
It appears to me that before we had entrusted the masses, the great bulk of whom are uneducated,
with the whole power of this country, we should have taught them a little more how to use it.
And not having done so, this rash and abrupt measure having been forced upon them, the
only thing we can do is, as far as possible, to remedy the evil by the most universal measures
of education that can be devised.
I believe it will be absolutely necessary that you should prevail on our future masters
to learn their letters.
This is a common remark by the anti-democrats.
Oh, now the proletariat have become our masters.
Well, as I say, the government hoped to do it economically, and they certainly wanted
to preserve the principle of local autonomy as far as possible.
What made educational legislation so difficult was the conflicting ideas about what the religious
component of the curriculum should be.
Nearly everybody thinking about it thought that the religious component was central, and
the disagreement was exactly which church's views are going to prevail.
Will it be the views of the established Church of England, or what about the non-conformist
children, that is, the members of the many different non-Anglican Protestant groups?
Well, finally, another member of parliament called William Cooper Temple introduced an
amendment to the legislation saying that the curriculum should affirm Christianity or
should exclude anything which was denominationally specific.
What that meant in effect, actually, was that there was going to be a kind of generalized
Protestantism about the curriculum.
Now, in some areas, which had previously had a skeleton educational system, the children
had been expected, or their parents, to pay a small fee towards the upkeep of the schools.
And now, in the 70s, the situation developed that certain areas were requiring the children
to go to school, and requiring that they pay a little fee, and it was bitterly hated and
resented by the children themselves who didn't want to go to school in many cases, and also
by their parents who resented the fact, first, that their children were being taken out of
the labor force, and second, that they were forced not only to lose the income that the
kids otherwise would have earned, but also pay a little bit for the schools.
And this is the heroic age of the truant officer, where the truant officers are trying
to round up the kids and get them into school, and the kids, sometimes with the full connivance
of their parents, are doing everything they can to avoid it.
Well, further legislation in 1880 rectified this little anomaly, so from then on attendance
was compulsory, but it was also cost-free.
And in all the parishes where still no apparatus had been set up, school boards were established.
So from 1880, there's been more or less universal education in Britain from then to the present.
In 1902, just the year after Queen Victoria died, the Secondary Education Act created
universal secondary education up to the age of 15.
So there we are.
It isn't until the early 20th century that the principle of universal education into
the middle of the teens was established.
And even then, Britain's always tended to lag behind the United States, for example,
in its commitment to the education to a fairly high level of all its citizens.
Now, for the elite members of society, they would go to what are called in Britain the
public schools, although in America they'd be called private schools because they're
fee-paying schools.
The two most famous of them, and two of the most ancient, were Eaton and Harrow, and it's
astonishing if you look at the list of British prime ministers, just how many of them went
to one of those two schools.
The Duke of Wellington had claimed that the Battle of Waterloo back in 1815 had been one
on the playing fields of Eaton.
What he meant by that was that the tough schooling which young gentlemen were given there had
prepared them for their role as army officers and enabled them to prevail in the situation
of the battle itself.
Eaton, especially in the early 19th century, was a very hard school indeed.
A merciless discipline was enforced by the masters on the boys, but also by the older
boys on the younger ones.
They had a system called fagging, which really amounted to a kind of slavery in which the
younger boys were completely at the mercy of the older ones and could be bullied and
beaten by them without any redress at all.
And flogging played a very important role in the relations between teachers and students.
The headmaster of Eaton, John Keat, in much of the early 19th century, was a famous flogger
and he used to have public flogging ceremonies in which all the boys would be assembled
and there was a kind of, what's called the whipping block, a frame, which the boys would
be stretched on before they were beaten, and it became highly theatrical.
It was one of these great public ceremonial events, a little bit like the public executions
which also took place at that time.
Some of the boys deliberately screamed so loud when they were being beaten in an attempt
to upset the flogger.
One of them had a picture of the headmaster painted on his buttocks before the flogging
began, where there was a tradition at Eaton that when a new headmaster came in, the first
boy whom he flogged, he would then, the principal, would then have to give that boy a dozen bottles
of champagne and the birch rod itself.
So in other words, there's clearly all sorts of rituals surrounding it.
In 1838, a group of oldytonians, that is, young men who'd previously been students at
the school, broke in and stole the whipping block.
But it wasn't a humanitarian complaint, their leader was Lord Waterford and it was set up
in his house and then they used to do sadomasochistic theatricals in which they themselves would
take it in turns to play the part of the head and to play the part of themselves as young
men.
Well, in fact, flogging became an important part of the sexual underworld.
I mentioned earlier in the course the prostitutes in London.
And flogging played a very important role in the sexual fantasies of a lot of these
English men.
In France, it was known as the English vice and apparently there's a tradition even in
places like the parliamentary smoking rooms among the oldytonians and old herovians to
swap flogging stories from their earlier days.
Many of the other public schools, the boarding schools, were scandalously brutal and negligent.
There was one called Bose Hall in County Durham, this is up in the north of England, whose
principal was called William Shore.
And he was a great flogger as well, didn't feed the boys properly and did very little
to react to an epidemic which spread in the school which resulted in the blindness of
many of the boys there.
So sending your child off to school was a hair-raising proposition, which nevertheless
was widely adhered to in the upper classes.
Charles Dickens heard about this story and he made it the model, he made Bose Hall a
model for Do The Boys Hall in Nicholas Nicolby, which is another of his famous descriptions
of a cruel and arbitrary school.
The real principal was called William Shore and Dickens called him Wackford Squares and
was using the same initials.
Isn't this a lovely name, Wackford, for the principal?
And Nicholas Nicolby, the young hero of the book, goes to work there and is horrified
by the cruelty and the bad education.
And finally, one of the great climax of the early book is when Nicholas himself beats
up Wackford Squares before running away from the school and taking with him young smike
who's the persecuted jack of all trades there at the school.
Well in 1827 an important new development began in the public schools and this was when
Thomas Arnold became the new headmaster of Rugby School.
Wackford Squares was another of the rising public schools of the time.
Now he was an intensely devout Christian who wanted to help the boys conquer the evil
in their nature.
He wanted to turn them into good young Christian gentlemen, because you see the idea was very
widespread then, especially in the evangelical side of the Church of England, that we're
all born as sinners, we all inherit the taint of original sin and as children that sinfulness
tends to be unbridled and that the flogging was theoretically justified partly as a way
of beating the devil out of the boys.
In fact your education consisted of being domesticated and having the tempestuous passions
thrashed out of you.
So Thomas Arnold, the reformer at Rugby, was himself a flogger but not quite such a capricious
and brutal one as many of his contemporaries.
He did believe very seriously that earth was a testing ground in which you prepared for
heaven and that education was the first step along the way of preparing yourself for eternal
life.
He favored a much closer moral surveillance of the boys' lives.
If you look at many of the schools at that time, the teachers had left the boys largely
alone except when they had broken various of the rules.
But now Arnold starts to watch them more closely to try to make sure that they're devoting
their time not only to learning but also to dignified manly pursuits.
That was one of his favorite words, manliness.
He would expel boys who didn't try hard enough in other words who weren't academically good
enough or didn't have the right attitudes of solemnity because he wanted them to be a
good example to the younger ones.
He claimed that faith and steadiness were more important than academic achievement
but nevertheless he hoped to be able to get both.
But what's so striking about Arnold is that he himself thought that boys, this is all
boys' education, incidentally, he thought that boys were really horrible people.
Here's one of his typical quotation from him.
Boyhood is a state riotous, insolent and annoying to others like the gaiety of a drunken man.
He said that boys' high spiritedness was a spectacle of almost more morally distressing
than the shouts and gambles of a set of lunatics.
This is a very confrontational attitude towards childhood, you can see in all this.
Well Rugby did gradually develop into what was then regarded as a model of preparation
for a life of respectability and Christian gentlemanliness and a great tribute to Arnold
was written in the form of a novel, Tom Brown's School Days, which was published by Thomas
Hughes in 1857, he himself had been at Rugby and the book is a very, very thinly fictionalized
version of his own school days.
He himself thought that the school had been terrific and he admired very much the education
in young manliness that he'd been provided there.
As a young boy, when he first goes into the school, Tom Brown, the hero, is bullied by
a man, a student called Flashman, one of the older ones, who among other things holds him
against the fire to roast him a form of hazing, which was then very common.
But Tom Brown stands up to the bullying and gradually as he becomes older, he spreads
his own benevolent influence and a kinder regime among the other boys and at the end
of his school years is himself very widely loved and admired by the others.
The final scene in Tom Brown's School Days, it comes at the very end of his last year
in the school and there's a cricket match between the boys of the school and a local
team.
And although the Rugby boys lose, they lose in a very dignified and gentlemanly manner
and while Tom himself is waiting to go into bat, which in crickets sometimes can take
a long time, he goes off to have a long chat with his teacher of Greek and there's a feeling
there that he's accomplished a respectable new manliness.
Now it wasn't long before these schools became more and more preoccupied with sports and
against British sports were going through a transformation in the same period.
Cricket for example had once been a lawless and desperate game, but under the inspiration
of the new school masters, it also became an arena in which you could blend individual
excellence with team spirit and good sportsmanship above all and the schools were very enthusiastic
about emphasizing good sportsmanship.
By the late Victorian period, most of the schools placed far more emphasis on sports
than they did on academic rigour and we've got many memoirs which recall that your days
in school would be happy if you were good at sports and they'd be miserable if you were
bad at sports.
That's how important it was.
In CS Lewis's autobiography, Surprised by Joy, he was a public schoolboy just before
the First World War and he hated playing sports.
When he finally graduated from the school in 1915, I think, he went straight into the
trenches in the First World War and he talks about how much better it was being a young
officer in the trenches than it had been being a schoolboy because at least you weren't subjected
to cricket.
It was a very brilliant moment actually because obviously the trench warfare is a byword for
horror and Lewis says, oh no, it was a small price to pay by comparison with cricket.
By then, by the late Victorian period and the Edwardian period, these schools, the public
schools, were places where young men prepared to take up the white man's burden, that is
to become imperial officers in the army or in the navy or out in the colonial services
in India and Africa and so on.
You can gradually recognize the need for an improved higher educational system as well.
Right up into the 1850s, to go to Oxford or Cambridge, the two old universities, you had
to be a member of the Church of England, but that rule was relaxed in the 50s, making it
possible for members of the other Protestant denominations to go there as well.
In 1871, for the first time, it became possible for people who weren't members of the Church
of England to be dons as well, that is, professors.
They had been.
Oxford and Cambridge had been founded and had spent most of their time until then, chiefly
as seminaries for the training of clergymen.
In the 18th and early 19th century, most of the graduates of Oxford and Cambridge had
become clergymen in the Church of England and their curriculum had been mainly the classics
and theology.
But now increasingly, Oxford and Cambridge became places which were partly for the pursuit
of real scholarship and partly finishing schools for young gentlemen, to which they'd
go on after the private schools.
So there's a very sharp class divide within the Oxford and Cambridge colleges.
Between the scholars on the one hand, they tended to be impoverished, and the hearty sportsmen
like gentlemen on the other side.
There were a few outstanding teachers.
One of the most famous was the master of Balliol College Oxford, Benjamin Jowett, and he began
to actually seek out poor but brilliant young men, often from provincial schools, who he
knew otherwise would never have the opportunity for a rigorous education.
And it was he who perfected the tutorial system.
I was an undergraduate at Oxford and went through the tutorial system which had persisted
twice persistently right up to the present.
This is a system whereby a typical class consists of the student writing a paper and
going alone or possibly with one other student to the professor and having to read the paper
aloud and then have it rigorously criticized.
And the criticism really was rigorous.
I remember it very vividly.
This is largely one of the achievements of Jowett, this intense one-on-one encounter between
the student and the professor.
He wrote in the 1860s, at present, not a tenth or twentieth part of the ability of the country
comes to the university.
It is very important to provide a means of giving the best education to the best intelligence
in every class of society.
He was an educational elitist, Jowett, but he recognized that the educational elite
probably wasn't going to correspond very closely with the social elite and he was interested
in getting people from humbler social origins into the colleges.
Now he was one of the people who in the mid-nineteenth century, although he was himself a clergyman,
had become sympathetic to some of the new developments in biblical criticism, particularly
German historical criticism.
And the result of this was that although Jowett was very widely admired, he never got
preferment.
That is, he never did become a bishop.
He was quite happy about that.
Earlier in life he'd been a suitor to Florence Nightingale.
He'd hoped to be able to marry her, but she'd put him off along with everyone else.
But they maintained a correspondence later in life and he wrote to her saying how gladly,
how willing he was to reconcile himself to not being a bishop.
I'm not going to give up the gun life of Oxford so full of hope for the dead man's bones of
a cathedral town.
Well, of course, that might be an ex-postpacto rationalization, but I think it was sincere.
New universities were founded in the Victorian period in places like London and Birmingham
and they were relatively more sympathetic to scientific education than the very classics
oriented old universities.
The Scottish ones, Edinburgh and Glasgow, were far ahead of the English ones in scientific
education, but gradually the importance of scientific education edged its way into the
curriculum more widely.
Just I mentioned previously that Victorian women, a handful of them, were very eager
to become doctors, aspiring Victorian middle-class women were eager for higher education as well
and London University admitted women beginning in 1848.
The first women's colleges at Oxford and Cambridge were founded in the 60s, 68 in Oxford
and 69 in Cambridge, but there was such a lot of concern among doctors that women would
damage their health by overstimulating their minds.
This idea that women, especially women who were menstruating, were always on the brink
of hysteria, that there was a grave concern which the founders of the women's colleges
had to overcome in reassuring medical orthodoxy that the women weren't endangering themselves.
The women's colleges were built in the suburbs of Oxford and Cambridge, a little bit away
from the men's schools, and the women were very, very closely chaperoned to make sure
that in their social conduct and in their academic conduct they weren't endangering
themselves physically or morally.
They weren't allowed to get degrees, even that you could go as a woman to Oxford and
you could take comparable classes, but at the end of it what you didn't do was sit their
final exams and get the degree.
It wasn't until the 1920s that that reform came about so that women could also be recognized
as graduates of the university.
Now one popular alternative all the way through the Victorian period was homeschooling.
There was a great deal of it, and again especially in the upper classes, which could afford to
hire tutors for their children.
I'm going to now spend a moment describing the home education of one young man at the
beginning of the century, John Stuart Mill, and another young man at the end of the Victorian
period Bertrand Russell, both obviously extraordinarily brilliant people, who had very interesting home
education experiences.
Well first of all John Stuart Mill, he was educated at home by his father, beginning
at the age of three, and his father was incredibly enthusiastic about teaching his son to a very,
very high level.
The father was a philosopher, and he sat his son down when he was still really what we
call a toddler, and began teaching him in the most rigorous way, permitting his son
to interrupt as often as he wanted to ask questions, while writing books of his own.
Every day from the time that the boy was very, very young, they'd have a daily walk together,
and the son's job was to summarize his daily readings to his father.
He'd be given a daily assignment in reading history, and he'd have to summarize it to
his father, who'd then critique the skill and thoroughness of which he'd done the work.
And he says, the son says, in these frequent talks about the books I read, he used as
opportunity offered to give me explanations and ideas respecting civilization, government,
morality, and mental cultivation, which he required me afterwards to restate to him in
my own words, so he became very good at paraphrasing and summarizing.
And the work he did wasn't only in history and mathematics, it was also in the ancient
languages.
I quote, I have no remembrance of the time when I began to learn Greek, I've been told
it was when I was three.
After a course of vocables, I proceeded at once to translation, and I frankly remember
going through Esop's Fables, the first Greek book I read.
I learned no Latin until my eighth year.
It comes as a sort of concession, no Latin until I was eight.
But by that time I had read, under my father's tuition, a number of Greek prose authors,
among whom I remember the whole of Herodotus, Xenophon's Syrupedia, and the memorials of
Socrates, some of the lives of the philosophers by Diogenes Lertius,
part of Lucian and Isocrates.
I also read, in 1813, the first six dialogues of Plato.
So here he is, as he's a little boy, he's already becoming astonishingly learned in
Greek, and then going on to the Latin as well.
And he says, in his wonderful autobiography that he wrote, he says, he was astonished
to discover that there were little boys who didn't like Pope's versified translation
of the Iliad.
And he, knowing both the original and the translation, thought how masterful it was.
When he was eight and began learning Latin, he was also required to teach what he'd learn
to his younger brothers and sisters.
He was the oldest of nine children.
It was a part which I greatly disliked, the more so as I was held responsible for the
lessons of my pupils in almost as full a sense as for my own.
I, however, derived from this discipline the great advantage of learning more thoroughly
and retaining more lastingly the things which I was set to teach, perhaps to the practice
it afforded in explaining difficulties to others, may even at this age have been useful.
Well what's so wonderful about Mills' autobiography is that he says, I was always rather dull.
I was never particularly talented, of course in fact he's one of the great towering geniuses
of the Victorian period, but he says, my education proves that anybody can do this
kind of thing.
The result of the experiment shows the ease with which it may be done, and places in a
strong light the wretched waste of so many precious years as are commonly spent in acquiring
a modicum of Latin and Greek, commonly taught to school boys, a waste which has led so many
educational reformers to entertain the ill-judged proposal of discarding these languages altogether.
If I had been by nature extremely quick of apprehension, or had possessed a very accurate
and retentive memory, or were ever a remarkably active and energetic character, the trial
would not be conclusive, but in all these natural gifts, I'm rather below than above
par.
Well so he claims anyway, but he ends up in this passage by saying, so in fact I had
a 25 year start over most of my contemporaries, no wonder I was able to lead a life as a writer
and thinker.
His father was very careful to make sure that the son shouldn't become aware of his own
precocity, he didn't want the son to become vain of his own intellectual accomplishments,
and apparently managed in that respect.
Now here's Bertrand Russell, who was born in 1872, 60 years later than Mill.
He was educated first by his older brother, then by tutors, and finally at Cambridge University,
and again the first volume particularly of Russell's autobiography is a book that everybody
must read.
Here's a little passage from the first one.
They obtained from my brother, his parents, they obtained from my brother a tutor, D.A.
Spaulding of considerable scientific ability.
He was a Darwinian and was engaged in studying the instincts of chickens, which, the facilitators
studies, were allowed to work havoc in every room in the house, including the drawing room.
He himself was in an advanced state of consumption tuberculosis, and died not very long after
my father.
Apparently upon grounds of pure theory, my father and mother decided that although this
tutor ought to remain childless on account of the tuberculosis, it was unfair to expect
him to be celibate.
My mother therefore allowed him to live with her, though I know of no evidence that she'd
arrived at any pleasure from doing so.
This arrangement subsisted for a very short time, as it began after my birth, and I was
only two when my mother died.
My father, however, kept on the tutor after my mother's death, and when my father died,
it was found that he had left the tutor and Cobbden Sanderson, both atheists, to be guardians
of his two sons, whom he wished to protect from the evils of a religious upbringing.
Well, he can tell from all this that it's a very, very unconventional family indeed.
When he's seven, his brother begins to teach him mathematics, Euclid.
I began Euclid, which was one of the great events of my life, as dazzling as first love.
I had not imagined that there was anything so delicious in the world.
After I had learned the fifth proposition, my brother told me that it was generally considered
difficult, but I had found no difficulty whatever.
This was the first time it dawned on me that I might have some intelligence, and so on.
Anyway, it's a wonderful book.
Every sentence is packed with these lovely, ironic sides.
He describes how he then went on, first to a crammer, a school where you prepared for
the Cambridge entrance exams, and then he went to Cambridge itself, and keeps expecting
that he's going to meet the really intelligent people.
From my first moment at Cambridge, in spite of shyness, I was exceedingly sociable, and
I never found that my having been educated at home was any impediment.
For a long time, I suppose, that somewhere in the university, there were really clever
people whom I had not yet met, and whom I should have once recognized as my intellectual
superiors.
But during my second year, I discovered, as I already knew, all the cleverest people.
This was a disappointment to me, but at the same time gave me increased self-confidence,
and so on.
Well, there we are.
You can see that education in Britain was very, very uneven.
It was patchy and makeshift and a threadbare for the vast majority.
But for a handful of the most gifted and most intelligent, particularly once whose families
had the will, it could be accomplished to an extraordinarily high level, which is why
the intellectual attainments of some of the Victorians were so extremely high.
