Lecture 26 Trade Unions and the Labor Party
Victorian Britain, unlike America in the same period, never developed an ideology of social mobility,
this idea that you can rise from rags to riches or be born in a log cabin and rise to become president.
No, most working class people assumed that they would remain in the working class and that their children would as well.
But of course within their class position they were eager to create the most favorable possible circumstances for themselves,
improve payment, improve job security and safety and better working conditions.
And so to improve their bargaining position vis-à-vis their employers they joined trade unions
and trade unions are an enormously important part of British history from the Victorian period right up to the present.
Because it was the unions in turn which created first an organization called the TUC, the Trade Union Congress
and it created the Labor Party just at the very end of the Victorian period
which during the 20th century displaced the Liberal Party as one of the two great permanent coalitions in British political life.
And this lecture is devoted to the early part of that process.
Well in the early Victorian period unionization was hampered by a very hostile legal environment.
In 1799 Parliament had passed the Combination Acts.
These were laws outlawing the gathering together of working people to consider their common difficulties
from fear that it would have the same effect as the Jacobin meetings in France.
That is a revolution could take place in Britain as it had in France at the same time.
The only organizations workers were allowed to create in those days the early part of the Industrial Revolution were called Friendly Societies.
And a friendly society was a group of working men usually who were permitted to gather funds
against the possibility that one of them would be injured and be unable to work anymore
so that the fund would then be used to give some money to him or his family
and also money to pay for funerals and widow's pensions in the event of premature death.
The friendly societies often doubled our social clubs, drinking clubs, they very often met in the pubs.
Now in the early 19th century one of the sources of social unrest was Luddism
and the Luddites were machine breakers, people particularly handloom weavers
who believed that the mechanization of factory work was taking work out of their hands
and it was they were quite right in seeing this.
For example in the town of Nottingham in the English Midlands in 1812 through 14
the silk mills were periodically attacked by Luddites
smashing the machines so that the handloom weavers they hoped could continue their traditional way of life.
In 1824 when the great fear of a revolution had largely passed
the combination acts were repealed but even then the law against conspiracy remained very strict
and continued to present difficulties to men hoping to make a union.
In 1834 for example a group of Dorset sheer farm workers created a union
but in doing so were held to have violated the conspiracy acts
with the result that they were convicted and transported to Australia which was then still a prison colony.
They're remembered in labour history in Britain as the toll puddle martyrs that came from the village of toll puddle.
Well so in the 1830s unions still had a very unstable legal position.
So long as there were men's clubs catering principally to the men's entertainment and sociability
they were permitted to continue and they often had elaborate rituals,
special clothes, decorative banners, marching bands, other signs of dignity and pride.
They had a similar function then that the Freemasons had later
or the Elks or organizations of that kind.
It was a way of dressing up giving yourself an important title and enjoying a sense of being special
after a day of sometimes degrading and exhausting and very very dirty labour.
For example here's a description of the organization of the Nantwich Shoemakers in the 1830s.
I mentioned previously that every trade had its own patron saint and the Shoemaker's patron is Saint Crispin.
Here's one of the members.
After paying our entrance fees our society had about 40 pounds to spare
and not knowing what better to do with it we engaged Mr. Thomas Jones to paint for us a banner emblematical of our trade
with the motto, may the manufacturers of the Sons of Saint Crispin be trodden upon by all the world at a cost of 25 pounds.
We also purchased a full set of secret regalia, surpluses, trimmed aprons, etc.
and a crown and robes for Saint Crispin, that is the leader of the Union was Saint Crispin.
When the first nation wide trade union was founded in 1834, the Grand National Union,
some of its delegates were arrested for carrying quote,
two wooden axes, two large cutlasses, two masks and two white garments or robes,
a large figure of death with a dart and hourglass, a Bible and a testament.
Well in other words all this stuff, this is the mummery of theatrical dress up.
This isn't really hard trade unionism of the kind which became so familiar in Britain a bit later on.
This first union the Grand National failed because it was too difficult to coordinate nationwide
at a time when the railroad network hadn't yet been properly completed throughout the nation
and because it couldn't get legal protection.
What happened was that its treasurer ran away with the funds, having gathered all the funds he realized,
having control of a lot of money here and ran away and the Union found that it couldn't get legal protection under those circumstances.
So the effective unionization had to wait, nationwide unions had to wait until the railway network was more complete.
It wasn't really until the 50s that effective nationwide unions came into existence.
And when they did, it was the skilled craftsmen who created them.
This isn't surprising. After all, if a workman is unskilled or has a very, very low level of skill,
it's easy in the event of him and his fellows going on strike to be replaced.
But if the man is highly skilled and he and his colleagues go on strike,
the employer can't simply bring in another set of workmen straight away because they don't know the mysteries of the craft.
You have to learn it through a long apprenticeship.
So of course, the more skillful the workmen are, the stronger position they're in to be able to create a union.
Similarly, the unions are always in the strongest position during boom times, economic boom times.
If they go on strike then, the employer is very much aware of what a lot of potential sales he's losing
and is much more likely to make concessions to them.
If they go on strike during a slump, they're easier to replace because there's a lot more unemployment
and the employer is relatively more willing to accept temporary losses.
And of course, usually there's an enormous disparity in the economic condition of the workers and the bosses.
The workers are right on the brink of famine. They desperately need wages from week to week.
But of course, in terms of their own protection, it's often in recessions that unions are most necessary.
So they were aware of constantly being at the mercy of the business cycle itself,
always making conditions more difficult for them.
Well, the most skilled workmen have the name in England of the aristocracy of labor,
the people who tended to have the most reliable work and which tended to be the most highly paid.
And it's no wonder that this should be the group which makes effective nationwide trade unions first.
In the 50s, there was a group called the junta.
And these were the leaders of unions of carpenters, engineers, iron founders, the London bricklayers,
and the ladies' shoemakers, all skillful trades whose members couldn't readily be displaced in the event of an industrial dispute.
Now, unlike the friendly societies, the leaders of this generation, the junta, so-called,
were themselves great believers in sobriety and Victorian family values.
They didn't want to meet in the pub.
They wanted to meet in a place where they were going to be sober and to debate in a decent way.
They wanted to be able to get into a position where their wives wouldn't have to work,
where their wives could stay at home and make a working man's home something a little bit more like
a Victorian lady's home where she could nurture the home values.
In other words, they were socially very conservative in some ways.
They wanted the decency and the respectability which they could see that their employer's class already enjoyed.
They didn't object to the capitalist system as such.
They just wanted a better share of its proceeds.
So when the Cardiff branch of the Carpenters Union got together in 1867, they had a banner which portrayed friendship
between the employer and the owner.
The banner depicted the boss and the laborer shaking hands with one another.
And they made steady headway because their employers recognized the importance of conciliating this vital branch
of their own working men.
They would still sometimes go on strike, but when they did, they were very careful to make sure that the strike was
conducted in a peaceful and orderly way.
They wanted to allay all suspicions that they were turbulent or potentially revolutionary.
Strikes usually succeeded when the community sympathized with the working men.
In other words, if they had a broad community support in the locality, they were likely to succeed
because an employer who tried to bring in what were called black legs, that is, strike breakers from outside,
would find that they were subject to bitter persecution within the community.
Listen to this description of a Welsh coal miner's strike.
A visiting journalist went to witness the scene and he writes,
There was a curious element of religion in the strike on the side of the men.
Many of the local preachers were its most active supporters.
The prayers for its success were offered up at the chapels.
And it was no uncommon thing for a wayside crowd to join in supplicating the assistance of heaven
and to request that the men who were brought in from a distance to work in the colliery,
the black legs, as they call them, might be injured.
In other words, the minister is leading the men in a prayer that the black legs will be horribly maimed
by cave-ins in the mine and so on.
Now in 1866, an event which is remembered in history as the Sheffield Outrangers took place.
Sheffield is the cutlery town where knives and forks and steel instruments are made.
And the cutler's union was unable to get all the local cutlery workers to join the union.
Of course, a union is strong when everybody belongs.
It relies on the solidarity of its members.
And the fact that some of the cutlers wouldn't join meant the union was in a relatively weaker position.
So this is a case where the union was intimidating non-members to join
and intimidating them in a very violent way.
In a couple of cases, non-members had tins of gunpowder drop down their chimneys
which exploded and blew up the houses and there were some deaths associated with it.
Of course, an event like that gives trade unionism a very bad name indeed
and the junta, the respectable unions themselves were horrified
and joined in the appeal for a royal commission of inquiry into the condition of trade unions.
In 1868, the trade union Congress, the TUC, was created
and this was in response to a legal decision in the case called Hornby vs. Close
which again found that the union was not protected by law
if the treasurer of the union ran away with the funds
in other words, it wasn't recognized as a corporate entity
which had the usual legal protections of any other corporation.
The first meeting of the TUC in Manchester brought together 34 delegates
representing about 120,000 workers.
So at first it was a small organization but it grew very, very rapidly in the ensuing years
so that six years later in 1874, 169 delegates showed up
representing more than a million members.
It was an obvious benefit to getting together and discussing common interests,
exchanging stories, becoming familiar with each other's techniques and so on.
The royal commission which had been appointed after the Schaafield outrage
wrote a report which was surprisingly sympathetic to the unions themselves
even though no members of the TUC sat on the commission
because the report stipulated that with the exception of Schaafield
union violence was becoming rarer rather than common
by comparison with the days of the Luddites
and the chaotic early days of workers' organization
things were now much more peaceful
and the report actually quoted earlier reports on industrial unrest from 1824 and 1838
which showed that bosses had been assaulted,
machines had been broken, bottles of acid and vitriol had been thrown and so on.
And the royal commission report concluded
strong unions make strikes less likely rather than more so
as they discipline the man.
In other words, ironically, the employers might themselves benefit
from the existence of a strong respectable union.
The legal situation continued to improve for the union.
In 1871 and 1875 parliament passed laws
granting full legal protection to unions
so that a case like Hornby v. Close couldn't recur,
in other words they'd have recourse against a thieving treasurer
and legislation to guarantee peaceful picketing.
Picketing is another very important part of a union's life.
If the men go on strike, they need to be able to have representatives
outside the workplace explaining their cause to passersby,
trying to prevent strike breakers from coming into the factory
or at least notifying them of the fact that there's an objection
and spreading publicity for their side of the dispute.
If picketing was forbidden, which it had been,
the employer's side of the story would always tend to predominate
especially among other parts of the middle class
so it's a vital component of a union's favorable publicity.
Now it's significant, I think, that these legal reforms
took place in the early 70s because this is just after
a large part of the industrial working class had gained the vote
in the legislation of 1867, the Second Reform Act.
Suddenly, both parties, the Liberals and the Conservatives, realize
we've got a big working class constituency.
We've got to try to find ways to persuade them to vote for us.
So the first of these laws is passed in 1871
under the Gladstone administration, a Liberal government,
and the second of them by the Israeli government,
a Conservative administration.
Both parties recognized the majority of the population is working class.
We've got to find a way to make them vote for us
and therefore we've got to reassure them by our actions
that it's a logical thing to do, that we're sympathetic to their interests.
1875, the 1875 Act witnessed the abolition
of the master and servant law.
This was a law which gave a great legal advantage to an employer
because it said that if a man broke his contract,
he could be criminally liable.
In other words, the employer could sue him for breach of contract,
not just as a civil action but as a criminal one.
And of course that meant that any man going on strike
was potentially criminally liable.
These criminal penalties were abolished by the 1875 law.
Well, until then, the unionization had gone forward
mainly among skilled workmen for reasons I've explained.
In the 1880s, however,
unionization of the unskilled workforce began to spread as well.
And this is remembered by historians as the new unionism.
In 1888, for example, the match girls went on strike.
These were the women who worked in terrible conditions
and suffered a very high incidence of phosphorus poisoning.
I mentioned this disease they would get, a Fosse jaw.
Annie Besant, who was a philanthropist,
helped to organize the match girls
and they came out on strike and succeeded.
A wave of public sympathy through careful publicity measures
enabled a lot of the middle class public to recognize
that they were working in horrific conditions
and deserved better treatment than they were actually enjoying.
The next year in 1889, there was a successful strike
of the dockyard workers in East London,
led by two men called John Burns and Tom Mann.
Now, the great slogan of this strike was the docker's tenor.
A tenor was the nickname of an old English sixpony piece
and the claim was they wanted to be paid sixpence per hour
for their work on the dockyards.
And once again, it was a strike which succeeded
because of very clever public relations.
The most decent and orderly and respectable
of the workers' representatives went into the west end of London.
They worked in the east end, which is a slum and industrial area.
They went into the west end where the gentry lived
and began to publicize their callers through speeches and fundraising.
And they got a lot of sympathetic support.
Cardinal Manning, the ex-Anglican who had become a Catholic archbishop,
joined in on their side,
partly because a lot of Irishmen were involved in the dockyards.
And their success in achieving this goal of the docker's tenor,
a successful resolution of the strike in their favor,
inspired unskilled workers throughout Britain
to begin attempting to create unions of their own.
People like the gas workers, the carters,
and even the domestic servants, who in many ways were the most isolated
because each one tended to work separated from his or her fellows.
So a total membership of unions rose from about 600,000 in 1886
to one and a half million in 1890,
a very rapid rise over the next four years.
In the 1890s, the TUC became convinced that direct political action was necessary.
Some of them, including the followers of Karl Marx,
who'd been living in England,
believed that the trade unions were going to be the spearhead
of the revolutionization of the proletariat.
In other words, at first they'd come together for particular interests,
but gradually they'd recognized that collectively they represented
a massive majority of the nation
and that they were in a morally superior position
that by joining together they could overthrow the exploitative capitalist system
and introduce an ideal socialist society.
Now, looking at the actual situation of the unions in 1890,
that must have been a very difficult hope to sustain,
because like all organizations, the unions tended to be very particularistic.
The men in each different branch of the work tended to be jealous of their own privileges.
There were leadership squabbles and contests within each union.
There were many ranks of hierarchy within a union and certainly within a trade.
For example, in the railways, the train drivers regarded themselves as better than the firemen
and they regarded themselves as better than the guards
and better again than the plate layers and so on.
It's very, very fractured.
So they certainly didn't look like a proletarian mass
about to rise up and overthrow capitalism.
Marx himself died in 1883,
but here's his friend Engels, who was still alive in 1890,
very annoyed by the particularism of English unionists.
He writes in a letter to another of his German socialist friends,
in a country with such an old political and labour movement,
there's always a tremendous heap of traditionally inherited rubbish,
which has to be got rid of by degrees.
There are the prejudices of the skilled unions,
the engineers, bricklayers, carpenters and joiners,
the type compositors, etc.,
which all have to be broken down,
the petty jealousies of the particular trades,
which become intensified in the hands and heads of the leaders
to the point of direct hostility and underhand struggle.
There are the mutually conflicting ambitions and intrigues of the leaders.
In short, there is friction galore.
Anyone who looks only at the surface
would say it was all confusion and personal quarrels,
but under the surface the movement is going on,
is embracing ever wider sections
and mostly just among the hitherto stagnant lower strata.
The day is no longer far off
when this mass will suddenly find itself,
when it will dawn upon it
that it is itself this colossal mass in motion
and when that day comes,
short work will be made of all the rascality and wrangling.
Well, there we are. That's the triumph of hope over experience.
Angels continuing to hope that suddenly they'll realise
that Marxists had this idea of the sudden transformation of quantity into quality
as more and more of them got together.
Suddenly they'd realise we are a revolutionary spearhead.
Of course, it was in England that they thought the revolution was going to happen.
They would have been astonished to hear about it happening in Russia,
which they thought was hopelessly backward.
The idea of Marxist was
it's in the most advanced industrial nations,
Britain, Germany and America,
that the revolution will come first.
Britain above all was the place on which they pinned their hopes.
Now, the Marxists weren't widely influential in Britain,
although they did have a scattering of admirers.
The Social Democratic Federation was led by a man called H. M. Hindman.
And ironically, he was a gentleman.
He was a cricket player and a stockbroker
and used to go to socialist meetings in a top hat.
There were two outward signs.
He didn't belong to this group at all.
He admired Marx very much whom he'd met,
but Marx didn't like him.
I thought of him as a dilettante, a pretend revolutionary.
A member of his group briefly was the Countess of Warwick,
one of the wealthiest women in Britain,
who became fascinated with the submerged suffering of the working class people.
She was also one of Prince Edward's lovers.
I mean, she was all over the place in various times in Victorian history.
A lot of militant trade unionists passed through the Social Democratic Federation
and in doing so began to get a glimmering of socialist ideas,
which could perhaps be put to revolutionary use.
One of their famous early members was George Bernard Shaw,
the great playwright.
He describes how he went to one of their meetings when he was a very young man
and spoke up on behalf of an American social theorist called Henry George,
whose book he'd just read.
Henry George believed that a universal tax on land
was the most legitimate form of revenue-raising
because the owners of the land had done nothing to deserve it.
In other words, it was a way of taxing the parasites on society
and Shaw was impressed by his argument.
He writes,
Much as admired in England as a historian and as a social, as an economic theorist,
but certainly not really as the advocate of a revolution which was about to happen,
far more important in the development of an English socialist tradition
were Thomas Carlisle and John Ruskin and William Morris,
or socialists of a kind,
but particularly passionate critics of the injustices generated by capitalism.
Here's another remark from Shaw.
Socialism wins its disciples by presenting civilization as a popular melodrama
or a pilgrim's progress through suffering, trial,
and combat against the powers of evil to the bar of poetic justice with paradise beyond.
I think that's a very shrewd and insightful comment.
The atheistic and rather sterile scientific socialism of the Marxists
never had that kind of emotional purchase on people.
Gradual socialism was also more popular than the revolutionary brand
and gradual socialism, this idea that now that the working class had the votes,
it could be introduced progressively by legislation.
The capitalism could be legislated out of existence.
That had a wider following.
An organization called the Fabian Society represented this point of view.
It's named after the Roman general Fabius,
who eventually beat Hannibal, the great Carthaginian general.
And the fact that it's named after, it's got a classical name,
again shows that it had a large middle class component among its founders.
Fabius was famous for waiting for the right moment to strike.
And the Fabians have the same idea.
We're socialists, but we're not going to rush into any intemperate revolutionary activity.
We're going to wait for the right moment, gather information,
make sure that we know we've got the facts straight before we do anything rash.
They belong to an organization called the Second International,
which was subscribed to you by a lot of the European socialists.
This idea that it doesn't have to be revolutionary.
It can be done peacefully.
Now, the very first working class men to go into parliament
went in as members of the Liberal Party.
Of the two parties, it looked to them like the more sympathetic of the two.
And they're called the Lib Labs, that is, Labour men, but under a Liberal auspices.
Gladstone had supported extending the votes to working men
and was widely admired among many trade unionists at the time.
It seemed wise to a lot of the trade unions not to devote too much time to political organizing
because it's so slow and so expensive and because politics is the art of compromise,
that if they devoted an enormous resources to parliamentary work,
the outcome might still be slight.
Well, the early Lib Labs didn't achieve very much.
One thing that's important to remember is how intimidating parliament must have been
this beautiful place surrounded by the aristocracy and the gentry.
A man who spent his early life in the mines would tend to feel terribly socially intimidated.
And they were. It was a very powerful force inhibiting them from taking a strong line
and an independent line on behalf of working class interests.
So it wasn't until 1892 when Keir Hardy went into parliament
that a strong independent Labour presence first appeared there.
And Keir Hardy is a fascinating person.
He was an illegitimate Scottish coal miner raised in grinding poverty
and in the mines from the age of eight.
He'd been taught to read at night and early on had become a temperance advocate
and then a miner's union leader.
He became convinced that the workers must have an independent political representation.
So long as they were dependent on the goodwill of the Liberals,
they were never going to get very far because the Liberals was the party of most of the employers as well.
In 1888, in the county of Lanarkshire, one of the Scottish constituencies,
he stood for a parliamentary seat.
The Liberal candidate was afraid that he was going to win,
or at least that he might split the vote so that the Conservative candidate would win.
And the Liberals offered to buy him off.
They said, if you agree to abandon your attempts to get this seat in parliament,
we'll give you an annual income of £300 and give you a safe Liberal seat elsewhere.
Anyway, he was a spellbinding speaker whom they were afraid was going to win.
Well, many of his contemporaries would have accepted an offer like that,
which in effect would have enriched him straight away, but Keir Hardy contemptuously refused it.
He lost that election, but the next time he ran for parliament in 1892,
he won in a London constituency this time, West Ham.
And when he arrived for the opening of parliament,
he arrived in a completely different way than any MP previously.
He was in a horse-drawn wagon.
He wasn't wearing morning dress, which was the usual attire of MPs,
but instead a tweed suit and cloth cap, the Sunday best of an ordinary coal miner.
And there was a trumpeter on the wagon.
So in effect, a working-class procession arrives at parliament to declare,
here we are, here's something new in parliament itself.
Labour people were delighted.
Conservatives were horrified.
They saw it as an affront to the dignity of parliament itself.
Keir Hardy presided over the founding of the Independent Labour Party in 1893.
And during the 90s, there was a debate among the trade unions
whether they should put their full weight behind the ILP.
At first, most of them were reluctant to do so, for the same reason,
it's expensive and it tends to be very slow.
It's a distraction from their main interest in improved wages and conditions.
But in the 90s, employers became afraid
that union power was becoming increasingly threatening.
And they began to lobby very hard to get legislation sympathetic to employers
and restrictive of the union's power as the unions became more and more influential.
So in 1900, the TUC, the Trade Unions, created the Labour Representation Committee.
This was an organisation dedicated to running candidates for parliament,
independent of the Labour Party.
In fact, it was the founding of, sorry, independent of the Liberals.
This was, in effect, the founding of the Labour Party itself.
But the unions were still half-hearted about it.
They weren't sure that they wanted to devote so many of their resources to parliament.
The whole thing completely changed with the Taff Vale case of 1901.
This was a lawsuit in which the employees of the railroad went on strike
against the Taff Vale Railway in South Wales.
The employers sued them, claiming that they should be held responsible
for the losses of revenue that the railway had incurred during the strike.
And the court found in their favour.
Now, from a union's point of view, that was a catastrophic finding, of course,
because it meant that any strike would be followed by litigation,
which would ruin the union, would bankrupt it completely.
It had a mesmeric effect on the TUC,
which at once began to devote enormous resources to its Labour Representation Committee,
which it then renamed the Labour Party.
Well, in the general election of 1906, which was the next election after the Taff Vale case,
it won 54 seats.
It very rapidly grew.
And in each subsequent election, its power increased.
So that it was able to become a major participant in national politics.
It was only with Labour votes that the government of 1906,
a Liberal government, could stay in power.
And the price of Labour support was the Trade Disputes Act.
That is legislation to guarantee that unions were exempt from litigation of the kind
which had eventuated in the Taff Vale verdict.
From then on, Labour very, very rapidly grew in importance,
so that by the 1920s, it had completely displaced the Liberal Party.
So the period from 1900 through 1920 is one of great internal turbulence in British politics,
as one major party is displaced by the other.
The 20th century itself saw a long and, in many ways, anguished history for the Labour Party,
because it continued to have a little bit of a dual identity.
It could never be quite sure whether or not it was dedicated to idealistic socialism or not.
Certainly, many of its influential members were socialists.
But many others said, in the meantime, we've got to find ways to act responsibly within the system,
not least because we're suddenly in command of a great worldwide empire.
The anguish of the Labour Party wasn't really solved until the 1990s,
when under Tony Blair's leadership, it finally and emphatically abandoned its long socialist heritage.
