Lecture 28, Gladstone and Disraeli, 1865 to 81.
William Gladstone and Benjamin Disraeli were the two towering political leaders of
near and late Victorian Britain. Both prime ministers, both larger-than-life figures,
whose brilliant abilities enabled them to adjust the nation to its rapidly changing economic,
imperial, and democratic character. There were rivals throughout most of their careers,
and they gave to British liberalism in the case of Gladstone and British conservatism
in the case of Disraeli, the characters which influenced them permanently.
Well, first of all, Gladstone was born in 1809. He embodied many of the great Victorian characteristics.
He was the son of an immensely wealthy businessman. His father was a Liverpool merchant
who's made his fortune first in the West Indies slave trade and then in the sugar business.
The son himself, not going into the business, which was so common in this generation,
went instead first to Eaton, the great school, and then to Oxford University,
where he scored a double first, the best possible degree you could get in both mathematics and classics.
And he then made a very advantageous marriage into the Whig aristocracy,
which gave him great political advantages. So he was politically well placed, very rich, and very gifted.
His wife, Catherine Glyn, came from the biggest landowning family in the county of Flint in Wales.
And she was also very good at keeping him under control. She said, for example,
that when his speechmaking became too wordy, she said once,
Oh, William dear, if you weren't such a great man, you would be a terrible bore.
Must have been valuable to have a restraint like that upon him sometimes.
Well, it was quite common by the Victorian period for rich businessmen to be in Parliament,
but few of them had the same social gloss and confidence that he had because of his upbringing and connections.
He was a very polished performer and enormously self-confident.
But he was also a devoutly religious man. His first book, for example,
it's hard to imagine a politician writing a book like this these days.
It was a three volume study of Homer in which he attempted to prove that the Greek poet had foreseen the doctrine of the Holy Trinity.
Like many of his contemporaries, he detested Roman Catholicism, which he regarded as a form of heresy and also a threat to Britain.
He was friends with Henry Manning, one of his college friends had been Henry Manning.
And when in 1850, 51, Manning converted to Roman Catholicism as part of the Oxford movement, he was absolutely horrified.
And he wrote, he felt as though he'd learned that his mother had been murdered.
An interesting metaphor there for the description of the horror he had that his friend Manning should have gone over to Rome.
He believed very strongly in how right it was to have an official state church.
But he eventually realized that in many ways he was going to have to abandon this belief, not in the sense that the state church was going to be demolished,
but that it was becoming increasingly intolerable to be given civil benefits because of membership in the church.
He wrote a book on it called The State in its Relations with the Church.
But then in 1868 he was forced to admit that he wrote, quote,
When I became aware that there was no party, no section of a party, no individual person probably in the House of Commons,
it was prepared to act upon it.
I found myself the last man on a sinking ship.
He was a puritanical moralist as well.
And as I mentioned earlier, he tried to rescue prostitutes from the London streets.
He'd accost them and try to persuade them to turn away from this life and to get back into the decent, respectable mainstream of society.
Sometimes they'd even go to live on his estates in North Wales at Howarden.
There were endless affairs that he was a sexual hypocrite and that in fact he was having affairs with some of these women.
But there's no actual documentation.
He himself always denied it very sternly.
And I mentioned previously that on the days when he felt himself to be sexually tempted by the fallen women,
he'd flog himself.
He'd draw a little whip in the corner of the page of his diary.
And he'd draw the whip also if he'd lost his temper in public.
So he tried to police himself very rigorously.
He was an expert on efficiency and economy, two of the great Victorian virtues.
And he loved the details of political life, particularly as it related to money.
He became the Chancellor of the Exchequer between 1852 and 55 and again between 59 and 66.
And the annual budget speech which the Chancellor of the Exchequer gives,
he turned it from being a rather dull and insignificant part of the annual political round into one of the great annual events,
which it remains right up to the present.
In fact, the briefcase which he used in 1853 to carry his budget speech from Downing Street to Parliament
is still used every year.
When the Chancellor has got his budget speech ready, it goes into Gladstone's briefcase
and it's still carried back and forth to the House of Commons today.
His budget speeches were often four hours long.
They were big performances.
And he designed them not simply to be an account of how the money was being spent,
but really as reports on the progress of the nation as a whole as organized around its economic activity.
He was very keen indeed on balancing the budget and in eliminating unnecessary expenditure.
He was a great believer in political probity and in trying to annihilate bribery from the British political system.
Clearly during the 19th century political bribery became increasingly uncommon.
So in all these ways he was very successful.
And it was he who established the principle which remains that the Chancellor of the Exchequer
is the second most important person in the party then in power beneath the Prime Minister.
Well, in his early life he was a Tory, a member of the Conservative Party.
But in 1846 during the great crisis over the repeal of the Corn Laws,
when Peel violated the principles of many of his own followers,
Gladstone became a Peelite.
That is, he agreed that Peel was right to abolish the Corn Laws
and therefore joined this faction, one of the factions of the fragmenting Conservative Party.
As a free trade Tory his political evolution continued until in the 60s
he emerged as one of the principal figures in the new alliance around the Liberal Party.
In 1859 various factions, the Peelites, the Old Wig aristocracy
and a group of the radical manufacturers, the Laysay Fair people,
met together in a place called Willis's Rooms on Palmao.
And they agreed to act together in Parliament despite the fact that they were made up of a rather abnormal hotchpotch of different groups.
A dedication to religious freedom, free trade, but also the Old Wig aristocracy.
And this party, the Liberal Party of which he became the leader in the mid-60s,
exercised a tighter control over their members of Parliament than had previously been the case.
You can really see modern parties taking shape partly under him with the Liberals
and also with the Tories under Disraeli.
It's normal isn't it? You often read in biographies that as somebody gets older,
especially somebody in political life, they get progressively more conservative.
He had just the opposite experience.
He became progressively more radical as he grew older.
So from being a stern, unbending Tory in his youth, by the end of his life
he was horrifying many of his followers by the daring of some of his political ideas.
Especially in the matter of Ireland, which we'll see next time.
And of course his whole life was paradoxical.
He was a stern Anglican, but he gathered behind him all the forces of non-conformity.
That is the non-Anglican Protestant groups.
Now Disraeli, just a few years older than Glaston, he'd been born in 1804.
And whereas Glaston was in many ways the classic insider,
Disraeli comes as a classic outsider whose rise to power completely violates
all the expectations of the Victorian stereotype.
He was Jewish.
And although he became a nominal Anglican, he never showed any real interest in religion at all.
His father, who was himself a minor writer, converted the family to Anglicanism in 1817
when Benjamin was about 13 years old.
He had a great love of Jewish antiquity, the idea of a continuous tradition
stretching back for thousands of years.
And he blended his love of Jewish antiquity with his admiration for the aristocratic continuity
of Britain, which could be traced back at least into the Middle Ages.
He risked the wrath of his Tory fellows in 1848 when he voted in favour of Jewish emancipation.
That is the right of Jews to sit in the houses of parliament.
Repeatedly, bills of this kind were rejected.
Finally, in 1858, the principle was conceded.
Disraeli pointed out Christianity is itself a derivation from Judaism.
So the really conservative position is to be pro-Jewish, a nice paradox which he made the most of.
After 1858, a Jewish member could come into parliament and instead of taking the old oath,
which was, I swear to uphold the duties of a member, upon the true faith of a Christian,
instead he could simply say, so help me God.
Disraeli had a classic misspent youth.
He encouraged large debts and he indulged in notorious love affairs without being secretive about them.
He didn't go to public school.
He didn't go to university.
He didn't have a profession.
He didn't make a politically advantageous marriage.
I mean, when you look at the characteristics of a successful politician in the Victorian period,
all the things which most of them did, he didn't do.
He wasn't a landowner, not until his mid-40s when he'd already become one of the most senior Tories,
not until then did some of his aristocratic friends help him to buy an estate called Hewenden in Buckinghamshire,
so that he could then at least play the part of a country gentleman
and win that much more of the trust of the country gentleman whom he led in parliament.
Well, I say he didn't have a career.
What he did do as a young man was write a set of novels and some of them were quite successful.
In many of them also, he took very seriously the scandalous fact
that in a nation rapidly becoming richer, some of its people were still desperately poor
and some of the most evocative descriptions of early Victorian poverty can be found in Israelis' novels.
Here's another little bit from Sibyl, which I've quoted to you before,
a moving passage on the sufferings of an abandoned child in one of the industrial cities
and the state's reluctance to take proper care of an orphan of this type.
At two years of age, his mother being lost sight of, he was sent out into the streets to play
in order to be run over, but this nameless one would not disappear.
They gave him no food.
He foraged for himself and shared with the dogs the garbage of the streets,
but still he lived stunted and pale.
He defied even the fatal fever which was the only inhabitant of his cellar that never quitted it.
All the children gradually sickened except himself.
And one night, when he returned home, he found everyone dead.
The child before this had slept on the same bed of straw with a corpse
that then there were also breathing beings for his companions,
and night passed only with corpses seemed to him in itself a kind of death.
Well, they were lurid, melodramatic like so much of his work,
but nevertheless showing a real compassion for the suffering that many people had to endure.
It was a brilliant parliamentary debater, a very, very effective political manager,
and a great speech maker.
I mentioned earlier that Gladstone's tendency to be wordy.
The Israeli called him,
a sophistical retribution inebriated with the exuberance of his own verbosity.
Kind of impromptu phrases like that with one of all resonance in their own right.
Well, briefly, in the early 40s, he and Gladstone were together in the Tory ranks,
but he'd been denied office by Robert Peale,
and he retaliated against Peale in 1846 by not following the Pealites
as they split the Conservative Party over the question of the Corn Laws.
He became one of the leaders of the Tory protectionists,
that is, those who protested against this repeal.
But in the late 40s, as the Tories were out of power,
he witnessed the gradual dismantling of more and more of the protectionist legislation,
as Britain did, in fact, become a free trade community.
He was always pragmatic enough to shift with the wind
and recognize that protection was a lost cause
and that he, in turn, was going to have eventually to adapt.
He first went into office.
That is, first became a minister in the government of 1852,
when very, very briefly the Tories were in power.
It was an unstable government because it didn't have a parliamentary majority.
The Prime Minister was Lord Derby,
who was the Conservative leader in the House of Lords.
And this government is remembered as the Who-Who government.
Why? Well, because when the names of the ministers were read out in Parliament,
the old Duke of Wellington, who by then was very deaf,
the name would say, Who?
And then somebody else is there, Who?
They were obscure figures, most of whom hadn't been heard of.
So, of course, the wigs said, Oh, this is the Who-Who government.
And he also became Chancellor of the Exchequer.
So his first sparring with Gladstone took place over budget questions.
Well, as I say, each of them contributed to the democratization of Britain
and the creation of modern political parties.
In the mid-60s, there were growing demonstrations
for a widening of the franchise
for an extension of the votes to working people.
Gladstone was very impressed by the hard work and sobriety
shown by much of the working class.
And he believed that its enfranchisement, giving it the vote,
would not be politically destabilizing.
He spoke so ardently on behalf of this point of view
that in 1865, he lost his seat.
He was the representative for Oxford University at that point
because the members of the University Corporation
were against the idea of democracy.
He got into Parliament through another constituency
and supported what became the Second Reform Act in 1866 and 67.
At this point, the Prime Minister was Lord John Russell in the Lords,
but he was the Liberal leader in the House of Commons.
But this first legislation was defeated
by a combination of moderate Liberals and Conservatives.
Israeli became Prime Minister for the first time in 1867.
And a mark of his ability to shift with the wind
was the fact that he then passed a more radical Second Reform Act
than Gladstone himself attempted.
So Gladstone was the one who initially got the impetus going.
And Israeli was pragmatic enough to say,
well, this isn't something I would have instigated.
But now there's such an enormous amount of popular enthusiasm for it,
I must carry it through and make sure that it's done in such a way
that our side can get the maximum of political advantage out of it.
So ironically, it's under Israeli's leadership
that the franchise was extended, the very opposite of what you might expect.
Then the job came to make sure that the Conservative Party got working-class votes.
And so something which again is characteristic right up to the present
began flattering the voters.
Every democracy has to go through this.
And he says in a speech,
the 1867 Act was founded on a confidence
that the great body of the people of this country were Conservative.
When I say Conservative, I use the word in its purest and loftiest sense.
I mean that the people of England and especially the working-classes of England
are proud of belonging to a great country
and wish to maintain its greatness.
Well, in other words, he was banking on the fact that
you could persuade working-class people to vote Conservative.
The long run certainly bears him out
from then on, right through the rest of the 19th century
and also the 20th,
regularly Conservative governments did get into office
because a lot of working-class people had voted for them.
Of course, this is one of the things which enraged the labour movement,
especially after 1900 when it was trying to gather working-class support
behind its own candidates.
Although sometimes it could do so,
it was never able to get a lock on the working-class vote in England.
The tradition of social deference is so strong in Britain
that many working-class people taking the view that
we've all got our own station in life
and it's appropriate for us to support our betters
continued to vote Tory.
Well, he lost the next election, the election of 1868,
so in the short run his gamble had clearly failed,
although in the long run it was going to succeed.
And he spent the next years
building up a party organisation throughout the whole of the British provinces
under the general guidance of what's now called by historians
Tory democracy, this idea that Toryism, conservatism, can be linked to democracy.
He had a very skillful political agent called Sir John Ghorst
and it was Ghorst who recommended things like
setting up an annual Conservative Party conference.
The first annual Tory party conference took place in 1867
and it's gone on ever since.
The parliamentary MPs go usually to an English seaside town
and local party workers from each of the constituencies go to this conference.
It's a party and it gives them the opportunity to meet the great Tory lords
and have a sense of rubbing shoulders with greatness.
In other words, it's a public relations device within the party
and there they review their own policies and so on.
You may remember that Mrs. Thatcher was once involved in an IRA bombing
at a hotel in Brighton.
This was one of these seaside towns
and it took place during the annual Tory party conference
when all the important members of the party were together in the same place.
Well, the winner of the election of 1868 was Gladstone
and he continued this process of democratisation.
It was this government which in 1872 introduced the secret ballot
so that from then on you could vote without anyone knowing who you'd voted for
and that had an enormous effect on reducing the amount of bribery and intimidation
which took place in elections.
Previously very common, subsequently much scarcer.
Here's an editorial from The Times in 1880, the next election after that
and The Times says, a general election is fairly quiet now
but there was a time that within living memories
when it was a thing to wake the sleeping and recall the departed.
A convulsion of nature could hardly have made more stir.
Civil wars had kept more within bounds
and dynasties had succeeded one another more quietly.
All that was violent suddenly came to the front.
All that was rank covered the surface.
All that was outrageous filled the air.
So these turbulent corrupted political meetings
which had previously marked every election day,
were no longer now they became a very orderly matter
of going to the ballot box and secretly putting in your vote.
It was Gladstone's government which introduced compulsory education
for the first time and so on.
I'm sorry, I said the election of 1880 was the next election, wasn't it?
It was the next but one because in 74 it was the Israelis' conservatives
who returned to power.
When Israel became Prime Minister in 74
and Gladstone was the defeated leader, the defeated Prime Minister,
he said he was going to resign.
He said I want an interval between Parliament and the grave.
Actually he was still going to be Prime Minister in 1893
so he was anticipating his own demise at least 18 years prematurely.
He didn't actually die until 1898.
But while he was in his period of retirement
he was devoting himself once again to religious study and writing.
It was in this government, the conservative government of the mid-70s
that Israeli also continued to advance social legislation
trying to woo a working class electorate.
The government became very interested in sanitary reform
for reasons I've described previously.
And the Israeli joked that the biblical passage
vanitas, vanitatum omnia vanitas, vanity of vanities
really should read sanitas, sanitatum omnia sanitas.
In other words, it's all about improving sanitation.
He himself was irritated by this kind of thing.
He felt it was a little bit tedious
but nevertheless he understood the political importance of it
and therefore would pursue it.
He says the first consideration of a minister should be the health of the people.
So pure air, pure water, the inspection of unhealthy habitations,
the adulteration of food, these and many kindred matters
may legitimately be dealt with by the legislature.
And so it was this government, the Israeli government
which passes the Public Health Act of 1875
under the Sale of Food and Drugs Act
designed to introduce basic pure water, drinking water supplies,
drainage, decent food and so forth.
Things which are so elementary
but which Urban Dwellers had not been enjoying until then.
And this was the government
which improved the legal situation of the trade unions
by ensuring that they would have access to peaceful picketing
and wouldn't be vulnerable for prosecution
in violation of the master and servant law.
The point to remember about the Israelis
was that they believed in social equality.
He wasn't really an idealistic Democrat
but he was a very realistic politician
who could always adapt pragmatically to new circumstances
and make the best of a situation
which he wouldn't have chosen left to his own devices.
Now it was in the late 70s
that the two leaders' foreign policy ideas clashed.
Israeli, as you'd expect from what I've already said,
was guided almost entirely by matters of the national interest.
He was a real politic.
He wasn't interested in moral flights
so much as in strategic advantage.
It appeared patriotic to his admirers
but of course it looked Machiavellian
and rather sinister to his detractors.
He made Queen Victoria the Empress of India.
She was absolutely delighted
because more and more of her European relatives
were becoming emperors of Russia and Germany and so on.
And in 1875 he was able to make Britain
one of the largest owners of the Suez Canal.
The Suez Canal had been completed in 1869,
work undertaken by a French company
but of course it was a vital routeway
for British ships to get to India
much quicker than going around the Cape of Good Hope
and because you're mainly in the protected Mediterranean
and Red Sea less stormy, less dangerous.
Well he discovered that the Khadive of Egypt,
that is the Turkish military governor of Egypt,
was bankrupt and was able to get hold of the shares
that the Khadive owned by borrowing
four million pounds from the Rothschild family,
another big European Jewish family
with whom he was connected.
Queen Victoria was absolutely delighted to hear
that we'd now become part owners of the canal.
She gave him a title, made him the Earl of Beaconsfield
and made a great fuss of him.
And he called her the Fairy.
Well she might possibly have deserved the title
when she was an 18 year old beginner
but perhaps not by the 70s.
Anyway she described him as
the firm and wise head that rules the government
and who is my great support and comfort.
His health and life are of immense value to me
and the country and the country
and should on no account be risked.
By contrast she didn't like Gladstone at all.
Disraeli was careful to make it sound as though
he really was taking her advice.
Sometimes she'd sow an idea in her head.
She'd then elaborate on the idea.
Then he'd say such a good idea Your Majesty.
I think that's the way in which we should act.
Gladstone tended to pontificate to the Queen
with a resentment against it.
Now one of Disraeli's techniques
was the development of what's called jingoism.
That is enthusiastic patriotism.
He manipulated the idea of the British Empire
to whip up enthusiasm among ordinary citizens
who had no direct material gain to be made
except one of feeling proud of their own country.
And there was a crisis in Eastern Europe
in the late 70s
where he deployed this very effectively.
He deployed it against the Russians.
They'd invaded part of the Balkans
that is South Eastern Europe
and threatened once again to dominate Eastern Europe
just as they had done at the time
of the Crimean War Crisis 20 years previously.
The threat was that Russia would overwhelm
the sickly Turkish Empire.
Well now the Russians said
no no we've invaded this area
so that we can protect the Bulgarian Christians
who've been attacked by the Turks
who asked true that the Turkish army
had committed a series of atrocities
killing Bulgarian Christians.
So the question was
on whose side should British diplomatic weight be thrown?
The Russians as the protectors of the Christians
or the Turks as the preservers
of the balance of power in the Eastern Mediterranean.
In Disraeli's view it was necessary to support the Turks
and he got the backing of the Queen
and of course of his own party.
He said it's absolutely necessary to fight if necessary
told the cabinet we must preserve the absolute necessity
of showing a bold and united front to the enemy
in the country as well as outside of it.
The issue is not one of upholding Turkey
or of upholding Russia
but British supremacy in the world.
Of course also by then he said
if we let the Russians become the dominant force
in the Eastern Mediterranean
the Suez Canal will be threatened again.
Let's make sure that doesn't happen.
The British army was mobilized
called from India to the Eastern Mediterranean
and a British fleet went to the Dardanelles
the crossing into the Black Sea
led by an English warship with the very suitable title
HMS Devastation
who wouldn't be frightened by the arrival of such a ship.
Meanwhile there's a music hall song
supporting this belligerent foreign policy
whose chorus went like this
we don't want to fight
but by jingo if we do
we've got the men, we've got the ships
we've got the money too
we've got the jingle
that the word jingoism was derived
unreflective patriotism.
Well in the event it didn't come to a war
because the leader
of the newly unified Germany Bismarck
called together the senior heads of state
from all over Europe
to arrange a pacification
and a settlement of the issue
the Congress of Berlin
and Disraeli went there
and it was a great diplomatic success for him
Britain certainly came out of the
meeting with nearly everything it wanted
particularly a restriction on Russian power
and with the addition of Cyprus
as a new naval base for British power
in the eastern Mediterranean.
The British ambassador in Berlin
at the time wrote
the impression which Lord Beaconsfield
made was extraordinarily great
and it was impossible to overrate
the extreme ability
with which he conducted much of the Congress's business.
The other representatives
were evidently afraid of him
and of all the
marked men assembled there
no one was regarded with so much curiosity
or treated with so much deference.
Well, Disraeli comes back
covered in glory from this Congress
the idea is economically
and through diplomatic superiority
Britain's got everything it wanted
and the Russians have once again retreated
from their attempts to profit from the breakup
of the Turkish Empire.
The Queen greeted him back
very enthusiastically and awarded him
one of the highest awards that you can be given.
Now while this has been going on
Gladstone was horrified
he certainly thought that in this crisis
the real scandal
was the Turkish atrocities
against the Bulgarian Christians
and he wrote a book about it in 1876
it was a pamphlet but a book length pamphlet
horrified by these
these Turkish attacks.
He was much more willing
to think of the Russians
as being the protectors of the Bulgarian Christians
and his point of view
at first had popular support
but he wasn't able to match
Disraeli in the manipulation of public opinion.
But when the next election came up
in 1880 he was resolved to go back
directly into political life
and this time he chose his constituency
Midlothian that is
the city of Edinburgh in effect
and he made in Edinburgh
a very brilliant and stirring set of political
speeches which are remembered as the Midlothian campaign
demonstrating that his party too
the Liberals were capable
of putting on a great democratic show
again part of what's become
the regular routine of political life
he was a spellbinding orator
even though by now he was in his 70s
and one of his audience
in Midlothian listened to one of his speeches
and this is a man called W.L. Watson
he says
Surrendering myself to the prevalent sentiment
it seemed to me as if someone had touched the stops
of a mysterious organ
that touched us through and through
two more sentences from Gladstone
and we were fairly launched upon a sea of passion
in that torrent of emotion
the petty politics of the hour
figured us huge first principles
and the opinions of the people
became as edicts of eternity
all through a long speech
of torturous sentences
he endowed us with a faculty of apprehension
we did not know we possessed
we leapt to our feet
and cheered a frantic mass
of humanity
roared themselves hoarse for a full two minutes
others who heard him during the Midlothian campaign
agreed he's a magnetic orator
he's capable of
luring us into his way of looking at things
this is a great age of political oratory
obviously it's just a few years after Abraham Lincoln
and about the time that William Jennings
Brian is coming onto the scene in America
so in both countries there's no
microphones to enlarge their voices
they've got to be big stage
presences and Gladstone certainly
was one of them
so he too is organizing his party on a mass
democratic level just as
disraeli had done
well he returns to the prime ministership
in triumph in 1880 the Tory party loses
partly because of economic hard times
and partly because of the success of the Midlothian campaign
Gladstone returning to office hoped to be able
to apply Christian moral principles
to foreign policy
although in practice he found it very very difficult to do so
because he was inheriting a situation
too complicated to allow the kind of
moral simplicities
which as an opposition leader he'd claimed
to favor
well disraeli died the next year in 1881
only a year after leaving the
premiership he'd had time to make some more
speeches against Gladstone in parliament
and he'd had time to write the first nine chapters
of a novel called Falconet
one of his characters is a kind of
cruel lampoon of Gladstone
to write up to the very last minute of his life
he's still hacking and hewing away
anyway the two of them there are
we don't have to choose between them
we can take the best of each of them
there's certainly a study in dramatic contrasts
but both of them vital figures
in converting British political life
from a relatively elite activity
to a relatively mass one
and taking in all the instabilities
which do tend to come with
a transformation of that type
now sooner had disraeli died
then the next Tory party the Lord Salisbury
began to use the memory of disraeli
as a loyalty building device
among ordinary conservative voters
