Lecture 29, Ireland and Home Rule
As the British political system became more democratic, and especially after the introduction
of the secret ballot in 1872, Ireland began to elect Catholic members of Parliament, most
of whom belonged to the Home Rule Party.
Irish poverty was increasing again in the late 1870s in an unfavorable world trade climate.
By 1880, Irish tenant farmers were being evicted in large numbers once again.
A charismatic leader called Charles Stuart Parnell became their champion.
He won the support of Ireland's farmers and the support of the Home Rule members of Parliament
and the support of many Irish Americans in the New World.
With this extensive base of power, he was able to organize boycotts of Irish landlords
and to disrupt the everyday running of the British parliamentary system in Westminster,
trying to force the British political system to concede the principle of Home Rule for Ireland.
In 1885 and 1886, the whole British political system was convulsed by the first Home Rule
crisis, and to the astonishment of many of his friends and enemies, Gladstone, the Liberal
Prime Minister, came out in favour of Home Rule.
The legislation failed, however, it couldn't get a majority in either house, and it had
the effect of beginning to break up the Liberal Party, because important sections of it, the
Liberal Unionists, believe that the Union of Britain and Ireland, were so important
that it was an issue over which they had to break ranks within the party.
Meanwhile, the Conservatives, through their support behind Union, and particularly gave
their support to the Ulster Protestants.
Parnell carried on the struggle, but at the end of that decade, the end of the 1880s,
which he magnetized, he was ruined in a divorced scandal.
Well, after the Irish famine of the 1840s, most of Ireland remained very poor and met
most of the people bitterly anti-English, because of the widespread perception that
England had done far too little to alleviate the crisis of the 40s.
It was still very rural, and its population was constantly falling.
Emigrations to America particularly remained very common.
And Irishmen who had gone to live in America and Canada and Australia, often kept alive
a highly emotional sense of their Irishness, simultaneously a sentimental veneration of
Ireland and a bitter anger about their memory of English persecution.
An organization called the Phenians developed, and it picked up the theme of revolutionary
nationalism.
It was a lot of sentimental nationalism in the 19th century, among the Poles and the
Hungarians, and certainly among the Irish.
In America, the Phenians, in some places, it was a kind of social club, very mild and
moderate.
But in other areas, it actually took on the serious planning of revolutionary activities.
It was very, very good at generating publicity for the Irish cause.
When members were arrested, they'd make striking oratory in the courtroom.
They published manifestos.
One of the limits on the Phenians was that they were infiltrated very early on by British
informers, so the British government usually had a fairly good idea of what was going on.
Probably their most striking act was the, it took place in May of 1866, when a group
of the American Phenians invaded Canada.
They crossed over the border from Vermont into Canada, in the hope of sparking uprisings
among Irish people in the New World and back in Ireland itself, striking a blow for Irish
freedom.
800, a little army of 800 men crossed the border, and they skirmished with a group of Canadian
student volunteers.
The result was that eight of the Phenians were killed.
They killed about 12 of the Canadians before having to withdraw.
The big uprisings they'd anticipated didn't take place, and the American government then
disarmed them and deported the leaders back to Ireland.
There were Phenian uprisings in Dublin and in the town of Chester in the north of England
as well.
Well, they were, all these risings were defeated, and the ringleaders were arrested and put
in prison.
But a remnant of the Phenians, usually going by the name of the IRB, the Irish Republican
Brotherhood, lived on, and although they were numerically very small, their influence persisted
through the later decades of the 19th century.
Blaston became Prime Minister in 1868, a belief that his destiny was to resolve the Irish question,
the inability of the British political system to deal adequately with Ireland.
Because you know, he was a profoundly committed Anglican, but nevertheless, he presided over
legislation in 1869 to disestablish the Irish church.
The Irish church was a Protestant church, in there only about one sixth of the Irish
people belonged to it.
He recognized that that was one of the grating annoyances that the Irish people had to endure,
and therefore arranged that it would no longer be an establishment, it would become a voluntary
church instead.
Opponent conservatives, particularly in Parliament, were horrified by this.
They didn't like the idea of the separation of the church from the state, and they said
this was an augury of the breakup of British control.
A historian called Robert Key says this, disestablishment of the Irish Protestant church, though marginal
to the Irish people's welfare, was the first measure the Union Parliament had passed solely
because the majority of the Irish people wanted it.
It was indeed, in a sense, the beginning of the end.
Well, nevertheless, although it was the removal of a festering grievance, that alone was not
enough.
And in the 1870s, especially after 72, with the secret ballot, the Home Rule Party began
to develop.
Its members of Parliament were nearly all Catholics, although ironically their first
leader, Isaac Butt, was himself a Protestant.
And in the election of 1874, when Disraeli replaced Gladstone, they won 59 members of
Parliament.
That meant from then on they were going to be an effective presence in the House of
Commons.
The agricultural depression of the late 1870s led to worsening conditions on the Irish land.
What directly affected most of the Irish people was agricultural conditions.
Most of the landlords were themselves in debt, and regarded the steady payment of their
tenants' rents as vital to their own solvency, but increasingly the peasant tenants were
unable to pay.
This was largely because it was in the 1870s that the American Great Plains were opened
up.
The first American Transcontinental Railroad was completed in 1869, and vast areas, the
whole of really the central one-third of the American nation, became increasingly accessible
through railroads to large-scale wheat growing, particularly.
That meant the imports of food from America were coming into Europe, creating an abundance
on the market and driving the price down.
So anyone who was trying to make his living by selling farm produce in Britain was finding
a steady fall in the price of food.
It's good for people who have to buy food, but it's bad for people who produce it because
they can't get so much for it.
So it's becoming harder and harder for Irish farmers to make ends meet and to meet their
landlords' rent demands.
An organization was created called the Land League, which was committed to trying to get
fair rents and also security of tenure so that the Irish peasant wasn't constantly in danger
of eviction from his land.
It was formed originally by a man called Michael Davit, who himself had been a former
Finian conspirator.
He'd been in Dartmoor, one of the British jails, for his part in the Chester Uprising.
Came out on parole and once went to Ireland and began organizing poor tenant farmers
into the Land League.
And it wasn't long before he'd won the sympathetic interest of Parnell, and Parnell became the
inspirational leader of the Land League.
Gladstone himself, incidentally, admitted the need for further agricultural reforms,
and particularly for the opportunity for Irish farmers to feel secure in the land they
formed.
Well, let's look now at Parnell himself.
He became the leader of the Home Rule Party in Parliament in 1880, having first been elected
to Parliament back in 75.
And the fact that he was in control of both the Land League and the Home Rule Party gave
him a very powerful base on both sides of the Irish Sea.
Now, he's a very ironic figure because he also was a Protestant, even though he was
an Irish nationalist.
He came from one of the landowning families of what was called the Ascendancy, that is
the Anglo-Protestant Landowning Minority.
He owned a bigger state in County Wicklow.
He'd been educated at Cambridge in England, and his accent was English.
To hear him speak, he sounded English rather than Irish.
He loved cricket.
In many ways, a very eccentric figure to become the charismatic leader of an Irish nationalist
party.
He didn't even like the color green.
In fact, he was very superstitious about green.
His mother was American, and her father had been one of the American sea captains in the
War of 1812, whose ships had preyed upon the English.
So there was in the family a tradition of standing up to the English in a military way.
Well, historian James Morris described some of Parnell's eccentricities.
There was said to be madness in his father's family, and all his life Parnell was the slave
of eccentric fancies and taboos.
He hated the color green.
He blamed the greenness of a floor carpet when he had a sore throat.
He was afraid of October, of Fridays, of three candles, and thought that cobwebs were a good
treatment for cuts.
Moody, silent, an animal lover, a devoted reader of Alice in Wonderland, who found nothing
in it to make him smile, nobody who met him in his prime ever forgot his presence.
Some found him evil, some thought him a kind of saint, none seemed quite able to isolate
his fascination.
It was like a spell.
Well, the Home Rule Party was made up of a central organization which paid its members.
It enabled relatively poor people to sit in Parliament for the different Irish constituencies.
What they tried to do in the late 70s and early 80s was to prevent any other legislation
from getting through the British Parliament at all unless they'd got guarantees of quid
pro quo from Gladstone's government.
In other words, they're constantly pushing the Gladstone government towards Home Rule.
They're specialized in filibusters, and on one occasion they filibustered for 41 hours
the longest session in the history of the Houses of Parliament, trying to make it impossible
for any other business to be done until their own demands were met.
Britain came to them from Irishmen in exile in America, and Parnell himself made an oratorical
tour of America in 1880, where spell-binding speeches generated a lot more money for the
cause back in Ireland itself.
Because he was a Protestant, nominally, and because he wasn't really a very religious
person at all, a lot of the Catholics at first, the Catholic hierarchy, were suspicious of
him, but he was able to allay their doubts by insisting that Catholic education ought
to prevail in Irish schools.
Religion was always the sticking point on education, and he was able to win Catholic
support by his reassurance that he agreed that's how it ought to be done.
Well the fact of the secret ballot, and then the further fact that in 1884 the vote was
extended to most rural working people, were reforms which could have been tailor made
for the progress and success of the Home Rule party that made it progressively easier for
this party to be strongly represented.
And Parnell was a folk hero on the land among ordinary farmers because of his outspoken
opposition to evictions.
The period from 1879 to 1881 is remembered in Irish history as the years of the land
war, and there was something very close to warfare going on.
In 1880 alone there were 10,000 evictions for non-payment of rent, but very often the
evicted tenant farmers and their friends retaliated, sometimes by beating the evicting landlord
or his agents.
And it was Parnell who introduced the principle of the boycott, a boycott now is a word we're
probably all familiar with, of refusing to have anything to do with a certain person
or a business.
He was an actual farmer called Captain Boycott, he was a County Mayo land agent, and because
he was involved in evictions, Parnell said from now on we're going to have absolutely
nothing to do with Boycott at all.
Now Boycott was himself a farmer who needed to have his crops harvested, but he couldn't
find out he couldn't employ anybody to do it, and so his crops are standing there in
the fields.
Finally, it was only by importing 50 Ulster Protestants to his estate that he was able
to get the crops harvested, and they had to be protected by 7,000 British troops.
In other words, he became the focus of an enormous rural, it wasn't uprising, but it
was a boycott there, and he's the man from whose name the activity comes.
He became a kind of local non-person, and his name came into the language to mean somebody
who's completely ostracised.
Well by early 81, large areas of the Irish countryside were virtually ungovernable from
Britain.
Parnell himself was an extremely gifted politician, he was always flirting with illegality, and
he was certainly aware that a lot of intimidation was going on, but he didn't want to inquire
too closely into that.
Meanwhile, he was insisting, I'm just following constitutional procedures.
Well in 1881, Gladstone, despite his sympathy for the Irish farmer's situation, recognised
that until law and order was restored, no kind of proper reforms could go forwards, and
so he presided over the passage of a coercion act, which enabled him to have Parnell arrested
and imprisoned without a formal court case being held.
In the hope that without their leader, rural crime and disorder in Ireland would diminish.
For being imprisoned for Parnell had the same kind of effect then that he'd had for Martin
Luther King in America a hundred years later, he was interpreted as a martyr, and his sufferings
in jail, even though it wasn't a particularly strenuous imprisonment, intensified other
people's loyalty to him.
Rural crime increased rather than diminishing, and while he and the other leaders were in
prison and kill mined in jail, the ladies' land league took over.
This is women who were associated with the members.
Parnell's own sister Frances was one of them, and she was one of the people who gave a political
education to a generation of women who later on were going to play a big role in the nationalist
cause, and we're really one of her poems.
O by the God who made us all, the senior and the serf, rise up and swear this day to hold
your own green Irish turf.
Rise up and plant your feet like men, where now you crawl as slaves, and make your harvest
fields your camps, or make of them your graves.
Three hundred years your crops have sprung by murdered corpses fed.
Your butchered sons, your famished sires, the ghastly compost spread.
Their bones have fertilized your fields, their blood has fallen like rain.
They died that you might eat and live.
God, have they died in vain?
Well, lots of that sort of thing, stirring, invoking the memory of the ancestors to make
sure that never again do these kinds of catastrophes happen to Ireland.
Well, in Kilmine and Jail, Parnell was comfortably placed and had plenty of books and visitors,
and he realized that he was making steady political gains from being in prison.
It wasn't long before, through some intermediaries, he and Gladstone, the prime minister, were
negotiating.
See, he was aware that Gladstone was latently sympathetic to his point of view, but what
he also wanted to do was to make sure he didn't make too many concessions to Gladstone from
fear of losing the support which stood beside him, behind him, in Ireland itself and in
the Home Rule Party.
And finally, he and Gladstone negotiated what's come to be called the Kilmine and Treaty,
not in the sense that it was ever a written treaty, but it was really, in effect, a deal.
Gladstone agreed to release Parnell and the other Home Rule leaders.
And in return, and to offer increased security of tenure to poor farmers, with the promise
that Parnell would help to pacify Ireland, which is in a state of something approaching
rebellion.
Well, a lot of members of Parliament, both within Gladstone's own Liberal Party and
certainly within the Conservative opposition, were horrified at what looked to them like
Gladstone giving in to illegal pressure.
It looked like caving in under threats of force, and this began to open up splits within
the Liberal Party's ranks.
The man who was the British Secretary for Ireland, Forster, resigned in protest.
He was so horrified by this move.
Gladstone sent to become the new Chief Secretary for Ireland a man named Lord Frederick Cavendish,
to whom he was slightly related.
Cavendish was the husband of Gladstone's niece.
But no sooner had Cavendish got there that he was assassinated in an event called the
Phoenix Park Murders.
What happened was that a radical group called the Invincibles, a group with links to the
IRB, the Irish Republican Brotherhood, and with American funding, they'd been planning
to kill Forster, the previous secretary.
Forster left in disgust.
Cavendish arrived, and then he and his under secretary, Thomas Burke, were both murdered
right there in the park at a genteel place, horribly cut about with surgical knives which
had been brought in specially.
There were rumours, unsubstantiated, that Parnell himself had been involved in these
murders.
It's almost certainly true.
It's almost certainly untrue.
He almost certainly wasn't.
Well, finally, mounting pressure from home rule and from events on the ground led Gladstone
to introduce legislation for Irish home rule in 1886.
He proposed that an Irish parliament should be set up, which would deal with all internal
Irish affairs, but that it should remain connected to the imperial parliament in London.
And the fact that he was putting his authority behind it caused a great sensation in parliament.
It was one of these great upheavals which punctuated the Victorian period.
He made his speech introducing the legislation on April the 8th, 1886.
It was a speech scheduled to begin at 4.30, and already by midday, every seat in the House
of Commons was taken, and he meant crowds gathered in London as the different factions
reacted strongly to this what looked like a constitutional crisis.
Gladstone's speech itself lasted three and a half hours.
And here's what he wrote in his diary that day.
He was already in his late 70s by then.
He was an old man.
The message came to me this morning, hold thou up my goings in thy path that my footsteps
slip not.
He often had a biblical inspirations of this kind.
I reflected much, took a short drive, House of Commons 4.15 to 8.15.
Extraordinary scenes outside the House and in.
My speech, which I have sometimes thought could never end, lasted nearly three and a half
hours.
Voice and strength and freedom were granted to me in a degree beyond what I could have
hoped.
But many a prayer had gone up for me, and not, I believe, in vain.
He used the analogy of Canada.
Canada had been granted home rule in 1867, but it was still attached to the British
Empire, and in his view the links were stronger and healthier than ever previously.
It was appropriate for Canada to be self-governing, the same applied here.
Now, by contrast, opponents, particularly the Conservatives, now under the leadership
of Lord Salisbury, because Australia had died back in 1881.
Opponents used the analogy of the Indian mutiny, that there was going to be an anarchic, chaotic
uproar in Ireland if the British formally withdrew and handed government over to the
Irish themselves.
And Salisbury, the Tory leader, says, the Irish, like the hot-and-tocks, are incapable
of self-government.
There's quite a lot of English, what you could really call racism against the Irish, a belief
that the Irish were gravely inferior and weren't capable of self-government.
Now, Parnell himself, in the early and mid-80s, had always been aware that home rule legislation
was going to have a very difficult time getting through Parliament, particularly through the
House of Lords, which had a virtually permanent Tory majority.
And so he'd hoped it was a very brief Conservative administration in 1885 for complex reasons.
And Parnell had flirted with the idea of getting Lord Salisbury's Conservatives to pass home
rule.
It would be certainly much easier with their leadership to usher the legislation through
the House of Lords, but he'd been unable to accomplish it and therefore had fallen back
on the help of Gladstone.
Well, it was pretty clear, as the legislation made its way through Parliament, that it wasn't
going to pass.
It wasn't going to be able to get a majority of votes, despite the fact that the Liberals
were a majority in Parliament and had the support of the home rulers.
In other words, a lot of Liberals were going to break ranks against it.
Here's Gladstone making an impassioned speech to his fellow party members.
Go into the length and breadth of the world, ransack the literature of all countries.
And if you can, a single voice, a single book in which the conduct of England towards
Ireland is anywhere treated except with profound and bitter condemnation.
Think I beseech you.
Think well.
Think wisely.
Think not for the moment, but for the years that are to come before you reject this bill.
Well, nevertheless it failed.
The Liberal party split over the question into a pro-home rule branch, loyal to Gladstone's
vision, and a unionist branch, union meaning the continued union of Great Britain and Ireland.
The historian W. D. Rubenstein says that Gladstone's announcement of home rule policy was, quote,
perhaps the greatest sensation between the 1832 Reform Act and the Declaration of War
in 1914.
Perhaps I can give you an analogy by saying that a lot of English politicians greeted it
with the same kind of horror as Americans had greeted the secession of the Confederate
states just, you know, 20 years previously.
Well, growing numbers of Liberal MPs were beginning to have doubts about Gladstone because as it
became older, it became increasingly radical, the very opposite of the normal political
path people take.
He was, even though Britain had the world's greatest empire, he was an anti-imperialist
in many ways, inconsistently because often he was forced by public opinion to intervene
even where he would rather not.
He was increasingly enthusiastic for democracy, which made the old Whig aristocrats suspicious
of him.
And a famous quip at the time, Randolph Churchill, this is Winston's father, said, Gladstone
is an old man in a hurry, that was a little paradoxical phrase.
Joseph Chamberlain and other of his ministers, who'd left the government in protest in 1886,
said, if Ireland gets self-government, Britain will become a third-rate power.
You know, the whole thing will start breaking up internally, that was the fear.
Now, meanwhile, the six counties of Ulster in the northeast of Ireland, the counties
which had Protestant majorities, were fiercely pro-unionist, and it was to them that the
Conservative Party attached itself.
Northern Ireland, and particularly the city of Belfast, was really the one area of Ireland
which had gone through the Industrial Revolution.
Belfast itself had big shipbuilding yards, the Harland and Wolff yards, the place where
20 years later the Titanic was built.
And they also had a thriving linen industry.
So those two industries had combined to make Belfast Ireland's most industrialised town.
Now, English Conservative politicians started going to Ireland to make unionist speeches
to the Belfast and other Ulster Protestant workers.
Here's Arthur Balfour, who is himself to be a Tory Prime Minister a bit later on.
He says in 1886, for a group of Protestant workers in Ireland, home rule means to you
that you are to be put under the heel of a majority which, if greater than you in numbers,
is most undoubtedly inferior to you in political knowledge and experience.
It means that the whole patronage of Ulster is to be handed over to a hostile majority
in Dublin.
You, the wealthy, the orderly, the industrious, the enterprising portion of Ireland, are to
supply money for that part of Ireland which is less orderly, less industrious, less enterprising
and less law abiding.
In other words, don't put yourself into the hands of this chaotic and turbulent group
who will make you a minority and milk you dry.
Well, in fact, there were riots among the Belfast Protestants in 1886 protesting against
home rule.
Allegedly sparked by a Catholic chipp yard worker telling one of his Protestant fellow
workers that the days of their dominance were coming to an end and that home rule was close.
Lord Randolph Churchill himself visited Ulster and in a famous phrase said, Ulster will fight
and Ulster will be right.
In other words, there will be a Protestant uprising in the event of home rule succeeding.
While a general election followed the defeat of the home rule legislation, it was the second
general election in seven months.
Again, when you find very rapid successions of elections, that's a sign of great upheaval
in the system.
And it was really a referendum on Gladstone's proposal.
And it was a referendum which Gladstone lost because the Tory party was returned with a
big majority.
Nevertheless, there were 85 home rule members of parliament which meant that the problem
wasn't going to go away.
It might be deferred, but it would still be there.
Now just after this new election, the London Times run a series of articles alleging that
when the Phoenix Park murders had taken place a few years previously, Parnell had been directly
involved.
The Times had been given a set of letters by an Irish journalist called Richard Piggott.
In fact, they were forgeries.
They were alleging a connection which was missing.
But the Times run a big series called Parnellism and Crime and for the first time ever it used
a two column headline.
This is just the very early days of more spectacular newspaper presentations.
An official commission of inquiry investigated these charges and it was able to completely
exonerate Parnell.
So in other words, although there were a lot of people in Britain highly indignant at
Parnell and willing to believe the worst of them, particularly conservatives, nevertheless
he came out of it smelling like roses.
It was great rejoicing in Ireland, of course, that he should be exonerated and Piggott,
his discredited forger, committed suicide in Madrid.
Parnell returning to Parliament after he'd been cleared was lionized, Gladstone bowed
deeply to him.
And one of Parnell's friends said, isn't it wonderful?
And Parnell replied, yes, wonderful, but how much more pleased they would have been if
the forgery had been proved genuine.
He was aware that there were many people who wanted to think the worst of him.
And yet it was only a year after that that despite his what looked like spectacular successes
in quick succession, Parnell was ruined by a divorce case.
He'd been his mistress over the previous eight or nine years had been Catherine O'Shea and
she was married.
She was married to one of the other home rule MPs.
His name was Captain William O'Shea and in fact he'd clearly been complicit in the affair
and Parnell had ensured his political advancement.
Parnell and Kitty had had three children together.
They spent a lot of time living fairly secretively in hotels on the south coast of England.
But when O'Shea sued for divorce and brought into the glare of national publicity the fact
that Parnell had been having this affair with his wife, then he was in severe political
danger.
Gladstone in particular could no longer give him open support, even though Gladstone had
certainly known that the affair was going on and had been willing to tolerate it as long
as it was secretive.
Once it got the full blast of publicity he could do so no longer.
It came just three years after another big divorce scandal which had ruined another member
of Parliament, Charles Dilke, because evidence came out in the trial that Dilke had been
in bed with two women at once and had been involved in teaching French vices, that was
the word for it, to married women and so on.
So the Dilke scandal had created the background for the Parnell scandal and damaged him very,
very severely.
Gladstone was still committed to home rule but said that he felt he could no longer do
it in an alliance with Parnell, he was a discredited figure.
That in turn had the effect of creating a split inside the ranks of the Irish home rule
members of Parliament.
Some of them stayed loyal to him, others didn't.
Parnell himself had been completely obsessed by Kitty O'Shea, even more than his commitment
to Irish nationalism.
He sent her two telegrams and a letter every day when they were apart and hadn't been discrete
enough by the standards of the day in keeping the affair secret.
Well once the divorce had gone through the two of them married and Parnell struggled
to maintain his influence within politics but he's now leading only part of a party
which has now alienated so many influential sections of the political nation that it couldn't
have the effectiveness that it had had previously.
In 1891 he died suddenly at the age of only 45 and that brought to an end one of the most
spectacular passages of Irish history.
Gladstone became Prime Minister yet again in 1892, again introduced legislation for
home rule.
This time got it through the House of Commons only to have it defeated in the House of Lords
yet again.
But the issue wasn't going to go away, it was only going to be deferred and the failure
of home rule in the 80s and 90s set the stage for much worse upheavals, firstly Easter Rising
of 1916 and then the Revolution and Civil War of the immediately post First World War
period.
