Lecture 30 – Democracy and its Discontents
The nature of British political life changed in the last two decades of the 19th century.
The exception of Gladstone, the great figures of mid-Victorian political life, had now retired
or died, and Gladstone himself became increasingly radical in his old age, as could be seen in
his denunciation of the House of Lords, his support for Irish home rule, and his support
for the rights of an atheist Member of Parliament.
Israeli successor as the Tory leader, Lord Salisbury, was unenthusiastic about the democratisation
of Britain, but in practice he handled its consequences very shrewdly, and showed by
his appointments and by his political style that the British aristocracy had found ways
to compensate for the expanded franchise, and in many respects to maintain control.
Both these Prime Ministers were affected very directly by the rising national enthusiasm
for the British Empire, for which there was an enormous amount of sympathetic, energetic
enthusiasm in those decades, the 80s and 90s.
Now superficially, the rising Empire, which continued to grow rapidly in this period, was
a sign of Britain's ever-increasing strength.
Certainly more and more parts of the globe were now stamped as being British, but in
some respects it was a strength which disguised a growing weakness, certainly in the economy.
And they were already, by the end of the Victorian period, auguries of Britain's coming economic
and political decline, which are closely connected with its imperial policies.
Certainly at the time, in the 80s and 90s, most British people had a boundless confidence
that they were the most important and powerful people in the world, and the career of one
of the influential colonial secretaries, Joseph Chamberlain, bears out that idea.
Well, in 1881 Gladstone was nicknamed by another Member of Parliament, the Grand Old Man,
and that was his standard sobriquet from then on.
The younger politicians, he seemed almost like a living legend.
He was already the subject of dozens of biographies, and you could buy lithographs of him.
You could buy embroideries of Gladstone, little statues of him.
Apparently some Tories had Gladstone chamber pots as a way of denigrating the great man.
And he himself used to welcome delegations to his estate in North Wales.
His way of keeping fit was by chopping down trees on the estate, and so it was quite common
for a delegation to follow him out into the grounds, and he chopped down a tree.
Randolph Churchill, this is Winston's father, said,
he was the greatest living master of the art of personal political advertisement.
Every afternoon the whole world is invited to assist at the crashing fall of some beach
or elm or oak, the forest laments in order that Gladstone may perspire.
So there's plenty of jokes about him and mockery, especially from the conservative side.
He introduced two new acts of parliament to extend the democratization of the political system in the 80s.
The first was the Corrupt Practices Act of 1883, designed to prevent election bribery.
It had become less common with the introduction of the secret ballot, but still hadn't ended altogether.
Under the new act, very severe penalties were imposed on people who offered bribes or accepted them.
And that, in turn, encouraged the development of political voluntaryism,
a system which has persisted in Britain right up to the present,
of people working for their party at a conviction rather than out of the hope of direct financial gain.
And, of course, the less bribery is involved in politics,
the more poorer people have the opportunity to participate.
It means that a man from relatively modest circumstances could stand for a parliamentary seat in the hope of winning,
because he didn't have to depend upon greasing the wheels in the old-fashioned way.
The Third Reform Act of 1884 was the third in the great extensions of the franchise which had punctuated the 19th century.
It extended the votes to rural working-class men, and as I said last time,
it had a very important effect in Ireland because it meant that a large number of Irish farmers were enfranchised for the first time.
There were still plenty of... All the women of Britain still could not vote, and still some working-class men could not,
particularly those who moved frequently.
But, nevertheless, now the old idea that you had to be a property owner to be a voter had clearly ended.
Parliament itself was made up of new kinds of people sitting in Parliament.
Earlier in the century, it had been very much a gentleman's club, but this is less true as well now.
First of all, Labour people were starting to get into Parliament.
Originally, it was the Lib Labs, that is, Labouring men who had been elected but within the Liberal embrace.
But, as I mentioned before, Keir Hardy goes into Parliament in 1892, determined not to be associated with the Liberal Party,
but to create an independent presence.
And, starting in the early 1900s, the Labour presence in Parliament grew rapidly,
completely transforming the social complexion of the place.
The Irish home rulers were there as well.
They weren't interested in the government of Britain.
In fact, they were determined to stop it, as far as they could, until such time as it should cough up the Irish question altogether.
And there was their members of a Parliament to which they don't want to belong, a paradoxical situation to be in.
And it was they who introduced these paralyzing filibusters in the early 80s.
So, the mood of Parliamentary life is changing.
Nevertheless, it was still a very, very highly sought-after honour, a coveted honour to become a member of Parliament.
And many of the most ambitious and the brightest young men sought a political career.
Much more so than in America, where the most talented young men wanted careers in business,
and regarded Congress rather as something secondary.
Well, Gleistin became increasingly mistrustful of the elite, among whom he'd spent most of his life.
He nicknamed them the 10,000, in other words, the 10,000 most privileged people in Britain,
or the West End of London.
And here's one of his speeches from this period.
Looking over all the great achievements that have been made in the last half-century,
that have made the last half-century illustrious,
not one of them would have been effected if the opinions of the West End of London had prevailed.
The Test Act would not have been repealed.
Parliament would not have been reformed.
Slavery would not have been abolished.
The Corn Laws would not have been repealed, nor free trade established.
I regard it with sorrow and misgiving that the nation has ever been in advance
of those who ought to have been its leaders.
Growing confidence in ordinary people, and now he's claiming, not altogether accurately,
that the ordinary people have led the way.
In 1880, an atheist was elected to Parliament.
His name was Charles Bradlaw, and he came from the constituency of Northampton,
which is in the southern part of the English Midlands.
Now, it was bad enough that Bradlaw denied the existence of God.
He also opposed the institution of monarchy.
He was a Republican at the time when that was a very radical position in Britain.
And he was a believer in birth control, which then was, it was illegal to advocate birth control.
So, it was a very talented man and deeply attractive to his own constituency.
With our many spiky points, he was clearly at variance with the orthodoxy of the day.
Well, to become a member of Parliament, you had to swear an oath to God.
But because he didn't believe in God, he said, let me simply affirm my loyalty to the institution.
Gladstone was willing to let him do so, but the conservatives were determined not to.
They sensed the opportunity of discomforting Gladstone and getting rid of him altogether.
On one occasion, he actually tried to administer the oath to himself
and was manhandled by the sergeant at arms on the floor of Parliament.
There was an undignified scuffle with one of the guards on the floor of the House of Commons.
Four different times, he was re-elected by his constituency,
and each time Parliament refused to seat him.
Now, that raised the question of who had the right to decide.
Was it the constituency's right to decide who they wanted?
Or was it the House's right to decide whom it was going to admit an interesting constitutional point?
Gladstone himself described Bradlaw's opinions as, quote, loathsome and revolting.
And, nevertheless, spoke on behalf of admitting him.
He said, well, he's been elected.
The point is, because his constituency has chosen him, Bradlaw, to be seated.
After all, says Gladstone, until 1829, we didn't admit Roman Catholics,
but then we went through the process of Catholic Emancipation.
In 1858, Jewish Emancipation, bit by bit, we've broadened the rules
to admit people of more diverse views, and this is an appropriate next step.
Gladstone was incoming increasingly to the view that the Church and State
ought to remain completely distinct, having earlier been one of the most passionate
supporters of Church State Union.
Gladstone says, if Parliament required Bradlaw to use the religious oath, quote,
and if these words are not justly measured to the condition of his conscience and his convictions,
you give him an inducement to do violence to his conscience in order that he may not be stigmatized
by being shut out from what is held to be the noblest privilege of an English citizen,
that of representing his fellow citizens in Parliament.
And, therefore, I say that, besides our duty to vindicate the principle of civil and religious liberty,
which totally detaches religious controversy from the enjoyment of civil rights,
it is most important that the House should consider the moral effects of this test.
Yes, let's not permit ourselves, ourselves the Christians,
to be put in a morally inferior situation.
After all, he said, there's such a lot of popular support outside Parliament
for the idea that Bradlaw ought to be seated, that if we're not careful,
we're going to associate the idea of atheism with the idea of justice or justice scorned.
Unbelief attracts a sympathy which it would not otherwise enjoy.
And the upshot is to impair those convictions and that religious faith,
the loss of which I believe to be the most inexpressible calamity
which can fall either upon a man or upon a nation.
Well, finally, in 1885, a new speaker permitted Bradlaw simply to make an affirmation.
This is after his fourth re-election.
There were by-elections in his constituency after each of these recurrent crises.
And in 1888, the rules were changed.
So since then, it has been possible for atheists to go to Parliament.
There are plenty there now.
Glaston was Prime Minister for the last time between 1892 and 1894.
And once again, his ministry founded on the principle of home rule.
As I mentioned last time, he reintroduced the legislation.
This time was able to get a majority of pro-home rule liberals and home rule Irishmen.
But again, the legislation was defeated in the Lords,
which had a big permanent unionist and Tory majority.
The very last speech Glaston ever made in the House of Commons, March the 1st, 1894,
was a bitter condemnation of the House of Lords and their obstructiveness.
And he anticipated, rightly as it turned out, that their days were numbered,
that the system wasn't going to continue to put up with obstruction
from an unelected body like the House of Lords.
In 1910, its authority was going to be severely curtailed.
Glaston then resigned as Prime Minister and Lord Rosebury took over.
And Glaston finally died in 1898.
A huge funeral was held for him at Westminster Abbey.
And two future kings were among the Paul Bearers, the people carrying the coffin.
Edward VII, Queen Victoria's eldest son, and his eldest son,
the man who later on was going to be King George V.
The Queen had always despised Glaston and was very indignant that her son and grandson
should have participated, should have preferred that they hadn't.
Well, after the 1886 home rule, the first home rule crisis,
political life had become embittered.
The Liberal Party itself was fracturing.
And politics themselves became much tenser than they had been previously.
It was common throughout most of the 19th century for people to disagree bitterly
in Parliament across party lines, but then to socialise together,
because they tended to be intermarried and interlocked in a narrow network of leading families.
But increasingly now, there's a social spillover to the political frictions of the age.
For example, the Duke of Westminster, who'd left the Glastonian Liberals in disgust
after 1886, took down a portrait of Glaston,
which he'd commissioned from a prominent living artist,
and sent it away to an estate salesman who didn't want to have it any more at all.
The Queen herself, who earlier had maintained at least a pretence of impartiality,
became more and more outspokenly a Conservative.
She'd always preferred Disraeli to Glaston,
and now she was less and less reticent about saying that she was a Conservative.
Well, the man who dominated the Conservative Party in the 80s and 90s was Lord Salisbury.
He came from one of Britain's oldest and most distinguished political families.
He'd been educated at Eaton and Oxford, the classic pattern,
the same two schools that Glaston himself had been to.
And he was a very good example of the wild eccentricity,
which is so common among the British upper classes.
He was religious too, very religious, who had to chapel every morning at Hatfield, his estate.
But he was also interested in science and had a private laboratory of his own,
where he used to do experiments, chemistry experiments.
He built a hydroelectric power generator at Hatfield,
that is using the flow of the river to turn a turbine, which generated electricity.
This is in the very, very early days of electricity,
when many of the principles still hadn't been worked out.
And apparently he was stringing up wires inside Hatfield House,
and shouts of sparks would suddenly fly from them.
And the women in his family would throw cushions at the sparking wires.
Must have been a terribly hazardous situation.
But the result was that he was one of the first people to enjoy electric lighting in Britain,
partly at his own instigation.
He didn't like the usual upper class pursuits, leisure pursuits of hunting and shooting and riding.
But instead he wrote a tricycle, again one of the new inventions of the time.
He'd caught on to this very quickly.
And when he was in London, he'd write his tricycle every morning around St. James' Park.
As he got older, a coachman would come along with him.
And when they got to a hill, the coachman would push to help Lord Sorsbury get up the hill.
And as they were going down the hill, the coachman would jump on the back
and hold onto his lordship's shoulders and then ride down the slope together.
He was six foot four inches tall, very, very tall indeed for those days.
A profoundly pessimistic man in his outlook and demeanor,
subject to what's now, would now be called acute depression, a sleepwalker, very cynical,
and very nearsighted, but rarely wearing glasses.
There are stories that he sometimes didn't recognize his own cabinet ministers.
That is people who politically he was very close to.
Some people say it was because he was so nearsighted.
Others say it was because he was so snobbish and disdain to recognize those
who he thought of as coming from a lower social station.
As Prime Minister, he refused to live in the Prime Minister's traditional residence, Tandowning Street.
And throughout his life, he'd been opposed to the idea of democracy
and opposed to the idea of human equality, both of which he thought were wrong and bad.
He thought democracy was dangerous because it made the political system far too subject
to the sway of sudden passions and dangerous to the demagogues.
This was always one of the standard objections to democracy, of course.
Here's one of his remarks on the subject.
Always wealth in some countries, sorry, always wealth in some countries' birth,
in all countries' intellectual power and culture, mark out the man to whom, in a healthy state of feeling,
a community looks to undertake its government.
Such men must be ledgered, they must have wealth and they must be ledgered,
quote, so that the struggles for ambition are not defiled by the taint of sordid greed.
They are the aristocracy of the country in the original and best sense of the word.
In other words, it may be true that the aristocracy doesn't really represent the best of everything.
But nevertheless, we must have an aristocracy and it must be wealthy enough not to have to worry about the need to get rich through politics,
because that's just going to introduce greed as a new problem.
Back in 1867, when Disraeli had introduced the legislation for the Second Reform Act,
extending the vote, he'd been the secretary for India, he'd been a cabinet minister,
and had resigned in protest against it.
He felt so strongly against the principle of democracy.
Now, at a time when Disraeli was trying to develop Tory democracy,
this idea that there could be an alliance between the upper and the lower classes,
Sorsbury preferred an alliance with the middle classes, which at that time were rising very rapidly,
as more and more people became involved in professional work and managerial life,
and could uphold respectable standards.
He saw that as the future of the party, which to some extent it really was.
In his day, by the 90s, the Conservative Party dominated southern England, particularly,
and was very strong in the rising middle classes.
An organisation had been founded in 1883, just after Disraeli's death, called the Primrose League.
The Primrose was supposed to be Disraeli's favourite flower,
and the Primrose League was a Conservative social club with political overtones.
Men, women and children alike were encouraged to join it,
and to work in ways which were harmonious with Conservative Party interests.
Like some of the early trade unions, it also had ritual functions.
You'd get a title if you became a member.
That's right, you could be a knight, almaner, a vaversua, a dame,
or if you were a child, a Primrose bud.
In other words, you had the pleasure of a little title to go with your membership.
And these were the people who did the legwork in the constituencies every time an election came up,
that is creating a good nationwide network of loyal Tories of every age.
Now, Salisbury benefited from the defections to the Conservative Party of the Liberal Unionists,
that is people who belonged to Gladstone's party until the Home Rule Crisis.
And so by the mid-90s, the Tory Party was more and more becoming a concentration
of what's called the British establishment, that is the bishops, the senior landowners,
the big businessmen, really all the representatives of property and the state and its official functions.
Certainly Salisbury's cabinets consisted mainly of land-owning aristocrats, many of them interrelated.
And this is a demonstration of the great staying power of the British aristocracy.
It's always about to disappear and it always keeps not disappearing.
This is still true today, although less so.
Salisbury was his own foreign secretary and a very experienced diplomat.
He'd done a lot of good diplomatic work in the second half of the century.
And he was a very tenacious negotiator.
He said, victories in diplomacy are won by a series of microscopic advantages,
a judicious suggestion here, an opportune civility there,
a wise concession at one moment, and a far-sighted persistence at another,
a sleepless tact, immovable calmness and patience,
that no folly, no blunder, no provocation can shake.
Well, you can see from this little glimpse of his personality that he's a very complex but capable figure
who knew how to adapt his party and his own circumstances to a changing political world.
Certainly in terms of durability and office, he was one of the most successful prime ministers of the post-1832 era.
Now, new world conditions were having a big impact on Britain in the 80s and 90s.
And British foreign policy had to change accordingly.
First of all, Britain's economic dominance, which had been so strong in the early 19th century,
was now under very, very severe challenge, particularly from Germany and America.
As I mentioned in talking about Ireland, American food stuff started to flood Western Europe in the 70s and 80s.
Now, overall, that's clearly a highly beneficial thing.
The last time America and Western Europe ever had to fear food shortages was then.
The great problem in agriculture in the 20th century was overproduction.
But, of course, it connoted severe dislocation for farmers in Europe
who could no longer compete with these cheap American imports.
Even more sinister for a nation which had pegged its fortunes to industrialization,
British manufacturers were no longer becoming competitive.
The price of German and American manufacturers kept going down
and the quality of the goods being made kept rising.
Britain could no longer make the goods as well.
For example, in 1883, the New Zealand railway system was being built.
New Zealand was a British colony.
And the managers ordered 20 new locomotives to be sent out from Britain.
But a year and a half later, not one of them had been delivered.
And finally, the management gave up in disgust and switched the order
to an American company, the Baldwin Works in Philadelphia.
It got all the locomotives in four months and they cost 400 pounds less each.
That was a vivid moment of showing suddenly Britain can no longer provide the goods.
Always previously, it had been able to give the best, quickest and at the lowest price.
In 1887, the Royal Navy ordered 24 new torpedo boats, a new generation of steamships.
When they went on trial, everything went wrong.
Eight of them broke down on the first day of the trial cruise.
In one of them, to quote an eyewitness,
the boiler furnace crown came down, the engine room and stokehold staff were scalded
and three men subsequently died of burns.
Ten more accidents followed in the space of two weeks.
From faulty steering gear, two of the boats collided.
One of them went aground on the rocks.
And in the end, after 14 days of trial, 19 of these 24 boats
had had accidents or mechanical breakdowns.
So the British reputation for making effective machinery is suffering a severe dent.
This certainly remained true into the First World War
when the two great fleets met at the Battle of Jutland.
German direct hits on the British ships often destroyed them completely,
whereas British hits on the better built German ones often damaged them,
but they were able to stay afloat.
By the 90s, relations inside British workplaces were becoming increasingly bad.
I mentioned the development of the trade unions,
which in turn led to the development of the Labor Party.
Unions in workplaces often led to a deterioration of relations between management and workers,
because the management and the workers looked at each other as adversaries,
rather than as common collaborators in the joint scheme of getting the work done.
Unions which were strong enough to do so, especially in trades like shipbuilding,
introduced very rigid demarcation principles.
That is, close descriptions of exactly who had to do which kind of work,
with no latitude at all for them doing new kinds of work as new issues developed.
That made the shipyards increasingly inefficient at the onset of the 20th century.
Some unions were even strong enough to introduce the principle that there should be no technological redundancies.
In other words, the number of people who are now employed in the shipyard
that number shall remain or increase, even if labor saving machinery is introduced.
Of course, that gives an enormous incentive to the boss not to bother to introduce this new machinery,
which in turn means that the company as a whole is going to become relatively less efficient.
There was also an incredible lack of salesmanship.
Even though Britain was dependent on selling its manufactured goods abroad,
they wouldn't put their best people into sales, but they're worst.
They wouldn't teach them to learn foreign languages.
They wouldn't print their brochures in French or in German or Italian or in Spanish,
even when they're trying to sell the goods in those countries.
They wouldn't convert the weights and measures into kilograms and centimeters and so on.
They kept it all in pounds and ounces, even though such measurements were unused on the continent.
In all these ways, Britain was falling behind in its industrial life.
There was very little technical education.
Although scientific education had improved, it was mainly in pure science,
rather than in applied science, that is converting the scientific ideas into workable technical devices.
Management certainly is partly to blame for this.
It was very unimaginative.
It was very confrontational against the unions, rather than trying to find a way around it.
If you look at who actually sat in Parliament in the 1890s, virtually none of them had degrees in science or technology.
You see, Salzburg is very unusual, even in having an interest in science.
The great majority of the members of Parliament were graduates in the classics or in law or in history,
but not in scientific subjects.
So as the Americans and the Germans are leaping forwards in things like the creation of mass production,
one of the big American developments of that time,
and as the Germans are becoming more and more accomplished in things like the chemical industry, Britain's failing to keep up.
Now, in the 90s also, majorities in both parties supported imperialism.
They supported the Empire, partly because it provided a sheltered zone
within which this British inefficiency could be protected.
Raw materials could come in from the colonies,
and manufactured goods could be sent out to the colonies,
in a way where it was less necessary to worry about the intrusions of superior foreign competitors.
This remained true, actually, for the next half century.
So right through the early 20th century, the British Empire, looking very mighty, in a way,
was shoring up the gathering catastrophe, which really announced itself at the end of the Second World War.
Well, in the short term, the Empire is growing fast, and everybody's very confident.
In the 80s and 90s, Britain annexed into the Empire lands which were 24 times as great in land area as Great Britain itself.
No wonder they felt so confident about it.
This is the period called the Scramble for Africa, France, Germany, Portugal,
even America was becoming interested in the possibility of colonial empires around the world,
but nobody was so successful as the British in extending their territorial holdings.
Let's look for a moment at the career of Joseph Chamberlain,
who was one of the men who helped to expand and run this empire.
He was a man who inherited a metal factory from his father.
It was in Birmingham, this is in the very centre of England.
They manufactured screws.
Well, at the age of 38, he sold the business.
He didn't want to be in business, he wanted to be in parliament,
like so many of his most gifted contemporaries.
He'd been Lord Mayor of Birmingham, then he became a Member of Parliament,
and at first was a Gladstonean radical.
In one of his speeches in 1883, he denounced Lord Salisbury, the Tory leader,
because he belonged to a class which lived off inherited land and hadn't worked for it.
Lord Salisbury constitutes the spokesman of a class who toil not, neither do they spin.
His fortune and position originated by grants for services which courtiers rendered to kings
and have since grown and increased while they slept by levying an increased share
on that which all other men have done by toil and labour
to add to the general wealth and prosperity of the country,
so highly critical of the parasitism of the aristocracy.
He was President of the Board of Trade for Gladstone in the 80s, very suave.
He used to wear a monocle, you know, the single eyeglass on a chain,
and would always have a fresh orchid in his buttonhole, a magnificent appearance,
and a resonant voice.
But he hadn't been to Oxford or Cambridge, and he wasn't Church of England,
he was a Unitarian, and politically he was impatient.
Arthur Balfour, who was a Tory Member of Parliament 12 years, his junior, said of them,
the difference between Joe Chamberlain and me is the difference between youth and age.
I am age.
Well, he left the Liberal Party over Home Rule like so many others in 86,
because he thought it was going to destroy the Empire,
and he campaigned very, very strenuously against Home Rule when it came up again in 1893,
arguing that now that Britain was surrounded by potent rivals,
it was going to collapse internally if it fragmented in this way.
So in 1895, he was brought into the Conservative Government,
that's Lord Salisbury's Third Ministry, as Colonial Secretary,
and he was very committed to the idea of strengthening the British Empire.
He dreamed of creating an Imperial Parliament where representatives of all the different colonies came together,
and where the whole place continued to strengthen its bonds rather than weakening them.
He took a great interest in the welfare of colonial peoples, malaria abatement,
the building of roads in the colonies, the betterment of the West Indies,
which had been very economically backward since the abolition of slavery.
So his earlier radicalism on behalf of the welfare of ordinary people is now expanded empire-wide.
He's a very curious mixture of militant aggressiveness as an imperialist
with a genuine sense of benevolent intent towards the people of the Empire.
He was also what we now call a racist in the sense that he believed in Anglo-Saxon supremacy.
God and nature have conspired to make the Anglo-Saxon peoples those who should dominate the Earth.
But they should dominate it, and if necessary they should fight for it,
but having got it they should then do good within it.
That was a common position among the liberal imperialists
and also among many of the other supporters of the Empire at the same time.
Well, in 1901 when Queen Victoria died,
the whole British system was on the brink of an extremely turbulent period.
We can't really get into it because it's beyond our charge here,
but it was certainly to undergo more upheavals in the immediately ensuing years.
Incidentally, let me just leave you with a thought,
that it was Joseph Chamberlain's son Neville who was to be British Prime Minister in the 1930s
at the onset of the Second World War.
So a very important family with the father in a vital position as the century closed.
