Lecture 31, The British in Africa, 1880 to 1901.
Britain became ever more deeply involved in African affairs in the last two decades
of the 19th century.
Britain entered Egyptian politics, first to ensure the stability of the Suez Canal, which
was an important routeway to India.
But then, having taken over in Egypt, it was drawn, despite Gladstone's reluctance,
into pacifying the Sudan, further south, that is, further upriver, on the Nile.
As the other European powers also became enthusiastic about the economic and strategic advantages
of African colonialization, Britain annexed further lands in turn.
It was just to forestall its rivals, and sometimes also with an undignified haste.
The most dramatic African conflict of the period came right as the century ended, not
against native Africans, but against the Boers, the white settlers of Dutch and French Protestant
descent.
Their occupation of the Transvaal, in which gold had since been discovered, and an escalating
series of confrontations over foreigners' rights in the gold fields, finally led to
a declaration of war in 1899.
The British armies, at first, in the Boer War, were soundly defeated.
It was an enormous and horrifying surprise.
They managed to recover the initiative and win the conflict, but they entered the 20th
century with a new sense of sobriety and chastened by this experience of defeat.
It was the defense of the British route to India, which preoccupied the late Victorian
imperialists, and first drew them into Egyptian affairs.
The Suez Canal had been finished in 1869 by De Lassets, and as I mentioned in one of
the earlier lectures, Benjamin D'Israeli as Prime Minister managed to acquire a large
share in the canal by buying up the bankrupt Khadai of Egypt.
In those days, if you sailed out from Britain to India, you travel in a way that was called
Posh.
The word Posh is familiar to you, probably meaning the best of everything, classy.
Here's where it comes from.
You could contact the shipping lines and say, I want to travel Posh.
What it meant was that you'd be traveling in such a way that you were mainly in the
shade.
So as you're going out to India, that is sailing east, you'd be on the port side of
the ship, mainly in the shade, because the sun goes through the south, and the way home,
going west, you'd want to be on the starboard side of the ship.
That's where Posh comes from, port out starboard home Posh.
And it came to be associated with the best of everything.
The Khadai of Egypt was nominally a vassal of the Turkish Empire, but it was really more
like an independent king, because the enfeeble Turkish Empire couldn't keep adequate control
over its own people.
He was very, very heavily in debt, and a lot of the investors who, to whom he owed money,
were British.
And finally, at the end of the 1870s, Britain and France collaborated to overthrow the Khadai
from fear that otherwise he'd declare bankruptcy, and they'd lose their investment completely.
But that kind of direct internal intervention in Egyptian affairs provoked a nationalist
uprising under the leadership of a man called the Arabi Pasha.
Arabi instigated rioting in the city of Alexandria, in which 50 Europeans were killed.
And in those days, the European powers were absolutely not willing to stand for that kind
of affront to their own people, even if they were in foreign countries.
But Gladstone, who had recently been re-elected and become Prime Minister again in 1880, even
though he'd criticised Israeli's imperial adventures very bitterly in the foregoing
years, found himself willing, well, encouraged and willing to retaliate.
And he authorised a military expedition to go out from Britain to pacify Egypt.
It was under the leadership of Sir Garnet Woolsey, who was one of the great imperial
warriors of the late 19th century.
And he won a decisive victory at the battle of Tel El Kabeer.
Woolsey had an army of about 13,000 men, and as they approached the place where they knew
the Egyptian army was waiting for them, they did a six-mile march in silence at night against
an enemy which outnumbered them about two to one.
And they attacked at dawn with a bayonet charge.
Here's a sergeant from the Black Watch, one of the great Scottish regiments describing
what happened.
The 42nd charged over the last 50 yards like tigers, sprang into the trenches while the
bullets were whirring, whizzing and pinging like as many bees.
The backpipes struck up, while all the time, as far as we could see, to the front, right
and left, was a sheet of flame from the enemy's rifles and cannon.
We climbed an earthwork in front of the Egyptian lines.
And up we came in swarms, wheeling to right and left, bayonetting and shooting every man.
Sergeant Major McNeil ran his sword through six in rapid succession, but then he got wounded
in the thigh.
I shot the man with a revolver who did it.
McNeil fell, but rose and led on for a minute, but got shot again in the stomach and groin
and fell mortally wounded.
We charged against a six-gun battery, which was mowing down the 72nd Highlanders.
We did over 100 men who defended themselves well.
Three minutes did it all, so an enormous shock impact with the advantage of surprise because
they'd arrived overnight.
A Royal Engineer's Officer wrote about the scene of the battlefield afterwards, Tal Al-Kabir.
Words cannot describe the horrors in the lines, the fearful stench, the corpses of the Egyptians,
all still unburied and covered with masses of flies which flew up into your face the
moment you approached.
Even two of our marines not yet buried, and one or two wounded Egyptians still living
under the broiling sun, which was 115 degrees in the shade.
The dead horses, the mules and camels, the wreck of camp tents, arms, etc., abandoned
by the Egyptians.
The returned fugitives and Bedouin robbers prowling about through all the ruin and even
stripping the corpses of their clothes.
It was necessary to keep a ready revolver for these fellows.
So a gruesome battle, but one which as usual in the colonial wars presented the British
with overwhelming victory.
And from then right through until about 1952, Britain was the presiding power in Egypt.
It offered its protection to Egypt without ever formally annexing it as a direct colony.
But certainly Egyptian affairs from then on ran at the behest of the British government.
Well Britain next became involved in Egypt's Sudanese hinterland further up the river Nile
to safeguard Egypt, despite Gladstone's reluctance to get involved in a place which on the face
of it seemed so remote from Britain's real interests.
A man called the Mardi, Mohammed Ahmad Al Mardi, a charismatic Muslim holy warrior,
had led a rebellion in the Sudan and now dominated the area completely.
The Mardi believed himself to be the reincarnation of the prophet Mohammed and was the leader
of a holy warrior Jihad.
Two local expeditions were sent into the area and both of them were easily defeated.
The first led by a British officer called Hicks and the second by an officer named Baker
with reluctant Egyptian recruits were both easily defeated and their forces massacred.
By the Mardi's very disciplined followers.
So at this point Gladstone decided he'd send an envoy, Charles Gordon, to investigate the
situation in the Sudan with the presumption that he would then evacuate the remaining
Europeans who were in the capital of the Sudan called Khartoum.
Now this man, Charles Gordon, is another of these amazing British imperial figures.
His nickname was Chinese Gordon because he'd been a British army officer fighting in the
Chinese opium wars in the preceding decades and was a very effective general.
During the Taiping rebellion, for example, he'd been involved in 33 battles and emerged
unscathed from all of them as the victor.
He was also a devout evangelical Christian.
We call him a fundamentalist.
He believed in God's direct intervention in all the events of the world and regarded
everything that happened to him as single out and selected by God himself.
During the 1870s he'd worked for the Khadai of Egypt as his military governor in the
Sudan.
In other words, he was a British officer but he'd been seconded to the Khadai's Egyptian
government.
So he knew the area very well.
Like David Livingstone, he'd been horrified by the Arab slave trade and devoted to attempting
to stamp it out in this part of the interior of Africa.
Well, rather than withdrawing the remaining Europeans from Khartoum, which Gladstone had
expected, he decided he was going to stay there and fortify the area and try to find
a way to defeat the Mardi.
When it became known back in England that Gordon refused to leave, imperialist pressure
began to mount in England to get Gladstone to send a rescue mission, an army which could
go into the Sudan, defeat the Mardi and rescue Gordon, who otherwise was going to find himself
in an increasingly perilous situation.
That's exactly what happened.
The Mardi besieged Khartoum and so he was cut off inside the city.
Once again, Garnet Wallsley was entrusted with the job of taking a relief to Gordon.
But it's a very, very long way and it's very difficult to get there.
It means going upstream along the River Nile.
And Wallsley's army advanced at a snail's pace, really.
Some of them were mounted on camels.
Some of them had borrowed tourist boats from Thomas Cook, the tour company, which in those
days had just begun to do tours to the Egyptian pyramids.
Anyway, they inched forwards and then finally had to fight their way in the approaches to
Khartoum against the Mardi's army.
When they finally arrived, they found that they were two days too late.
The siege had just overwhelmed the city and Gordon had died fighting in the defense of
the place to the end.
A great wave of regret and remorse spread through Britain and Gordon was regarded as a great
martyr.
He was one of Britain's most famous imperial martyrs.
Continuing turbulence in the Sudan itself meant that in the 90s, the British government
sent another expedition, this time it's Lord Salisbury, in 1898, sending an expedition
against the Mardi's successor.
The Mardi had died and his successor, the Khalifa Abdulahi, was now in control of the
Sudanese rebellion.
This time the army was under the leadership of Lord Kitchener, another of the great British
imperial soldiers.
He was a logistics expert, believed in bringing a great deal of heavy equipment to deal with
every contingency, equipped with high-powered artillery, maxing guns, which were the new
high-speed machine guns, and so on.
And at the Battle of Omderman in 1898, a discipline British army under Kitchener's command won
an overwhelming victory against the Mardi's force.
Even though the Mardi's army was 60,000 strong and outnumbered the British.
It's an interesting battle, partly because it featured the very last set-piece cavalry
charge in British history.
And one of the participants in the charge was Winston Churchill.
The young Winston Churchill had got a great gift for getting himself to the scene of whatever
warfare was going on.
He'd already been fighting on the northwest frontier of India, then he'd heard about this
campaign and managed to get himself into Africa.
And he wrote a great book about it called The River War, and here's his description
of the charge with the Lancers, charging straight at the enemy.
At the charge they all fell, knocked backwards, and we passed through them without any sort
of shock.
One man in my troop fell.
He was cut to pieces in an instant.
Five or six of our horses were wounded by backhanders, but otherwise no scave.
Then we emerged into a region of scattered men and personal combats.
The troop broke up and disappeared.
I pulled into a trot and rode up to individuals, firing my pistol into their faces and killing
several.
Churchill always had a great relish for combat, and wrote full-blooded accounts of his exploits.
While throughout the 1890s leading up to this campaign, the European powers had all been
involved in the great scramble for Africa.
The German leader Bismarck had summoned the European heads of state in 1884 to a conference
in Berlin in which he hoped to be able to create ground rules for the colonization of
Africa.
Bismarck could foresee that otherwise it was highly probable that the European nations
would be at each other's throats over disagreements about colonies.
So he attempted to establish ground rules which would govern the taking of colonies.
It was a meeting which none of the Africans were invited.
The assumption was we're going to dominate Africa and we're going to decide how to do
it.
The agreement was, for example, that whichever of the European powers dominated the coastline
would have a presumptive right to dominate the interior, the hinterland behind that
coast.
Well, here's the historian James Morris talking about the way in which, in this period, the
old imperial idea which was of service was gradually displaced by a rather undignified
haste.
He says,
There were still visionaries genuinely concerned with the betterment of the Africans who saw
the humiliation of tribes and ancient kingdoms only as sad means towards honorable ends.
Generally though, the Africans scramble as a chronicle of squalor, chief's gold, tribes
dispossessed, vast inheritances signed away with a thumbprint or a shaky cross.
That is, persuading local powers to surrender their authority without really the full realization
of what they were becoming involved with.
Some of the European powers met with unexpected resistance, and an Italian army attempting
to invade Ethiopia was soundly defeated, but on the whole the Europeans were able to prevail
because of their greater power.
Some of these colonies were absolute nightmares of exploitation and suffering.
The most notorious of all was the Belgian Congo.
It became the scene for Conrad's novel, The Heart of Darkness, about the mad colonialist
and the brutality and slavery involved in the Congo ivory trade.
Britain carved out more of these colonies than any other power, and in the 90s alone,
it added to its African empire the Sudan, Kenya, Uganda, Niasaland, Nigeria, and Rhodesia,
and it reasserted its claim, which is temporarily given away to the Transvaal and the Orange
Free State, that is the Boa Republics, in the interior of South Africa.
This was the area which was to become a great flashpoint in the late Victorian period.
Discoveries first of diamonds and then of gold in the area made South Africa the wealthiest
part of the whole continent and the one which was most intensely competed for.
And the man whose name dominates the history of this area is that of Cecil Rhodes, a man
who became fabulously wealthy through his control of the diamond mines at Kimberley
and who was the founder of the corporation De Beers, which has remained one of the giants
in the diamond business right up to the present.
And he was, in many ways, characteristic of the late Victorian imperialists, a great bundle
of contradictions, in some respects ruthless and cynical and Machiavellian, in other respects
very high-minded and idealistic.
He was the son of a Church of England vicar and came from a mild little English village.
But he went out to Africa, originally planning to become a farmer, but quickly got involved
in the excitement over the diamond business in Kimberley.
He named a country after himself, Rhodesia, Rhodesia, Rhodesia, it's a country much bigger
in geographical extent than Britain itself, named for him, and for a while it was something
approaching a private empire of his own, certainly dominated by his own South Africa company
police and more or less entirely at his disposal.
And it was also he who planned to make the British Empire an entity which would spam
Africa all the way from Cairo on the Mediterranean coast right down to Cape Town.
He said, the one the British Empire needs to do is to annex lands along the whole of
this great spine of Africa, build a railway along the whole length of it with spur lines
going out into the regions, and this railway will become the great instrument of the civilization
of Africa.
That was his hope.
And in a way it was an idealistic hope.
He certainly believed that Christianity and good business practices and education and
Western medicine would all have an immensely improving effect on the African people.
And of course it was going to be vastly profitable.
It was also he who, after his death in the early 20th century, left six million pounds
for the creation of the Rhodes Scholarships.
And the Rhodes Scholarships were themselves designed to bring to Oxford, which he thought
of as one of the great centers of civilization, to bring to Oxford representatives of the
Anglo-Saxon race from all over the world.
In its early days, it had a very explicitly racial component.
And he wanted people who were very intellectually brilliant and also great athletes from the
Anglo-Saxon countries, Australia, the United States, Canada, South Africa, and Germany,
to come to Britain and to provide each new generation of Anglo-Saxon leadership.
That was the idea.
So it was an idealism with a heavily racial flavor.
Well, Britain never did manage to annex this whole continuous strip.
German Tanganyika stood in the way right in the middle.
Eventually it was ceded to Britain after the First World War when Germany lost its colonial
empire.
But even then, the Great Railway, which Rhodes had foreseen, never did get finished.
Gold was discovered in 1886 in the Transvaal.
This is the Ba Republic across the Vaal River, hence Transvaal.
And it's in the Wittwatersrand Mountains, the site of Johannesburg today.
It turned the Transvaal into one of the world's richest places, having previously been a remote
and backward pastoral area.
And the Transvaal Gold Rush was very similar to the California Gold Rush of the 1840s or
the Australian Gold Rush of the 50s.
Adventurers and treasure seekers came pouring in from all over the world.
Prostitutes, swindlers, tough, no-nonsense businessmen, gamblers, a great array of human
types.
So that Johannesburg, from being a tiny little bar town, started to grow and swell very rapidly.
And the bar people themselves living there had profoundly ambivalent ideas about it.
On the one hand, they were delighted to find that they were suddenly becoming very rich.
On the other hand, they didn't like the way in which culturally they were being overwhelmed
by what they called the ute landers, or in other words, the outlanders, people coming
in from outside.
Paul Kruger, who was the president of the Transvaal Republic, imposed very heavy taxes
on the ute landers and denied them all political rights.
It was his way of trying to say, we'll make the maximum revenue out of these people, but
make sure that they don't come to dominate the political system, because if they do,
it'll really cease to be a bar republic altogether.
And he also planned and began building a railway to Delagoa Bay in Portuguese East Africa,
the place we call Mozambique, as a way of sidestapping British commercial control.
In other words, if the railway only went down to Cape Town, which was in British hands,
the Borough Republic was going to be at the mercy of British authorities.
But with a rival railway in Portuguese hands, he could play the two powers off against one
another.
Well, the outlanders became increasingly impatient at the high-handed treatment they were receiving
from Kruger's government, and particularly at Kruger's determination not to grant them
any political rights.
And so in the very end of 1895, beginning of 96, there was an attempted coup by a group
of people in the British South Africa Company.
This is Rhodes' company.
It's pretty clear that Rhodes himself had instigated it, although he denied it at the
time.
And the event was called the Jameson Raid, a man named Dr. Leander Starr Jameson led
a group of British cavalry, 470 cavalrymen, over the border into the Transvaal in the
expectation that when they got to Johannesburg, the outlanders would rise up in sympathy and
overthrow the Borough Republic, or at least extort concessions from them to give political
representation and a relief from onerous taxation to themselves.
But it failed.
The cavalry went forward, but the outlander rising didn't take place.
Instead, what happened is that the Borough horsemen tracked and harassed the Jameson
Raiders.
And as they entered the Johannesburg area on New Year's Day of 1896, they were disavowed
by the British government.
The rising didn't take place, and the Raiders were defeated.
Many of them were killed, but the survivors were handed over back to the British by the
Borough cavalrymen who had triumphed at humiliation of British power.
Now, just as Rhodes was widely suspected of having been involved in it, so was the colonial
secretary Joseph Chamberlain, who I mentioned last time.
He'd recently come into office, and it was just the kind of project he would have enthusiastically
supported, extending British government over an area which is badly governed and in which
our people are being denied their proper rights.
Well, a parliamentary investigation took place of the Jameson Raid, and it exonerated Chamberlain
from direct complicity.
But everyone commenting couldn't help noticing that Chamberlain himself had been a member
of this commission.
Therefore, its impartiality was always under a cloud, to say the very least.
It censured Rhodes, who was forced to resign from his position of prime minister of the
Cape Colony, but exonerated Chamberlain.
Rhodes himself, handed back to the British authorities, was tried for treason and imprisoned,
even though the idea remained very widespread that he really had government approval at
some level.
And Britain, embarrassed by the Raid, had to pay reparations to the government of the
Transphal, which Kruger used to buy modern weapons.
He started buying high quality artillery from Germany and good long-distance rifles in the
anticipation that the tension might recur and that the Boers might have to fight to maintain
their own independence.
Well, between 1996 and 1999, the British government and the Boer government continued
to negotiate over the rights of the Oatlanders.
Popular opinion in Britain became more and more impatient with Kruger and more and more
sympathetic to the idea that he ought to be overthrown, especially because the Kaiser
of Germany was openly sympathetic to Kruger's position.
The rise of German power over the foregoing 20 years had become more and more menacing
to Britain.
Obviously, this was going to eventuate in the First World War, and already the threat
of a new powerful united Germany is on the horizon.
So as the king of Germany, the Kaiser, depicts himself as the supporter of Boer independence,
the Anglo-Boer friction continues to increase.
Britain claimed that they'd never surrendered suzerainty over the area.
They'd retained a nominal claim to the Boer republics.
Kruger answered, no, we're completely independent.
And finally, a breakdown of these negotiations led to a British declaration of war.
In October 1899.
At first, at home in Britain, there was an enormous outburst of enthusiasm, jingoism.
I talked about how in the late 70s, Australia had been able to whip up jingoistic enthusiasm.
There was another great surge of it at the end of the 90s when Britain went to war.
And because Britain had won one after the next of its colonial wars, usually with a
massive disparity of casualties, that is killing thousands of the enemy for losses of one or
two or none, the expectation was it won't take us long to hammer the Boers into submission.
But in this belief, they were totally wrong.
In one week in December 1899, which was remembered in British history as Black Week, the three
leading British generals were all defeated, including the Commander-in-Chief General
Redvers Bullock at the Battle of Colenso, where 3,000 British soldiers were killed.
Now briefly, at the beginning of the war, the British army there was outnumbered.
And of course, they were at a tactical disadvantage because they were far less familiar with the
landscape than the Boers who lived there.
And the Boers had an enormous esprit because they were fighting for their own homelands.
I mean, they could reasonably claim that their homes were being invaded by a foreign intruder
and that they would fight desperately to maintain it.
Well, again and again, in the early months of the war, the British suffered very heavy
casualties.
One of the most brilliant books about the war was written by a young Boer soldier called
Dennis Reitz.
The book is called Commando, and it's about his life as a Boer soldier in those days.
He was only 17 when the war began, but absolutely fearless and fought throughout the war.
And he describes his participation in the Battle of Spean Cop, which was one of the
famous battles of the war.
He was pinned down there all day by British rifle fire and was finally able to get away
at nightfall.
After night, the British themselves had suffered heavy casualties, withdrew from this hilltop,
and when Reitz went back there the next day, he found how much worse British casualties
had been than those of his own side.
We hurried across to the English breastworks to find them abandoned.
On our side of the fighting line, there had been many casualties, but a worse sight met
our eyes behind the English chancers.
In the shallow trenches where they had fought, the soldiers lay dead in swathes, and in places
they were piled three deep.
The Boer artillery in particular had wrought terrible havoc, and some of the bodies were
shockingly mutilated.
There must have been 600 dead men on this strip of earth, and there cannot have been many
battlefields where there was such an accumulation of horrors within so small a compass.
So whereas at Tel El Kibir it had been the British massacring the Egyptians in this way,
suddenly now the British are taking very, very heavy casualties in here at Spean Cop.
The bullet was discredited by these defeats, and replaced by Lord Roberts, a man whose
own son had been killed in the battles of Black Week.
Once again the young Winston Churchill was on the spot, this time working as a military
journalist, and writing from the besieged, or from near the besieged city of Ladysmith,
he said, it is astonishing how we have underrated these people.
The combination of mounted infantry and heavy guns is extremely effective.
Their intelligence department must look to their laurels, along and bloody war is before
us, and the end is by no means as certain as most people imagine.
A little bit later on he was captured and made a very daring escape, one of the many
things which created the cult of the personality of Winston Churchill at the turn of the century.
Queen Victoria, now 80 years old, sent to every soldier an active service in South Africa
a brass box of chocolates, and after hearing about these catastrophic defeats said, we are
not interested in the possibilities of defeat, they do not exist, well of course in the short
term they did, but now the British Army sends big reinforcements to make certain that it
can recapture the military initiative.
Lord Roberts borrowed a technique from the Burs of using mounted infantry, men who could
cover a lot of ground quickly on horseback, and by the middle of May of 1900 had managed
to bring to an end the bar siege of the cities of Maffeking and Lady Smith and Kimberley,
the three cities which they besieged.
There was a day of hysterical relief and rejoicing in England at the news that Maffeking had
finally been relieved.
Another of the heroes of the war was Baden Powell, who had been inside Maffeking and
had used the children there as communications forces.
This was the foundation of the Boy Scouts, he said, the children made themselves useful
there and we could put this kind of kids activity to good use in other ways of life, so the Boy
Scouts began as a kind of British Imperial training ground for kids who later on would
become Imperial soldiers in their turn.
Well Britain won the conventional warfare phase of the war and expected that it would
come to a rapid end, but in fact the Burs carried on fighting a guerrilla conflict for
the next two years and it proved very, very difficult to pacify.
In the end the British resorted to a scorched earth policy, burning all the crops and taking
away all the civilians who lived in the area and who had been helping their menfolk and
putting them into concentration camps.
Not camps like the Nazi ones, but camps where they would all be concentrated in one place
so that they could deny aid to the Boer men.
When epidemic diseases began to sweep through these camps so that in the end 20,000 Boer
civilians died there, it did look like a terrible human rights violation and atrocity.
16,000 British soldiers died of fevers as well and as in all previous wars, the fevers
proved more lethal than enemy action.
It was scattered criticism of the war from the inside Britain.
Lloyd George, a rising liberal politician, was outspokenly critical of the British role
and its brutality, but on the whole British support remained wholeheartedly behind the
pacification of the Boers.
Finally, a treaty was signed between the antagonists in 1902, the Treaty of Vareneging.
By which time Britain had 300,000 troops in South Africa.
The treaty agreed that the Transvaal and the Orange Free State were now going to be incorporated
into the British Empire and that civil rights were going to be extended to the outlanders,
that is to the British miners who were working in South Africa.
But the British government also recognized the importance of conciliating the Boer leaders
with the result that they gave a lot of money for the rebuilding of the damaged infrastructure
of South Africa and they did everything they could to win over to their own side the leaders
of their Boer antagonists.
So that, for example, General Smuts, one of the Boer leaders, became a British general
during the First World War and Dennis Wright's book I mentioned to you previously was a British
regimental commander in the war and later on the South African High Commissioner.
In other words, the Boer leaders were reconciled to the British Empire.
Not least because the majority population of South Africa, that is the African majority,
the black majority, both sides agreed to completely exclude them from political power.
The whole struggle went on over the heads of the African people themselves.
So it wasn't really until the 1980s that the political rights of the African people
themselves could be taken into consideration as one of the principal factors in South African
politics.
Well, the Boer war along with a sense of German power and growing economic troubles was one
more of the things which put a dent into British imperial pride as the 20th century began.
