Lecture 33 Leisure
The rich had more leisure than the poor in Victorian Britain, but members of every social
class found ways to enjoy themselves.
Good rural forms of relaxation, including the maypole tradition, saint's day fairs,
and massive football matches, sometimes between entire communities, were often very rough
and lewd and saturated in alcohol.
Some of these old customs migrated into the industrial cities, but the Victorian era's
evangelical reformers tried to suppress the worst of them, particularly the sports which
depended on cruelty to animals like cock fighting and bull and bear baiting.
And with some of the others, particularly sports like cricket and football, reformers
tried to transform them into far more disciplined and orderly and rule-bound games, and especially
in the case of cricket, it became an honorable sport, having previously been rather dishonorable.
Cricket was played, in fact.
It was the game which crossed the most class barriers, and it migrated with the British
Empire, so that still today, throughout the world, cricket is played in places which were
once British colonies, India and Pakistan, Australia and New Zealand, South Africa and
the West Indies.
The British Imperial world, cricket was the great game, which also crossed all the class
barriers.
It was also in the mid to late Victorian period that professional football, the game which
Americans called soccer, became institutionalized, once enough people had the leisure on Saturday
afternoons to create a crowd to watch the games.
And by contrast with cricket, soccer was a strongly working class game.
Most sports retained a very distinct class identity.
Hunting was an aristocratic sport.
The new games or the relatively new games of tennis and golf were middle class games,
and football in particular was a working class game.
Thomas Cork was an entrepreneur of holiday making.
He was the first man to come up with the idea of package holidays, paying one price to get
the entire vacation to travel, the hotel and the food and everything.
And he also specialized in creating vacations to suit every pocketbook, vacations for the
very wealthy, to different parts of the world, and also simple ones for working class people,
usually to the new English seaside holiday resorts.
Well, first of all, the traditional leisure activities, most of which continue to thrive
in countryside districts far into the Victorian period, and sometimes beyond.
Most of them were related either to events in the Christian calendar, or to events in
the agricultural year, or else to the commemoration of historical events in British life.
And most of them were occasions for heavy drinking.
In a time before safe drinking water supplies were available, there was actually a public
health advantage to drinking alcohol, but of course it always had very disruptive effects
as well.
And so the year would go something like this.
It would begin with big celebrations at Christmas, often with mummer's plays, people playing
the Christmas story in the village, 12th night, the 12th day of Christmas would be another
big festival, bringing that season to an end.
Plough Monday, the day in which in many parts of Britain was the first day of the agricultural
year on which you'd begin to play all the fields, and then you'd celebrate that with
some drinks as well.
This is the first Monday after 12th night.
Pancake day was celebrated in most places.
This is Shrove Tuesday or Mardi Gras, the last day before Ash Wednesday, which is the first
day of Lent.
And because during Lent you're supposed to give up greasy and gratifying foods, on Shrove
Tuesday you'd cook up everything that was left and have a feast.
Traditionally it's the day in which English families eat pancakes.
And often you'd have pancake races down the village street.
Sometimes the women of the village would all gather with a pancake in a frying pan and they'd
run down the street tossing the pancake to see who could get to the finish line first.
That's a tradition which has persisted right up to the present in some villages, including
the one I grew up in.
Easter Day marked the end of Lent.
Obviously it's one of the great Christian festivals, and it also marks the beginning
of spring and the return of plenty in food, at least for those who can afford it.
On May Day the young boys and girls of the village would often dance around the Maypole,
each carrying a streamer and interweaving them in such a way as to make patterns on the Maypole.
Oak Apple Day was May the 29th.
This is the day which commemorates the escape of Prince Charles, the man who later became
King Charles II.
He escaped from Oliver Cromwell's army by hiding in an Oak Apple tree on May the 29th.
This is in 1647, I think, 1607.
Whitsontide was another heavy drinking festival.
Harvest Festival, when the harvest was brought in at the end, there were big, big dinners.
Often the farmer would treat the farm workers to a big dinner.
November the 5th was Guy Fawkes Day, the day on which the British Protestants remember
the breaking of a Catholic plot to explode the houses of parliament just in time, and
that was the day on which British kids would have fireworks originally, in some communities,
an anti-Catholic sermon followed by the fireworks, and so on.
Most parishes also had a fair, and usually the fair took place on the local Saint's Day,
so if your parish church was Saint John's, on Saint John's Day you'd have the village
fair.
At the fairs, travelling entertainers would often come to the village, and there would
be puppet shows and games and drunkenness, and again, sometimes inversion rituals, where
the squire or the most important people in the community would take on the humblest roles,
and sometimes you'd have the youngest person in the village be king for a day.
In other words, the social hierarchy would be turned upside down.
Anthropologists call them inversion rituals, and very often the fair also coincided with
courting boys and girls coming in from the countryside and the hiring of working men
for new jobs.
Now, a great number of these rural traditions migrated into the industrial cities.
The industrial workforce was made up of people mainly leaving the land and going to work
in the factory.
An evangelical writer called Lloyd Jones wrote a book called The Progress of the Working
Class in 1832.
It's got a rather disapproving evangelical tone, as you'll see, and here's what he says.
Large numbers of working people attended fairs and wakes, at the latter of which jumping
in sacks, climbing greased poles, grinning through horse collars for tobacco, hunting
pigs with greased tails were the choicest diversions, and almost general unchastity
prevailed among the women employed in the factories, and generally throughout the lowest
ranks of the working population.
But drink was the main spring of enjoyment.
When Saturday evening came, indulgences began which continued till Sunday evening.
Fiddles were to be heard on all sides, and limp-looking men and pale-faced women thronged
the public houses and reeled and jigged until they were turned drunken and riotous into
the streets at the most unseasonable hours.
In fact, sullen, silent work alternated with noisy, drunken riot.
You can tell how bitterly disapproves of all this.
Well the barbaric pastimes were transformed one by one by the Victorian reformers.
Bull and bear baiting, which earlier had been common, and cock fighting, were suppressed.
Parliament actually legislated against these blood sports in the 1830s.
And the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals was founded in 1824, and it became
the RSPCA, the Royal Society, in 1840.
Although its upper class patrons were very careful to exempt from their survey fox hunting,
and things like the Scottish field sports of deer stalking and quail shooting.
In other words, those were regarded as beyond the boundaries of objection, because the aristocracy
themselves participated.
And the reformers, just as they had the idea of trying to emphasize that temperance and sobriety
could be fun by introducing choirs, they also picked up certain days of the year, which previously
had been notorious boozing festivals, to make them days of Christian observance.
Whitson, for example, is a famous example.
In Lancashire and Yorkshire, it became a Sunday school processions day, and groups of Sunday
school children would get together and process and have prayer services together.
So it's solemnizing what had previously been a riotous occasion.
And as I mentioned in one of the earlier lectures, some working men, particularly what's called
the aristocracy of labor, that is the most respectable and most skill of the working men,
were themselves advocates of a new sobriety and self-discipline, the idea that they should
acquire education and lead sober industrious lives.
The tradition of St. Monday was in decline.
This is partly a change imposed from above.
Employers want them to stop, but partly also an initiative coming up from the bottom as well.
Evangelicals and the aristocracy of labor cooperated in trying to abandon the tradition,
which had been honored in many communities, of paying the men on Saturday night in the pub.
In other words, to get your paycheck, you had to actually go to the pub.
And of course, the temptation would be all the stronger that you'd at once start drinking
away the money you'd earned.
Well, the game of football was completely transformed.
It's the game which Americans call soccer.
Early football matches were terrifying events.
Often, for example, in the village of Derbyshire, sorry, the village of Ashbourne in Derbyshire,
every year on the Saints' Day during the fair, the game consisted of two enormous crowds of men
and there were no rules at all.
They had a pig's bladder, which was the ball.
And the sole objective of the teams was to get the ball for one end of the village or the other.
And the team which got the ball to its goal at the other end of the village was the winner.
And in fact, it was two great mobs fighting with one another.
People were thrown in the river.
People had their eyes gouged out.
There were horrible woundings and deaths and people being kicked.
And these massive scrimmages, a very, very violent thing.
British entertainments tended to be violent.
You can still get a little reminiscence of it by seeing soccer violence in Britain today,
which is also a highly ritualized activity.
And in those days, it took the form of participants in the game playing in this desperate way.
Well, Victorian reform has created a set of rules for soccer,
specifying 11 men on each side, specifying exact boundaries for the field
and rules governing the kind of conduct you could undertake while you were playing
and introduced the principle of having a referee who could decide
right on the spot when the rules had been violated.
Some of the public schools, notably Rugby School,
also began introducing soccer, but in a far more disciplined way for the boys' exercise.
Now, as I mentioned earlier, some of the evangelical reformists, the Sabotarians,
were eager to prevent any activity except church going on Sundays.
But by the later Victorian period, more and more of them were becoming sympathetic to the idea
that to simply stop leisure activities was impossible,
especially among men who routinely worked a six-day week and only had Sunday as their day off.
And so instead, organizations like the YMCA, the Young Men's Christian Association, began to promote
football as a healthy leisure game that the working men might play on Sundays.
And it became very, very popular indeed.
The Football Association, the F.A., which right up to the present is the Body Governing British
Soccer, was founded in 1863. And a professional soccer league in Britain began in 1889.
And again, the date is no coincidence. By then, there's a very, very good railway network,
so the trains from each of the different cities can rapidly get to the next one to meet their fixtures.
And by 1889 and 90, it was becoming increasingly common for factory workers to do a five-and-a-half
day week, to go to work on Saturday morning, but then have Saturday afternoon off as well as Sunday.
And Saturday afternoon was the time when the professional football games were played
and continued to be played right up to the present.
The social status of the game as a whole was going down.
At first, genteel in its new form, it gradually began to attract bigger and bigger working-class
crowds, sometimes of 10,000 or 15,000 or more already in the 1880s.
The Football Association created a trophy in 1871, the F.A. Cup, and it's an open competition which
any team could participate in. And it's still one of the greatest. It's the English equivalent
of the Super Bowl, intensely competed for right up to the present. Now, the very early winners
of the F.A. Cup, the national champions, tended to be gentlemen's teams. But in 1883, the final
was played between the Old Etonians, that is former boys of Eaton School, and Blackburn Olympic.
Blackburn is a little Lancashire textile town, and the Blackburn team had included three weavers,
a spinner, a dentist, and a crowd of factory workers, but Blackburn won. And this was a sign
that soccer was becoming increasingly a proletarian game. From then right up to the present, in fact,
in Britain and in most of the rest of the world, it's a classic working-class kids game, because
you can play it if you've just got a ball and nothing else. You just create an area of a field
or an area of the streets to play, certainly in places like Brazil also. It's got a very,
very strongly lower-class reputation. Now, by contrast, Cricket spanned the social classes
and has continued to do so. Americans often say, those who've been to Britain, Cricket's
so bewildering. It's so impossible to understand. This is quite untrue. It's a bat and ball game,
and anybody who can understand baseball can understand Cricket. And anyone who likes one
is going to like the other. So if you're a baseball fan, you will like Cricket as soon as
you've understood what's happening in the game. Now, it too had once been a very dangerous affair,
and it included things like deliberately flinging the ball as hard as you could at the batsman's
head. But again, the Victorians started to ritualize and reform the game to make it safer.
It's got a set of rules, and it's also got a very elaborate etiquette. And to be a good Cricketer,
you have to live up to the exacting expectations of the principles of etiquette as well.
In the early Victorian period, it was the subject of big bets, and a man called Thomas Lord,
who owned a cricket ground in London, promoted matches among the best players he could get
together. And it was like a horse race meeting, an occasion for big bets. The ground where he
operated this is still called Lord's, right up to the present. And now it's the head of the MCC,
the Metropolitan Cricket Club, which is the governing body of cricket.
Thomas Arnold, the reforming headmaster at Rugby School, tried to suppress Cricket at first,
because there were so many injuries associated with it. But finding himself unable to do so,
instead, he started to work on ways to transform the game. There was already an annual game
every year between Eaton and Harrow, the two most prominent of the private schools. And we've got
some letters written by Lord Byron when he was about 16. He was at Harrow, and he's boasting to
one of his friends about how well he played in the Eaton-Harrow match, and how many runs he'd scored.
But actually, we know he was lying, because we've still got the scorecard as well from the game,
showing that he did much less well than he claimed to have done. Well, now the thing about cricket,
again, comparable to baseball, is that it, to be played well, it's a perfect blend of individual
expertise and collective team endeavour. You've got to be a good individual, but you've also got
to be a good team member. And to play properly, to have the right sportsman-like attitude,
was a great attainment, really for English schoolboys, especially in the private schools.
Being a good cricketer was the very highest avenue of social status. The climax of Tom Brown's
School Days, the novel by Thomas Hughes, is a cricket match in which the Rugby Schoolboys
play against a group of townsmen, and the schoolboys lose, but that doesn't matter,
because they play it in a sportsman-like way. They show that they're Christian gentlemen,
and that's the really important thing. And in a vast quantity of boys' literature written in
Britain ever since then, a cricket match often plays a very important role, because cricket's
the game they play during the spring term, and so if you're about to leave school, it's the game
you're playing as your school days come to an end forever. And book after book has these
elegiac cricket matches. By the 1880s and 90s, the schools particularly were playing it with
intense earnestness. You've got to be good at cricket. Let me read to you now from the memoirs
of Leonard Wolfe. This is the man who later on married Virginia Wolfe. And he says that the
headteacher at his school, a man named Wolfe, would bring out all the boys into the playground and
give everyone of them a cricket bat, and they'd have batting practice together. Not with a ball,
but just making the right kinds of strokes. The batting is itself very highly stylized,
and to be able to play with a straight bat, in fact that's become a metaphor for being an honest
and upright person in England, how he plays with a very straight bat. Here's how he describes
these incidents at his school. Wolfe, a handsome, dark, lean, graceful man, faced us with a bat in
his hand, like a conductor before his orchestra. Forward or off drive, he would say, making the
stroke perfectly himself. And the whole school would play forward or off drive. And he, like the
great conductor, would spot even the smallest boy in the back row if he did not come perfectly
straightforward or did not follow through with the drive in perfect style. From Wolfe, I learned
the seriousness of games, the importance of style, the duty when you go into bat of making every stroke
with a concentration which an artist puts into every stroke of his brush in painting a masterpiece.
Now, I don't know about that passage. It seems to me that it's written without irony. It could be
a hilarious passage because the whole thing is so ridiculous, but it doesn't seem to be in this case.
Leonard Wolfe himself was Jewish and so potentially susceptible to anti-Semitism,
which was, it wasn't a terrific problem, but it was kind of a scattered phenomenon in Britain.
But in fact, he had very high status at the school because he was a good cricket player.
That trumped any other associated problem it might have. And as I mentioned to you before,
C.S. Lewis had a wretched time at school because he was bad at cricket. It made all the difference
in the world. Now, one of the differences between Britain and America is that in Britain,
the great thing is to be an amateur. In America, if you say, oh, that's a bit amateurish,
it's denigrating, isn't it? But in Britain, it's praise. The bad thing in Britain is to be a
professional. Perhaps that's one of the sources of Britain's economic decline. Well, certainly
in cricket, there was a very sharp distinction among the first-class players between the gentlemen
and the players. Every year in Britain, starting in about 1825 or 6, right through until 1963,
there was an annual game called The Gentleman vs. the Players. And it was a contest between the
very best of the cricketers who were paid, the players, and the very best who weren't paid,
the gentlemen. And the gentlemen often won. In other words, the really high status thing was
to play first-class cricket and not be paid for it. That was the great thing. It's always been
regarded in Britain as a little bit infridig to have to be paid for an activity.
Well, the most famous of the gentlemen was a man called W.G. Grace, a brilliant player who
started in his teens and played right through until his late 50s. He was one of the greatest of
England's gentlemen players. One of his cousins was called Gilbert Grace, also a player, also a
cricketer, I'm sorry, not a player, because he wasn't paid. But unfortunately, for Gilbert Grace,
the family was in fact very hard up. They were, you know, he was suffering from genteel poverty.
He was offered pay for his cricket, but felt it would be so socially belittling to him to accept
money for it that instead he started stealing money from other players' clothes. He'd sneak
into the locker room and steal money from their coats. Well, it became known that money was
disappearing in odd ways. And so finally W.G. Grace, the great star, hired a private detective
who witnessed his cousin doing it. And the family confronted Gilbert and told him that he could no
longer play, and in fact that he must get out of the country altogether. So he took himself
off to Canada and lived out his life in exile. It wasn't until about 1970 that this story even
emerged. It's taken place 80 or 90 years previously. But that's a vivid example of the fact that
you mustn't get paid for it, if possible. Arthur Conan Doyle, the author of Shill Our Combs,
was a great cricketer. He even played for England on a couple of occasions. And he belonged to a
cricket club, a group of writers and London entertainers whose captain was J.M. Barrie,
the man who wrote Peter Pan. Well, now, recent cricket history is an enormous industry in Britain,
just like baseball history is in America. Cricket stories recently have discovered that W.G.
Grace did sometimes get some money for playing. In other words, for example, he was asked if he'd
go on the England Cricket Tourist to Australia and was given the incentive of some money,
but kept it secret. He didn't want it to be known that he was being paid because he thought it would
be shaming to do so. Well, cricket spread throughout the British Empire. And by now,
the best players in the world are the West Indians, who are far better. I mean, routinely,
when England and the West Indies meet, England loses. There were some brilliant Indian players
as well. And one of them in the late Victorian period became famous throughout the Empire.
His name was Ranjee Vibhaji. He was a prince, the Sahib of Nawanagar. He came from Gujarat in
Northwest India and was an exact contemporary of Gandhi, the Indian independence leader.
Studied in Britain for a while. And while he was there, began to play cricket for the
county of Sussex. In those days, it was possible to play, even though he was Indian,
the county could make an exception. And he played for the England team for a while. So when the
English team visited Australia, Ranjee was playing with them. And he was their great star that year.
And in Australia, all kinds of things began to be named after him. You could get the Ranjee
sandwich and Ranjee hair gel, just in the way that today, you know, there's a chocolate bar
called a baby roof. It's the same sort of principle, I suppose. Well, let me read you a poem. I
mentioned last time the dreadful poet laureate, Alfred Orston. Another of the great Imperial
poets, actually a shade better than Orston in some ways, was Henry Neubolt. And in 1898,
he wrote a poem called Vita Lampada, where the poem begins with a school cricket match
in which a young man through disciplined play manages to enable his team to win.
And does it, but does it not for the victory, but for the honor? And then the poem jumps forward
in time to one of the crisis of one of the colonial wars, where he's fighting in a square of soldiers
and the square is broken. But he remembers his cricketing prowess and the cool demeanor he learned
as a young cricketer. And that enables him to beat the savage foe. Here's a couple of verses.
And the game is being played in an area called the close of the school.
And his team needs 10 runs to win, which in cricket is a reasonable target.
There's a breathless hush in the close tonight. Ten to make and a match to win. A bumping pitch
and a blinding light, an hour to play and the last man in. And it's not for the sake of a ribboned
coat or the selfish hope of a season's fame, but his captain's hand on his on his shoulder
smote. Play up, play up and play the game. Then we jump forward into the wars. The sand of the
desert is sodden red, red with the wreck of a square that broke, the gatlings jammed and the
colonels dead, and the regiments blind with dust and smoke. The river of death has brimmed its
banks and England's far and honors a name. But the voice of a schoolboy rallies the ranks.
Play up, play up and play the game. Well, it's terrifically popular poem at the time.
By far the one poem by Newbold that everyone can remember. By contrast, Rudyard Kipling didn't
like cricket. And in his novel, Storky and Co., the hero there is a kid who deliberately avoids
cricket and therefore avoids the discipline that you learn from the game. But later on, again,
the book jumps from school days to the colonial wars. And it's there. It's because he's not a team
player that he can show the kind of initiative that the cricketers can't show and he saves the
regiment from disaster. But in both cases, there's a cricket incident followed by a colonial war
incident and the implications of what sort of character you learn from it. Well, then, and
certainly right up to the present, the county championship, the first-class game, was played
by a mixture of gentlemen and working-class players. And it was taken very seriously at every
level of society. New sports were becoming popular in the upper and middle classes. Hunting was
still a very high status game. And one of the sports and one of the ways in which you should
show you were becoming wealthy was by becoming a hunter who'd keep his own stable of hunting
horses and so on. When Prince Albert got married, at first, as you know, he was rather unpopular
because he was foreign. But when British people, when the upper classes discovered that he was a
good rider, his popularity increased, his Lord Greville, who says he acquitted himself in the
field very creditably. He was supposed to be a very poor performer in this line. And as Englishmen
love manliness and dexterity in field sports, it will have raised him considerably in public
estimation to have rode well after the hounds in Leicestershire. The Queen herself wrote,
this is in 1843, one can hardly credit the absurdity of people here. But Albert's riding so boldly
and hard has made such a sensation that it's been written about all over the country. And they make
more of it than if he'd done some great act. It rather disgusts one. But still, but still it has
done and does good. But it's put an end to all impertinent sneering for the future about Albert's
riding. This was the kind of thing that really mattered. Golf was a traditional Scottish game,
but it caught on among the English middle classes in the mid and late Victorian period. And the
first English golf club was founded in 1864. It was about the same period, actually 1874,
a little bit later, that Major Wingfield patented a new sport, which he calls
Swaristiki. One of his friends said, you know, it's never going to catch on. Although in fact,
now it's a very, very popular game. But it was renamed Lawn Tennis. That's what we all call it,
or just tennis. The All England Croquet Club, founded in 1874, changed its name in 1877,
adding the word Lawn Tennis. And this was at Wimbledon, which of course is the place where
the annual open English tennis tournament takes place. And now tennis and golf had a very middle
class identity. So the working class plays football, the middle classes play golf and tennis,
and the upper classes go hunting. But they all play cricket together.
Well, holiday making was another development of the Victorian period. And again, once again,
the perfection of a railroad network made it possible for everybody to travel, at least
occasionally. Nobody in Britain lived more than about 90 miles from the seaside. And so this was
the period when a whole set of seaside holiday resorts grew up. Blackpool, Brighton, Southend,
Skagnes, and Torquay. And depending on which of the industrial cities you lived in, you tend to go
to whichever was the closest to these seaside resorts. Working men sometimes had to be contented
with simply a day trip to the seaside using the parliamentary trains. And Thomas Cook was
the first entrepreneur to take advantage of this new potential mobility in a systematic way.
His first tour was just from Leicester to Loughborough, only about 10 or 12 miles,
to enable a group of temperance enthusiasts to visit a Loughborough temperance meeting.
But it wasn't long before he saw the logic of the potential of these holidays and began to
organize them, very ambitious ones, such as to see the pyramids of Egypt, where he'd arrange for
you to get onto a ship in England and go to the Eastern Mediterranean and then on a boat up the
Nile. But also very simple ones where it was just a matter of going for two or three days to Blackpool
to enjoy the beach and some fun. The fun fairs at the beaches were themselves descendants,
really, of the old county fairs. As the county fairs had died out, as the nation became more
industrialized, the seaside towns became a place where you'd go for a few days to have a fair-like
atmosphere. And so they're very vulgar places, fun fairs, peep shows, heavy drinking, fish and
chips. And of course, in the nature of things, the weather's nearly always bad when you go there.
So you're having to shelter inside and drink heavily, even when you're there.
By now, the English seaside holiday towns are in steep decline because of the increasing
availability of foreign travel, but they enjoyed their heyday between about 1870 and 1930.
Well, the study of leisure has become important to historians in recent decades,
because the historians now understand how much you can learn about a society and the way in which
it spends its spare time, and the significant way in which there are links between economic
activity and leisure activity. In other words, just as you had to learn a new discipline to work
in the factory, say you'd learn a new discipline in the sports you tended to play. There are
obvious connections of this kind. Historians agree that leisure was transformed in Victorian Britain
under a combination of these forces, industrialization, urbanization and evangelicalism.
So it's one more of the ways in which we can get a little insight into everyday life there.
