Lecture 35, Victoria after Albert, 1861 to 1901.
Queen Victoria never fully recovered from the shock of Prince Albert's death, and throughout
the whole of the rest of her life she wore mourning clothes.
Prince Albert died when she was 42 years old, and she lived on to the age of 81, so in
other words the second half of her life she lived as a widow, and throughout the entire
period of her widowhood she wore mourning all the time.
In the 1860s and early 70s she was very reluctant even to do her constitutional duties such
as the state opening of parliament, and became more and more reclusive, and as she did so
her popularity began to decline so that really for the only time in her reign the idea of
abolishing the monarchy altogether began to revive.
She drew some solace from the companionship of a Scottish servant called John Brown whom
she trusted very implicitly.
And his death in 1883 was another stunning blow to her sense of herself.
Her last and most ardent follower was an Indian servant, an Indian Muslim servant called the
Munchie, who was her servant right up from about 1887 until the time of her death.
In the very last years of her reign, particularly after her golden jubilee celebration of 1887,
and her diamond jubilee celebration of 1897, her popularity began to recover, and certainly
when she died in 1901 there was an enormous outpouring of grief in Britain.
You'd have to have been more than 65 years old even to remember anybody else being on
the British throne, and already by the late 80s she'd been queen longer than anyone else
had ever been the monarch of Great Britain.
Well first of all her reclusiveness after Prince Albert's death.
She always wore morning clothes, even at her children's weddings, and she used to go to
bed with a cast, a plastic cast of Albert's hand.
And sometimes she'd take one of his dressing gowns into bed with her as well.
She wrote on paper with very, very broad black margins.
This was common morning note paper, but it used to annoy her servants and helpers because
the writing would go off into the black and be completely unintelligible.
She became morbidly fascinated with funerals and would attend lots of them and require
her staff to come along as well, and there's a certain amount of irritable correspondence
among them saying that they'd had to attend even the funerals of a minor housemaid, for
example, at the Queen's demand.
She refused to attend many of her official functions.
Here's a letter she wrote explaining how reluctant she was to open Parliament in 1866, which
was one of her official duties.
The Queen must say that she does feel very bitterly the want of feeling of those who
asked the Queen to go and open Parliament.
Why this wish should be of so unreasonable and unfeeling a nature as to long to witness
the spectacle of a poor, broken-hearted widow, nervous and shrinking, dragged in deep mourning?
Alone in state as a show where she used to go supported by her husband is a thing she
cannot understand.
She resents the unfeelingness of those who have clamored for it.
She became a hyper-contract.
She complained constantly of feeling far too ill or sick and fully expected in her early
40s that she was going to follow Albert very quickly into an early grave.
She treated herself in the first years after his death as an invalid who was herself on
the brink of the grave.
As you know, in fact, she lived on to a very ripe old age at a time when it was unusual
indeed to live to 80.
She had a doctor called William Jenner and she'd tell him that she was very, very sick
and he'd examine her and say that he could find no evidence of it, but she'd bully him
to confirm her version of the story that she was, in fact, gravely ill.
As she became reclusive, her popularity declined.
In 1864, a rather cruel practical joke, somebody one night stuck up on the railings of Buckingham
Palace, a sign that said, for sale.
These commanding premises to be let or sold in consequence of the late occupants declining
business.
In other words, it's almost as though the monarch isn't there at all.
Now one of the reasons that she particularly disliked Gladstone when he became Prime Minister
in 1868 was that he used to make her do a certain number of these state functions.
Two bridges, the Blackfriars Bridge and the Holborn Viaduct, were both opened on the same
day in 1869 and he demanded, in effect, that she go along and do it.
She went very reluctantly and was hissed by people in the crowd who began to think,
we're getting no benefit at all from our monarch.
A radical member of parliament called Charles Dilke said, the Queen costs a million pounds
a year to the tax payers of Britain and they get nothing back for it and he was cheered
in the commons.
He and certain other radicals proposed that England become a republic on the American
model.
Now in 1871, two things happened in close conjunction which had a surprising effect of restoring
the prestige of the monarchy.
The first was, yet another revolution in France, the Paris Commune, the overthrow of
Louis Napoleon, Napoleon III, an invasion by Germany and anarchic scenes in the streets
of Paris.
Suddenly the people of Britain reflected, particularly the upper classes reflected,
well at least our constitutional monarchy spares us this kind of constant turbulence
in which France has suffered from it in the last 50 years.
So her oldest son, Bertie, that is the man who was later going to become King Edward VII,
fell gravely ill with typhoid and it seemed highly probable that he was going to die.
There were anxious news bulletins every day and finally Bertie pulled through and recovered
and there was great popular rejoicing at his recovery.
So it wasn't an event which directly pertained to the Queen itself, nevertheless it indicated
a durability to enthusiasm for the monarchy.
Well throughout the second half of her life, Queen Victoria depended heavily on the help
of a small group of friends and special assistants.
She didn't like Gladstone, but she loved Israeli, her great conservative Prime Minister
and he himself was a marvellously accomplished flatterer, very obsequious and very careful
to make to imply that all the good ideas were her ideas, that he was simply following her
will.
Here's a little fragment from the letter he wrote to her on becoming Prime Minister.
Your Majesty's life has been passed in constant communion with great men and the knowledge
and management of important transactions.
Even if your Majesty were not gifted with those great abilities which all must now acknowledge,
this rare and choice experience must give your Majesty an advantage in judgment which few
living persons and probably no living Prince can rival.
Well he knew how to really ladle it on thick.
It was he who made her Empress of India in 1876 and as I mentioned earlier more and more
of her relatives were claiming the title of Emperor so she felt it was good to be able
to join in.
And he in turn did use her as a testing point for public opinion.
He said that if everyone wanted to know what the middle classes were going to think about
some new measure of government, he'd simply describe the proposal to Queen Victoria because
he was confident that her reaction would be the reaction of the British middle classes
and he said that regularly it was true so she was a good representative figure for public opinion.
Gladstone was respectful towards her as well but he didn't pretend to be taking her advice
in policy issues as Disraeli did and very often would, certainly as she thought, he
would talk down to her.
Also, the Queen had heard rumours like so many people that Gladstone was not only helping
to get the prostitutes back on the straight and narrow but that he was having affairs
with them.
And at one point he actually said to one of his ministers, Lord Stanmore, why is the
Queen so cold towards me?
And Lord Stanmore said, well apparently she's heard stories that you're consorting with
the prostitutes.
Gladstone's answer to that was, if the Queen thinks that of me, she is quite right to treat
me as she does.
Well, a Scottish companion, a Scottish servant, John Brown, became her favourite companion.
He was about seven years older than Queen Victoria and had been a familiar figure at
Balmoral, their Scottish house, while Prince Albert was still alive.
He took them riding and on one occasion he saved Victoria from a riding accident.
Knowing that he was very popular and that the Queen liked and trusted him, this doctor,
Brenna, brought John Brown down to Windsor, the residence outside London, after Prince
Albert's death in the hope that he could persuade her to take up riding again.
In fact, she was suffering from a very acute depression and the doctor hoped that by getting
her to do some activities she'd start recovering her equilibrium.
And sure enough, once Brown was there at Windsor, he would persuade her to go out riding.
You can see all this in a very good movie about it called Mrs. Brown, which shows scenes
of this kind.
She liked him because he was completely unafraid of her.
Sometimes you'd call her woman in a very rough Scottish accent.
And he was the only person in the 60s and 70s who could make her do what she didn't
really want to do.
Because he was so influential with her, it wasn't long before John Brown got an important
position at court and was able to, in effect, boss around other courtiers, certainly other
members of the royal household.
And she was so loyal in her devotion to him right to the end of his life that he became
an extremely important person to know and to stay on the right side of, if you wanted,
for example, to get access to the Queen.
Sometimes he'd even prevent her children from having access to her, if, in his opinion,
she needed the rest.
Well, his nickname was Mrs. Brown, and it was the allegation was that they'd secretly
got married.
There were rumors to that effect, or that they were having an affair.
One of his nicknames, among the other servants, was the Queen's Stallion.
Lytton Strachey in his biography of Queen Victoria writes this,
John Brown had, too, in her mind, a special connection with Albert.
In their expeditions, the Prince had always trusted him more than anyone else.
The gruff, kind, hairy Scotsman was, she felt, in some mysterious way a legacy from the dead.
She came to believe, at last, or so it appeared, that the spirit of Albert was nearer when
Brown was near.
Periodically, from then right up to the present, every few years, there's a shocking new revelation,
some papers come to light, reinforcing the idea that they were sexually involved.
For example, in 1972, the secret diary of William Scow and Blunt was uncovered, was
published.
Now, he had heard, from Princess Louise, this is one of the young princesses, sculpture
instructor, Edgar Berm, that Brown had unbounded influence with the Queen, quote, treating
her with little respect and presuming in every way upon his position with her.
Blunt tells us that she used to go to a little hillside house with him when they were staying
at Balmoral, and that his room was right next to hers, while all the ladies and waiting
were housed at the other end of the place, ostensibly says he could take care of the
guard dogs, which were looking after her.
It actually says, Blunt, he had every conjugal privilege.
And Berm added, the Queen, who had been passionately in love with her husband, got it into her
head that somehow the princess spirit had passed into Brown.
This is a theme which comes up constantly, that somehow the spirit of Prince Albert is
embodied in John Brown.
Well, he was a drinker and sometimes would be incapacitated, be drunk and unconscious
from drinking Scotch whiskey.
Normally, the Queen would have been highly disapproving of something like that, but she
agreed to turn a blind eye to it in the case of John Brown.
So if she was told that he was indisposed, which was a euphemism for his being drunk,
she'd say, oh poor man, he needs his rest, he must recover himself as best he can.
In 1872, a young man fired a pistol at the Queen, and it was John Brown who wrestled
the would-be assassin to the ground.
It was one of seven attempts to assassinate Queen Victoria, although several of them,
including this one, were made by young men who seemed to just want to make a display
rather than really kill her because they didn't have, they had powder in the gun, but not
a bullet.
In other words, it was a non-lethal shot aimed at the Queen.
The young man was given a year in prison and 20 strokes of the birch rod, but meanwhile
the Queen, in gratitude, had a special gold medal struck to be presented to John Brown.
When he died in 1883, she felt absolutely crushed, and her grieving was commensurate
with the grieving she'd shown for Albert.
Here's a letter to Victoria, her eldest daughter, I feel so stunned and bewildered.
He protected me so that I felt safe.
And now all, all is gone in this world, and all seems unhinged again in a thousand ways.
The shock, the blow, the blank, the constant missing at every turn of the one strong, powerful
arm and head.
This anguish that comes over me like a wave is terrible.
Gods will be done, but I shall never be the same again.
Four years later, in 1887, she met the Munshi Abdul Karim, was his name, and he became
her servant throughout her, her old age.
He was then 24 and working as a waiter, but it wasn't long before she gave him preferment
and he became her more or less constant assistant and companion in the way that John Brown had
been.
He even taught her some Hindustani, she was very eager to learn the language now that
she'd become Empress of India.
And he in turn, having become the great royal favorite, began to take on heirs and graces
and to adopt a position of relatively greater importance at court because he too could control
access to the Queen and he needed to be in his good graces to be in hers.
Well she defended him against all kinds of detractors because he was a widely hated figure
at court.
And she was, well if they were apart, she'd write him letters, signed, your loving mother.
By then she's in her 70s and he's in his 20s, there's a very big age difference between
the two of them.
And her courtier suspected that he was having a baleful political influence.
Obviously, one of the great issues in the government of India was the constant tension
between the Muslims and the Hindus.
He himself was a Muslim.
And because she would regularly receive state papers, some of which were secret, pertaining
to Indian affairs, the allegation was made that he was reading these documents and gathering
information which was supposed to be kept secret and then passing them on to a friend
of his called Rafiuddin Amr, a member of the Muslim Patriotic League, that is an Islamic
fundamentalist group.
So the allegation was that England's potential enemies in India were getting secrets right
from the highest position.
Incidentally, he'd been misleading about his own origins.
He claimed that he was the son of a wealthy Indian doctor.
But when courtiers investigated, they found that his father was a poor apothecary in an
Indian village.
So the Munchies rise really was an astonishing accomplishment, very unlikely.
And when she heard that his father was a poor drug peddler in one of the villages, she
flatly refused to believe it.
Most of the royal household detested him, partly for racial reasons.
On one occasion, for example, in 1897, the whole royal household rebelled and said that
they were all going on to France for a holiday.
And the whole royal household collectively said to the Queen, please don't bring the
Munchie.
The Queen then rage and swept everything off her desk and said that they were all guilty
of racial prejudice and they should be ashamed of themselves.
And the Munchie was definitely coming.
One thing they found it hard to endure was that he should sit at the dinner table with
them.
When she died in 1901, the Munchie was pensioned off and sent back to live in comfort in India
for the whole of the rest of his life.
The Queen was very conservative, both in a big seaway, but politically conservative
way.
In a social way, she didn't really want changes to take place in her life.
And many of her servants did devote the whole of their lives to her.
So that as she aged, many of her household aged with her.
Her private secretary was called Henry Ponsonby and he was a man who knew her very, very well
and was extremely tactful and knew how far he could push her in issues of confrontation.
He said at one point, when she insists that two and two make five, I say that I cannot
help thinking, but that they make four.
She replies that there may be some truth in what I say, but she knows they make five.
Thereupon I dropped the discussion.
It is of no consequence and I leave it there.
She was very imperious and hated to be contradicted.
And Ponsonby knew exactly how to manage without infuriating her too much.
She had nine children and their marriages meant that in the later years of her life,
she was closely linked with all the royal families of Europe.
Just listen briefly to some of the connections which were established through her relatives.
Her oldest daughter, Victoria, married the king of Prussia and their son was Kaiser Wilhelm
II, the man who has a large responsibility for the onset of the First World War.
Her oldest son, Bertie, married Alexandra, the Danish princess, and one of their daughters
married the king of Norway.
Her third child, Princess Alice, married the Grand Duke of Hesse, Darmstadt, and their
sixth child, married the Russian Tsar, Nicholas II of Russia.
Her fourth child, Prince Alfred, married a Russian Duchess, and two of their daughters
married the king of Romania and the king of Spain.
The seventh child, Prince Arthur, married a Prussian princess, and one of their daughters
married the king of Sweden.
The ninth, Beatrice, married another German prince, and their daughter Victoria, Victoria
Eugenie, also became a Spanish queen.
So you can see here that by the end of her lifetime, the royal families were all interlinked,
and she was the grandmother of a great many of the royal heirs of Europe.
Her eighth son, Prince Leopold, was the one who suffered from hemophilia, the inability
of the blood to clot properly.
He was very awkward and clumsy, and he would sometimes fall and have very, very severe
bruises which would bleed internally and become really health, life-threatening.
Where to and on else, there'd be minor incidents.
Now her idea, Victoria's idea was that she'd keep him and then her youngest daughter, Princess
Beatrice, permanently at home as companions.
Because as they reached their twenties, they became increasingly restless with this confining
way of life with their mother, and eventually each of them married, even though their mother
was reluctant to let that happen.
Now poor old Leopold eventually died in 1884 at the age of 31 after having a fall which
to most people would have been a relatively harmless incident.
She had 38 grandchildren and by now has hundreds of living relatives throughout the world.
Relations with all these children, but particularly with Bertie, the oldest son, remained very
strained.
He never quite got over the idea that it was Bertie who had caused the death of Prince
Albert, and he certainly never lived up to her moral expectations.
He was a notorious philanderer, had a whole succession of celebrated mistresses and would
periodically have flings with other women in society, and sometimes not really in society.
He was sometimes called to give evidence in divorce cases.
For example, in 1870 Harriet Mordent admitted in her divorce that she'd committed adultery
with several other men, and one of the men she named was the Prince of Wales.
He strongly denied it, but he had written her some very affectionate letters which sounded
compromising, especially in terms of the day.
The Queen believed his protestation that on this occasion he was innocent, but she was
still furious with him because it was so indiscreet of him to have written letters of this kind
which were constantly compromising the dignity of the royal family.
And she said, you're setting such a bad example to the lower classes.
That's one of the things which pained her most.
His oldest son, Prince Eddie, died in 1900.
Right, just at a time when the father, Bertie, was himself involved in another scandal.
All through his adult life these scandals kept on coming up.
This was the Trembie Croft affair he'd been playing backer at for very high stakes at a
country house where cheating had been discovered and it led to a public scandal.
So Bertie seemed unable to keep out of rather embarrassing trouble throughout his life and
was always acutely aware of his mother's disapproval of his life.
He was nearly 60 when he succeeded to the throne.
Victoria had very ambivalent feelings about Germany.
She herself was half German, her mother was a German princess, her husband had been German.
They spoke German together a lot, her favorite daughter married the Kaiser and so on.
But nevertheless she did recognize the growing power of Germany, particularly after the unification
of Germany in 1870.
As she hated Bismarck, the man who was chiefly responsible for that accomplishment.
And so in the very last days of her life she already had premonitions of Anglo-German rivalry
which was going to displace the very close proximity between the two which had gone on
through most of her own life.
Now, as I said at the beginning, in the last years of her reign her popularity began to
recover.
She came out into society more in the 1880s, still in only limited ways and still wearing
her morning dress.
But nevertheless she was available again and what most of the British public wanted was
simply to be able to see the Queen.
1887 marked her 50th year on the throne.
She'd come to the throne in 1837, 87 was 50 years later, the Golden Jubilee and she attended
a service which was held at Westminster Abbey, still refusing to wear robes of state but
just instead wearing her black.
Part of the music at the service was a setting of the Tadeum which had been composed by Prince
Albert himself.
The previous year, 1886, was the moment at which she'd passed the longevity record and
had become Queen for longer than any other monarch in British history.
Ten years later she was still thriving and the Diamond Jubilee celebrations in 1897
are regarded by many historians as the official high watermark of the British Empire, the
moments at which Britain bestowed the world, certainly if you look at the map and see which
parts of it were pink, usually the British Empire was marked in pink, about a quarter
or something approaching a quarter of the Earth's land surface was marked, it was called
the Empire on which the sun never sets and people from all over the Empire came into
England and processed through London.
The 11 leaders of what were called the White Dominions, that is areas to which a lot of
British settlers had gone, and then cavalry troops from all the provinces of India, the
West Indies, South Africa, the Gold Coast, Ghana, China, Malaya and Burma.
The Queen herself processed through London in an open land now with eight cream horses
and had a good time, it was a nice day.
She wrote afterwards, it was a never to be forgotten day.
No one ever I believe has met with such an ovation as was given to me, passing through
those six miles of streets, the crowds were indescribable, the cheering was quite deafening
and every face seemed to be filled with real joy.
She sent an electric telegraph message throughout the whole Empire, this is in the early days
of electricity when it's becoming more sophisticated.
From my heart I thank my beloved people, may God bless them.
And one group of old men who cheered as she went past were the survivors of the charge
of the Light Brigade, itself by then already a historic event from the 50s.
She perhaps never grasped really the extent of the impoverishment of most of her subjects.
E. F. Benson, a popular writer of the time and himself the son of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
writes this very shrewd comment about her.
She knew nothing whatever of the working classes, of the barbarous beggary, of the poverty and
suffering and squalor in which she lived.
And when some inarticulate protest from below seized up into horse murmurings and mutterings,
she heard in them nothing but threats of rioters and revolutionaries who uttered menaces against
all which made for stability and ordered government.
She was a firm believer in class, but she knew of only three.
First came the monarchy, then came the upper and landed class which directly buttressed
the throne, thirdly there was the great middle class which she could see was becoming the
governing power.
Below it there came no doubt a very large quantity of dim human beings, but of these she neither
saw nor heard anything to any purpose.
While it was true that she used to go when she was at Balmoral in Scotland to visit the
crofters, that is the local peasantry in effect of the Scottish Highlands, but they were very
because they lived there and because of who they were they lived in abnormally good circumstances.
They were clean and decent and well cared for.
She certainly never ventured into the urban rookries, the real slums of the big cities
and she hardly ever visited the places on which the British Industrial Revolution had
been based, places like Manchester and Leeds and Liverpool.
She died in 1901, aged 81, having just survived the very worst catastrophes of the Boer War
and witnessed the gradual recovery of the British military position in South Africa,
the great upheaval of the turn of the century.
She had a stroke and was gravely ill and her grandson, the Kaiser, came from Germany.
He was called her grandmama and she was actually in his arms when she died.
This was at Osborne on the Isle of Wight, another of her favourite houses.
Well she'd given a notification in her will that she wanted to be buried beside Prince
Albert who was at Frogmore in Windsor and so on her instructions into her coffin were
placed, her wedding veil from 1841, her favourite rings and bracelets, a cast of Prince Albert's
hand, the same one she'd always taken to bed, his dressing gown, but also in her other
hand a photograph of John Brown with the lock of his hair, this is one of the pieces of
evidence used of course by the people who suspect that they'd been very close.
Now earlier in the 70s, Lord Tennyson had told her that he thought funerals ought to
be white rather than black and even though she herself always wore black and she made
a concession to this idea that she got from Tennyson of having the horses drawing the
coffin be white horses instead of the usual black funerary ones.
The coffin was brought from the Isle of Wight to the English mainland, went on a train up
to London, then was carried through the streets of London to Paddington Station and on another
train out to Windsor Castle to where the place where the Muslim was to be.
A sculptor called Maricetti had made an effigy of Albert back in 1861 after his death and
she'd ordered one to be made of her at the same time, so it depicts him as a 41 or 2
year old and her at about the same age, but such a lot of time had gone past since then
another 40 years that they'd lost track of where the effigy of her was and so a big search
ensued and finally it turned up, bricked up in part of the works department at Windsor
Castle, so it was brought out and polished off and placed beside his on the tomb which
they shared together.
So finally Bertie, her son, became King Edward VII at the age of 60.
Throughout her whole life Queen Victoria had had a very, very highly developed sense of
responsibility and duty.
One of the reasons we know so much about her is because she herself wrote so much, both
in letters to her friends and family and in her very, very extensive diary and in state
papers she was constantly in touch with what was happening in her ministry.
She really did do a great deal to restore the plausibility of the monarchy, so much so
that it could even withstand the shock of that long period in the middle of her reign
when she'd in effect abandoned most of her duties.
Throughout her whole life though, from beginning to end, she'd been afraid that she was going
to go mad like George III, her own grandfather.
And I'd like to close this lecture by reading again from this man, E. F. Benson, one of his
witty but very, very shrewd remarks about her.
He says that she was never in any danger of going mad.
Queen Victoria was a woman of peerless common sense.
Her common sense, which is a rare gift at any time, amounted to genius.
She'd been brought up by her mother with the utmost simplicity and she retained it to the
end and conducted her public and private life alike by that infallible guide.
She had no imagination, no flight of fancy ever bore her away.
She looked very steadily with her rather prominent blue eyes on every situation that presented
itself and made up her mind as to what was the level-headed and sensible thing to do.
Common sense poured out of her gray and strong like the waters of the Amazon.
Thank you.
