Lecture 36 The Victorian Legacy
This course on Victorian Britain has been half chronological and half thematic.
We've generally moved from the early Victorian period through to the turn of the 20th century.
But with lots of pauses and digressions along the way to survey issues which don't lend themselves so easily to chronological study.
Like changing ideas about women and servants, leisure activities, the music, the art and the architecture and so on.
Now in this final lecture I'd like to give a brief overview of the whole period and bring your attention again to some of the paradoxical aspects of Victorian life
and the striking contrasts which it presents so that we can make some general conclusions about Victorian Britain as a whole.
Well first of all politically, clearly this is a period in which Britain moved towards being a political democracy of a recognisable modern kind.
Impediments to voting and impediments to sitting in Parliament were gradually removed.
Three great reform acts in 1832, 1867 and 1884 expanded the franchise so that by the time of Victoria's death most, although still not all, of British men could vote.
Women were still excluded and the women's suffrage movement was then gathering steam.
The secret ballot introduced in 1872 meant that it was no longer possible to tell exactly who had voted for whom.
And the Corrupt Practices Act of 1883 really brought to an end very effectively the use of bribery in elections which until then had been extremely commonplace.
That in turn meant that elections were honest by the kinds of standards we'd apply now and that poor people who didn't have the resources to bribe were more likely to be able to be admitted.
After 1829 you couldn't be excluded from Parliament because you were a Roman Catholic.
After 1858 you couldn't be excluded because you were a Jew.
And after 1888 you couldn't be excluded because you were an atheist.
So once again the special privileges attaching to members of the Church of England were gradually dismantled.
We live in democratic circumstances and we tend to take it for granted that democracy is superior to its rivals.
So one of the challenges of studying history of this kind is to take seriously the fact that democracy had very serious critics who did have a good point to make.
Even if you disagree with the point you need to take seriously the fact that they took it seriously.
The great criticism that was made against it was this, that the more democratic politics become the more the politicians have to pander to their constituencies.
The less free they are simply to use their intellect in all its fullness and clarity because now they're going to be more and more constrained by their awareness of what the voters want.
In other words the level is going to descend, the level of political discussion is going to descend and it's going to tend to become more and more the work of demagogues.
In their view representative meant mediocre and some brilliant people voiced this view throughout the 19th century.
But what actually happened is that the mediocre didn't get into Parliament.
It continued to be an arena where very exceptional people were far more common.
Certainly if you look at the last big governments of the 19th century in the 1890s they were still almost completely dominated by the aristocracy.
But now labbed by a handful of people who through entrepreneurial success had bought their way into the highest places in political life.
And to the extent that there were people of lower social origin in Parliament, people like Keir Hardy, they were also very brilliant people.
It wasn't becoming mediocre in the way that the anti-democrats had anticipated.
Britain did not go through a revolution in the 19th century.
Now sometimes in the study of history it's important to pay attention to what didn't happen and the lack of a British revolution in the 19th century is a very remarkable phenomenon.
France had revolutions in 1830, 1848 and 1870 to 1771.
Germany went through a whole succession of wars in the process of its unification.
So did Italy. America had the catastrophic civil war.
So the countries to which it's most obvious to compare Britain, you have to be struck that in every case there were great armed up evils that in Britain there weren't.
There was a steady fear of revolution as a kind of undercurrent to political life.
But there never was a revolution and it never even appeared very close.
As I said last time, Queen Victoria did an amazing job in restoring the reputation and creditability of the monarchy and assured that it was going to have a continued role in the Constitution right up to the present.
Through the 19th century, and at an accelerating pace in the 20th century, monarchies came to an end, but not the British one.
And once again there's never been a powerful movement to abolish monarchy right up to the present.
The Victorian period witnesses the early history of the Labour Party and with immense significance of the future, much of which is a little bit beyond the period of our particular attention.
But the Labour Party, even though it had socialist members, was never revolutionary.
In fact, it was always very committed to parliamentary procedure and due process.
And in many respects, the Labour Party itself was very British in the sense of being rather conservative with a small sea.
Incidentally, the Labour MPs loved the monarchy just as much as everybody else.
And through the 20th century, the Labour prime ministers were always deep monarchists as well.
Very different from the ideal socialism that people like Karl Marx had then envisioned.
The Labour Party itself was ambivalent about its own commitment to socialism.
Some of its members clearly were socialists, idealistically. Others clearly weren't.
And through the 20th century, it had this long, uneasy anguish about what exactly it was going to do.
On the one hand, it had a constitution which committed it to socialism, a constitution written in the early 20th century.
On the other hand, most of its members, particularly the Trade Union Congress, the TUC membership,
which was the bulk of the Labour Party, wasn't really committed to it.
It wanted a better deal out of the capitalist system, but it didn't really want to overthrow capitalism itself.
And again, the whole 20th century went forward without revolutionary upheaval.
Politics itself remained a prestigious and honourable career in Britain,
much more so really than in most of Britain's rivals.
Let me read to you from the historian Paul Johnson making a comparison between Britain, Germany and America in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
He says,
The English had a particular order of priorities in the way in which they invested their brain power.
And industry certainly came low down the scale.
The elite educational system was geared to produce above all politicians, lawyers and churchmen.
It deliberately and systematically encouraged the ableist young men to aspire to be prime ministers, lord chancellors and archbishops.
And within the limitations of its terms of reference, it was conspicuously successful.
It is no accident that England was able to move from oligarchy to democracy and then to social democracy without revolutionary violence,
the only country in the world to do so.
To become a member of parliament, Anthony Trollup correctly observed, was the height of ambition of every decent Englishman.
The same remark could not conceivably have been made in the United States or Germany.
In neither was politics a uniquely attractive or honoured career.
Absorbing a regal share of the best brains in the country.
And the consequences were indeed are evident.
The German nation then and now the best educated in the world, industrious, beautiful, splendidly organised and equipped,
twice surrendered itself to political imbeciles who led it to disaster.
America also has under-invested her talents in politics.
This explains her long failure from 1900 to 1941 to accept the world's democratic leadership,
which her physical power made desirable and her very indifferent performance since she's reluctantly shouldered the task.
Well, a very insightful comparison there of the three systems.
Second great theme of the course has been the growth of the British Empire.
It was enormous and it provided a model for other aspiring imperial nations.
One of the ironies of British history is that most of the British were so insular,
even as they were travelling throughout the world and conquering a large part of the world,
they didn't realise how much the other peoples of Europe particularly admired them.
There was a roaring anglophilia throughout much of 19th century Europe,
because the other Europeans had the perception that the British were doing things right and they were doing them best.
Most of the British didn't even know that that was the case.
Of course, not everybody lived up to the idealism expressed in Kipling's poem, The White Man's Burden.
But nevertheless, the idealism which went with the Empire was more than just a cover for commercial rapacity.
There was clearly more going on than that.
There was a great deal of idealism about ending slavery throughout the world in bringing Christianity,
in bringing education by the end of the period to bringing sanitation and medicine and decent water
and trying to suppress malaria and great public health achievements were accomplished in the Empire.
One way you can see this influence, I think, is looking at the history of the Indian Congress Party.
That is the Indian organisation dedicated to bringing the British Empire in India to an end,
because in so many ways it was itself an organisation which depended upon Victorian values.
It used the English language as the Indian government still does, right up to the present.
It was staffed by lawyers, many of whom were trained in the British technique.
Certainly its principal, most luminous figure, Gandhi, was himself a great admirer of Britain in many ways.
And Gandhi understood that he was going to succeed when he was going to be able to use British ideas against the British Empire.
In other words, the logic of making the British live up to their own idealism was to get them out of India.
And in the end, of course, that was a movement which succeeded.
Well, when we look at imperialism today, it tends to be judged harshly.
Certainly a great majority of historians are very, very critical of it.
But there are still some residual points where there's plenty of scope for disagreement.
What do we think, for example, of issues like sati, widow burning in India?
Cultural anthropologists are trained simply to look at a cultural activity and take note of its characteristics
and to say of it, I see, so this is the way in which widowhood is treated in India.
That's one way you can do it.
Or you can take the view which certainly the British missionaries took.
This is horrifying and it must be stopped as soon as possible.
Still today, external scholars go back and forth in their judgment of what moral standards ought to apply.
Should you always apply prevailing local standards?
Or should you sometimes be willing to say, oh no, our outsider standards are different and better?
Of course, the British Empire could only last so long as its own administrators believe wholeheartedly
and really uncritically that their values were indeed superior.
Once the British themselves started to doubt their imperial mission, which they did begin to do after the First World War,
it couldn't persist indefinitely.
It was based upon Victorian verities which began to crumble.
Also at a point I mentioned earlier, the apparent power of the British Empire
actually disguised Britain's gradual loss of economic leadership in the world.
It seemed to be making the world more and more British and ever more powerful.
But actually it had become a buffer against economic uncompetitiveness,
a protected zone within which Britain could acquire raw materials and sell manufactured goods
rather than updating the machinery, modernizing the techniques and going head-to-head with Germany and America.
Britain never did overcome certain crucial weaknesses.
Perhaps most amazing of all, it never really honored sufficiently the businessmen
on whose work British greatness was founded.
It continued to prefer the amateur to the professional
and to give greater social status to the man of leisure than to the hard worker,
more status to the bishop than to the entrepreneur.
This is surely the central paradox of Victorian society.
It was dysfunctional in this most elementary of all ways.
That is, the society collectively declined to recognize where it was that its greatness had come from in the first place
and what was going to be necessary to sustain it.
This status all through the Victorian period came above all from family pedigree and leisure wealth.
Now by the Victorian period it was possible to buy your way into landed society
and many of the most successful business people did that.
I've mentioned how two prime ministers at least, Gladstone and Peel, were the sons of businessman,
Joseph Chamberlain is another one, although he was never prime minister,
people whose family fortune had been made in business,
but they bought their way out of it into the leisure and landed and political classes.
Let me redo a little passage from Anthony Trollop's novel, The Way We Live Now, a brilliant novel.
It describes the way in which one of the minor characters is a man called Sir Damask Monogram.
He's got a background in trade, but he buys his way into the landed classes
and ingratiates himself with the other aristocrats by being generous with his new possessions
because he's also got plenty of money.
Sir Damask was a man of great wealth whose father had been a contractor.
But Sir Damask himself was a sportsman, keeping many horses on which other men often rode,
a yacht in which other men often sunned themselves, a deer forest, a moor,
a large machinery for making pheasants.
He shot pigeons at Hurlingham.
He drove four in hand in the park, had a box at every race course
and was the most good-natured fellow known.
He'd really conquered the world and had got over the difficulty of being the grandson of a butcher
and was now as good as though the monograms had gone to the crusades.
Of course, when it says he'd conquered the world, it means he's conquered the social world.
He's become a central part of London society by being a gentleman of leisure.
Social snobbery was very persistent, tenacious and very disabling too.
It was extremely difficult to rise from humble origins to the highest levels of society
or even to the intermediate levels of society.
There's lots of fiction about this.
The fiction of Arnold Bennett is largely about it.
Hardy's book, Jude the Obscure, is a novel about a young man who comes from obscure origins
and hopes to become a scholar and goes to the university, which is really Oxford,
with visions of becoming a scholar but finds he can be no more than a stone mason
in the exterior of the colleges.
The interior of the colleges is closed off to him.
An interesting American novel about the same phenomenon is Henry James' book, The Princess Kassimassima,
one of whose plots deals with a working man who's got great educational aspirations,
but he's socially too different from the people with whom he wants to share an intellectual life
to be able to enter easily into their society.
So this is a recurring theme in the literature of the whole period.
Throughout the whole period, most British people were poor.
Living standards did rise between 1837 and 1901, but they only rose slowly
and they rose from a very, very low starting point.
So for most people throughout the Victorian period, life was a matter of chronic anxiety,
the anxiety which comes with poverty, fear of lack of medical help,
fear of a complete absence of any kind of financial cushion at all,
fear of falling into the workhouse, and the ultimate fear of dying there and being dissected,
which was a source of chronic anxiety also.
It was a society with very uneven distribution of income, very few opportunities to rise socially,
and no idealism about class mobility.
There was nothing comparable to the American rags to riches mythology.
Of course, in neither country did many people actually rise from rags to riches,
but in Britain you didn't even have the idea that you might do so,
although it might be right to aspire to do so.
That's one of the reasons why the trade union movement was so powerful in Britain.
You were born into a class position and you were there to stay, and so were your children.
Trade unions were organizations dedicated to making the best of it,
in other words trying to get a fair deal out of the economic situation you were in,
a fair return of pay, safe job conditions, job security,
eventually the beginnings of things like pensions as well.
The union movement became very powerful and did much good.
There's no question that it made working conditions better and safer than there had been.
But unfortunately Britain paid a very high price for that,
because it built in a systematic mistrust between management and labour,
which Britain was very slow in being able to overcome.
Certainly Britain's industrial decline was intensified by the rigidities
which the trade unions introduced.
Demarcation rules were perhaps the most paralyzing of all,
the fact that each new generation of improvements to industrial conditions
couldn't be taken advantage of because agreements worked out previously
between management and labour were adhered to even when they made no sense.
It's astonishing to look at things like the Scottish shipyards during the Second World War
when British ships were being sunk rapidly by German submarines.
Even under a crisis conditions like that, the Scottish shipyard workers
stuck doggedly to rules which had been worked out in the 1880s,
which made them incredibly inefficient, because they were afraid that if they didn't,
their management would use this as an opportunity to exploit them,
fire half of them, pay the rest of them less, and leave them permanently destitute
when the war had ended.
And as you study British industrial history, you're constantly vexed by how illogical it was
and by the mutual mistrust which surrounded it from both sides.
Well, so there's Britain already at the end of the Victorian period,
mighty but with crucial internal weaknesses.
One of the tragedies of 20th century history is that Britain was never able
to make adequate use of its own influence.
It was never able to create international stability.
In fact, coming out of the Boer War in 1901, 1902,
the lesson Britain derived from the Boer War was we can no longer afford to be isolated.
It was then that it made alliances with France and Russia,
which helped to drag it into the First World War,
rather than being able to use its moral authority, which was still very great,
to keep Britain out of the war and possibly even to prevent the war from either starting at all
or persisting for as long as it did.
But of course, when you're studying history, it's easy to read back into the past
the significance of later events.
Nobody in Victoria's Day knew about the First World War because it hasn't happened yet.
So although we can find auguries of it,
we mustn't assume that they were self-evident at the time.
Well, history in general and Victorian history in particular
presents great opportunities and great challenges and it's a great pleasure to do it.
It requires an imaginative engagement with people whose ideas were different from our own.
And this is, I think, one of the things which makes it so enjoyable.
The Victorians are similar enough to us that we can readily share their hopes and dreams and aspirations.
But they're also different enough from us that sometimes they can seem highly objectionable
or just wrong or strange in their obsessions.
What about snobbery, for example?
How do you think about the history of snobbery?
I think the way to do it is to remember that we're all snobbish about certain things as well.
We think of ourselves as having principles which other people would regard as elements of snobbery.
So without coming to share the snobbery of others,
we have at least got to get ourselves provisionally into the frame of mind
of recognizing that they thought that they were justified in their ideas or their prejudices or their obsessions.
In other words, we mustn't be too judgmental too quickly.
You can certainly find plenty of people in Victorian Britain who at first glance seemed just dreadful
and there the discipline for us is to say, well, let's see how they were thinking about it
rather than at once being too quick to condemn.
The more you condemn, the harder it is to understand, really, except in an exterior way.
Of course, history ought not to be the mere recital of the facts.
I want to read you from a lovely Victorian book to give you the point.
It's Alice in Wonderland, which was published in 1865.
Charles Dodgson was a mathematics professor at Oxford University
and he wrote the book to Alice Liddell, who was the daughter of the master of the college where he worked, Christchurch.
If you've read it, you'll remember that at one point Alice eats a cake and it makes her much bigger
and she weeps while she's big, but then she eats another one and becomes very, very small
with the result that she then falls into a pool made out of the tears which she wept when she was very big.
So there's a little emergency when they fall into the pool and she's there with various creatures as well.
Alas, the mouse, who seemed to be a person of some authority among them, called out,
sit down all of you and listen to me.
I'll soon make you dry enough.
They all sat down at once in a large ring with the mouse in the middle.
Alice kept her eyes fixed anxiously on it, for she felt sure that she would catch a bad cold if she didn't get dry very soon.
Ahem, said the mouse with a self-important air.
Are you ready?
This is the driest thing I know.
Silence all round, if you please.
William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the Pope, was soon submitted to by the English,
who wanted leaders and had been much of later custom to user, patient and conquest.
Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him and even stiggened
the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury found it advisable.
How are you getting on now, my dear?
It continues, turning to Alice as it spoke.
As wet as ever, said Alice in a melancholy voice to this idea.
And this is a passage from an actual English history book, which was used at the time, apparently, in some English schools.
And, you know, Dodgison Lewis Carroll himself said, what dreadful stuff.
This really is the driest thing I know.
Well, but of course, history writing doesn't have to be dry.
And the trick is to try to bring it alive as far as you can and give a feeling to the lives of people in different times and places.
Now, luckily, we do have from the Victorian era inspiring examples of very, very good historical writing
to which we're indebted right up to the present.
The enormous historical output of Thomas Babington Macaulay is an incredible pleasure.
He belonged to what's called the Whig School of Historians.
Historians whose great narrative drive was to say, we live in a better world.
It's morally better.
It's materially better.
Bit by bit, we've been producing more abundance, producing more freedom, producing more health, more liberty.
Everything's moving forward in a lovely upward progression.
And as you read in Macaulay, it's inspiring and reassuring.
Another great historian is Thomas Carlisle.
I mentioned to you earlier how his manuscript of the French Revolution was accidentally thrown on the fire by John Stuart Mills, a literate servant.
Anyway, Carlisle was also a prolific historian.
Let me read you a little passage from him.
This is from Carlisle's book called Heroes, Hero Worship and the Heroic in History, and he was a great hero worshipper himself.
Here's a little passage by Carlisle on Oliver Cromwell.
He fought and strove like a strong, true giant of a man, through cannon, tumult, and all else, on and on till a cause triumphed.
It's once so formidable enemies all swept from before it, and the dawn of hope had become the clear light of victory and certainty.
That he stood there as the strongest soul of England, the undisputed hero of all England.
What of this?
It was possible that the law of Christ's gospel could now establish itself in the world.
Well, there we are.
Lovely resonant Victorian sentences in which he gets into the frame of mind of Cromwell's generation and Cromwell himself and his hope of creating a great Christian Commonwealth.
We still owe a lot to Carlisle and McCaulay, even though academic history is certainly written in a far more technical way now.
Historians, I hope, have never completely lost sight of the importance of technique and stylistic grandeur.
Now, in studying the Victorian period, one problem we've got is the sheer abundance of materials.
There's so much available that we can't possibly use it all.
We have to be selective.
Here's a good little passage from Lytton Strachey in the beginning of his book, Eminent Victorians.
He writes, it starts with a nice paradox.
The history of the Victorian age never will be written.
We know too much about it.
For ignorance is the first requisite of the historian.
Ignorance which simplifies and clarifies, which selects and omits with a placid perfection unattainable by the highest art.
Now, his view was, this is writing in 1916, 17 and 18, that most Victorian history writing was awful because there was too much of it.
It was turgid and long-winded and drab.
And here's his own method.
He says, if he is wise, a historian will adopt a subtler strategy.
He will attack his subject in unexpected places.
He will row out over that great ocean of material and lower down into it here and there a little bucket,
which will bring up to the light of day some characteristic specimens from those far depths to be examined with a careful curiosity.
And that's certainly what he himself did.
He didn't attempt to be comprehensive.
In fact, he didn't even attempt to be fair-minded.
He was prejudiced and biased.
He was anti-Victorian quite openly.
But by now, but we certainly owe something to Stratie as well.
We can enjoy his attacks on Florence Nightingale and Cardinal Manning and so on and on Queen Victoria herself,
but without thinking that he's had the last word.
We certainly do continue to depend upon the little bucket that he talked about.
Certainly, I've been aware in giving this course, even though there's now 18 hours of it, still there could be far more.
Again and again, I've had the sense in covering these different subjects that I was just scratching the surface,
and we could go much more deeply into many of these topics.
Well, because there are so many vestiges of the Victorian age, we all have the opportunity to delve more deeply.
There are hundreds of great books, and I've mentioned a few of them,
but could easily have included very many more.
The novels of Charles Dickens and George Eliot, the Bronte sisters, Anthony Trollope, Rudyard Kipling, Thomas Hardy,
the poetry of Browning and Tennyson, the essays of Cardinal Newman and Matthew Arnold, the drama of Oscar Wilde
and the operettas of Gilbert and Sullivan, the wonderful moral exhortation of authors like Carl Isle and Ruskin and John Stuart Mill.
And when you go to Britain, which I hope you have the opportunity to do, there's so much to see.
The vexation of being a medieval historian is that there are only tiny little fragments of the Middle Ages left.
But if you're a Victorian historian or you've become interested in studying Victorian stuff, there's masses of it.
The infrastructure of British cities is largely Victorian, except in places where German bombs destroyed it.
So there's still an enormous amount to see, Victorian houses and monuments and public buildings.
And even in medieval churches, you'll find it often had very heavy Victorian makeovers,
even then you're often looking as much at the Victorian rendering of the Middle Ages as you are at the thing itself.
And as I mentioned in talking about Wales and Scotland, the Victorians invented a lot of traditions.
Very often when we think about ancient Britain, what we're actually doing is thinking about the Victorian version of ancient Britain,
which of course is a rather different matter.
So there we are. We've done a lot in these 36 lectures, but there's still infinitely more to do.
And as with all good sources of study, the more deeply you enter into it, the more you become aware of further depths.
So I do hope that this course will launch you into a fuller investigation of the Victorians and their world.
Thank you very much.
