Have you ever wondered why robots don't get cancer?
After this conversation, you will.
In this conversation, I had the privilege to speak with Dr. Michael Avine, one of the
most innovative and fascinating biologists I've ever met.
Dr. Michael Avine is a professor at Tufts University and an expert in the field of developmental
biology and regenerative medicine.
Throughout our conversation, we discussed his groundbreaking research, including the
role and notion of bioelectricity.
What is it and why it is so profoundly important, both to biology and medicine?
His theories about the self and free will are mind-blowing.
And some of the things we discussed today sound like science fiction, but let me assure
you one thing, they are not.
They are true science, backed up with great results.
Hi and welcome to my channel.
My name is Dr. Roy Jozebic.
In this channel, I converse with the most interesting and influential people from all
around the world, discussing science, biology, artificial intelligence, and more.
If you find this talk interesting, please consider subscribing, hit the bell button
and be part of this great community.
And now, without further ado, Professor Michael Levine.
Okay, one, two, three.
Hi, Michael, and thank you so much for being on the show.
How are you today?
I'm great.
Thank you so much for having me.
It's a pleasure.
Before we start, since I see this shirt over and over again in many interviews, could we
tell us what are we seeing on the shirt?
It's just a normal B or there is something, it's not a normal B?
Well, this is the Diverse Intelligence Summer Institute.
And this is a student named Brenda made this T-shirt for a community of, it's quite an
amazing community of people who gather to study what we call Diverse Intelligence, which
is intelligence and unfamiliar embodiments.
And so this is a kind of, you can see it's a kind of chimeric B, right?
It's a little robotic and a little, and so these, these are the kinds of things that
I'm, I'm very interested in is novel, novel ways that mind enter the physical world.
You know, I wrote a book about intelligence in Hebrew, it's called Intelligence, the
Unpleasant Truth, but listening to you, you, you had another definition, James Watson,
I think, definition of intelligence is the idea to pursue the same goal by different,
from different perspective.
Could you please elaborate on this definition of intelligence?
Sure.
Well, of course, many definitions of intelligence and I'm not claiming this is the only one,
but one that I like as being useful for research is one that was really used by William James,
the psychologist and philosopher.
And his definition is the ability to achieve the same goal by different means.
And so I like this very much because first of all, it doesn't say anything about what
kind of brain you have or how, where you came from or any of these very specific things.
It tries to understand what is common to all intelligent beings.
And I think that what is common to all agents, no matter what they're made of, no matter
the evolved design, whatever, is the ability to pursue goals with different degrees of
competency.
How clever are you?
And somebody, somebody had this great quote, and I wish I use it all the time, and I wish
I could remember who said it, he said, it's the difference between two magnets trying
to come together and Romeo and Juliet trying to come together, right?
You see that, that in between there's a spectrum of how much cleverness can you expect when
you put a barrier in this process, minimal for the magnets and quite considerable for
Romeo and Juliet.
So that's the idea.
Oh, this is great.
By the way, the magnets do come together eventually, but this is another story.
You keep mentioning in your interviews, and I listen to many of them as a preparation,
the books that you read when you were 17, the body electric electromagnetism and the
foundation of life.
This is a book by Robert Baker.
And when you speak about the book, you said, listen, I read it when I was 17, and it's
like it, it, this is the origin of me seeking for, you know, bio electricity.
Could you please elaborate more on this book and the influence that it had on you?
Because just one book at age of 17 just paved the way to you as a researcher.
Yeah.
So, so I'll take a slight step backwards and say that my fundamental interest, which I've
had long before that since I was quite a little kid, is really in the way that mind exists
in the physical world.
Okay.
I wanted to know what it is that makes engineering, engineering different from biology or what
they have in common, and how it is that creatures made of physical things can have preference
as goals, you know, behaviors and so on.
Bio electricity is one way in which here on earth, we can see the scaling of goals from
little tiny goals that individual cells have to very large goals that organs and then and
then of course, whole bodies have.
So bio electricity is very important, but it's just one, it's one particular way that
that happens.
And there were actually several books.
The very first book that I encountered on this was a book by William, by H.S. Burr, Harold
Saxton Burr, and this guy worked in the 1930s and 40s.
He basically had the first good voltmeter and he went around measuring everything, plants,
rabbits, tumors, patients and psychiatric institutions, everything he could manage.
And on the basis of this, he wrote, he wrote a remarkable book, I think, I think the guy
had a crystal ball he foresaw with this very simple technique, many of the things that
we've discovered since then, just amazing.
But and so and so this made a huge impression on me, but not until I saw Becker's book did
I understand that there was actually a considerable body of work after Burr, Burr's book came out
in I think 1936 or something like that.
And what what's amazing about the body electric, which is Robert Becker's book, is that he
talks about a lot of the people that have done work since then.
So all the great, all the all the greats of early bio electricity.
And on reading that book, it became obvious to me that this was an actual field that could
be pursued now, you know, now now also that book has half of the book is about electromagnetic
dangers of field exposures and things like this.
And I'm not really into that, I think that doesn't actually have anything to do with
bio electricity, I think that was kind of a red herring really.
But but but the part where he goes over how it is that electricity is the basis of embryonic
development, regeneration, cancer, this this really, you know, kind of put me on the path
that that's a that's an entry point to studying the things I really want to study.
OK, so we must, I think, go from there to your interview with Chris from from Ted,
we have the notion of DNA as being the building blocks of everything human or
everything that is alive, basically.
And the idea is that you have this A, G, C, T, the sequence, a big sequence of A of
DNA. And with this sequence, you can build everything.
This is like the hard wire hardware of everything alive.
And then after the concept of DNA of of genes, we have the concept of
epigenetics. The idea is that some genes can be activated or turned on and off in
certain scenarios. But then that you go beyond or above this level and say, listen,
we have another level of complexity or flexibility, which is bio electricity.
The idea is that cells that the human cells or the just cells communicate and can
modify themselves according to scenarios or the environment with electrical
signal. Is it true? Am I saying it right?
You're saying it right, but I want to draw a stronger distinction between bio
electricity and genetics and epigenetics on the one hand and bio electricity and
physiology more generally on the other. The big difference is this.
It isn't, I think it isn't just another layer of complexity or another set of
physical events that you have to understand in addition to your chemistry and
things like that. There's a really fundamental distinction here.
And let's look at two pieces. One piece is if we ask what is encoded by these
various layers? So if you look at the genome, what you see encoded are protein
sequences. When we can read genomes now, and it's been clear for many, many
decades that what's in the genome are not things about whether you have eyes and
how many eyes and where they're located relative to your feet and how many toes
you have. None of this is directly in the genome. When you look at the genome,
what you see is specification of proteins, little tiny hardware components
that every cell gets to have. So I'm going to make the analogy and there are
places where this analogy breaks down and there are other places where this is a
good analogy. I'm going to make an analogy to a computer because it's
familiar to everybody. What the genome does is define the lowest level
components in your computer. So it will define things like the silicon, the
transistors and this kind of thing. It defines the very lowest hardware level.
And then you have a different question. You have, okay, that's nice. That tells us
about the hardware. But now I see this thing running some sort of program and
doing some sort of things. It may be very simple. It may be quite intelligent.
Maybe it's running in GPT-3 who knows what it's running. How do I explain this
by reference to what's in the hardware? And we know that the hardware is
essential. Without the hardware, nothing happens. But we also know that most people
who operate computers don't do it with a soldering iron. And so you ask this
question, why not? Why do we not do what we did in the 40s and 50s? And if you see
a picture of somebody programming a computer in those days, what are they
doing? They're pulling wires, right? They're connecting wires in and out.
And this is because, yes, you can interface with this thing at the bare
metal, at the lowest level of the hardware. But what we learn from computer
science is that there are actually much more convenient, higher levels of
organization here. And specifically, there are some things known as algorithms,
that the computer, right, it's very useful to think of algorithms and to write
algorithms. You know, if you're really focused, I give you this example, if
you're hiring programmers, coders for your company, and somebody comes in and
they say, I'm a reductionist, I have this Laplacian view of the world where I
don't believe, what's this algorithm? There's no algorithm, there's electrons,
and there's Maxwell's equations of the of electron motion. There's no
algorithm, there's just electrons, right? Would you ever hire that person for
your software company? Of course not. They would never write anything.
I wouldn't hire anyone writing assembly language.
So if somebody does not believe that there is an algorithm that makes the
electrons dance to the logic of the algorithm, they're not wrong in the
sense of physics, but it's a sterile view that doesn't let you make full use of
the system that you have. Bioelectricity is the same thing. It is the software,
it is the medium in which the software of life operates. And furthermore, very
much like in the brain, so the other good analogies to neuroscience, like in the
brain, what's magic about the electrical dynamics of the brain is that it is the
medium in which the cognitive content is kept, right? If we understood how to
decode it, and people certainly are working on neural decoding, we could read out
the memories, the goals, the preferences, the behavioral competencies of a creature
by decoding this electrophysiology. That is exactly what electricity does in the
rest of your body. It is not just the layer of complexity. After the genetics and
the epigenetics and many other aspects of chemistry have had their say and they
determine what the hardware is, now you have this physiology, this real-time
physiology that determines what the hardware is going to do.
So let me just recap and make the distinction about how the software... I thought,
and apparently I was wrong, that my sequence, three billion AGCT sequence,
determines who am I. So I could take this three billion sequence, go to the laboratory
and say, please duplicate me. But you say, as I understand, there is nothing in this
sequence that tells me, listen, this is a human being, this is a human body, the eyes
should be here, the mouth should be here. Is it true?
This is a subtle question, so let's distinguish a couple of things here.
It definitely does not say who you are. So if we were to copy your DNA, we could clone you
from your DNA, we would get...
Get... Sure, yep, exactly. We would get another body that is fairly similar to your body.
When you say it will be you, the adult physiology, the memories, the behavior,
none of that will be determined in the same way as we tend to think. So all of that is really
due to various inputs, experiences, all of the things you...
No, no, no. I am sorry. I meant like a hardware duplication, like Dolly.
That's what I meant. You said, but you said, or I thought you said, that there is nothing in
this DNA, in this genome sequence that tells me, listen, this is a human body, the eyes should be
here, the mouth should be here, we have two arms, two legs. So if this information is not encoded
into this giant AGCT sequence, well, is it encoded? Yeah. Okay, so let's be clear. If you were to
duplicate clone the genetics, you would in fact get a similar body with the same number of eyes
and limbs and everything else. That's what you would get. But it is not because those things
are encoded in the DNA. Imagine, if I give you the description of a couple of transistors
and how they connect together, you will end up with a logic gate. Let's say a NAND gate or
something like that. That logic gate comes with a truth table. And we know that it operates,
does this computation, it makes this truth table. That truth table was nowhere in the
description that I gave you. I gave you the description of some transistors. Where did
the truth table come from? And nevertheless, so you have this very interesting thing where
certain kinds of machines, when they are specified at the hardware level,
make use of laws of physics of computation to do specific things that were never in the
original description. So yes, you will get a human body, but what's in the instructions is the
hardware that then exploits the laws of physics to do all of these amazing computations that
eventually result in most of the time, two eyes, 10 fingers and all of that stuff.
This is a great analogy because one can look at four, I don't know,
fat transistors for 100 years without even considering a NAND gate. The idea is that,
okay, so there is someone from above the system, outside the system, who can make
sense. I think the concept is make sense of what we've seen. And my question is,
and I hope it's a legal question in your realm, who is it? Or what is it?
This is extremely important. And everything that I've been working on for years now and in
particular with a collaborator called Chris Fields, we've been developing a way of looking
at these things that is really centered on the notion of an observer. So everything that we
talk about, so in behavior, intelligence, computation, physiology, all of these things,
all assume the presence of a particular observer who interprets events in a particular way.
Now one key thing, and this goes to Hofstadter's notion of a strange loop,
that observer can be the system itself. So you can easily have, you don't need one sort of
supernatural mega observer to observe everybody else, systems can very easily observe and
interpret themselves if they have the right degree of complexity. But none of these things,
in my opinion, are objective universal truths. They are a viewpoint of some observer that sees,
in fact, Josh Bongard and I just wrote a paper on polycomputation, where it starts with his
amazing discovery that you can take the exact same set of events, some kind of physical medium
doing something, and you can look at it from multiple perspectives and see different computations
happening in the exact same piece of hardware. And so I think this is really important. You
put onto a very important point, which is all of this is observer relative.
And this is very interesting. I would ask you, in your opinion, okay, maybe the system is complex
enough in some levels that can that the system can observe itself. But would you also consider
the system at the beginning at the embryo level as also complex enough?
Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. I mean, we can tell, look, let's, let's, we can tell a story about
we can tell a story about metacognition in bacteria. So, so, so you have a bacteria and
no, just a second, just a second, I want to go to the metacognition later on, please. Let me
let's start, let's start with the science fiction and move on to the more science fiction. Okay,
because I think everything that you do is so mesmerizing, so mind blowing. And let's start with
the fog. Okay, what you say that you can do is you take an innocent fog. And in the process of
you're going to explain me how you're going to put its eye on the on on the tail or something
like this. And you have another thing that you do to the harmless fog is that you can reshape
its face to a Picasso shaped face. For example, the mouse will be off here and the eyes will be
like here and the nose will be. So, A, is it true? And B, how do you do it?
Yes, yes, these things are true. And, and there are many other similar stories that I could tell
you. But, but let's, let's discuss these two. So the eye on the tail, this is the work of Douglas
Blackistan, who works in my lab. And what we decided to ask was a simple question. How, how
much, you see, we started out with this idea of intelligence as being able to get to the same
goal despite perturbations, right? So this is our attempt to understand what is the intelligence
of development? How much, how much intelligence does it have? Because it's really, it tends to
fool you the fact that frog eggs always make frogs and acorns always make oak trees, give you this
false idea that, well, what else is it going to do? It can do one thing. That's all it's ever
going to do. So we decided to really see, using the only way you can judge these things is to do
perturbative experiments to make difficulties for it and see what it does. So one thing he
discovered is that if you take some cells that normally are going to become eye, you physically
take, and this is a very early embryo, it doesn't look like anything yet. It's just a ball. It
doesn't look like a, like a frog or anything like that. From the front of it, you take some cells
that we know are supposed to be eye and you move them to the back of the, the back of the embryo
and you just sort of stick them in. I mean, it's a physical surgical transplantation under a microscope
with little tiny needles. You can do this. And so you move these cells to the back and what we find
out is several amazing things. First of all, even though these cells are in a crazy environment,
instead of sitting next to the brain where they belong, they now are sitting next to muscle,
right? So they're in a very bizarre environment, but they still make a perfect eye with all of
the right components, lens, optic nerve, everything is perfect, right? Then, so that's the first
thing, amazing thing. So you end up with these frogs with eyes on their tails, on their butts,
you know, anywhere you want. There's the eyes connected to the brain. Now that's the next step.
The eye does not connect to the brain. The eye puts out one optic nerve, the optic nerve sort
of looks around where he's going to go. And then it connects to something, sometimes to the, to
nothing, sometimes to the gut, sometimes to the spinal cord, okay? So it does not go all the way
up to the brain. It connects to somewhere local, not too far away. Then we find out that if we do
this with embryos that have no primary eyes, so we moved all of the cells, right? So there are no
eyes in the head, but there is one eye on the tail. Those animals can see. How do we know that they
can see? Because we built a machine that gives them, gives them training to perform in particular
color assay. So we shine different color lights on them, and then we train them to do particular
things. And these, these animals train very well, they can clearly see the light, they can, they can
avoid a moving light and things like this, they do very well. So now this tells you some amazing
things. It tells you that, first of all, that the plasticity of the whole system is such that
we didn't need a thousand generations to, to evolve, to adapt to this novel architecture,
that now your, your sensory system is not connected where it's supposed to be, it's connected
somewhere else. You didn't need eons of evolution for this. It immediately works right away, the
straight out of the box, it works. And it means that it has this remarkable implications for
evolution. Because if, if you're evolving a system where changes like this don't wreck the whole,
the whole business, that, that really tells you something very important about how evolution
is going to work. Because remember, one of the biggest problems with evolution is how do you
keep prior gains? If you have a, any engineer knows that when I first, as a kid who built many
things, when I first heard of the idea of evolution, that you're going to make random changes, I said,
are you kidding? This is ridiculous. That is never going to work, right? As an engineer, you think
you're going to make random changes in this carefully, you know, sort of working thing,
forget it, it's always going to be bad. But that's because we didn't understand what we were dealing
with. Unlike typical engineers, evolution doesn't deal with passive materials, it deals with
what I call agential materials, and we can talk about that, meaning that they will try to get
their job done, even if things go wrong. So if evolution, let's say there's some kind of mutation
that moves the eye to the tail, but it also does some other nice things. Typically, in another
architecture, if that animal couldn't see, he would be dead. And you would never be able to
explore the other consequences of that mutation. Just about every mutation would be, would be
very bad, harmful for the organism. But if many of these mutations are going to be
dealt with by the cells and the tissues that can still get their job done, even if things change,
why then all of these mutations become either neutral or positive? Because now you have a much
smoother surface to evolve. You have much more flexibility. Much more flexibility, you don't
immediately wreck the system every time you try something new. This is huge, this is, this
potentiates the power of evolution hugely. So that's the story of the eye on the tail.
Just a second, just a second. I actually can feel my brain getting warm. So one, this is,
from what I understand, goes a little bit against the concept of Darwinian evolution,
because as Darwin said, there are no jumps in nature. And what you said is that, listen,
we don't need generations and generations like genetic algorithms that you need like
many, many generations. We, you can make enormous changes, enormous fundamental changes
in just one embryo. This is like an, it's not what Darwin meant, I think. This is one. And, and, and
B, in your fog example, you said, listen, if, if the fog has one eye on the face, the other eye on
the tail will not see. But if we remove all the eyes from the face, the eye in the tail
will be able to see. So what is the difference? I didn't say the first part. So, so, so every
eye is going to contribute to vision. So, so what we have are frogs that have no eyes in the face,
none. And then one eye on the tail, and we show that they can see. Okay. But if, but what you said
that if I just put some cells on the, on the tail, and there will be one optical nerve,
and this optical nerve will be connected to the guard or the spinal cord,
this eye will be also functional. Oh yeah. But yeah, that's exactly right. That's how the animal
will see through that eye. Yeah. Okay. So from this fog and what, and what about the concept of
the Weenian evolution that what you, what you present, what you show here in your experiment are
huge leaps. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I think that and, and, and I want to be clear. I am not the first
person to show these kind of leaps. In the, in the 1940s, there was this phenomenon called
Slippers Goat. It was this guy, I think he was Dutch that, that had a goat. This goat was born
without arms, you know, without forearms, right? All it had was legs. And because goats are very,
very robust and very stubborn, he, he learned to walk upright. So this goat walked, walked upright.
When the goat died, they dissected the goat, and they found that many of the changes that you need
for bipedal locomotion, so the pelvic tilts, the backbone, all the stuff that you need was all there
in this goat. No, no, you know, it normally takes, I don't know how many hundreds of thousands of years
from, from four legged primates to, to, to upright humans, right there in this goat. So, so this
phenomenon has been known for a really long time, but I think now we're starting to understand how
it works. And the thing about this, this, this in no way invalidates what, what Darwin was saying,
it's just that Darwin was trying to get to the same outcome, which is adaptive evolution.
He showed how it can eventually happen with a very dumb passive substrate. So, so, so if you
assume no intelligence in your substrate whatsoever, you can, and we know from genetic algorithms in,
in computer science, yeah, with a completely passive substrate, if you just have a big enough
population and you do the kind of, you know, if you have a gold function in genetic, I teach
I teach genetic algorithm and in computer science, but the idea in genetic algorithms that you have
the gold function all, all the way, all the way long and evolution according to Darwin is local,
is not global. So there is no like a, like a big reward function that like extract you
from the future. It doesn't happen this and this exactly what happens in genetic algorithm in the
concept of computer science, I know where I want to go. Therefore, I can take, I can extract all
these modifications, say, this is a better modification than this, because I have the final
goal. This is tremendously different, no? Well, the part that they have in common is that the
environment in a way implements these kinds of fitness functions, right? Because, because, you
know, you can think about the, the biomechanics of the legs and insects and you're trying to jump
and the environment will be very clear who had the nice, who had the well jumping legs and who
didn't because it's going to kill off everybody who didn't jump correctly, right? So, so there's
this notion of a, of a fitness function, of course, many of them simultaneously in the, in the real
world. But, but the part that, that this adds to evolution is an incredible speed up. And in fact,
I think some minimal intelligence, because when you are dealing with material that can, and in fact,
I can, I have a, I have a student, a Lakshman who recently, we recently published an interesting
story on this, where if you are dealing with a material that itself has competency, meaning
that it's not just a passive material, exactly what the genome says, that's what it does. It
actually during development has the opportunity to fix up some things and, you know, things aren't
quite right, it will make up for some of these defects. Then something very interesting happens.
When imagine that you have an individual and it comes up for selection, and it's pretty good,
it does a pretty good job, whatever, whatever it's doing, does a pretty good job. Selection can't tell
whether it does a really good job because the genome was amazing, or whether it does a good
job because the competency fixed up for some of the things that were wrong in the genome, right?
And then this becomes, as soon as that happens, the selection has a really hard time picking the
best genomes. What it can do is pick the most competent individuals. So you've got this crazy
feedback loop, right? Where now more and more of the effort goes into increasing the intelligence
of the system, because, and the more you do that, the harder it is to see the genome again.
It's like many, many variables, optimization functions that you need, you know, to modify
each one of the variables, and you don't know which one of them is responsible for the optimization
function. That's exactly right. And you will never know. And Steve Frank gave me a really fun
analogy from computer hardware, which is that he says that as the RAID arrays became more popular,
you know, for hard drives, the quality of the media went down, because you don't need to have
such great media once you have a RAID array, and that sort of feeds itself, right? But the
trick is it's a one-way ratchet, because once you depend on your, you can't now remove your RAID
array and stick with your disk, because the disks are junk. And so that explains some amazing puzzles
in biology, including the planaria, and probably you will want to talk about this, but there are some.
Yes, the two-headed planarian. But before the two-headed planarian, we needed to pay respect
to the Picasso fog. Okay? So we had the eye on the tail fog, and now we're going to the Picasso fog.
And again, this is not CRISPR. This is not that you take the sequence of AGCT, and you cut this
is like the face, and I put the face over here. This is something completely different. You take
the cells that you know, somehow this is a cell off of the mouth, and you put it in a different
location. Yeah, there are many ways to, I'll talk about how we did it. There are many ways to
mess up this process of craniofacial morphogenesis. The reason we did it was, again, that we are
interested in finding intelligence in unfamiliar places. So when you look at a typical tadpole,
and so the tadpole of the frog has, it has the eyes, it has the jaws, the nose, the nostrils,
everything, that tadpole has to become a frog. In order to become a frog, it has to move all
of those organs. So the jaws have to move forward, the eyes have to move, like everything has to
move. You might think, just from observing the process that, well, this is probably hardwired,
every tadpole looks the same, every frog looks the same. So every organ, it just needs to know,
go three millimeters in that direction, and then I'm done, right? So that's it. You might think that
this whole process can be completely hardwired, and you'll go from tadpole to frog. So we wanted
to test this idea, because we suspected that actually this was a much more intelligent process
than that. And so how do you test for intelligence? You make a perturbation, and you see what the
system does. So this was the work of Laura Vandenberg in my group, and what she did was
using a variety of techniques, including surgical transplantation of cells,
including bioelectrical modifications. We'll talk about why bioelectrical, many, many different
ways. Chemicals are different ways to make the early tadpole face be incorrect. So the jaws are
over here, the eyes on top of the head, the noses off to the side, everything is scrambled.
And what we observed is that these animals largely became perfectly normal frogs,
because all of the organs starting in the wrong position moved different distances
through different paths to end up in the correct location. In fact, sometimes they go too far,
and they actually have to move back a little bit. So again, I just going to show something.
This is like the the tuple that's going to be a frog, and you just
messed with it. And our concept is that if you know, like, let's say that I'm the cell here,
over here, that I need, I know that I need to go four centimeters forward. But if I go four
centimeters forwards in this modified version, I will be like a Picasso frog. But somehow,
and you're going to explain me how somehow these cells, these particular cells, knows that it needs
to move a different length in order to compensate for the mess that you did in your laboratory.
That's exactly right. That's exactly right. So so what we were able to show is that this is a
more intelligent system than simple hardwired, because it can get to the same goal, the same
anatomical outcome, even if you started in the wrong starting position. So now now that sounds
kind of magical. How does it know? But if you think about very simple cybernetic devices like
your thermostat. So your thermostat is what's interesting about it is that it does not always
simply go up five degrees. What it does is it measures the current temperature, compares it to
the set point, and then does whatever it needs to do to try to minimize the error, right? It's
basically a homeostatic kind of system that tries to minimize error. And so what we started doing
was investigating this process of embryonic development of regeneration, and regeneration
is the same thing. If you have a salamander, and you amputate anywhere along the length of the limb,
it will regrow exactly what's necessary. And then it stops. When does it stop? It stops
when a correct salamander limb is complete. I mean, this raises a very obvious question. How
does it know what a correct salamander limb looks like? But not just in planaria and in salamandra,
in a baby embryo, where the cells duplicated at the tip of the fingers, somehow the cells at the
tip of the fingers know, A, that they are the cells of the tip of the fingers, and they should
act and behave differently than, for example, heart cells, and B, they know where to stop. Although
each cell has no, it's not like each cell has like the master plan of the human body. Say,
ah, I'm going over here. And we know that it cannot work that way with the master plan,
because it's extremely flexible. So you can take an early embryo, human, divide it into four pieces,
and you don't get four chunks of a body, you get four quadruplets, you get perfectly normal,
healthy quadruplets. So you can make all kinds of crazy changes, the cells will get to where
they need to go. So we started thinking about this process. Could we imagine the whole thing
as a kind of homeostatic process, and more specifically, as a navigational process? What
do I mean? What are they navigating? Well, you can imagine the space, it's a virtual space of all
possible anatomical configurations. It's very hard to visualize because it's a multi-dimensional space,
but you start as a single cell, which is here in this space somewhere, and you need to be up here
eventually, which matches to a human body or a frog or whatever you're going to be, and you need
to navigate along the way. And like any autonomous vehicle, part of being an intelligent navigator
is, well, what happens if somebody interferes along the way? Oh, I'm started in the wrong
starting position, or there's a barrier, or something is happening. How do I navigate?
So we started thinking about this process. And in particular, what we found was that
the thing about, there's two interesting things about this whole weird way of thinking about it.
And I should tell the listeners, this is not the standard way of thinking about any of this.
This is not the story you learn in basic developmental biology, right? This is many
of the examples I talk about. They never mentioned these things in the typical course,
because they are very difficult to explain using traditional viewpoints. And thus,
they're sort of these side issues that I think are actually the most important thing.
So there are two amazing things about this kind of homeostatic model. One is that
it makes a very strong prediction. It tells you that somewhere, there should be the set point
recorded the same way that in your thermostat, you can point to, well, how does it know what is
the right temperature? Well, here is recorded somehow, the set point is somehow recorded.
So we should be able to find. And then the prediction is this. If we find the set point,
if we decode it, and if we learn to rewrite it, then you can do the same trick you do with a
thermostat, which is an amazing trick. You can change it to keep a temperature of the room,
so something else, without rewiring the machine. It means you do not have to rewire physically the
machine. And you don't even have to know how the machine works, really. You don't need to know
every aspect of it. All you need to know is that in fact, it is a homeostat, and you need to know
how to change the set point. That has huge implications for regenerative medicine, because
if it means that it means that if we can not treat cells and tissues as a mechanical clock,
where your only hope is to rewire at the hardware level, right, with genetics and CRISPR and all
of that, if we understand that it is in fact a homeostat, then you can learn to reset these set
points and let the cells do what they do best, which is to build to that set point. And in fact,
you can get that way success long before you even understand every part of the process,
because you've offloaded some of the complexity onto the system itself.
This is a strategy that humans have been using for 10,000 years. Why did we know how to
train dogs and horses before we knew any neuroscience? You don't have to know all the
neurosciences. You have to understand what type of intelligence does your system have,
what is the currency of learning, and how do you interact with it?
Just a second. I want to go back to your example of self-driving vehicles. You know
what you said, that I can think about it like a navigation algorithm problem.
Let's say, and I specifically ask it because I teach those very subjects. Let's say that I teach
navigation algorithm, like A-style. You said there is this cell, and there is at the end
the human body, and the cell need to go from here to the human body and bypass barriers.
And this makes perfectly sense. If I can compare between this position and the human body,
I need a reward or a penalty function between this position over here and the final body
program over here. And I didn't quite understand where is this reward function.
Yeah, I haven't said it yet. I'll tell you now where it is. I'm just building up the story piece.
So you're exactly right. There is a reward function, and now it is not a single function
that takes you all the way to the end. It is a series of, first you get to here, then you get
to here, then you get to here, then you get to here. It's a series of changing reward functions.
The reward function is this. In starting to think about, okay, so where is this set point?
Where is, we call it the target morphology, the encoding of what are you trying to make,
how many fingers you want to have, and so on. I asked myself, well, what is an example of this?
And of course, the most obvious example is the brain. In the brain, we have creatures that use
their brain to have a goal that they want to get to. And then they have some degree of competency
of getting to that goal, maybe very smart, maybe not so smart, but they have some degrees. How
does the brain encode goal states? You know, you might say, well, it's kind of, it's kind of crazy.
How can a bunch of cells encode a goal? Well, that's what we have in the nervous system. If you
remember, if you're a rat, and you remember how to run a maze, you encode the structure of that maze
in your brain somehow. So we said, well, that capacity surely had to come from somewhere,
an evolution that didn't just sort of arise out of nowhere. What is the primitive version of that
capacity? And so this is where the bioelectricity comes in. We've been testing for years, we've
been testing this hypothesis, that the electric circuitry of all of your body cells, not just
the neurons, not just your brain, all of your body cells, what the electric circuitry is doing
is two things. One, holding a memory of what the correct anatomy should be at any given time,
and two, doing the computations that compare the current state to the target state.
So imagine now, you have a particular configuration, and you have a memory of what that configuration
is supposed to be. And I'm going to tell you in a minute that we can now, we can read and write
this encoding. So you have this electrical memory of what your shape should be. Your shape is not
that it's wrong. It's early, from the perspective of each developmental stage, the previous stage
is a defect. It's wrong. From the perspective of a gastrolyph, if you're still a blastula,
well, you're wrong. That's a birth defect. You need to be repaired. And so what happens is that
there is an error that gets calculated. The error, I believe it's basically, although this
much remains to be found here, but I believe it's basically stress. It's basically cashed out a
cellular stress. The error basically stresses out all the cells, and they try to minimize that stress
by doing all the things they know how to do. They divide, they differentiate, they do all these
different things. This is great. If I agree on one and two, that it has like a memory of the final
goal and a waste, this is great. But my question is, okay, one, how do we preserve a memory of the
final body, of the final shape, and where does this memory come from? Yeah. So, okay, so the first
question is easier than the second question, but I'll give you my thoughts on both of them.
What we now can do is something similar to what neuroscientists do in the brain,
which is we do electrical imaging in the body. So we have, and this technique was
worked out by Thorly Thorland and then Danny Adams in my group and many others,
where we can take a voltage-sensitive fluorescent dye, and this is just a chemical that glows
different degrees, depending on the local voltage. And we put it on the embryo, and what you see is
all the electrical states across the tissue. And what you can see is that long before the genes
get turned on, and long before the anatomy is there, you can see a pre-pattern of what the
future shape is supposed to be. This is what Burr already said this in 1936. Burr already said this
from his measurements with a voltmeter. He could already say that, of course, he couldn't see the
whole field, but we can now literally see, and so we've seen the patterns of, you know, one pattern
is, we call it the electric phase, because before the phase is formed, you can see where everything
is going to go. Here, the eyes are going to be, here's the mouth, here's the placos on the side.
You can see all this in the electrical pattern. This is what you're talking about? This is what
you're talking about? This is the video that, so Danny Adams made this video. This is a very early
one, meaning that it's a very, this is, this doesn't have a face yet. These are just an early frog
embryo at the very initial stages of development. So you can see... But here you can see the different
cells, that it is just one cell, yes? No, there are about, in this embryo, there are probably
32 cells, something like that. Okay, but you said that in another video, you could see, and the green
lines are the electric signals, you could see that in the green lines, one can see like the shape
of the face. Absolutely, absolutely. Later, about, you know, about 12 hours after this, yes,
you can see, you can see that. And the amazing thing is, and this is, we should get to the
planarious story, because that's where it's best described. What we found out is that that electrical
pattern determines where the genes are going to turn on and off, they determine where the anatomical
structures are going to be. And if we reproduce those electrical patterns somewhere else in the
body, you can make those structures. So for example, one of the earliest things my student,
Sherry Howe did, was to reproduce the electrical signal that normally tells you where the eye
goes. She reproduced it on the gut of the animal. And guess what those cells did? They make an eye,
of course, because this is, these electrical patterns are served as the error function to
the local cells, and they will do whatever they can do to minimize that, that delta.
This is literally hacking the system. Yes, this is literally hacking the system. So we know
what you, what you say is the following thing, you can record this electric, electric signals
that signals the cells to make it to make an eye, and then play the tape of the electric signals
into another place. And, and the, and the cells over there, for example, in the gut,
knows or compute according to, according to the stress, how to make an eye, because this is a
software. And if you hack the soft, if you hack the system, if you hack, if you know the language,
yes, you know, you could do whatever you want. Yes, yes, that's, that's exactly right. And the
only reason we are able to do that is because evolution gave us a machine that has this architecture.
Why does, why does it have this hackable architecture? Because that's how evolution
makes the embryo in the first place. All of these cells are hacking each other all the time. They
have this amazing interface on their surface, which is these ion channels, these little
gates that send ions in and out that determine the voltage state, exactly like in the brain,
same, all the same mechanisms, exactly the same. And it is, it is reprogrammable in exactly the same
way that the nervous system is reprogrammable, meaning the exact same hardware can learn many
different things, depending on its history and experience. And it's, it's this architecture,
evolution loves this architecture, because that's how you can most easily make complex
embryos that repair themselves and do all these kinds of things. We are just, we are, we are the
second to discover this, the evolution was the first to discover all of this. And we're just
hacking into that same interface. Before we move to the plan area, I must ask you, before I met you,
I have never came across those mind blowing ideas about bioelectricity, etc. And you said
evolution was the first, we were the second. Now, without this knowledge, without this notion
of bioelectricity that explains so many, so many different things, how traditional biology or
traditional biochemistry, explain all the unexplainable things before your research.
There is a difference. So, so there's a difference between explaining. And you can also, so the thing
is that for any phenomenon, you can always drill down to the lowest level, and describe what you
see at the lowest level. And you will never find magic, and you will never find fairies, you will
always find physics and chemistry is what you will find. So you can see equations. That's it,
you will find you can you can do that at any point. And you can always drill down and you say,
Well, what more do you need? I see the atoms are moving, the genes are being expressed,
emergence, you know, they will say that, that right that there are local rules, the cellular
automata, and eventually you get emergence. That's fine. Then the question becomes, okay, very good.
But now you want to make changes to the system. Right, you want to make changes to the system.
What do you tweak to make changes? And so here is my prediction is in this with this, you know,
this is not something that makes many people happy, but I will make this a prediction anyway,
that the standard paradigm ideas of look at modern molecular medicine, everything is focused
on the hardware, CRISPR, genome editing, pathway rewiring, protein engineering, all of this stuff
is down at the absolute lowest level. I think that all of these things will plateau in terms of
their capabilities will plateau after you've picked all the low hanging fruit that are easily done
at the hardware level. Yeah, you can do amazing things in assembly language, sure. But at some
point, you know, you flatten out, right, and you need to go beyond, and you need to to really get
the promise of transformative regenerative medicine, you need to exploit the beauty of
your material, the material is intelligent, you can treat it as a mechanical clock, sure,
and you can try to program your computer with a soldering iron and some magnets, you could try that.
But why when you have this beautiful interface, that's much better.
And again, you cannot finish the unfinished symphony using only your knowledge of acoustics.
You need a different way, a different level of knowledge of understanding, which is much higher.
And this is the knowledge of music. Now you can reduce in some way to a very specific part,
all of music into acoustic, but it really doesn't go all the way. You can't you can't explain music
with acoustic. By the way, I think that you cannot explain, up until now, I thought that you could
explain the human phenomena with biology. And I think that you still, there is much more to the
human phenomenon than biology and chemistry. Well, yes, and I think that's true. And I think that
these these other levels of description exist for a reason. I don't think that, well, and in fact,
it used to be this question of reductionism, right? Do you get everything from the lowest level?
It used to be a philosophical question and people have argued about this for millennia.
That is no longer a philosophical question. It has been answered in a rigorous mathematical way by
people like Giulio Tononi and Eric Hall and folks like that. And you can now calculate that in
certain systems, higher levels of description literally do more work than the lower levels.
It's an amazing discovery in information theory that actually you can now calculate this,
strictly speaking. And I think this is the difference is that, yeah, after the fact.
So after I tell you that, hey, these things are smart enough to do this and that, yeah,
then you can drill down and see all the molecules and say, it was the molecules all along.
But that's after we did this. And so what I always say is, this is not a philosophical
question. This is an empirical question. You may have a model that's in terms of molecules.
I may have a model that is in terms of error minimization and goals.
And let's see what each of these models facilitates in terms of biomedical advances.
Your ability to modify, change and predict complex behavior is much greater than just
looking, you know, in the scope of the, just the only molecule or the only cell or the single cell.
So we must move on to the plan area. And what I know from off plan area from your research is
I can cut plan area, I can paste plan, I can control x, control v, control x, control v,
and I can make plan area lives forever. So let's start with cutting. How do you cut your plan area?
So yeah, so plan area already live forever. They are immortal. They do not age as far as we can
tell at the body level. And one of the amazing, so they have many amazing properties. So they are
immortal. They are highly regenerative. So you can literally, you put them on a piece of ice to
anesthetize them. And then you take a scalpel and you cut them into pieces. And within about a week
to 10 days, each piece will grow a perfect tiny little worm. The old part shrinks to be matched,
size matched to the new part. The new part grows. It's exactly will be an exact copy of the new one.
This is also how they reproduce. So they, but to reproduce, they tear themselves in half and
then they regenerate. And so that's how they, that's how they reproduce. And two more amazing
things. One is that, and this was first discovered by McConnell in the 60s, and he got a lot of
flak for it, but he was absolutely right. If you train a planarian in a particular task,
and then you cut off their head, which contains their brain, the tail will eventually regrow
a new head and a new brain, and it will remember the original information. So there's this movement
of learning information between the brain and the body and then back onto a new brain. So,
so there's that. And then the final thing is this, which kind of just a second, you say it,
you say so unbelievable thing in a very, you know, peaceful way. If you cut the tail, the brain
will, the tail will develop a new brain with all the, what? Yeah. Yeah. Don't tell me. Do you have
like, how do you leave me? How do you explain it to yourself? How do you explain this
wonder based on your understanding in biology and chemistry and physics and all the knowledge
that you have? How do you explain it to yourself that it will grow with the memories of the brain?
How? No one knows. Okay. So this is a big mystery and we do not know. The only thing that we know
for sure are two things. One, that information that you learn is, at least in that animal,
I'm not sure what happens in mammals, for example, but in that animal, what you learn is not strictly
in the brain, that much is clear. And two, wherever else it is in the body, it is able to be
imprinted onto the new brain so that it can control behavior correctly. That is all that we know.
We literally have no idea. I mean, other people have studied the transfer of memory, for example,
David Glansman studies transfer of memory by taking RNA from the brain of a learned,
from a trained C-slug and he shoves it into the brain of a new C-slug and he shows that you can
transfer some memories this way. So there's some work on this, but we don't know. I have no idea
how this works in planaria. We just don't know. Okay. So we take the planaria and I can stitch
together two heads. So I can make a two head planaria. But there's no stitching. So there's no
stitching. Okay. So what we do is, so here's the thing. When you cut a planarian, so you have a
tail, a middle and a head, and you cut it in two, you make two cuts. So you remove the tail,
you remove the head and now you have this middle fragment. With the old permission,
I'm taking this from Chris, but this is Chris with you. So I am allowing myself. So this is
a planaria and I'm making two cuts. This is one cut and this is the other cut. And we see the heads
only here. Yeah. So what we're going to track is the middle fragment. Let's look at the middle
fragment. Okay. That's it. That's it. That's it right there. So now in order to regenerate,
this little fragment has to remember how many heads am I supposed to have and where do these
heads go? It could go up at the top. It could go at the bottom. How do I know where it goes?
Right? So if you listen on Spotify, please switch to YouTube. Now you must see it. Yes, please.
Michael, continue. So this fragment of tissue has to make that decision of
how many heads am I going to grow and where do these heads belong? So we hypothesized,
and this was the first person to do this in my group was Wendy Bean, and what she did was she
used a voltage sensitive dye to ask the question, can we find the electrical pattern memory that
tells you how many heads you're supposed to have? And this is really, look, if I make the claim that
any kind of morphogenesis or development, remodeling, regeneration is the behavior
of a collective intelligence of cells in this anatomical morphospace that we talked about,
right? There's this collective intelligence, just like we are a collective intelligence of neurons.
There's a collective intelligence, and it has to make decisions in this space.
So by looking at the bioelectrics, we are reading the mind of this collective intelligence,
exactly how neuroscientists try to read the mind of, you know, of animals with brains.
So we looked for this electrical pattern, sure enough, we found one. There's an electrical pattern,
and you're seeing it here, that says one head, one tail. The red portion tells you one head,
and the blue portion tells you one tail. Yeah. So I'm pointing now, this is one head,
and this is one tail. So it should, you know, make from this middle planaria,
it should grow on the top head, on the bottom tail. Exactly. Exactly. So, but having seen this,
we can say, okay, I'm going to rewrite this set point, I'm going to reprogram that memory
into a different memory. I'm not going to touch the DNA, just like you do not touch the wires
of your thermostat when you reset it. I believe that this is a goal directed homeostatic system.
I believe it's using this voltage to know what to build, and I'm simply going to rewrite it.
Now, how do we rewrite it? Well, the voltage is there because of the action of these ion channels
that pass potassium, sodium, chloride, protons, and so on. And so what you can do is you can,
with a computer model, you can ask, which ones of these do I need to open or close
in order to make the pattern be different? So literally, you're literally interacting with,
we call this the bioelectric code, the idea that if we understood which channels and pumps to turn
on enough, we could make that pattern be whatever we want. So you open and close channels in order
for the blue one to look like the red one, and then you get the two-headed worm.
Exactly. Exactly.
Or the red one to look like the blue one, and then you get no head worm.
Exactly. Because these, now, why does it work? It works because, and both of these have completely
normal hardware. There's nothing wrong with the genome, the cells, everybody's, all the cells are
exactly wild type cells. The reason it works is because this is not a hardwired system. This is
a system in which the cells will, will build whatever the pattern says. So now what can we
build? We can build two head worms. We can build no head worms. We can even build now worms with
heads of the wrong species of planarian, because there are other species that have triangular heads
or flat heads or round heads. We can make them build these other species because the cells are
very happy to build whatever the electrical pattern says. So this is the example, you know,
we talked in the beginning about how do we, how do we know any of this is true? Because you can
literally see the memory, you can rewrite the memory, and then you can, you can see that the cells
will, the exact same cells will build. Now the most amazing part. And you discovered another
thing that if you cut the two-headed planaria, what, what, what will happen? So I keep calling
this thing a pattern memory. Now what's the most important thing about a memory? The most important
thing about a memory is that it's not only rewritable, but it's stable, so that once you rewrite it,
it stays where you put it. So what we found was now, now this is really interesting. This is,
this goes back to our, our discussion of explanation versus pre, pre, you know, sort of
pre-invention. Two-headed planaria were first seen around 1903. Okay, that's somewhere around there
was the first time anybody saw, because you can make them and there are other ways to make them.
As far as I know, in that whole time, until we did it for the first time in like 2008, something
like that, Larissa Wozniak was a student in my group who, who I asked to recut these guys. As
far as I know, nobody had done it in that whole time, because it was pretty obvious, everybody
thought it was pretty obvious what would happen. The genetics are normal, you got rid of the second
head, well then of course it should go back to normal and be a normal worm. That's not at all
what happens. That memory, that electrical memory stays. So when you take a two-headed worm and you
cut off the heads, and that electrical circuit will still say two heads, and the piece will build
two heads forever, as far as we can tell. You can keep cutting them and cutting them and cutting
them, they will always make two heads. And so, so you can imagine. The electrical modification that
you did, you know, making two red, two red things, just it preserve, it's like a, it's like a register.
It preserve the electrical state. And then, and then if I cut the two head, it will produce
another two head. And if I cut the no head worm, it will produce another no head worm. Yes?
That's actually, you know, I'm not going to swear to that because I don't remember if we ever
recut the two, the no head worms. I don't remember. I may, maybe we did that. I don't know that for
sure. I know, I know we, we focused most of our effort on the, on the, on the two head worms.
And you can sort of imagine this amazing scenario where I can take an, oh, and of course the way
they reproduce is they tear themselves in half. And when they tear themselves in half, you still
get a two-headed worm. So I could take these worms, I could throw them in the, in the Boston,
in the Charles River here. And 100 years later, some scientists will come, they'll scoop up some
worms. They'll say, oh, a single-headed form and a double-headed form. Cool. It's a speciation
event. Let's sequence the genomes and see what led to the speciation event. Nothing. There's
nothing wrong with their genomes. Their genomes are exactly the same because it is not a hard,
hardware level problem. So you can ask a philosophical question. What determines the
number of heads in a planarian? You can sort of say the DNA because under normal conditions,
the DNA produces an electrical circuit that has a default behavior, very stable. The default
behavior is to say one head. And under those conditions, you make one head. It's like you buy
a calculator and every, you buy a thousand calculators, you turn them on, all of them say zero
by default. When you turn on the juice, they all say zero. It's a very reliable circuit.
Yes, but there was a programmer who said, say zero. You, that's the next, so we'll get to that
momentarily. If you reject to the concept of the external programmer, the question remains.
And the question even bigger because two-headed planaria is an unstable situation for the planaria,
but nevertheless, the planaria keep being a two-headed after cutting and cutting and cutting
again. So this is very strange. Yeah. Well, that's not the only thing. So I'll tell you a story about
how really strange it is. It's even stranger than that.
One interesting thing about these planaria is that because they often reproduce by tearing
themselves in half and regenerating, it means that unlike us, you see, in most animals, if you
get a mutation in your body, your children don't inherit that mutation, right? The soma is disposable,
the body is sort of disposable, and then children come from the egg. In planaria, many species of
planaria, this isn't true. If you make a mutation that doesn't kill the stem cell that it's in,
it will make multiple copies and it will refill the rest of the animal. And so for 400 million
years, these guys have accumulated mutations. They, in fact, to the point where they, every cell can
have a different number of chromosomes. It's called being mix-a-ployed. They look like a tumor,
genetically, they look like a tumor because every cell has all this crazy stuff. And yet,
so think about this, what a scandal this is that I never heard this once in all of the
developmental cell biology classes that we talked about the genome and how important it is,
never heard once the idea that the animal with the worst genome, with the craziest genome,
has the most robust anatomical control, fully regenerative, cancer-resistant, no aging,
perfect anatomy. But how is this possible? How is this possible that the worst genome? And so
this drove me crazy for years, for decades, actually. And only in the last year, I think we now have
some understanding of what's going on here. And what's going on here is related to a story that
we started talking about, which is that when you are dealing with a material that has a little bit
of ability to make up for defects, whether they be physiological defects, and I have some amazing
stories to tell about that, with anatomical defects, whatever, evolution ends up having,
there's a feedback loop, which means that evolution ends up making improvements in the
algorithm, because it can't see the genetics very well. And the more this happens, if you take this
all the way to its logical conclusion, you end up with an animal like planaria, where all the
effort went into making an algorithm that makes a beautiful planaria, no matter what the genetics
looks like. So what you have here is basically an animal where the algorithm has been selected for
the ability to repair even when your pieces have a lot of junk in them. And that explains one really
bizarre fact about planaria. Every other animal that we know of, fruit flies, chickens, humans,
you can find mutant lines. So there are albino mice and the flies with weird curly wings and humans
with different genetic, whatever, you can get these lines. In planaria, there are no mutant lines.
No one has a weird line of planaria, except our two-headed form and ours isn't genetic.
There are no genetic lines. Now, why is that? People have been trying this for many decades to
make transgenic worms, to do mutagenesis. It doesn't work. And I think the reason it doesn't work
is because the algorithm is optimized by evolution to ignore defects in the hardware. It's unreliable
computing at its ultimate. You can't mess the planaria. You just can't mess the planaria because
the algorithm is so strong. The only way to do it is to really hack the algorithm itself,
which is what we did to make the two-headed forms. But other than that, as far as genetic defects,
there are no transgenic lines of planaria. There are no mutant lines.
Wow. Which leads me, I think, to the most obvious question.
What can we learn from planaria? Because obviously, as human beings, we are not planaria.
How can I take all the knowledge that you have about planaria and this
massive robustness and say, okay, how can we imply or apply some of those things
to human beings and to cure diseases, for example? Yeah. The good news is that
these amazing tricks, specifically the multi-scale competency architecture,
this idea that the cells are not passive components, but they're trying to implement goals,
is extremely ancient. It goes back all the way to our unicellular ancestors, to microbes,
and in fact, bacterial biofilms. This is amazing work by Gural Soelle in California looking at
how bacterial biofilms have brain-like electrical activity. Evolution discovered that
electricity is good for scaling intelligence all the way at the time of bacterial biofilms,
not to us, not to mammals, all the way back. This stuff is incredibly well-conserved.
That means that all of the same tools and principles that we use in the so-called lower
animals, so in planaria, in frog, in mouse, all of these things are very likely to be directly
applicable to us. We have, and I have to do a disclaimer because David Kaplan and I have a
company called Morphosuticals Inc. where we are trying to do this for biomedicine. This is my
commercial disclaimer here. I really think that all of these technologies, not just the bioelectrics,
but the idea, the specific idea of repairing from a high level, not by micromanaging these things,
but by communicating with the cellular intelligence. Really, I mean, this is not,
you know, new age metaphors. I mean, I think it's literally true that what we are doing here is we
are sending signals to a collective intelligence to convince it to move in that morphospace the
way we want it to move. There are two very simple examples. When we induce the eye
on the gut of a frog, we didn't have to give all the information about how to make an eye.
We don't know how to make an eye. The eye has dozens of different cell types. We have no idea
how to do that. What we did was a very simple subroutine call. It was a very low information
content electrical signal that just says build an eye here. That's it. We don't have to know all
the details because the cell, the collection of cells already knows how to do this by following
this particular, trying to reduce the error to this particular representation. In the frogs,
when we make adult frogs, we generate their legs, which adult frogs normally don't do that. Salamanders
do it and frogs don't do it. We did it by a stimulus at the wound that lasts for 24 hours.
The treatment lasts for 24 hours. The leg grows for 18 months after that. During those 18 months,
we don't touch it. This is not 3D printing. This is not micromanaging gene expression. This is not
putting stem cells where you want them to go. It's nothing like that. It's communicating to the
collective all the way upstream what they should be doing. If we understand the language, then
that's the road to biomedicine. Like I told my viewers, we started with the science fiction and
then we move on to the more science fiction and to the more science fiction. Now, don't give away
any commercial secrets, but how this process is going to be? Let's say that I'm going to be
treated with bioelectricity. So I have two questions. One, how do you record those signals?
And two, how do you play them? Are you going to electrify me with like a what the process
is going to be like? And how do you let's say that you need to inject this electrical signal
into the stomach? What is going to be the procedure? Okay, so a few things. We don't use any applied
electrical fields. We don't use electrodes, fields, no waves, no magnets, nothing like that.
What we do is we are going to open and close the native ion channels that control the electrical.
We're going to use the native interface. So the keyboard, as it were, of these tissues,
they already give us a beautiful interface. We don't need to do anything else other than
control this interface. The key to all of this is a computational platform that we're developing
that and we've already used it. We've had success of repairing brain defects and cancer
normalization and some other stuff where what you can do is you can compute which channels need
to be open and closed to move the electrical pattern to the way that you want to move it.
Now, the way you apply it is this. So our current applications is for limb regeneration.
So somebody loses a limb, what happens? And we've done this in Frog and now we're doing this in
mice. What happens is that you put on this thing, it's a wearable bioreactor that's made by David
Kaplan's group. It has a little bit of silk gel inside. And inside that silk gel are some drugs,
which we call electroseuticals, that are specifically targeting different ion channels
that we have computed need to be open or closed to tell the cells at the wound, don't scar,
remake whatever goes here normally, which is a normal limb. So that's what it's going to look
like. Now, I will also point out that you mentioned the stomach. I will also say that one of the things
that we've been discovering in all of these experiments is that bioelectrical information
is highly non-local, meaning that when we fix the brain, for example, in the frog,
we can do it from cells in the belly from the opposite side of the embryo, because I guess
it should be no surprise, electrical networks are very good at integrating across space, right?
So we found that you do not need to necessarily treat the exact same cells that you're trying to
reach. The system integrates information from very far away in the body. So I don't know,
in the case where there's a problem deep inside, I'm not even sure that we are going to have to
go there directly. I think you might be able to treat at a surrogate site. We've done that with
cancer, for example, we make tumors on one side of the temple, and we treat them with using either
optogenetics or various other ion channel modulators on the other side of the animal,
on the opposite side of the body. I'm just in awe. So just a second, in mice, you just cut
the arm, and they put like a gel, and the place keeps growing the leg.
To be super clear, we have not yet published this working in mice, okay? So with these
experiments have just been started, we are, I mean, it's kind of obvious after the frog you
go to mammals, so we are going in mice. What we have published so far, so the thing that for
sure works, is that you can do this in an adult frog. In an adult frog that normally never regenerates
his leg. You, after the amputation, you put on the bioreactor, it stays on for 24 hours,
and then for 18 months, it regrows a leg with toes, and it can be feeling at the end, and it
can stand on the leg, everything like that. The next step is mice, but I'm not claiming we have
done this in mice. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. But would you, it's, and do you think it will be
also be applicable to amputation in human beings? Do you mean mutation or do you mean injury?
No, yes, in injuries that I put the gel and the hand will regrow itself, regenerate itself.
My personal opinion is that- Your personal belief, yes.
My personal opinion, and I cannot tell you how much time this will take, because I don't know,
but my personal opinion is that, yes, it's going to work. There is no reason it can't work.
Deer, deer, every year, you know, deer, you know, the big adult mammals, every year,
they regrow their antlers, right? Bone, vasculature, innervation, like a meter of every year.
There is absolutely no reason mammals couldn't do this. We need to find the right trigger,
and we need to find the right supportive apparatus, so some kind of a microenvironment
that will make this possible. I believe it's going to work.
You made me speechless. Basically, you just made me speechless. It's so-
Wow, the complexity. And you know, I'm in the field of computer science in artificial neural
net, and we always say, yes, artificial neural net, it's like the neurons, but it is not like the
human neuron, because the human neuron is so much more complex, so much more adaptive,
and this is going back to one of the things that you said, why robots don't have cancer,
because again, in robots, we have passive parts that combine to something more intelligent,
but in human being, or in any living creature, the elementary parts are also very intelligent,
and like you say, intelligence in the cell. Yeah, it's not just neurons. Every cell,
every tissue in your body has some degree of competency to solve problems in different
spaces, in transcriptional spaces, in physiological spaces, in morphological spaces.
All of them have this kind of intelligence, and cancer is what happens when that breaks down,
and you have autonomy of lower level units that decide to go off and have a different agenda,
but the good news is that it makes the whole structure incredibly robust, and if you think
that it's science fiction to regenerate the limbs, I will point out one other thing, which is that
in frog, the signal to regenerate the leg and to regenerate the tail in the tadpole is exactly
the same, meaning that we don't even have to, not only don't we have to provide the details of
how to do it, we don't need to regenerate, just regenerate, build whatever normally goes here,
that's what we are really telling it, build whatever normally goes here, and so I think,
and can we also say stop regenerating in cancer cells? We've done it in the frog, we've done it,
and we're now doing it in human glioblastoma tissues, so yeah, no, you absolutely can. Now,
to clarify, we are not telling the cells grow or don't grow, what we are telling the cells is
connect together into a nice electrical network, and remember what you're supposed to be doing,
and when they do that, what the tissue remembers is, oh yes, we were some nice skin or some nice
muscle or whatever we were, whereas before that, they're basically amoebas that treat the rest of
the body as outside environment. Which leads, I think, to the concept of collective intelligence,
and many people say, and you said yourself, that we treat ant colony as collective intelligence,
but we said, listen, collective intelligence are in everywhere, so could you please elaborate on the
concept of collective intelligence in the context of cells and human beings? Yeah, the fundamental
fact is that to my knowledge, there is no such thing anywhere as an indivisible intelligence
that is not made of parts, everything is made of parts. So now the question is,
isn't it amazing, I mean, we are a walking bag of neurons and other cell types,
isn't it amazing that these cells who have little tiny local agendas, they have preferences about
metabolic states, about physiological states, but when they get together, they acquire preferences
that are huge, so all of your little tiny neurons get together and they have opinions about the
world financial markets and the fate of mankind after the sun burns out. They have these enormous
goals that are unfathomable to the individual cell. And so the world emergence doesn't solve
anything, it's just a world that just shut up emergence. This is basically the meaning of
this world, it shut up emergence. There is much more to be done and I have put out a very specific
theory of how cognition scales, so how you take little tiny homeostats that care about little
tiny local things and how connecting them together allows you to be an being, an emergent being,
that has a much bigger, so I call this the cognitive light cone. The cognitive light cone
is a notion of what is the scale of the largest goal that you can pursue, not how far you can see
and how far you can sort of sense, but what is the largest goal that you can pursue. So if the
largest thing you care about is the local glucose concentration, well, you're probably a bacterium
and if you have 10 minutes of memory behind and maybe five minutes of anticipation forward,
so you have this tiny spatiotemporal light cone, maybe you're some kind of bacteria.
If you're a dog, you can have quite a long memory back, you can have some predictive
capacity forward, you are never going to care about what happens in three months, 10 miles
over, you just can't, that goal is too big for you. If you're a human, you can have enormous goals,
planetary scale goals, about things that will happen long after you're dead. So we have this
amazing fact and maybe it gives rise to some psychological pressures actually that you can
envision goals that are absolutely unachievable. The simpler organisms, all their goals are
achievable because they're shorter than their lifespan, so you can achieve all your goals.
The humans, you may have goals that are enormous and so the trick for all of this is to cash out
how it is that you scale goal-directedness, how you connect cybernetic systems with tiny little
goals to get systems with much bigger goals and that's what all of this is about.
And again, one can, one, if I go, you know, top-down approach and I say, okay, I start with a big
goal and then I divide and divide and divide, then I can explain each neuron going to do the very
same exact tiny, tiny, tiny thing, but I can't go the other way around. I can't start in the single
neuron and then move up, up to the giant goal that will happen after I'm dead. So it is very
tricky and how can you explain this very, this single, single neuron acting in part of, you know,
decision-making for the world financial crisis? Well, of course, the single, the single neuron
isn't doing that. What's happening is that you have a larger system that is bending the action
space, it's bending the energy landscape for all of its parts to get the parts to do things that
they otherwise wouldn't do. That's kind of the whole point of this collective action is to get
the parts to do things that by themselves they're not going to do. And so you have this, we're back
to this idea of you look at the computer and you say, ah, it's doing an algorithm to calculate,
you know, pi and then you look down and you say, but this electron here, what makes this
electron do go from here to there to help to calculate the pi, right? We have many examples
of this where you have these like, this scaling of levels and that's the trick in biology to
understand how it happens in biology and then to use that to develop new technologies that achieve
intelligence in that way, in a multi-scale architecture. And can we say that the single
neuron somehow knows through backpropagation and, you know, penalty and reward that
is actions are part of a bigger goal? That's a really interesting question. So how do you,
if you are part of a bigger system, how do you know that? I suspect, I don't know the answer
to this, but I suspect that some kind of girdle theorem limitation is going to say that we can
never really understand the mind of which we are part, okay, the bigger system that we can never
really understand it. But I bet that there are techniques from, let's say, information theory
or something like that, that can help you gather evidence to the fact that you are part of such
a system. So I have this, yeah, I have this sort of fantasy of imagine you're a neuron inside a
brain. Actually, there's two neurons and the one neuron says to the other neuron,
I think our universe is a cold, unfeeling place of zero agency. It's just physics, no one cares
what we do. You know, it's just this cold mechanical universe. The other neuron says,
I disagree. I think I can sort of feel that the universe has, there's a mind to this. We live in
in a mindful universe where some things are rewarded and punished. And every time there's
this sort of like wave of corrective propagation, I feel that the universe is not indifferent to
what we do. I think we, you know, so I can't tell if it likes cats or dogs or what this neural net
is trying to do. But I have this feeling that the agency of my environment is not zero. And
in the case of the neurons, of course, the second neuron is correct, because, because even though
he cannot comprehend everything that that brain is doing, he does not live in a mindless universe.
He's part of this thing, this, this, this giant mind, right? So of course, you know, we meet people,
some people feel that they live in a, in a cold mechanical universe and other people feel they
learn lessons, right? The universe is teaching me a lesson and I've learned, you know, it likes me
to do this and that. I don't know what the answer to that is. And I'm not sure we can prove it.
But I think it would be a big mistake to assume that we are necessarily without the agency of our
environment is necessarily zero. You know, wow, it's not, it's not biology. It's not philosophy.
It's even not philosophy. I think it's theology. So the idea of meaning and purpose. So Michael
Levine, thank you so much for your time. And it's not just for your time. It's for your
a groundbreaking research and what you do. And I think it's like I asked you about what do you
hope? What do you believe? I believe that I'm talking with a future Nobel laureate. And I think
that this is so mesmerizing and thank you so much. I always ask my guest and I must ask you,
could you give me just one single productivity tip? Because what you do in your lab, the Levine lab,
produce so much valuable work. So if you can share with me just one single productivity tip
that you use, I will appreciate it very much. Okay, here's one, one thing that I tell my students
in postdocs. I think it's very important to clearly separate creative work from mechanical work.
And specifically what that means is let's say, let's say, let's say you're going to write a paper.
And many people are stuck because because they have many ideas and they're trying to write it down
and you have to keep changing it. So what I do is the following. I have a creative phase where I think
about, what do I want to say? What is my story? How do I want to whatever? After that, I make an
outline. And then after that, my goal is to, so I go as a computer scientist, you'll understand
what I'm saying, I go bread first, always bread first. So the first thing I do is put in an outline
that matches my creative vision of how I want to tell the story. After that, it gets a little more
mechanical because each big point of the outline, well, it's kind of clear what has to go under that.
The next step is even more mechanical. And if you do that properly, you lose by the time you
get to the bottom of that outline, there is no more degrees of freedom left. You know exactly
what goes in. Now it's total mechanics. You just type in whatever the outline says, that's what you
put in. And so by separating the process where it's sort of intuitive and creative and all that,
from the process where, okay, now I can see exactly what has to go here,
you end up not getting stuck. And so I try to be very clear that way. And that helps me get
things done. This is great. And the mechanical Michael Levine is part of the collective creative
Michael Levine, which is our topic of the conversation today. Thank you so much for your
time. God bless you and keep on your very important work that you're doing.
Thank you so much. I really appreciate the conversation. It was great fun. And yeah,
thank you for having me on. Okay, bye, bye, bye, Michael. Thank you so much. On this channel,
you will see the authors of these books and many more having great conversation with me.
Please subscribe, hit the bell button and be part of this great community. See you in the next video.
