Lecture 6 Traditional Beliefs and Philosophy
In the last lecture we talked about some of the traditional beliefs
and philosophical assumptions of the Yoruba people.
But one might ask, is this really philosophy?
I mean, after all, isn't philosophy an analysis of these things,
questioning some beliefs or trying to make them consistent?
One of the fascinating things about contemporary African thought
is that that, in fact, is one of the main debates.
In fact, the question is often put,
is there a traditional African philosophy
or is there African philosophy at all?
That may seem like an odd question for a tradition to be asking.
To put this in perspective, it's necessary to consider the fact
that in sub-Saharan Africa, most of these nations were,
in fact, all of these nations were at one point colonized.
And one of the results of colonization was a lot of destruction of records
that had something to do with philosophical thought.
Colonization sometimes did this very intentionally.
The Mexican Inquisitor, for example, after the Spanish came into Mexico,
decided that what should be done is,
as many of the picture books of the Aztecs as possible should be destroyed.
And in fact, we ended up losing to humanity much information
about the Aztecs and their thought.
Or similarly, in the American Allotment Act of 1887,
there is a deliberate effort to ban the practice
of American Indian religions on the reservation.
And this stayed on the books until 1934.
Quite a long time, time for a couple of generations
not to be trained in the traditional beliefs of their societies.
And so what one has in these situations is a case where it's not clear
how much what comes down to us is actually what thought was like
at a previous time before colonialism.
And one big question that gets raised as a result of that is,
what have we inherited?
Particularly in Latin America and Africa, philosophers ask,
are any of the ideas we have really very true to our tradition?
What do we do with the fact that a lot of our understanding of philosophy
does come to us from the West?
After all, our own cultural identity doesn't seem to have much to do
with the philosophical problems that are discussed at all.
Now the question that comes up, a kind of philosophical question,
is really what is philosophy after all?
And there are two, I would say, somewhat extreme answers to this question.
One of them is the answer given by Universalists.
Universalists claim that philosophy is basically the same project
wherever it's practiced.
In philosophy what we try to do is systematize beliefs,
offer criticism to those beliefs,
try to figure out whether or not these beliefs really are solid or helpful
and whether they pass various tests of reason.
The alternative is culturalism,
which contends that philosophy, like any other human endeavor,
depends in many ways on the circumstances in which it occurs.
What become philosophical issues have much to do with a society
in which these issues are discussed.
And in fact, many culturalists would say,
you don't have to have written philosophy,
texts of the sort that we're accustomed to in the West,
in order to have philosophy at all.
In fact, many of the practices of a society
themselves implicitly indicate philosophical beliefs.
One of the further reasons for philosophers
in Latin America and Africa to worry about the question
of whether or not universalism or culturalism ought to be the dominant answer
is that these philosophers are well aware
that many of the Western notions that came in to their societies
as a result of colonialism were often used very manipulatively
in order to justify European dominance.
So there's a certain amount of suspicion
of the Western philosophical project,
and yet philosophers practicing in these countries,
of course, themselves, have been educated in Western thought
to a large extent.
That's what philosophy became in those societies.
One of the spokespeople for the culturalist viewpoint
is Cheyke Anta Diop, a Senegalese intellectual,
who argues that philosophy is always implicit
in a culture's productions.
If you look at the way economic behavior occurs
in a particular society, if you look at the artworks of a society,
there are all kinds of beliefs that are evident in that
and also decisions about how to solve certain philosophical issues.
From his point of view, then, to talk about African philosophy
really ought to take into account
a whole range of different things that are happening in the society.
Similarly, Auguste Salazar Bondi from Peru argues
that there's a real problem that Western thought has become
so dominant in Latin America.
One of the results of this is that Latin American intellectuals
and philosophers have really felt, in a sense,
beholden to Western thought.
The ideas of Western philosophy weren't generated
in the context where they're actually being applied
in Latin America, and the consequence is
that there always seems to be a bit of a mismatch
between what it is philosophers are doing
and the real problems that people face.
So he calls for an end to this,
the development of what's truly an authentic philosophy of Latin America.
We'll be talking more about Latin America in a future lecture,
and for the remainder of this one,
I'll primarily concentrate on the debate as it applies to African thought.
This debate between universalists and culturalists
has led to a lot of consideration of what we should do
with what we know of traditional beliefs of various societies
and now post-colonial nations.
And the question here is, considering some of the things
that we talked about in the last lecture,
are these things really philosophical,
or are these just a kind of summary of some beliefs people have
which really haven't been very systematically considered
or critically analyzed?
I would say, well, yes, of course these are philosophical.
And if we haven't systematically considered them,
maybe one of the reasons is that they are part of an oral tradition,
but that's no reason not to try to systematize them now.
So some thinkers try the approach of finding out what they can
from the oral tradition and trying to put it all together.
Indeed, these thinkers who claim that there's nothing about
an oral tradition that prevents it from being philosophy
would say that if you don't acknowledge that the oral tradition
can give us philosophical insight,
then what you're doing in effect is claiming that the means
and the message can't be separate.
But indeed, there's no reason why people can't verbally convey
philosophical insights just as they do this oftentimes in writing.
And indeed, some of these people who think systematizing
traditional beliefs is a good plan,
they maintain that it's really ethnocentric to insist that philosophy
be something that is written down in text on the format of
Western philosophical treatises.
After all, the whole problem has arisen because
or the problem of figuring out what authentic philosophy in Africa would be
has arisen because of colonialism,
because models from the West, which really weren't very appropriate
in the first place, have been imposed on Africa.
So why should we say that the West practices philosophy
is the only way to do it and then somehow try to bend
African thought to that kind of model?
On the other side are opponents of what they call ethno-philosophy,
these efforts to systematize traditional beliefs in a philosophical way.
What I'll proceed to do is consider some of the criticisms
that have been offered of these various strategies
of putting together traditional beliefs and calling it philosophy.
One of the spokesperson persons for the idea that ethno-philosophy
really isn't philosophy in a full sense is Henry Odera Oruca,
a Kenyan thinker.
Oruca considered various ways in which contemporary Africa practices philosophy
and he thought that in fact there were four basic categories.
One was the category of the ethno-philosophers,
the people who attempted to write basic systematic accounts
of how traditional beliefs worked together
and basically did nothing beyond that in his view.
In other words, they tried to organize what it was
that they could get from the oral tradition,
ideally finding some consistency.
This in itself is not really something that is not challenging.
As we considered in the last lecture,
there are often variant accounts of the same sort of thing.
So if you ask how is it that we end up getting the particular inner head we have
in Yoruba thought, well there are various accounts.
So the ethno-philosopher does have to somehow figure out how to synthesize these things.
But Oruca claims that philosophy to be fully philosophy needs to be critical,
needs to do more than just catalog and effect beliefs that are held,
but needs to consider whether or not some of these beliefs are based on faulty assumptions
or are inconsistent with other beliefs that are held.
His view is that in Africa there have always been in fact ethno-philosophers
or people who knew a lot about the beliefs of their societies
and he would not call them really ethno-philosophers
but cause them cultural sages,
people who were aware of the wisdom that had been received from the past
and were good at applying it.
But his claim is those weren't the philosophers.
The philosophers were those few people who probably were already cultural sages
who went on to criticize or evaluate the beliefs that had been received from tradition.
He sees a big difference between simply accepting what it is your tradition has given you
and using those as your working tools to deal with reality
a worthwhile goal in itself.
But he thinks that that itself is one project,
whereas the project of evaluating these things,
determining whether or not the tools that your inheritance has given you
are really applicable in the here and now
and whether or not some of these ideas perhaps should end up being dismantled from your tradition.
These in fact were what he calls the philosophical sages.
So he distinguishes first ethno-philosophers and philosophical sages.
Of course he claims the philosophical sages are far rarer than cultural sages.
Cultural sages are basically the wise people of the community,
the people people go to with problems.
And his view is that all societies have these.
But he thinks even though all societies probably have philosophical sages too,
it's a much rarer individual who's able to reflect critically on the tradition.
And without such people, in a sense you're trapped in the views that have been handed down to you.
So he thinks that philosophical sages serve a really vital role.
In fact they end up having to be very courageous people.
He would view Socrates certainly as a philosophical sage,
but look what happened to Socrates.
It's sometimes a very dangerous thing to suggest that traditional beliefs
aren't what people should continue to live by.
Oruca considers two other categories, which I'll quickly mention,
that we'll be encountering them in what precedes.
One of them is the category of professional philosophers.
These are current philosophy professors working in Africa
who largely analyze their tradition using some of the tools that they've received from the West.
Many if not most of them are educated in the West, or at least in Western techniques.
And some of their projects tend to be using Western techniques,
perhaps to analyze what's going on in African thought,
but sometimes to evaluate exactly the same kind of issues that people anywhere else would be discussing.
So it might not be culturally rooted at all.
It might be even a question about European thought.
It's quite possible for an African philosophy professor to write a paper about Descartes
and not really bring in anything about the ideas that emerge in some African tribes
about multiple souls or multiple soul elements.
So that's another dimension of the philosophical scene operating currently.
And certainly the professional philosophers are the ones who most consistently raise the question,
does Africa have philosophy?
A fourth group is a group that he calls nationalistic ideological.
And these are the thinkers who are mostly concerned to address the concrete situation of African nations now.
Their view is that whatever philosophy ought to be doing,
it ought to be dealing with the realities of post-colonial life in these nations.
And if wisdom from the past helps us to do that, well and good.
But if not, let's not pay much attention to it.
We have a really important agenda to address right now.
We'll say a little bit more about that later on.
Okay, so Oruca criticizes ethno-philosophy because it doesn't really deal with the critical aspect of philosophy
that he thinks it needs to include.
There are other critics of ethno-philosophy too who are more consistent in denigrating the whole,
sorry, it's not that Oruca is not consistent, but Oruca does at least acknowledge
that within the traditions that can be studied, we will find philosophical sages.
But one has to find them.
Just knowing things about traditional beliefs isn't enough,
but one needs to find those people within the traditions who actually did criticize certain things
and evaluate their traditional beliefs.
But there are other views that are a little bit more antagonistic even to looking at the tradition period.
For example, some tend to think that ethno-philosophers are really inherently derogatory toward Africa.
Now it may seem a little ironic that someone would take the time and trouble to try to understand an African traditional system
and still have denigrating goals.
But nevertheless, many African thinkers think that that's exactly what happened.
One of the problems is that the initial ethno-philosophical accounts were made by people outside the traditions they were studying.
Probably the most important of these was a book called Bantu Philosophy,
which was written by Plessid Temples, who is a Belgian missionary to the Congo.
And Temples, I think to be fair to him, treated the worldview of the society that he dealt with
with more respect than many missionaries did.
Overall, he did take the time and trouble to try to figure out what the basic ideas of the Bantu peoples were.
But some people would say, right off the bat, just the idea of writing a book called Bantu Philosophy is a bit of a problem.
Why? Because the Bantu are a group of peoples who don't all agree about exactly all the details.
What he assumed was that the people that he worked most directly with were representative of a much wider group of people.
We'll find this complaint recurring in critics of ethno-philosophy.
But more problematic still, what was Temples' motive?
Well, he was a missionary. Why did he want to understand the people that he worked with?
Well, because he recognized that if you didn't, being very persuasive in promulgating Christian teaching wasn't very likely.
So his goal, even though you might say initially was to understand, nevertheless it had this further purpose,
which was to convince people to abandon their traditional views or at least abandon them insofar as they didn't coincide with Christian belief.
And that strikes people as not a very desirable goal at all.
It's not really a very fair hearing if your only reason for listening to someone is to try to convert them into thinking something other than what they're saying.
There's also a tendency in Temples to view the truth as being basically the way Westerners and Christians tended to think of things.
So although he analyzes the way the Bantu think in terms of abstract terms, he doesn't think the Bantu will do this themselves at all.
And implicitly, the idea is, well, we in the West are real philosophers.
The Bantu just kind of do this implicitly, and when we go in with our ability to analyze, we can see what the basic lines of analysis are.
But this is something that they would never reflect about at all.
In general, these approaches that come from the outside often do have some motivation beyond simply trying to take an open mind to what people in the traditions in Africa are saying.
And that strikes a lot of critics of ethno philosophy as really pretty pernicious on the whole.
It seems to be real concern with traditional thought in these societies, but in fact what it is is trying to get a lot of information for an ulterior motive, namely to replace these traditions with one's own.
Paul and Hantunji, a contemporary African philosopher who is one of the professional group that Oruka talks about, thinks that in general to rely on an oral tradition is a problem.
We can consider the problem that we have in figuring out, well, for the Yoruba, how do people get their inner heads?
We don't know exactly just because there are variant accounts.
Hantunji points out that in oral traditions, a lot of times we don't have enough that really gives us the wherewithal to say very specifically what's going on philosophically.
In other words, we have some accounts. We can't really put them together, so we have to say their variants.
There isn't a system that brings these things all together.
And his view is that for philosophers to discuss thought, to critically evaluate thought of a society, they need to have it in writing.
Why? It gives them something clear to pinpoint. They can look at something, see what's being systematized, see what's being left out, and so on.
If I were to say, well, I don't know if the Yoruba talk about this, that doesn't mean that they don't.
It just means that the oral tradition, as it's reached me, hasn't included a certain kind of thing.
Whereas if you have a philosophical system written out, you know what's included and what isn't included.
Hantunji also is concerned with the fact that in any other society, when people talk about philosophy, they typically do refer to things that are written.
He is rather contemptuous of the idea that, well, in Africa, of course, they didn't write it down, but everywhere else people wrote things down and it was very systematic and so on.
He thinks that the result of that is to say that, well, there's philosophy and then there's African philosophy, which means not really philosophy at all.
So his proposal is, let's just get rid of this notion that we can have philosophy without writing.
He actually makes the rather bold proposal, seemingly an odd-broke bold proposal, that we should call African philosophy philosophical writing by Africans.
That might not sound very shocking, but in a way it is.
I mean, consider Temples.
Temples gives us this book called Bantu Philosophy, which was taken very seriously by a lot of people for a considerable period of time.
Hantunji would say, that isn't African philosophy, it isn't written by Africans.
And he recognizes with Aruka that there are a number of approaches currently taken to philosophy in Africa.
Why pick one and say, well, that's the real thing, whereas these other things are not?
Instead, if they're written, if the effort is to be systematic, whether it's a philosophy professor trained in the West who lives in Africa,
whether it's someone who actually immigrated to Africa, maybe came from somewhere else, but is now living in Africa, dealing with the cultural situation there,
all these can be called African philosophers.
So there is such a thing as African philosophy, but he thinks we shouldn't be looking way to the past to find this out.
This idea of past orientation is another point that some of the critics of ethno-philosophy have made.
They point out that when people focus a lot of attention on the traditional beliefs of societies in Africa, they're really looking back to a really quite distant past.
They point to the fact, for instance, that the major religions of Africa are Christianity and Islam, both Western religions.
And what they're claiming in effect is that there isn't really a kind of purely traditional line of belief in any of these African societies that have since been colonized,
because there's been interaction between whatever traditional beliefs were and Western viewpoints.
And anyone living in Africa now inherits things from both.
So again, the idea of looking to the traditions is really kind of going back to a golden age, perhaps, in some people's fantasies,
but not anything that's very real and certainly not anything that deals with Africa as we experience it now.
Critics have also pointed out that to talk about African philosophy in terms of just what the traditional beliefs were is to exaggerate the unanimity of Africans,
even within a single tribe. People don't all agree.
I mean, if there's anything exploring the various traditions of the world to tell us is that people have controversies wherever they are, whatever issues that are important to them at the moment.
And so we shouldn't think that giving a report in effect of what the Yoruba or any other tribe believed is really giving us the whole story.
These might be the predominant views, as in earlier lectures, some of the things we highlighted are the predominant views in the West.
But it would be really quite an exaggeration to say, well, this is what everybody thought. Of course, it wasn't.
The whole philosophical tradition involves people fighting about exactly these things.
And so if we act as though, well, African philosophy, everybody absolutely agrees, but in every other tradition, people are arguing about things.
Again, that's denigrating. The idea is, well, in Africa, people weren't able to be critical. Where else they were?
The idea of this past orientation of ethno philosophy has also been attacked by people who think that the practices that go with these traditional beliefs are, in some cases, outmoded.
African feminists, for example, think that ethno philosophy is certainly not the way to go.
Because oftentimes the beliefs about what is morally expected of someone has to do with notions about women that really should be passe, and that they're making active efforts to make passe.
So again, ethno philosophy doesn't deal with the situation as we're really encountering it in Africa.
This leads to the conclusion of many of the people who fall into the nationalist ideological camp, as Aruka describes them.
And these are the people that think that ethno philosophy is really just irrelevant.
What we ought to be concerned with in Africa, they claim, is liberating people from the legacy of colonialism.
Franz Fanon, a philosopher from Martinique, originally, is one of the well-known spokespeople for this position.
His view is that what we should do is, if there are resources that we can take over, fine.
But the real situation that most people in societies that have been colonized or facing is the fact that their own humanity has been negated for so long and so structurally that what's important now is just to destroy that structure.
Fanon is viewed as a major advocate of violence.
And I should point out that his notion of violence includes more things than we probably usually would include under that category.
For example, his view is there's been so much violence done just by telling the African where his place in the scheme of things was that any effort to sort of cross those lines is already an act of violence.
But he does have a very extreme view about the importance of taking violent action just in order to overcome this terrible legacy.
Fanon was a psychiatrist and one of the motivations for some of his claims is that he recognized, in effect, what kind of mental illness was wrought on so many people as a result of being treated as less than human in their own countries.
Well, there are quite a few arguments, obviously, against ethno-philosophy.
And some people view it to be a possibility to take some of the things that have come to us from African traditions and work with them but work with them in new ways or drawing attention to certain themes in them but adapting those to our current situation.
The notion of celebrating what's uniquely African was promoted by a movement called the Negritude Movement, which began in France in the 1930s.
And the people who began this movement were Africans who were being educated in France.
So already we've got one of those situations that professional philosophers often point to and that Eruca points to as well, the fact that we do have a lot of people with mixed heritages.
They're trained in Western techniques, but they come from African nations and are trying to put these together.
One of the main spokespeople for the Negritude Movement was Leopold Seidar Singhor, who was the long-term president of Senegal as well as a man of letters.
And his notion of Negritude and what this whole movement believed was that there's a certain kind of approach to the world that Africans take that is inherently different from the approach to the world that Europeans take.
He comments, for example, in dark Africa people always dance because they feel and they always dance someone or something.
Now to dance is to discover and to recreate, to identify oneself with the forces of life, to lead a fuller life and in short to be.
It is at any rate the highest form of knowledge. The reason of classical Europe is analytic through utilization, the reason of the African Negro, intuitive through participation.
Now what he's comparing there are the basic approaches to the world that he thinks the Europeans take and that Africans take.
His claim is that Europeans tend to be very analytical, that what they believe we should do to know things is try to remove ourselves from our emotional reactions.
We might hear think of Kant. When Kant talks about morality and proposes the categorical imperative, what he's explicitly doing is trying to give us a tool to help us disengage from a situation where we want something.
If we apply the categorical imperative and think, gee, is this a kind of approach that I think anyone at all could take?
What we've done is moved ourselves out of a situation where we have some concrete desire and moved into a more analytic mode and this Senghor claims is typical in all dimensions of knowledge in European discussion.
Africans on the other hand assume that an emotional approach to things is the proper way to deal with them and Senghor emphasizes the participatory feature of what he sees as the African approach.
So to come to know things is not to kind of get as much distance as you can and look at it from that point of view, but instead to really participate very vitally with things.
In Western thought, sometimes a distinction is made between knowing that and knowing how. Where knowing that tends to be a kind of more detached view where you have information as a result of looking at things without necessarily taking a personal invested interest of an emotional sort.
Whereas the African approach according to Senghor is much more like knowing that, namely that you've become, or sorry, knowing how you've become accustomed to things, you've learned about things by engaging with them.
Senghor's view is that both traditions have something incomparably important to provide humanity with and therefore it's important for the two approaches to interact in dialogue.
But some people find his approach deficient, in particular those who think that this idea of magnitude, which is supposed to be a racial trait, and even extend to people who are simply descendants of Africans, no matter how long their family has been away from Africa,
that this is really reinforcing racism, reinforcing stereotypes, reinforcing the notion that Europe is the rational place where real philosophy is done and that Africa is a place where people just react emotionally.
There's also the assumption that there's a homogeneity not only among Africans, but among African descendants as well.
And so many people have rejected Senghor's notion. Nevertheless, his idea that it's important to focus on what is concrete to the African experience, even if people disagree with his analysis of it, does characterize the thinking of a lot of philosophers in post-colonial nations today.
