Lecture 8 Mesoamerican Thought
On the whole, Western thought about morality has placed a lot of emphasis on human freedom.
Kant is perhaps an extreme case, but he argues that if in fact our lives and our choices were determined,
we wouldn't be able to be moral at all.
We've already seen that some societies don't think that that emphasis on human freedom
is necessary to say that human beings have moral responsibilities.
The Yoruba, for example, think that really quite a lot about our lives and destinies
is already determined before we're born by the choice of an inner head,
and yet they still believe that we have moral responsibilities.
American Indians, too, tend to think that there's no way of stepping out of the basic connection
of everything else with nature, or our connection with everything else in nature,
but nevertheless they think that we have responsibilities,
and that in fact these responsibilities come from our connections to other things in nature.
The Aztec view of human obligation is similar to these latter viewpoints
in that emphasis on freedom is not primary.
Most of the emphasis has to do with those things that influence us,
and many of these things that influence us come from other planes of reality entirely.
They don't seem to be part of our everyday world.
On the other hand, human beings have in some ways extraordinary obligations
and some obligations to beings on these other planes.
Moreover, the Aztecs believe that it is possible, to a certain extent,
to influence the effects of other planes on us,
even though our destiny is to a large extent controlled or influenced by them.
To understand the Aztec view, we need to keep in mind that they saw time and space
as themselves involving more than one plane.
Space involved three different dimensions.
There's the terrestrial space that we operate in,
but there's also the celestial space of the God as well as an underworld,
and forces could operate and move between these various levels.
There are particular channels that made it possible for influences
to come from other levels or come up from other levels to our plane,
and these are called Malanallis.
The belief was that you could pinpoint where these Malanallis occurred
by looking around at certain things in the natural world.
So, for example, rocks could be the locations of Malanallis.
Caves, fire and sunlight, similarly, and even other animals, other creatures,
could be a source of these particular influences arriving on our plane.
The Aztecs thought, therefore, that in lots of ways we got the impact of these influences,
but nevertheless they thought it was important to perform rituals at the right time.
If we knew when these forces were going to arrive,
and they thought to a large extent that could be predicted
precisely because it was a deterministic steady system,
then if we perform rituals, we might be able to influence the effects that these had on us.
Similarly, time had three dimensions, human, mythic, and transcendent.
Transcendent was the time of the creator gods, this imposed order in the first place.
Mythic time was the dimension in which the gods struggled, died, and were dismembered.
In other words, mythological stories occurred on this level.
And, of course, there was also human time, the time that we experience in the here and now.
Interestingly, although you might say that the myths, of course, refer to something in the past,
or for that matter certainly creation occurs in the past,
nevertheless these other dimensions of time were felt to be continually active,
so we got influences on our level from these as well.
The Aztecs paid a lot of attention to their calendar system
precisely because they believed it provided a determination
of when these forces were going to particularly be flowing into our level,
and if we responded, if human beings responded appropriately by performing the right rituals,
it would be possible to contain them, or at least make some kind of peace with them.
In a rather fascinating way then, Aztecs science and religion worked together.
In fact, science was motivated by a religious concern
insofar as religion attempted to deal with these forces coming from other levels,
levels in which the gods and mythic heroes existed.
The Aztec system was deterministic, but it wasn't fatalistic.
Determinism is the view that certain things outside of our control control us,
but fatalism is the view that absolutely everything is dictated
and there's not much point in making efforts to control things,
and the Aztecs didn't believe that there was little point in attempting to gain some control.
They did believe that the particular point in both space and time
where each of us was born had much to do with the destiny of that person,
but they also thought it was possible to manage this destiny in various ways.
For example, parents could have an influence on managing the destiny of a newborn child
by giving it an auspicious name.
As life proceeded, developing self-control was important
for gaining some influence over the forces that seek to control us.
And education was certainly very important.
The Aztecs attempted to educate their children to develop what they called face,
which amounts to something like character.
And if we develop character in this way, we'll be able to fare reasonably well
regardless of the kind of destiny we have.
Nevertheless, the emphasis tended to be much more on determinism than on freedom.
The fate of any individual was viewed as something that was ultimately in the God's hands
and something about which we really didn't know all that much.
Interestingly, the Aztecs viewed themselves as caretakers,
and in this respect, they're rather similar to other North American Indian tribes
viewing the caretaking of the entire world around us as being a human responsibility.
Now, this notion of dealing with cosmic stability is a theme that occurs in lots of other places in the world as well.
In a way, what the West does in various different formulations is consider the order of the world.
And Plato believed that the order of the world was something that preceded us,
something we simply needed to find out about in order to order our more localized human world.
If we find the truth of the forms, which do give order to reality, we'll know how to work well with it.
Kant also thought that order was something that we didn't have to impose out of our own free will, in a sense,
simply because our minds, just being what they are, are going to give it a certain kind of shape and structure.
And that will enable us to deal with it in an orderly way.
American Indian tribes considered the idea of balance within nature.
And this is a different sense of order, perhaps.
But the idea here was that the order that concerned us was the natural balance of things.
And human beings had a role in trying to ensure that the balance worked out harmoniously.
But nevertheless, there wasn't any sense that any tremendous cataclysm was going to happen,
or that anything would disrupt nature.
The idea was simply to fine-tune it for human beings to assist it along its natural way.
Now, this is not a universal view, the idea that nature, in a sense, has a course that human beings can help or hinder,
but that basically it's going to proceed in a continuous flow.
The ancient Persians, for example, thought that chaos was always threatening from outside.
This more cosmic notion stemmed perhaps from their political situation of having invaders trample their cities.
But there is a sense that human beings really needed to ally themselves with the forces of order
in order to keep things going in their proper direction.
And the Aztecs view is very similar to that.
The Aztecs thought that cosmic stability was extremely precarious,
that it wasn't very likely that time would continue on this human dimension unless human beings did certain kinds of things.
And most particularly, and I think most shockingly from the standpoint of many other cultures,
they viewed human sacrifices absolutely essential to this whole situation.
Why was that?
The Aztecs believed that we lived in the age of what they called the fifth sun.
The fifth sun was the fifth in a series of suns like ours.
But in each case, with the previous suns, a disaster had occurred.
The sun ceased to exist.
A whole world had evaporated in the process.
And all that was left was the hearth of the gods.
So there was a sense that not only could a world come to an end, it already had many times before.
And we're living in the fifth age with our own sun.
If suns had come to an end before, this could obviously happen again.
And the Aztecs believed that they should do whatever they could to prevent this fate from happening.
The sun, the fifth sun, our sun, had come about when two gods,
Nanhuatsan and Kuzis Tektel, had leapt into the hearth of the gods, sacrificing themselves.
And the fifth sun was a reincarnation of Nanhuatsan.
It was important to maintain this sun by feeding it.
The sun like any other being needed nutrition.
And in order to avoid the fate that had befallen the earth in the past,
when darkness occurred between the suns, it was necessary to give support to the sun, earth, and rain.
All the things that we see in the here and now that came about as a result of the god's sacrifice.
And what do they need?
Primarily blood.
Blood and other life forces from the human body.
So human sacrifice was felt to be a real obligation to maintain the world at all.
Human sacrifice was essential, first of all, to repay the god's sacrifice.
If the god sacrificed their life, human sacrifice seemed the appropriate recompense for them.
But also human sacrifice was necessary just to keep this world going.
Indeed, I think it's possible to see why people within Aztec society might have thought that being a sacrificial victim was not such a terrible fate.
Because after all, what you were doing was giving your life to sustain the whole world.
If you thought that your own action could actually keep the world going and the lack of it might make the world come to a stop,
it's pretty easy to see this as having a lot of significance, even though it might not be the most cheerful of fates.
Moreover, Aztec teaching had it that if one died in this way, one became one with the sun so that you had the most resplendent possible afterlife.
Only sacrificial victims and women who died in childbirth, both continuing the species and continuing the world in effect, had this kind of glorious afterlife.
So maybe it seems odd, but nevertheless members of Aztec society accepted the fate of being sacrificial victims themselves.
Nevertheless, the whole idea of human sacrifice had a lot of political repercussions beyond just convincing people of the necessity to perform sacrifices of this sort.
For one thing, the fact that there was real danger that the world might come to an end suggested that an authoritarian way of life was simply what one would expect.
You wanted to be as sure as possible that the world would continue, so of course you needed to have a lot of order on the human level as well.
Ceremonial wars came to be viewed as a normal part of business because in ceremonial wars you could provide the blood that the sun needed and the other different forces that existed in the human body.
Now I should say something at this point about these various forces.
There were three basic forces that occur in the human body and all of these were thought to be essential to providing nourishment to the sun and thus the cosmos in general.
The first of these and probably the most important in a sense was tonali.
This is the force that gave life. It animated the human being.
And indeed tonali was what various military forces felt that they needed to have a lot of in order to be effective.
A second force, teolia, was a force having to do with emotion, knowledge, and it was thought to reside in the heart.
Tonali resided in the head, teolia resided in the heart.
The third was ihiodal and this was a very interesting life force connected with the liver.
It provided bravery and some of the really stable passions that go into giving a person the kind of personality and character that one has.
So for example love and hate had to do with ihiodal.
But ihiodal was also thought to be a kind of gas and it was effervescent in a certain sense.
So that when a person met someone else they would recognize this particular life force and this would make the person recognized attractive to the other person.
So it was this life force connection to the liver that had a lot to do with the way human beings interacted with each other in a positive sense.
One of the motivations for decapitating enemy warriors however had to do with this other life force, tonali.
The idea was that if this force resided in the head one could get the tonali out by decapitating enemy warriors and this was a very steady practice.
Indeed the idea was that the community as a whole could get more tonali by decapitating enemy warriors.
So the Aztec worldview as a whole encouraged militarism.
But this militarism was intensified in 1424.
It sometimes said that the victors write history and certainly this was true in 1424 when the great general Plochallel wrote a new myth for his society.
Plochallel actually ordered the burning of codices, the kind of picture books that the Aztecs had about history up until then and had new ones presented or produced.
These new ones suggested that the Aztec war god Witzelopochli was actually the sun.
So now we had a new reason to think about the need for war as a basis for feeding the sun.
It wasn't just that the sun in order to continue to exist as any other natural being needed nutrition.
Indeed the sun was the god of war and therefore it was a moral responsibility not just to provide blood for the sun but actually to make war.
Now that's far what I've been talking about this Aztec worldview amounts to a kind of ethno philosophy of the Aztecs.
But there was a critical philosophy in the Aztec world as well.
This occurred in the schools of higher learning that were run by the Flonatinime.
The Flonatinime were knowers of things and these were the people who were responsible for training the nobility and the future priests of society.
In fact one of the very interesting things about Aztec society was that education was believed to be vitally important so it wasn't just the aristocrats that were educated.
But nevertheless those who were anticipated to be the leaders of the future got particularly fine education from the Flonatinime.
What the Flonatinime did was present the knowledge of Aztec reality to all of the people that were their students.
In other words what they tried to do was train them in all kinds of different endeavors that the Aztecs had knowledge about.
So they taught science, history, the arts, etc.
But they also reflected on myth and what they tried to do is figure out things in a critical way.
Indeed many scholars think that the Flonatinime were explicitly critical of the military regime.
That they didn't buy the kind of effort to rewrite history that made warfare seem absolutely incumbent on human beings.
Their aim was to realize human potential and in educating the young what they did primarily was paint, write poetry and songs.
Because it was in a certain sense a kind of oral tradition the way to pass on knowledge wasn't by means of writing in a direct sense.
But in terms of songs, poetry and also pictures which with proper education one knew how to interpret.
And this was what they would teach the young who were learning these various dimensions of reality.
Clamacox was the name of the kind of school that the Flonatinime had.
And one of the things that they reflected on was the whole nature of truth.
Now here we have a rather interesting comparison or similarity with the West.
Because actually truth as the Flonatinime saw it was linked to the idea of stability.
In fact very literally in the Nwadal language the Aztec language the word for truth and the word for root share the same root.
So the idea of truth as having to do with being rooted, being stable was a very fundamental idea.
And when the Flonatinime asked is there truth on this earth they concluded actually no.
Life as we see it is something that's far too transient, far too unstable to provide any kind of root, any true reality.
So they considered life to be a dream.
Nevertheless they did believe that it was possible to gain insight into the truth even for human beings.
Even though human beings live on this particular plane that's full of so many transient things.
The way to gain this truth interestingly was by means of a poetic vision.
One looks beyond the visible to another source of stability and one attains this when one is poetically inspired.
So the gods in a sense inspire one from the heavens and this heightens the individual who has inspiration so that they can actually perceive certain truths that are otherwise not available to human beings.
We have a comparable story actually in the West, at least comparable in certain respects, in Plato.
Plato suggests that it's possible to have inspiration from other realms and indeed that many artists actually gain inspiration in this way.
Plato however was not entirely confident that what artists got was necessarily truth that we should trust.
In a dialogue called the Ion, Plato has Socrates as usual challenging whoever it was that he encountered, encountering a Rhapsod named Ion.
A Rhapsod was someone who went traveling through the world basically performing or reciting aspects of different kinds of poetry and taking on the parts of various characters that showed up.
And Ion was an expert in interpreting the poetry of Homer and because Homer was considered to be in effect the Bible of ancient Greek society, he had a pretty good reputation.
But he himself was in a sense a little bit disconcerted about his own talent because he realized that when he did Homer he was a wonderful actor but if he tried any other text he really didn't amount to much of an actor at all.
And Socrates convinces him that there's a good reason for this because he really isn't operating with any kind of knowledge at all.
Knowledge according to Socrates is something that's organized and systemic. So if you know how to do something in one context you ought to be able to know the same thing in another context as well.
And Ion doesn't seem to have that. So Socrates concludes this is because he really doesn't know anything at all. He's just in a sense inspired by someone on another level.
And Plato tells this complicated story about how something like a magnetic field or actually something more like a magnetic charge extends from first a god to Homer and then from Homer to Ion and from Ion to his audience.
So there is indeed a kind of fantastic audience response. After all what the audience is getting is something that comes directly from the gods by means of inspiration.
But Ion in a sense is completely passive in this respect. Now in certain ways the Aztec idea resembles this. The human being who comes to know things is also in a way passive.
The truth comes from another level entirely. Once again we have this notion that it isn't so much human beings that control things but other forces from other planes actually exert a lot of influence.
But nevertheless they believe that it was possible to be more or less receptive to these influences. So to reach a state and have the ability to really feel poetic inspiration was the closest a human being could get to anything on Earth giving them the truth.
The results of poetic inspiration were what is called flower and song. This is basically the Aztec term for what poetry is. And what poetry was designed to do was provide symbols or metaphors for things on another plane.
Even a human beings couldn't really describe truth in this fundamental sense in terms of the hero now by means of symbols they could gain some insight into it.
And the role of the poet was considered to be extremely important. One was able to leave poetry behind them. After all if you consider that this is a primarily oral tradition society one could leave painting behind as well and indeed the same people who were poets were the painters who did these painted histories.
But in a sense the oral tradition is a kind of disturbing tradition if you're worried about leaving anything because after all how are you sure that people are going to remember what it is you say.
Poetry because it's so captivating and has such strong symbols appeals to people and this is something that actually would create an influence beyond one's own time on this plane.
Among the beings discussed as part of the supreme truth that exists on another plane was a supreme God called Amityadl. Amityadl interestingly enough is described as a dual kind of God both father and mother.
In fact a number of different metaphors are used to describe Amityadl and you might compare this to the difficulty that many people in the west have had speculating about theology or talking about God.
Indeed some philosophers have approached the whole problem by saying the best thing to do is only describe what God is not. Where finite God isn't God is infinite effectively not finite.
In other words the way we come to know things is by means of denying certain features to God. We'll find that this is actually a very important kind of strategy in a number of societies and future lectures.
The Aztec approach was more to compare God to certain things in their actual experience.
A passage from Miguel Leon Portilla who's written a very fascinating history of the Aztecs gives some impression of the way these images might work.
As he says, many aspects had Amityadl, mother and father of the gods. In his circle of turquoise, in the waters colored as a bluebird, it is he who dwells in the clouds, on earth and in the realm of the dead, the Lord of fire and of the year.
In whose hands rest Anwak? He is the mirror of night and day, able both to conceal and to illuminate. He gives all things their truth and then makes them vanish into the region of oblivion.
He is the inventor of man, the one who drops him into the maternal womb. He holds men and the world in the palm of his hand and rocking them to and fro amuses himself and laughs.
This then is Amityadl, the metaphysical configuration of God seen through flower and song.
So all these kinds of experiences that people had in the world around them, the experience of birds appearing.
Birds tended to be often important images because their feathers would glisten in the sunlight because they would seem to be both something stable but something that moved and created a lot of attention when they moved.
All of these everyday experiences are drawn into the metaphors that help people in the everyday plane to understand better what's going on on the other planes, to understand what truth really is.
Another sort of consideration that made the Tlantini make critical philosophers is that they didn't simply accept the speculations that their society had had to that point about the afterlife.
I mentioned before that sacrificial victims were thought to join the sun and that so were women who died in childbirth.
But there wasn't really a very clear picture of the afterlife or there are in fact a lot of different rumors about the afterlife.
And the Tlantini may themselves consider what does happen to people after they die.
It wasn't obvious many of them thought that the stories that people simply accept were true, but what could we say?
And again, it wasn't that they thought that there were definite answers, but they had a number of speculations and different Tlantini may understood the situation somewhat differently.
Some for example, as some thinkers in the West concluded, we really don't know much of anything about a life beyond this one and maybe we're best off not believing in any such thing.
Maybe the best thing for us would be simply to recognize the hero now as life as we know it.
So it kind of lived for the day philosophy developed among some of the Tlantini may.
Others thought that wasn't very likely.
They continued the belief that was prevalent in their society that there was a life beyond this one, but whether this was a good life or a bad life wasn't entirely clear.
And again, people had different speculations.
Some of the Tlantini may argued that indeed it would be a better life we go on to.
This was certainly in keeping with the idea of sacrificial victims joining the sun.
Others thought there was no reason to think things would get any better than this.
And indeed, most likely, things would get a lot worse than this.
So they joined another point of view and suggested that, in fact, beyond this life, things are probably worse than this one.
In a way, this encourages a belief something like lived for today, but there was a recognition that life might go on beyond this one.
Ultimately, though, even though these speculations might sound familiar from Western questions about an afterlife, there's a very big difference in the way the Aztecs approach this question.
And the big difference, once again, has to do with determinism.
Because human beings were determined in many ways, their destinies largely outside their hands.
Ultimately, their fate in the next life was something that they neither knew of nor controlled.
The gods basically determined what happened in the next life.
And unlike Western views of this, when there is a belief in the afterlife, the Aztecs tended to think that this really didn't have anything to do with punishing people for being bad or rewarding people for being good.
You might say that the traditional belief that the sacrificial victims joined the sun was a suggestion that there was a real kind of glory to be gained by sacrificing oneself.
But the Flanatini may, thinking about this, concluded, no, we have no real reason to think that morality in the here and now is going to be reflected in another realm.
Ultimately, our fate is in the gods' hands, and that's true in the next life, just as it is in this one.
At best in this life, we can control somewhat the forces that influence us by doing the right things, repaying the gods, trying to sustain this world in its course.
But we don't have any reason to believe that our efforts to do that are going to repay us in another world.
So we're left with the kind of notion that really poetic vision is the closest we can ever get to insight into another realm or a truer realm than this.
And this is a really kind of interesting contrast from the epistemology of many societies.
The idea here is that the way to come to know the most important things isn't using reason, though reason, of course, is useful in many aspects of life.
The way to come to know what's really valuable is by means of this tremendous emotional state that's fully attentive to the here and now in being receptive to things.
By being receptive to things in general, sometimes one is receptive to forces coming from another plane.
And if a god chooses to inspire you, at least in that way, you're open to it. Thank you.
