Lecture 9 Ethics and Social Thought in Latin America
Throughout the world, thinkers worry about how people should live, and they formulate
their ideas in four different ways.
The first is that they prohibit certain behaviors.
Some behaviors are just considered to be incompatible with living a good life in a social context,
and so murder, for example, is something that societies in general prohibit as one of those
things that they're simply not going to tolerate for that reason.
Secondly, certain ideals, a more positive idea of what a good life is, get proposed
by philosophers throughout the world.
What is a good life for a person?
Is the basic formula the same for everybody, or does it depend on your station in life?
Along with this, a third component is discussion of certain virtues.
What kind of traits tend to make for a better life?
What kind of traits tend to make for a worse life?
And again, are these something that you can say apply to everybody, or does it depend
on the particular life a person has chosen?
Finally, fourth theme is the idea of what is a good society?
How should people interact concretely in their daily affairs in order to make society ethically
a good one?
And that's the emphasis that we're going to be talking most about in the lecture today.
Actually, societies have taken a lot of different approaches to which of these four things they
emphasize.
In India, for example, the focus is very much on individual obligations.
People have obligations, in fact, on the basis of a social role.
And the social role is something that they're born into.
So if your parent has been the player of a sitar, that's what you're going to learn how
to do.
And your role in society is going to be a function of that specific niche.
In the West, there's also a kind of individual emphasis, but of a very different sort.
In the West, certainly there is no supposition that people are going to choose exactly the
same livelihood as their parents had.
In fact, the whole idea of individual choice is fairly distinct in Western society, something
you don't find in traditional Indian thought.
But at the same time, in the West, the emphasis is so much on the individual that many ethical
theories say, well, society basically consists of the sum total of individuals.
And utilitarianism, for example, when one tries to articulate what the greatest good
for the greatest number is, basically what you do is consider all the individuals and
add the good things that happen to individuals as a result of a certain plan and subtract
the bad things that happen to individuals as a result of a certain plan and get some
kind of conclusion or some kind of sense of whether this is going to be more pleasant
or painful.
In other words, it's the individuals that count.
And if you want to figure out what's going on socially, you just add up what happens
to all the individuals.
In Latin America, there's much more of an emphasis on the structure of society, where
the idea is that society is something more than just some totals of individuals.
How are individuals structurally related with each other?
Now I think it's not surprising that this would become such a prominent theme in Latin
American thought.
After all, with colonialism and the influx of lots of new ideas, often ideas imposed
on the indigenous populations by force, of course there was a lot of social upheaval.
So if philosophers are going to deal with the here and now, the real problems that people
face, pretty obviously social organization was going to be among them.
But pretty clearly, there was a lot of thought about social organization prior to the conquest
as well.
For example, the Inca Empire, which was quite massive, it extended for 2,500 miles and at
one point had 12 million people involved in it, all speaking different languages, at
least 20 languages that were involved.
This particular organization was an amazingly complex bureaucracy.
And its basic idea was collectivism was the primary way to organize all these societies,
however different they were.
The basic principle was that when the Inca conquered a people, they allowed that people
to retain their customs.
They didn't attempt to replace them with their own.
The only things that were required was that the new people must worship into the sun god
of the Inca.
But they could also worship their own traditional gods as well.
The other requirement was that they pay tribute.
And tribute included food, labor, and also materials.
Interestingly, this notion of tribute had to do with how much was actually produced.
So it was a proportion of whatever any particular people or any particular community produced
that they had to give to the central bureaucracy.
And this, I think, is a very telling indication of how collective, in a way, the thinking
already was.
There's a sense that if a community has a bad year and they didn't produce very much,
it would be unjust to ask them to pay tribute to a greater extent or a greater proportionate
extent than other communities.
And this whole idea has been promoted by even some recent Latin American thinkers as an idea
that Latin America really ought to get back to.
But to sort of move back in time from contemporary discussion, many things about the situation
after the conquest led to an emphasis on sociopolitical ideals.
Now, obviously, just the fact that there was this collision of worldviews, a new worldview
was being imposed from without, left people in a quandary about how to think about the
way society is organized.
But there were a lot of philosophical reasons, too, why social and political thought tended
to get emphasized.
First of all, there were a lot of missionaries coming into Latin America.
And their agenda, obviously, was to convert people to Christianity.
But they also had a certain notion of Europe as being an arena where there was a lot of
corruption.
Sinful society, the sinful world tended to have some European models in their mind.
And they often looked at the new world, as they thought of it, as literally that, a sort
of tabula rasa, a blank tablet on which new things could be written, or more specifically
a new way of life could be formed.
So in a sense, they kind of ignored the fact that there had been social practices in place
before they got there.
And they sort of viewed this as a paradisical world that they could shape as they would.
And some of them had a lot of really strong ambitions about how to make this new world
better than the old world.
At the same time, the missionaries were very much affected by what was going on in Europe
and the European Church in particular.
What was going on around the same time as the conquest in Meso and Latin America was
the counter-reformation.
The Catholic Church was responding to the reformation by attempting to clean up its
act in certain ways.
If one motive for the reformation had been certain corrupt practices in the church, one
of the things the church was trying to do was make sure that there wasn't that kind
of corruption that could be complained about.
But more philosophically, the idea of strict adherence to Christian doctrine and using
reason to sort it out so that it could be very clear who was teaching something that
really was the teaching of the church and who was being heretical was a big part of
the momentum in philosophical discussion in Europe, especially the European countries
that were coming to the new world.
So scholasticism, a philosophical approach that tries to use reason to spell out the
details of Christian doctrine, was the first major school from Europe to come into Latin
America.
And actually this persisted for many, many generations, in fact even in the 20th century
scholasticism still had a pretty prominent presence in Latin American thought.
The idea of trying to sort out details of Christian doctrine.
Now this doesn't obviously seem to have much to do with the socio-political scene.
And in fact that's precisely the reason why it tends to motivate thought about the social
and political situation.
Because it seemed that scholasticism really was ignoring the whole situation in Latin
America was really just taking some debates that happened elsewhere and suddenly putting
them in a new context and just not paying any attention to the fact that these debaters
had in a sense crossed the ocean and were now dealing with people that had no history
of exploring these ideas with them.
This was just ignored and that created a lot of motivation for people to think we really
ought to get a philosophy that has a little bit more to do with our actual circumstances.
The circumstances too tended to exacerbate this feeling because one of the effects of
colonialism was that people who came from Europe and their immediate descendants tended
to feel superior to people who were descendants of the indigenous population or people of
mixed ancestry.
So there was a lot of racism in the structure that came into place.
And there was a lot of stratification.
The people from Europe tended to be wealthier than the people who were part of the indigenous
or mixed populations.
And there was a huge disparity of wealth that resulted from this.
Now this led to some philosophical efforts to justify the situation.
It's not that all people who were thinking about philosophy were trying to make a fairer
world.
Some people thought the situation was perfectly fine, especially if it tended to be to their
advantage.
So some thinkers would use whatever kind of techniques they could to justify the way
things were.
On the other hand, people who found this not to be a very good state of affairs, the Criollo,
the population that was indigenous and mixed, tended to use philosophy to justify moving
for independence.
And there were independence movements that eventually threw off European rule.
But as often happens in colonial situations, even when you've changed who it is that's
actually running the country, sometimes the ideas they have about running the country stay
in place.
Pensadores, the thinkers of Latin America, we might view them as certainly they're philosophers
but we might think of them as public intellectuals.
They tended to have a bit more of a following in the population at large than philosophers
do in some societies.
Pensadores thought that it was important to start thinking more independently as well,
not just to have indigenous or people from the indigenous population being represented
in government, but also to have ideas that aren't being dictated from Europe.
Also the whole dream of science and progress started to affect people in Latin America.
There were certainly many, many situations where the idea of development seemed desirable.
Some people were not in very good material circumstances at all.
In Europe, one of the dreams of science was new and improved lifestyle for everybody.
That dream caught on in Latin America as well.
And certainly the idea of practical consequences to thought became a really serious issue.
The fact that European systems really weren't all that concerned with the practical situation
in Latin America when they came over was something that became more and more of a pressure to
start change.
So one of the first efforts to throw off, for example, the legacy of scholasticism, European
debates about church doctrine coming to take over philosophical thought in Latin America,
was an alternative school from Europe.
This was the school proposed by philosopher Auguste Compte in France called positivism.
Now what does positivism teach?
We can believe that we could have some real positive knowledge about human nature.
That basically human behavior, like anything else in nature, follows definite laws.
And what we need to do is figure out what those laws are.
If we're trying to organize a society, what we need to know is, well, what do people want?
What are they likely to do under certain circumstances?
And use this information in order to organize society as well as possible.
Indeed, many people thought that a utopian society would result.
You just figured out how it is that people best behave, however the organizers think
best would be defined there.
If you could just figure that out, you can organize society around these laws.
Now some thinkers in Latin America were rather excited by positivism because they thought
it offered to do a number of things that they felt sorely needed to be done.
For one thing, it was a much more practical kind of philosophy than scholasticism,
doctrinaire kind of discussions about particular interpretations of scripture, etc.
So they thought the practical orientation would be good.
Also, it seemed geared to progress.
The whole idea of positivism was you try to design a way of life that will enable people to progress.
But at the same time, it encouraged the notion of a certain stability.
If you really did find the right laws or understand the way human beings behave correctly and
you organize a government around it, that should be a really stable kind of government.
It should be really dealing with people's needs and desires and so on.
And in fact, positivism because of this interest that some had did become government policy
in certain places in Latin and Mesoamerica.
For example, Brazil utilized positivism in organizing its government.
And there it actually served to promote certain kinds of changes and also the development
of a more representative government than people had had in the past.
However, it was not universally a progressive governmental kind of program that positivism
led to.
Mexico devoted itself to positivism.
But what positivism became there was a justification of a very totalitarian law and order kind
of regime.
And this was one of the reasons why positivism fairly quickly, once it became a real policy
in some places, developed a number of critics.
The critics complained about a number of things.
First of all, positivism is a very formal abstract kind of notion.
The idea might be that what we're trying to do is something really practical.
But the idea of the positivists, the positivists sort of doing sociological research to see
how people do react to certain kind of things, try to come up with abstract laws that work
in any kind of context.
And not only do they come up with these laws that are supposed to apply regardless of the
actual situation, but they tend to be very deterministic.
In other words, they believe that people's decisions are going to follow a certain pattern
and we can absolutely predict them.
Now, many thinkers in Latin America thought that that was just going too far, that there
may be some things about people's desires and patterns of behavior that we can say,
but we can't say everything about them on that basis.
Some also pointed out that positivism was really not a very good move if the aim was
to get a more indigenous kind of philosophy going.
I mean, basically to move from scholasticism to positivism was to substitute one European
school of thought for another.
And the fact that Comte was a racist who thought that Europeans were superior to the rest of
the world didn't help in this regard either.
And certainly the fact that positivism became associated with totalitarianism was viewed
by many as a good reason to think we shouldn't adopt this kind of program either.
Some of the particular arguments against the doctrines of positivism are also important
and influential in 20th century Mexican and Latin American thought.
For example, the idea that scientific laws can be made about human behavior.
Well, some philosophers point out this doesn't really allow a lot of room for understanding
moral decision.
They point out along with Comte that moral decision implies some degree of freedom.
But if your agenda is to say, well, we can figure out all the laws that apply to human
behavior, it seems that something has been left out there, namely moral decision.
Moreover, people do things that are creative.
If positivism were really true, it's not obvious how that could happen.
It seems that if there are laws that govern how people behave in all situations, where
do new ideas come from?
What generates that?
So it seems to some thinkers that positivism just can't explain everything, and indeed
some of the most important things about human life.
Positivism was also criticized on the grounds that it's too individualistic.
What positivism does, actually I should mention that Comte was, in a sense, the founder of
the discipline known as sociology, trying to find out certain data about the way people
have made decisions in certain contexts and generalize from there.
But all these experiments ask people about individual decisions that they make.
And the idea is, well, you put all this information together and you come up with a profile of
the society as a whole.
The focus is very much on what individuals want and how they go about getting it.
Antonio Caso, a Mexican philosopher, suggests that if that's the way you organize a society,
just around what individuals want and how they get it, you end up constructing a society
around the idea of very lazy people.
Why lazy?
Well, because if all you're concerned with is getting what you want, you'd prefer that
that be easier rather than more difficult.
What people become geared to is the idea of getting everything that they want as easily
as they possibly can.
If other people can do it for them, fine.
If machines will do it for them, fine.
But there's not a lot of sense of individual initiative or activity or creativity.
Moreover, the consumer mentality that today one hears a lot of complaints about in the
United States is encouraged by positivism.
Again, because the ideas individuals want things, we try to figure out what's the best
plan to get them what they want, and there we are.
In this respect, spiritual ideas tend to be either unappreciated or underdeveloped.
And also the notion of individual goals and individual desires tends to encourage a really
isolated kind of way of thinking of yourself.
So instead of thinking collectively, something that many thinkers think was really one of
the virtues of traditional thought in Latin and Mesoamerica, people are encouraged to
think as isolated individuals in a way that's really kind of fiercely competitive.
I want this, and I'm going to go do whatever I need to in order to get it as quickly and
easily as possible.
And it doesn't really allow for a lot of appreciation of other people's goals as well.
Also, interestingly enough, tries to challenge this head-on.
As opposed to the greed is good philosophy that you sometimes heard espoused in the 1980s
in the United States, something he thinks that positivism leads to, his claim was that
the best existence was a life of charity.
Why?
Because if you're greedy, you become increasingly bound by your goals.
Your goals start to dictate everything.
He may not believe that positivism is correct in saying that people have agendas of a sort
that's predictable.
But if you start buying into that idea, pretty soon you are just wanting whatever the advertisers
say you should want, and you start getting bound up by all these agendas that have been
dictated to you from outside.
On the other hand, if you do something out of charity, you're acting quite freely.
You haven't been pushed into it by anybody or anything.
So he emphasizes charity as yielding the best existence.
It's a very polemical point.
It's an argument very strongly against certain views about what makes for a good life.
Positivism was also criticized for not being spiritual enough, and that was one of Caso's
points.
Jose Vasconcelos, a Mexican philosopher, criticized it on these grounds too, and his suggestion
focused more on art and the aesthetic dimension of life.
The aesthetic dimension having to do with those things that are values to us simply
because they seem to be desirable things that we can appreciate as human beings, but not
necessarily things you can put a price value on.
Vasconcelos thought that art helps us to recognize the real importance of emotion in our lives,
and this was something that the positivists left out, except for talking about emotions
like greed.
That emotion expands or consumes all of our experience.
We have emotions about everything, and it's not only that emotion is something very basic
to our nature.
Vasconcelos points out that even the way that we organize our knowledge about things has
to do with the way we relate to it emotionally.
How do we harmonize these various kinds of knowledge that we get?
Suppose we do find out that these are the various goals people have.
Trying to put all that together requires an emotional response, and so he emphasizes
the way the arts and various creative gestures on the part of human beings have a lot to
do with the way we understand reality.
Indeed, he points out getting attuned to the rhythms of reality, starting to feel that
you're participating in the world around you instead of just competing for certain ends,
is something that art especially helps us to be able to do.
He emphasizes music, for example, as being something that definitely involves this kind
of attunement of the individual with a larger reality.
Now, his ultimate goal or his vision is that the aim here is what Hegel calls union with
the absolute, the idea being that the human conscious mind wants to become one or at least
attuned with the rest of reality so that there isn't any friction.
That strikes Vasconcelos as a good way of viewing the most fundamental desire.
He, like Caso, complains that positivism doesn't really deal with these most fundamental desires
of human beings.
It's very goal-oriented toward not very important goals, ultimately.
People want certain things, and when they get them they want something else and so on,
but the big picture is really what's left out.
Michael Weinstein, discussing 20th century Latin American thought, points out that in
a way these critics of positivism have things to say that are still very valuable to the
agenda of Latin American thinkers today.
For example, as multinational corporations tend to have more and more impact on the situation,
the idea of concerning oneself with something other than just consumerism becomes increasingly
important.
As opposed to positivism or these various alternatives to positivism, other imports from Europe have
had an impact on Latin American thought as well.
Emphasis on social justice has sometimes taken a Marxist slant.
Now, this is a very complicated story, too, because once again Karl Marx was a European
writing about the situation in Europe and so on, but the aim of Marxism, the idea of
a classless society, a society where social classes are not poised against each other,
certainly struck many in Latin America and Mesoamerica as a very important goal.
The problem was how to see the situation in Latin and Mesoamerica as being comparable
to anything that Marx describes.
The movement that developed from Marxist thought, the international communist movement,
for a while struck some thinkers as perhaps useful in Latin and Mesoamerica, but the focus
was very much international and the idea seemed to be, here is this great system that we can
apply all over the world with the same aim, namely to get rid of social classes.
But the whole program tended to ignore anything that was very specific about one's own location,
in particular because it started in Europe, the focus tended to be much more the kind
of problems that Europeans faced than the kinds of problems that people faced in Latin
America.
So, for the most part, even though for a brief while some Latin American thinkers took on
Marxism, a hook, line, and sinker, most of the time Marxism has been influential either
by providing some categories to discuss the situation in, for example, talking in terms
of class conflict.
That was an innovation, certainly in the way that Marx does it, and some Latin American
thinkers think, well, that's a good way of focusing on what one of our problems is, but
let's figure out our own solutions to it.
Jose Carlos Mariatigui from Peru suggested that, in a way, that goal was ideal, but instead
of looking to Marxist's particular discussion of how a change would come about, let's look
back to the Inca.
He thought the best thing to do would be to restore the Inca system, maybe not call it
tribute, but restore the system of having each component of one's system contribute
what it could, a proportion on the basis of what it produced at any given time, and to
also distribute goods and services throughout the system.
He thought that it was most likely that the Indians, the descendants of the Incas, would
be the ones to really create a revolution like Marx's notion of a revolution in Peru,
and this again would be something quite different from the way Marx described things.
Marx's view was that this revolution would come about in cities or places where a factory
had basically taken over the lives of most people and made a few people wealthy.
Mariatigui and others point out, well, in Latin America, that isn't always how it's
worked.
There are some disparities, but not caused by the industrial revolution necessarily,
so something has to be modified.
Similarly, in Cuba, Castro certainly adopted a Marxist program, but the revolution he called
for wasn't an urban revolution.
Some national liberation movements, for example, in Nicaragua, thought that some of the goals
of Marxism were important and valuable to them, but once again, they tended to think
that they had to take these categories on board, but then modify them to their own situation,
so just the adoption of Marxism as an abstract theory for the most part didn't end up playing
out or becoming a maintained position in Latin and Mesoamerican thought, just because
it seemed that it assumed too many things that were built on European models that just
weren't quite the way the situation was in their own communities.
More recently, an approach to social justice in Latin and Mesoamerica has come from within
the Catholic Church and kind of related movement philosophically somewhat outside it.
This is liberation theology and liberation philosophy.
Liberation theology is a movement within the Catholic Church to view the whole agenda
of Christianity as always having been to serve the poor or to treat those who are marginalized
with great respect, and that's something that people who are part of this movement think
hasn't been done traditionally by the Church in Latin America.
So partly it's an approach to the way the Church has conducted business in Latin America
and suggestion that the Church changed the way it does things.
And philosophy attempts to do this outside the institution of the Church, but talks again
in terms of marginalization.
Enrique de Sel, an Argentinian philosopher, points out, for example, that as a result
of interactions between what he views as the Northern Hemisphere and the Southern Hemisphere,
very often the Northern Hemisphere has enriched itself at the expense of the Southern Hemisphere,
Africa and Latin America.
And his suggestion is in order to have a really just situation, it's important to get over
the idea that the North's way of looking at the world is the correct one.
The North may talk in terms of universality, he claims, but it really does that in an effort
to bolster up its own social goals.
So from his point of view, what philosophy ought to be doing in Latin America these days
is trying to redress this situation, trying to make sure that those who are marginalized,
indeed, in some cases whole, culture is being marginalized, start to have a voice in the
way things go in the future.
That he thinks is absolutely vital.
I'll close with a quote from De Sel, the political liberation of the periphery seems
to be the essential condition for the possibility of the restoration of the natural ecological
equilibrium.
If true liberation and affirmation of the cultural exteriority is undertaken, and not
simply imitation of the economic process and destructive technology of the center, it would
be the authentic humanization of nature, the development of culture and justice.
Thank you.
