Lecture 10 Indian Thought on Supreme Reality
Thus far we've been moving around the world at a pretty rapid rate.
But now for the next few lectures we're going to settle down in the Indian subcontinent.
The reason for this is not to suggest that there's more philosophy in India than elsewhere in the world.
But we have a lot more texts and we have a lot more traditional discussion of the same texts.
So we're in a much better position to talk about what debates have been like through the history of Indian thought.
Essentially what we're going to be focusing on in this lecture is the way in which Indian thought
has traditionally focused on the idea of a reality that is more real than the everyday world that we see around us.
As I mentioned in the last lecture there's considerable emphasis in Indian thought on the spiritual goal of the individual
and the obligations of the individual.
Nevertheless as we'll see in this lecture one of the interesting things about the way that is fundamentally conceived
is that the individual usually has the wrong idea about what the self really is.
I should mention at the outset something about the term Hinduism.
In effect the discussions that we're going to be having for the next few lectures are going to focus on what is often called Hinduism.
But we should use this word advisedly.
Partly because it was originally just a geographical term when the Arabic world came into contact with the Indian world.
It tended to call those who were on a certain side of the Indus River, the east side of it, Hindus.
Basically had to do with the Indus River.
Basically the sort of connections that different schools of thought within what's called Hinduism have with each other
can be kind of tenuous.
The main things that are really necessary to call something Hinduism is that the case system be part of the social structure in these societies
and that the Vedas be the main philosophical spiritual texts.
We're going to use the term Brahmanism because that's a little bit more precise to discuss the schools of thought in what's often called Hinduism.
And this lecture is going to focus a lot on the concept of Brahman, the supreme power.
The Vedas, the sacred texts of the Brahmanic tradition date back from 1200 BCE forward.
And they consist of four basic parts, hymns, sacrificial formulas, reflections on those formulas.
And a fourth part added much later than some of the earlier parts called the Upanishads, also called Vedanta.
This last part is particularly philosophical in that it is given to a lot of reflections, particularly on what is ultimately real.
And if what we take ourselves to be is something different from that, how are the two connected?
In general in Brahmanism, the Vedas have come to be interpreted as referring to an ultimate supreme underlying reality that is one.
Now this might sound a little odd because if you look at the Vedas, there are references to a lot of different gods.
So how can there be one reality?
As the Vedas have come to be thought of, these various gods are really different sort of masks for the same underlying reality.
Brahman in any case is the supreme power of the world, and the supreme power takes different forms.
So if you have stories, mythological accounts involving different gods, essentially it is nevertheless the same god within all of them.
The technical term for a worldview that sees one god as being within several different forms is henotheism.
So we can say that Brahmanism is a henotheistic system even though the texts tend to suggest something more like polytheism or belief in multiple gods.
One of the values some thinkers see in the fact that there are a number of different gods that are presented in these texts and are discussed
is that it's helpful to the mind to have a kind of focus.
We tend to think in anthropomorphic terms, so it's useful to us to have a kind of vision of god or the presence of Brahman in particular forms.
And it's possible to focus emotional energy.
Some Brahmanic traditions emphasize a lot the notion of bhakti, something we'll be talking about later on, bhakti being devotion.
You can devote yourself more easily to a god that is somewhat described.
And as we'll see in this lecture, one of the difficulties in understanding Brahman is the fact that Brahman is a single thing.
You can't say much to characterize Brahman simply because there aren't a lot of different details that you could distinguish Brahman from anything else from.
Brahman, after all, is the whole.
What we can say about Brahman is that basically Brahman is the same force animating everything in the world.
So if I'm looking at the world, that whole world is animated by Brahman.
At the same time, if I ask a question about what is reality, Brahman is also the questioner within me.
In general, the Brahmanic traditions and the Vedas in general suggest that all oppositions or all divisions among different beings, different kinds of reality,
certainly any kind of conflict, are only apparent.
Ultimately, there's a single reality underlying it all.
Okay, let's try to be a little bit more precise about this.
A way of doing this is to focus on the whole notion of the self.
Because this is a very fundamental emphasis in Brahmanic thought, and it's certainly very central in the Upanishads.
The Upanishads suggest that the self of all of us is essentially the same self.
Now, I think for a Westerner, this is a rather surprising idea.
Usually, we tend to think of our individual selves as being different, maybe related in some ways.
We often like other people, but nevertheless, we have a sense that it's really someone different from ourselves that we're encountering when we interact with each other on a daily basis.
And certainly, the Upanishads recognize that that is a way that people normally interact with each other.
But the idea being presented is that this is just an illusion.
It's as if we're all the same actor in different roles.
You might think of situations where you watch a movie and suddenly you notice, ah, that was actually Kevin Klein again.
I knew he looked familiar, but I just didn't see it as Kevin Klein.
In a sense, Ottman, recognizing that we're all Ottman, should be a recognition something like this.
We tend to think that each of these roles is very distinct.
But nevertheless, it's really the same self operating in all these different roles.
Now, Ottman is distinguished in Vedantic thought, Brahmanistic thought, from Jiva, which is the individual soul, soul is one way it's translated, what's individual about us.
Jiva is understood as being a fireball in the center of the heart.
In Brahmanism, intelligence is viewed as being located in the heart rather than the head.
And within that intelligence, there is a subtle fireball, and that's what gives us a kind of individual reality, or at least a parent reality.
And around the Jiva, a body is formed.
And this in particular is one of the things that tends to mislead us about how separate we are from each other.
We tend to think that we are, in fact, separate.
Why? Well, we have bodies that are in different places.
Time and space gives us each different locations, and we tend to think that's pretty serious.
But the Jiva is ultimately illusory.
It is what gives us a kind of sense of personal identity and psychological continuity.
What I mean by that is that it's because we have a Jiva that we have a sense that all these various experiences that have happened in our personal lives are all ours.
We do think of those as connected.
We have certain memories that we connect to ourselves, too.
That's all part of the Jiva.
But if we come to understand things rightly, according to Brahmanism, we'll come to understand that the Jiva is not the fundamental reality of ourselves,
that the reality is ultimately the same self within all of us, or Atman.
Now, how do Jiva and Atman relate?
I mean, after all, we're saying one is the real self, one is the unreal self.
What about Jiva, though?
Well, Jiva, in a way, is a manifestation of Atman.
If there weren't this same self, there wouldn't be all these particular selves that we think of ourselves as being.
You might think of this again as something like an actor.
If you didn't have the actor, you wouldn't have the actor in this role, this role, this role, this role.
You can only have those various performances because there actually is the actor.
And the actor stays the same even if the performances are different.
The same is true of Jiva.
When we die, according to some, Jiva reincarnates in a new body, but Atman continues without interruption.
One of the ways that Brahmanism suggests that we overcome fear of death is to recognize this fact.
What's important about us, what's really real, what's going on within us, continues.
It's just the particular trajectory of these memories or these experiences all being mine.
Those come to an end.
But that isn't what we fundamentally are anyway.
To give a sort of more concrete image of this, I thought I'd read a passage from Herman Hesse's Siddhartha.
Now, this is a rather strange thing to do in one sense because Hesse's book is about, in effect,
it's kind of a fictionalized account of the story of Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha.
And obviously, the Buddha moves away from Hinduism.
But in some sense, it's fair enough to use a passage from this book to talk about Brahmanism
since, after all, the Buddha was originally a prince who was part of the Brahmanic tradition himself.
And some of the images remain the same.
So here we have an image where Siddhartha in this book is gazing at a river and starting to think about
how all the different souls with all their different goals are actually one and the same thing.
Siddhartha looked into the river and saw many pictures in the flowing water.
He saw his father, lonely, mourning for his son.
He saw himself, lonely, also with the bonds of longing for his faraway son.
He saw his son, also lonely.
The boy eagerly advancing along the burning path of life's desires.
Each one concentrating on his goal, each one obsessed by his goal, each one suffering.
The river's voice was sorrowful. It sang with yearning and sadness flowing toward its goal.
The picture of his father, his own picture, and the picture of his son all flowed into each other.
They all became part of the river.
The waves and water hastened, suffering toward goals, many goals, to the waterfall, to the sea, to the current,
to the ocean, and all goals were reached and each one was succeeded by another.
The water changed to vapor and rose, became rain and came down again, became brook and river, changed anew, flowed anew.
But the yearning voice had altered. It still echoed sorrowfully, searchingly, but other voices accompanied it.
He had often heard all this before, all these numerous voices in the river, but today they sounded different.
They were all interwoven and interlocked, entwined in a thousand ways, and all the voices, all the goals, all the yearning,
all the sorrows, all the pleasures, all the good and evil, all of them together was the world.
All of them together was the stream of events, the music of life.
Now, in a way, this passage is reflective of certain Buddhist thoughts about the way in which everyone is interdependent.
But I want to focus not so much on the interdependence in that emphasis, but the idea that it's the same river that effectively is operating in all of us,
that ultimately you can't distinguish between the various selves that flow into the river, even though momentarily we arise from that river.
And that's essentially what this idea of atman is.
The jiva is like one of these pictures that comes into focus as one is looking at the river in Siddhartha's way of looking at it.
It's really a kind of image in the mind, but the reality is this flowing river that appears in all kinds of different forms,
sometimes as vapor, sometimes as a brook, but it all becomes a single ocean.
One of the major ideas in Vedanta, actually a fundamental Brahmanic idea, is that the rest of the world is really you.
That art thou is a formula that occurs early on.
And the idea is whatever you look at, whoever you encounter, that's you.
I think maybe one can get a sort of intuitive sense of this by thinking of situations where you're competing with someone,
but someone that you know well and care about.
Maybe this doesn't happen very often, maybe in fact when you compete it's pretty easy to ignore the fact that it's actually a friend and colleague you're competing with
and focus much more on how you really want what it is you want.
But if you have the occasion to actually realize, gee, this is a friend of mine,
we're actually having a conflict here that doesn't make a lot of sense,
because I'm going to be happy if I get it, but unhappy for my friend.
My friend's going to be happy if he or she gets it, but unhappy for me and so far as we're friends.
There's something weird about this situation.
The idea of individual competition has something not quite right about it when you're talking about someone that you feel connected to.
And the Brahmanic idea is that ultimately we should feel connected to everyone.
It isn't a question of just personally having gotten to know a person and then feeling some connection.
That this connection is really deeper and we only feel it in connection with some people that we've gotten to know.
What we feel is something that is implicit there with everyone.
We just haven't necessarily come to recognize it yet.
Now, in addition to this notion that Jiva is ultimately a manifestation of Brahman,
sorry, a manifestation of Atman, we can also say that Atman is a manifestation of Brahman.
To go back to what each of those means, Jiva is the individual personal self that is mortal.
Atman is this continuing self that exists in all of us and is exactly the same.
Brahman is the fundamental power of the universe.
The only reason that there is Atman, the same self in all of us, is that it is a manifestation of Brahman, this fundamental supreme power.
As difficult as it is to say much that's precise about Atman, however, it's even more difficult to say those sorts of things about Brahman.
Again, because Brahman is supremely non-dual.
This is a term we'll come to in a later lecture since some particular school of Brahmanic thought really focuses on this idea.
There's no division within Brahman, so you can't really talk about characteristics.
Anytime you talk about characteristics, it's trying to differentiate, say, one person from another.
If my characteristic is to have brown hair, that's really only something that might help someone locate me
because there are some people that don't have brown hair.
But in the case of Brahman, there aren't any characteristics that differentiate Brahman from anything else since Brahman is the whole.
Brahman is also a temporal. Brahman exists eternally and everything that manifests itself at all is Brahman.
What Kami said about Brahman, though, is that Brahman brings the world about,
both in the sense of what philosophers call efficient cause,
meaning basically bringing something about having a cause that produces effects.
I think that's the usual way that in ordinary speech we talk about causes,
but also in the sense of really being the fundamental stuff that's there.
All that exists is a manifestation of Brahman.
It can help a little bit to think about maybe Brahman being the microcosm,
the way Brahman exists within human beings, and Brahman being the world as it is in reality in totality.
That's an image, but it's not entirely right because once again, Brahman really is Brahman, fundamentally.
One of the tricky things about reading passages in Vedanta is that you find a lot of equations that seem rather hard to follow.
For example, if you say, well, Jiva really only is Atman, but Atman only is Brahman,
it sounds like we haven't gotten very clear about anything.
Nevertheless, you do get a lot of talk about Brahman in the Apanashads or the Vedanta,
and all of these various ways of approaching the idea is to help get this picture more clearly in mind.
They don't pinpoint it, but nevertheless, it's a kind of picture that the Vedanta attempts to help us understand.
One of the passages in which Brahman is discussed suggests that he transcends what are called names and forms.
Again, this is the point that I was making previously, that basically when you talk about Brahman,
you say, well, Brahman has these characteristics as opposed to some other characteristics that are possible.
Since Brahman extends throughout all names and forms, you're not going to be able to give Brahman a name or a form that tells the whole story.
One of the Apanashads puts it this way, invisible, incomprehensible, without genealogy, colorless, without eye or ear,
without hands or feet, unending, pervading all and omnipresent.
That is the unchangeable one, whom the wise regard as the source of being.
As we've mentioned before, sometimes in talking about something transcendent, philosophers tend to move to negative characterizations.
If what you're trying to say about Brahman is the normal limitations that we're used to talking about don't apply,
maybe the best thing to do is to say, well, not this.
So here we have invisible, incomprehensible, without genealogy, colorless, all these various kind of things that we might use to pinpoint someone or something.
None of those apply to Brahman, and that gives us some notion of what the idea is, but again, it's a somewhat amorphous one.
The Apanashads also suggest that Brahman is the essence of everything.
It's not just that, as I mentioned before, it's not just that Brahman causes everything, but also Brahman exists within every form that appears.
In fact, one of the things that's rather complex about understanding the presence of Brahman everywhere is the fact that we do see things changing forms.
There's movement, there's change, people change their appearance over time, all kinds of things seem to be moving in various different ways.
Nevertheless, the essence of all those things is Brahman.
Brahman is also understood as the supreme goal, and I'll read a couple of passages from the Vedanta or the Apanashads.
An ocean, a single seer without duality, becomes he whose world of vision is Brahman.
This is his supreme attainment. This is his highest fulfillment. This is his best world. This is his supreme bliss.
Other creatures subsist on a fragment of this bliss.
Not moving, the one is swifter than the mind. The gods do not reach that running always before.
That moves, that moves not. It is far and it is near. It is within all this. It indeed is outside all this.
He who experiences all things in the self and the self in all things, thereupon does not fear.
Now, that's a rather hard passage to quite make sense of because we've got that being one thing and then just its opposite.
Once again, we have this sense of Brahman not being definable in terms of the sort of specifics that we give to characterize any other thing.
But nevertheless, it's the same Brahman as we look around the world and do see these oppositions.
We see something that way, Brahman is inherent there, but if we see something that looks like just the opposite, lo and behold, Brahman is there as well.
And the supreme goal for a person is to recognize Brahman in everything.
Obviously, this is not the perspective that most people take in the here and now.
And it's not just a matter of the West. The reason that there's so much emphasis on what Brahman is and seeing Brahman is because there is a kind of natural illusion that prevents us from recognizing this.
The mere fact that things do change, move, take on different forms, all seems to be counter evidence to the idea that there's really one thing.
The Sanskrit word for illusion, maya, is used frequently to talk about the sorts of things that we take for granted as part of the everyday perspective, but which nevertheless mislead us in certain ways.
Sometimes the word maya is used in a rather negative sense or completely negative sense to suggest, well, this may be what you believe and there are certain reasons that you've come to this belief, but this is all false.
On the other hand, again, to use the actor idea, there's a sense in which maya is not completely negative because it basically is a reflection of Brahman acting in the world.
The word maya includes the root ma, which is to form or build.
And the idea is God has actually assumed all these masks, if you want to call Brahman God.
And I'll talk more about the fact that some Brahmanic thinkers do and some don't.
But there's a sense in which Brahman has chosen to manifest in these various forms, taken on these various masks.
So we could get taken in by the mask and not really see Brahman.
That's maybe the initial position that we all start in.
But much more importantly, it's possible to see Brahman through these masks.
So there's a sense in which focusing on the world as it appears to us is not entirely a bad thing.
We just need to know how to see through appearances.
Again, if you think about identifying an actor in different roles, you can get so captivated by the way the actor looks in this particular role that you don't even notice that it's the same actor you saw in another movie last week.
But there's a kind of recognition that allows you to see, ah, boy, this is really a talented actor who could do such different things.
In a sense, we can have that same realization with Brahman and gain more appreciation perhaps of the power of Brahman just because Brahman is in all these different kinds of things.
This is the spiritual goal recognizing Brahman in all of these situations.
Nevertheless, Brahmanic thought also offers very concrete pointers for how one should live one's life.
These are rather specific ethical suggestions.
And one of the ways that this is suggested is in terms of what are called the purushartas, the aims of life.
And essentially, there are four aims of life that people are expected to feel the pressure of and to comply with.
One of these is material possessions called arta.
Material possessions here includes all the things that you need in order to sustain your physical life.
But it also includes things that are simply pleasing to the senses.
In a general sense, the word arta does have to do with things we can enjoy through the senses.
So one of the goals that everybody is necessarily going to have just to stay alive is certain material things.
But another goal that everyone has is called kama.
And this has to do with pleasant emotions, pleasure and love.
Many of you may have heard of the kama sutra.
Well, the kama there is, again, this word kama.
And Vachishana's kama sutra, the famous book of that name, is about how to go about the practice of love, being in love,
but also what various emotions are like.
So this whole emotional dimension of life is covered in this particular way of describing one of our goals.
We want certain kinds of emotional experiences.
Those are essential to us.
There are a lot of texts actually describing emotions, sometimes with the aim of teaching people how to act.
Vachishastras is the name of this whole group of literature, literature talking about the arts and the way emotions are conveyed in them.
And again, these are compendia suggesting various things about this dimension of life.
The third goal is dharma.
This is a term we'll be talking about again in a later lecture.
But dharma basically has to do with the law.
And this includes religious laws, but also the law of moral duties that we have.
And as I suggested earlier, there's a sense in which these duties are very specific to the kind of role we have in society.
Of course, there are some obligations that oblige everyone.
Murder is wrong.
But there are a lot of moral obligations that people have because they have a certain societal role.
The law of Manu is a statement of dharma that's ascribed to a mythological or legendary character called Manu,
who's viewed as the forefather of human beings.
And it specifies a lot of details about these particular obligations that come to one because one has a certain role.
The basic idea of the caste system is included here.
There are certain roles that people have, and those bring with them certain obligations.
The fourth of these goals for human beings is moksha, spiritual release.
The other one so far sounds sort of pedestrian in every day, you might say.
But moksha is the idea that all of us spiritually have the desire to overcome the ignorance that we have just because of our natural situation.
We're naturally ignorant when we start out in the world simply because we do take our individual selves to be the self that we are.
But the desire to overcome the ignorance and really the various problems caused to us by this ignorance is something that all of us feel.
And the aim of this, the spiritual release, would involve the dissolution of the ego and the dissolution of the sense that jiva is really what we are.
The Brahmatic schools also talk about stages of life as stages focused on various of these goals.
And these stages are really different points of maturity.
The first stage discussed is the stage of the student.
And at this stage, the main focus is really learning dharma, learning what the laws are, what sort of things apply to one, and learning how to do them correctly.
Later on in life, one becomes a householder, and then the sorts of things that are important become somewhat different.
Of course, one is obligated to fulfill moral obligations, which one has already learned.
But certain things like material possessions to take care of oneself and one's family become particularly important at this phase.
Later in life, presumably after one has raised a family, the stage of forest dweller becomes important.
This might sound like a rather odd stage of life, but the idea is that from time to time, it's important to go on something like retreats, to go off by oneself and be reflective.
And when you're in the midst of trying to start a career and make a living, it's hard to do that.
But in time, this is an important aspect of becoming a more mature person, to take some time away from the everyday sort of business that we have to have in order to conduct our lives and move into a more reflective state.
And final of these stages is the stage of the renouncer, someone who has given up ordinary life and simply become reflective all the time.
Now, it might seem like these goals are quite different. The goal that one has as a renouncer is completely different, you might say, from the goal as a householder.
But the idea is that through life, our energies need to shift in order for us to mature.
We need to focus on different things. And so proceeding through these various phases allows us to attend to all the needs of life and at the same time, ideally, reach that final goal, which is spiritual liberation.
