Lecture 16, Nagarjuna's Interpretation of Buddhism
In this lecture we're going to be discussing Nagarjuna, a great Buddhist thinker.
Nagarjuna lived in the 2nd century CE and he's considered to be the legendary founder of the Madhyamaka school of Buddhism.
Madhyamaka meaning the middle way.
In a sense since the Buddha proposed his doctrine as the middle way,
the Madhyamaka school is basically taking that on board and saying what they propose is the middle way.
He wrote a book called the Madhyamaka Shastra, which means the guidebook of the middle way.
In it he gives a kind of systematic statement of middle doctrine views.
What's interesting about Nagarjuna is that even though he is a very analytic kind of thinker,
who is happy to debate with logicians, rationalists of all schools,
his main aim is really to get beyond certain doctrinal bickering that had come about.
As time went on in Buddhist thought, of course, people developed more and more ways of articulating the basic doctrines.
And as often happens in those situations, people had disagreements that got to be rather heated.
Whole schools would be generated around some particular way of looking at what the Buddha said.
You might think of this as comparable to situations that happen in the West,
where you have to wonder how did religion ever end up creating so much division?
If you look at Northern Ireland or the Middle East, it seems that basically peoples that have much in common
end up seeing religious doctrine as a basis for continuing their disagreement.
And very clearly that would be very far from the Buddha's intention.
So what Nagarjuna is trying to do is suggest that we've really shifted our attention to the wrong thing in continuing these disputes.
Interestingly, though, what Nagarjuna is largely known for is his brilliant argumentation.
In a way, it was a clever strategy on his part.
Suppose he attacked people who had waged these arguments in the various Buddhist schools
and done nothing of a comparable sort himself.
Well, then it would be certainly well within their ability and very likely that they would say,
well, he probably just doesn't appreciate this because he can't do it himself.
He proved otherwise. In fact, he was a brilliant debater.
And his overall strategy is to use debate to undercut dogmatism.
His fear was that too often certain dogmatic ways of understanding the Buddha's conceptions
was really interfering with the whole aim of being compassionate,
seeing the world in the kind of framework that the Buddha set out.
So how does he go about showing that dogmatic views are all wrong?
Well, he takes them one by one, but his general strategy is to show that somehow they refute themselves.
They assume something that contradicts something else that they assume.
So for an example, we can consider what he has to say about the Nyaya school,
a school of realism in India, a Buddhist school, obviously.
And in this case, what the Nyaya tended to focus on was, well, how can we know that our knowledge is really sound?
Obviously, people believe they know a lot of things, but sometimes they're wrong about that.
What really justifies a claim when someone claims that it's knowledge?
What Nagarjuna does is ask the question, well, what's the status of these justifiers?
I mean, suppose you have an assertion.
One should drive on the right side of the road according to the laws of this country.
And how do you figure that out?
You could ask a policeman.
You could read a book for a driver's license.
You could read the laws of the land.
There might be any numbers of ways that you might reinforce the belief that you have
that in this country you should drive on the right side of the road.
But in each case, you could always ask, well, was that really good evidence?
Should I trust the testimony of the policeman?
Maybe it's just someone posing as a policeman.
Do I really know that that person is competent?
Am I even sure that I remember what I read correctly if I read the manual for the driver's test?
For that matter, do I even know where to look if I look in a legal textbook of some sort or in statements of laws?
And even if I do, am I sure that these laws haven't been repealed?
I mean, there's something I can question about absolutely anything that I take to be a good justification for believing that something is knowledge.
So Nagarjuna says, look, if you try to justify a claim by looking for a justifier, you have to come up with a justification of that.
And if you try to justify that, what do you do?
Look for a justifier.
But what about that justifier?
And so on.
It reminds me a little bit of a kind of image that comes up in the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer,
a Western philosopher who actually was quite influenced by Buddhism,
though he mentions this example in another connection,
where he talks about going to a party and asking who so-and-so is.
And someone might say, well, she's the sister-in-law of Henry.
And if he asks, well, who's Henry?
Oh, Henry's the brother of Tom.
Well, who's Tom?
Oh, Tom is the son of so-and-so.
And the answers keep connecting all these people.
And he says, it still leaves you with a question, well, how do I relate to any of them?
And in a way, that's what you've got with this kind of question of justification.
You can keep questioning backwards and ask for a justifier of something else.
But ultimately, that doesn't stand on anything that's secure either.
So ultimately, what you've done is obtained an infinite regress.
You can keep going back as far as you want.
You're not going to get a final justification.
In this way, says Nagarjuna, the Nyaya thinkers are just thinking faultily.
They imagine that they can get to something secure,
and then all the beliefs that they have, they can say for sure are or aren't knowledge.
But that's precisely what they can't do, even given their own approach.
This style of argumentation is sometimes called reductio ad absurdum,
the idea of reducing your opponent's position to some kind of absurdity.
It's really absurd to base your whole case on justifiers
if you can't justify any of those justifiers themselves.
That's the basic strategy.
And Nagarjuna turns this approach to all kinds of different schools of thought
that are encouraging one way and saying this is the correct way to interpret the Buddha.
Now, when he tries to make suggestions about interpreting the Buddha,
of course, there's the danger that someone will say, well, look,
what you've been doing is saying anything we say about Buddhism is wrong,
and you challenge our methodology, what about your own?
His claim is the following.
If I would make any proposition whatever, then by that I would have a logical error.
But I do not make a proposition, therefore I am not an error.
What he's saying is that, of course, if he were dogmatically asserting something
about the correct way to interpret Buddhist texts or the Four Noble Truths
or the Eightfold Path, if he said this dogmatically,
of course he'd be guilty of the same thing that his opponents are.
But that's not what he's doing.
He isn't attempting to make any kind of dogmatic statement at all.
What he's attempting to do is to eliminate this kind of dogmatism
and get back to what all of these teachings were ultimately aimed at pointing at,
which is something more practical and not rational at all.
Nevertheless, he does, of course, suggest certain ways of looking at it that might be helpful.
And indeed, you might say, well, this is what started the problem in the first place.
Made after all, when people are trying to interpret Buddhism,
it wasn't initially that you had lots and lots of schools just because people thought it would be fun.
People were much more concerned with what they're supposed to do
in order to take on board the Buddhist vision of reality.
If the idea is there are no definite things, there are no permanent selves,
then how are you going to understand that?
And all of these schools attempted to articulate some way of thinking about the everyday way of looking at things
in order to make that consistent somehow with the Buddhist vision of reality.
But the problem is that these ways of understanding things took on a life of their own.
So when Nagarjuna himself attempts to talk about Buddhism,
what he draws attention to is, again, the notion of sunyata, emptiness.
And in fact, as we'll see, he uses a rather negative term in talking about it.
And this helps him to escape the plight that he'd be in
if he had argued against everybody else for being dogmatic and then asserted a dogma of his own.
His claim is, we can't really assert anything dogmatically about sunyata,
the status of all things taken as this single whole, the interconnected reality that interdependent arising is about.
We can't understand that or assert anything about it,
but nevertheless, we do at times need to refer to that idea.
So I simply call it void, something that is a negative characterization.
Once again, we have a via negativa.
To understand where Nagarjuna is coming from,
it's helpful, I think, to understand what one of the particular debates was
between the Taravata and the Mahayana schools of Buddhism
about thinking about the world that we see around us and take for granted
before we start thinking about the insights of the Buddha.
In general, we take our egos, our personal selves, for granted.
And both of these schools would say, well, yes, we do that,
but that's an incorrect way of looking at things.
Now, it makes sense, perhaps, to talk about ourselves from time to time,
but if we really take, look at what we're meaning when we say self,
we're really talking about something instantaneous.
If I say myself, if I really examine what I mean by that,
I mean a certain configuration of a bunch of processes happening to me in this split second.
And of course, when we see people move around in the room or in the world generally,
we often tend to think, well, there's the same person moving by us.
But in fact, it's not exactly the same person.
It's these various sort of instantaneous configurations of a number of processes
moving from one to another.
There's a chain connecting these various configurations,
and that chain, that chain of cause and effect, goes on eternally.
But the specific aggregate of all the processes that make me up right now
changes slightly when we move to the next such aggregate.
It's almost, you might compare this to a moving picture where you've got lots of little frames
where there's not much change from one to another,
but if they go by fast enough, it seems as though certain things are moving and so on.
We get effectively the same sort of thing in our everyday life,
and we think of ourselves the same way.
We think of ourselves as enduring because some of these processes seem more or less the same
from frame to frame, so to speak.
But in fact, we only have instantaneous snapshots, configurations that are connected causally
to the next one in the chain and so on, and that gives us the impression that we ourselves are stable.
Same thing with things around us.
Again, there's some kind of aggregate of various causes and effects that if you take like a snapshot
of something at a precise moment, you have a configuration,
and that configuration changes very slowly and subtly oftentimes,
but it does change as you move from second to second,
and gradually, if you watch long enough, more seems to change and you start to get this more in mind.
The way the Buddhists talk about these snapshot kind of pictures of things and selves and people,
all of which are somewhat illusory because we take them to endure when they don't,
if you talk about this brief aggregate of causes and effects in each of those cases,
the word they use is dharma.
That's rather interesting because we've already talked about that word in connection with the Brahmanic system of ethics,
dharma being the rules or the laws that go with your particular role in life.
In a sense, dharma here is used again as the law or the rule,
but it's sort of like rules of nature or laws of nature,
the law of how things come together at this particular moment in time.
Altogether, in both situations, there's a notion of cause and effect bringing about whatever is here right now,
and so the Brahmanic idea of dharma, there are certain obligations that you have because of your role in society,
and if you fulfill those, that's brought about certain kinds of effects.
If you've ignored your obligations, that brings about certain other kinds of effects,
and what's happening in the here and now is largely a product of all those various actions you've either performed or not performed in accordance with dharma.
The Buddhist picture is anything or self that we focus on and give a name to and tend to think of as real is really just a process,
but the sort of processes that we observe that go into each particular thing,
we observe in a sense in certain snapshots at instance,
and that's what we see in front of us, and since the processes move somewhat slowly in certain respects,
we don't see the subtle changes that are going on.
So we think of stable personality, stable chair, stable automobile.
All these things seem to us to be permanent when they're really not.
The only thing that is really there is this configuration.
Okay, now that's something accepted by both Taravata and Mahayana Buddhists.
Here's a subtle doctrinal difference which might not seem like such a huge deal,
but it does have something to do with the way the two schools ended up focusing on true understanding.
Taravata Buddhists claim that the things that we think endure in time,
selves, people, animals, things, all of these things are unreal.
It's an illusion that these things endure,
and what brings about the illusion are these dharmas, these configurations
that we see from moment to moment, slightly different but not often so different
that we pay a lot of attention to the changes.
Taravata Buddhists claim that these dharmas are real.
They're very short-lived, they're instantaneous,
but they're real in the way that one of the frames in a moving picture film is real.
Mahayana Buddhists, on the other hand, claim that even the dharmas aren't real.
Again, that's giving too much reality to something that is merely a part of a process,
and the process is really what's fundamental.
So the Mahayana Buddhists are not happy with the idea that the dharmas are real,
and because they look a lot like each other, if they're right next to each other,
we believe there are real things that endure.
The Mahayana Buddhists claim even the dharmas themselves are a product of focusing,
of looking at things in a certain way that is distorting.
What's fundamentally real is only the metaphysical substratum as a whole,
or what we've called the Buddha nature.
The Buddha nature, this interdependent connection of everything,
which is fundamentally a large process.
Only that is real, and we can't say anything about it,
precisely because to say anything about it is just to focus in and try to find the dharmas,
or focus in and try to find the thing that seems to be continuing.
So if we're really going to get a sense of what this underlying reality is,
we shouldn't try to describe it in everyday language.
In fact, the term that is given is thusness, tatata, related to our word that.
When we say, well, there is a metaphysical substratum, we can't say anything about its features.
That would be to try to pinpoint it and confine it, which is exactly what it isn't.
But we can say, well, it's there, it exists in this manner.
In fact, we can kind of gesture to it, but we can't do anything more than that.
And that's precisely why it is that Nagarjuna uses the word void,
something that sounds so absent of any reality.
It's not that there's no reality, this is the only reality,
but we can't say anything about it that's very precise.
The essence of all things is this substratum that's beyond change,
but nevertheless it's this interconnected thing which in our experience is just a continual dynamism.
And we analytically or with our minds try to slow things down and see something permanent.
It's the permanence that's not there, but this flowing fundamental reality that connects everything.
That's ultimate truth.
So we can't describe it, but nevertheless we sometimes need to refer to it,
especially when trying to understand what this vision really is.
So Nagarjuna says, it cannot be called void or not void, or both or neither.
But in order to indicate it, it is called the void.
So in other words, it's not that we think by saying, ah, the void, well now I understand.
The void is a word that is so obviously hard to understand,
that at least it reminds you that just giving a name to it isn't getting an understanding.
The understanding that the Mahayana Buddhists want, or any Buddhist for that matter,
is this understanding of how everything is interconnected, that there are no separate selves.
And we can help remind ourselves of that if we tell ourselves,
look, there's something that interconnects everything, but I can't say anything more about it than that.
And even to say that is already perhaps too precise.
And so Nagarjuna says, well we just gesture toward it, and we call it void,
even though to say it's void or that it's not void really isn't very helpful either.
So true insight isn't either affirmative or negative, and this is how he avoids dogmatism.
We're not affirming the reality of the void, but neither are we negating anything by doing so.
We're simply trying to give ourselves a way of focusing that helps us to overcome the tendency
to try to find permanent things whether in fact or not.
Now this is all well and good you might say, but nevertheless for lots of practical purposes
we do need some sense of permanence.
For example, it's raining outside today and I might feel the need to use an umbrella.
And suppose I ask someone very caught up in Nagarjuna's insights about the umbrella,
like I ask them, have you seen the umbrella or would you hand me the umbrella?
And what I get back is, well strictly speaking this is not an umbrella.
It's in fact an aggregate of clauses and effects.
What you're really only seeing is the dharma which itself is just an illusion.
What's really there is something I can't tell you anything about.
It's the void and strictly speaking I can only gesture toward it.
I'd be very likely to say just give me the umbrella.
And Nagarjuna thinks that's perfectly reasonable.
In fact, we don't have to spend all of our time discoursing philosophically.
Just as the Buddha said, if your house is on fire it's not the time to start
discoursing about the nature of fire and heat and what it does and so on.
It's time to put out the fire.
In everyday life there are a lot of practical situations where the practical goal is
something smaller than the idea of illuminating the world with truth.
Just functioning is sometimes important.
So Nagarjuna argues that it's appropriate to think in terms of two kinds of truth.
On the one hand we have conventional truth.
That's the kind of truth that's involved when I say that is an umbrella and I could use it today.
In other words, I'm not saying that really the only thing there is the void, although I might believe that.
I'm referring to something that even though its true identity is these moment to moment to moment processes
for the purposes I need it is stable enough for me to use it in some practical sense.
And in everyday life that's largely what our communication involves.
We use words, words are stable.
We all know that the umbrella can tear or get broken or get blown out of my hand or any number of things when I use it.
Those would be more dramatic changes in its form, but in general it's stable enough for the purpose.
On the other hand, the kind of truth that the Buddha's insight show us are transcendent.
They're not conventional in this sense.
They're not just a way of talking.
They're a complete vision.
And if you really have this insight, it's a full vision at once.
Because it is a full vision at once, it's hard to say a lot that's all that specific about it.
So people who are trying to convey the insights of Buddhism often resort to parables like the Buddha's about the house on fire
or they might use images or they might just say,
well, I can't really show you that everything is interconnected.
I can just gesture toward this in certain ways.
And that's basically what our discussion of transcendent truth is about.
And for that reason, the idea that the void is this ultimate truth strikes Nagarjuna as a perfectly appropriate way to talk about it.
Now Sunyata, this word that is being called the void here,
is also the word that we've used before as the Buddha nature,
which is supposed to be something that's very luminous.
If you clear away what is merely apparent,
if you sort of recognize the fact that your words are just conventional, practical conveniences,
but not really getting at what's fundamentally there.
And if you clear away the confusion that comes from that, it's not that you're left with nothing.
I mean, the idea of emptiness maybe suggests that, another way of translating Sunyata.
Instead, what you have is this very vibrant vision.
Stephen Phillips actually refers to the void as the vibrant void,
precisely to convey this idea that Nagarjuna has this sense of this being a luminous vision.
Again, something like the picture of gems that all reflect all the other gems,
that their own nature has everything around it drawn into it, but reflecting outward at the same time.
Again, another kind of vision to bring this into focus.
But the idea that this is a wondrous vision is something that is still a good attitude to convey about it,
even if words fail us here.
Once again, it's an approach of taking a negative way into an idea that really exceeds the boundaries of any particular word.
Now, the void does seem like nothing from an everyday point of view,
precisely because the way that we go about trying to figure out what's even being said there is,
we strip away certain ideas we have.
I strip away my sense of all kinds of separate identities.
On the Mahayana view, I even strip away the idea that we can take snapshots of causes and effects as they move along.
Because even those tend to focus too much on something that is really very temporary and starts to make it seem like that's really permanent.
So if I recognize the truth, I have to see that these are the things that are interfering with my conception of the connections of things.
And that does seem like a negative agenda.
But it's really important to understand that the aim of this is all something very positive and full.
So the notion, the message of Sunyata according to Nagarjuna, and indeed this is an emphasis in the Mahayana tradition generally,
is that samsara is nirvana.
Now, it's a little bit hard to see what that means initially.
Translate the terms again.
Samsara is this whole connection of things by means of cause and effect.
The whole chain that connects things is samsara.
And frequently the way samsara is used, it sounds like, well, this is the everyday world where all the troubles are.
We have all the troubles because of causes and effects.
And what we need to come to is some way of getting out of this mess.
But the Mahayana view is that already what we're looking at from that point of view as a big mess is in fact perfectly enlightened.
That's a kind of expression that gets used by some Mahayana schools.
That everything is, as it is right now, perfectly enlightened.
That enlightenment is everywhere at hand.
We just need to see it.
So it's really a question of our minds not recognizing that this interconnection of all things is itself a blissful vision.
And we keep having the fear that if we strip away our sense of things and strip away our sense of the dharmas and just have this notion of thus the void,
that we're left with a really pretty impoverished vision of reality.
So the idea of samsara is nirvana is to say, no, it's this very world.
The vision of the Buddha is a way of re-visioning this very reality in front of us.
Each of these particular things that we imagine are there are all bound to this huge interconnected reality which itself is full of meaning.
And our connection to it, recognizing that is precisely the way out of a sense that the world is troubled, disturbed, that our lives are inadequate.
So this is a very important notion and something that moves us completely to the other end of the spectrum from a vision like sankya.
Sankya, after all, tended to look at the everyday world as something that contaminates consciousness.
If we can just sort of free our consciousness from all of this contamination that's weighting us down, then we have insight.
Then we're perfectly free.
The Mahayana Buddhist view is just the opposite.
It's all these particular things here that we actually are in fact bound up with, something the Sankya school would deny.
We're already connected with everything that we observe.
What's mistaken, what makes our lives seem less than good is our sense that we're connected in a bad way, that they can hurt us.
Other people, other things, configurations in the world can hurt us.
In fact, our own reality is completely interconnected.
There is no outside of ourselves in that sense.
The outside and the inside are one.
So the blissful vision of nirvana is simply recognizing what the real state of affairs is throughout this chain of causes and effects that oftentimes we see as just a matter of trouble.
So on this way of looking at it, the everyday phenomenal world itself can be an occasion of insight.
The Theravada school tends not to focus so much on this positive feature of the everyday world.
The focus is a little more, let's clear away some of these confusions.
But the Mahayana school very emphatically asserts, no, you don't have to go to a better vision of the world.
You just have to start seeing through the appearances right here and now.
At any point you could start to look and see the Buddha nature resonating in everything and start to recognize your connection to it.
So there's a kind of sense of real possibilities.
If anything, it's almost a more optimistic kind of vision, at least looked at in this light.
And what one discovers is absolutely anything or anyone is an occasion for a real sense of belonging to the world where belonging doesn't mean that the world is just going to accommodate you.
Instead, you yourself, your own identity is the identity of this whole world and that indeed is a very blissful vision.
Thank you.
