Lecture 17, The Chinese Conception of Reality
In this lecture we're going to turn our attention to Chinese philosophy.
So far in considering various cultures in the world,
we've noticed a number of times that some people found it very problematic that things in the world change.
For example, the ancient Greeks thought it was disturbing that things changed and sometimes deteriorated
and sought to find something more stable and underlying to explain these changes that appear in our world.
Similarly, much Indian thought also found the changes of our everyday world to be a rather superficial vision
and again looked for something that was a more fundamental way of characterizing reality.
Buddhist thought too, in so far as there's a notion of a kind of underlying reality being the Buddha nature which sustains everything,
also sees change as something that is superficial, not the most profound way of seeing things.
In Chinese thought we don't get this kind of emphasis at all.
The assumption is that reality is the world around us, the world of change.
Change, in fact, is taken seriously as something to appreciate and to come into understanding of.
The word the dao, meaning way, among other things, is a term that sometimes used to talk about
the whole conception of the world flowing with all of its different kinds of fluxes taking place.
And a lot of effort is spent in Chinese thought trying to make sense of how we can talk about things that are constantly in motion.
The only thing that's absolutely steady and enduring is the fact of change itself.
Even relative stasis is just another instance of change.
It's one of the kind of things that changing things can do, but they can move again.
And basically the idea that reality all around us is the dao is a kind of fundamental insight that much Chinese thought begins with.
We'll be talking in the course of the lectures on Chinese thought about various thinkers in ancient China,
and in particular the daoists will be some of the thinkers that I'll be emphasizing in this lecture, though we'll come back to them later.
They tended to focus very much on paying attention to the patterns in nature and the world.
Now obviously if you say that everything is changing, it's kind of hard to know where to go from there unless you think that there are some kinds of patterns to be observed.
And certainly Chinese thinkers do think that there are some basic patterns.
So the nature of the dao is something that we can understand by means of observing the way in which changes come about.
The way in which processes happen, and we'll be talking more about that later on.
One of the ways in which the Chinese in general culturally have emblemized this idea of change being fundamental is through the image of the dragon.
You may recall having seen pictures of Chinese New Year's celebrations when lots of individuals are in a very long kind of unwieldy dragon costume,
meandering all over perhaps several streets.
And what this indicates in part is the idea of everything being part of the dao.
One of the things that I think is a little bit hard in terms of conceptually understanding the dao is to be clear about the fact that we're very much inside it.
Our reality is not separate from external reality.
We ourselves are part of this overall set of fluxes and changes and movement.
So the dragon in a way indicates all of these different individualities coming together and swirling around in effect,
manifesting the way change goes about, and nevertheless it's all one thing.
Traditionally the image of the dragon, according to John Hay, is something that's both benevolent and awesome.
The dragon is benevolent in the sense that we're all part of it.
It's our world. There's a kind of hominess about it.
On the other hand, it's awesome in that it encompasses absolutely everything.
In a way it's very difficult to even conceive of something as huge as the dao.
And the image of the dragon is a kind of concrete way through a mythological being of doing that.
A feature of the dragon that disposes it to suggesting this rather awesome character of it is the fact that the dragon is a composite creature.
You might think of pictures of dragons where you see scales that make the dragon look very reptilian.
But dragons sometimes fly too, so they have certain features that are like birds.
And some kinds of representations have characteristics of other animals as well.
Again, what this suggests is that the dao taken as a whole includes all kinds of things, things that we might even normally take to be in opposition to each other.
John Hay points out that the dragon has a number of characteristics in common with the snake,
and the snake's features in some way reveal certain things that this whole notion of the dao means in Chinese thought.
For example, snakes swallow their prey whole.
There's a sense that one thing turns into something else.
And this is very much a part of the underlying pattern that Chinese thinkers see when they talk about reality.
Things are always in flux, and what seems to be a form that has some integrity in itself gradually shifts to some other kind of form.
Similarly, snakes shed their skin.
There's a sense of continual transformation happening.
And that's, again, very much in keeping with this notion of the dao being something that is continually changing and becoming renewed.
The coiling and spiraling movement of the snake also seem to suggest this kind of movement in lots of different directions,
but a movement that is, in a certain sense, somewhat unpredictable, at least from an external point of view, in advance.
And when we look at a snake, we see something almost like pulsating energy as it moves forward.
All of these are sort of ways of bringing into focus certain features of the dao, even though the dao is meant to include absolutely everything.
In the bronzes of the ancient Shang dynasty, there are a number of images that have had a certain kind of controversy or led to controversy in our history,
because it's not quite clear what they are.
These are called the taotie masks, and they basically have a kind of face-like image appearing on the side of these bronzes.
You usually see something like rather thick eyebrows, something that looked rather like eyes,
something that might be a rather patterned mouth.
It also looks a little bit like a thunderbolt, and thunderbolts seem to occur on the side, and these appear over and over and over again.
Some have suggested that the taotie is another way of coming up with the kind of image of the dao.
It's sort of like the formless is suddenly taking form in this particular configuration,
but it's not so completely formed that we can definitely say, ah, that's an elephant, or ah, that's a snake.
Instead, there's this sense of things coming to crystallize at a certain moment,
and it's that image of coming into form, perhaps, that the taotie represents.
To talk more about the philosophical assumptions that go with this vision then,
one of the things that we can say definitely is that Chinese thought starts from an imminent point of view.
It starts in the here and now.
You might say that in the West, although of course anyone starting to deal with reality trying to reflect on it,
is going to be looking at it from some point of view,
nevertheless our ideal tends to be something that is outside of any point of view.
The objective truth, as we tend to see it, is something that transcends looking at something from a particular point of view.
You don't get that kind of suspicion of individual perspectives in Chinese thought.
Of course one perspective needs to be supplemented by others perhaps,
but the idea that everything is perspectival is in effect built into the assumptions that people just start with.
Probably one of the sort of historical or contextual reasons why this is so
is that China has been an agrarian country.
Essentially when you are a farmer, it's very easy to recognize that you're related to everything around you.
Weather patterns, the fact that sometimes bugs, infested crops, sometimes they don't,
the sorts of things that you need to do, there's a kind of constant interaction between you and the elements.
And this kind of image of continual interaction and relationship between the human being
and everything all around the human being was just taken as basic.
An image that is frequently employed in talking about this kind of interaction is the image of Yin and Yang.
Those terms are actually terms that in a way characterize all oppositions.
So Yin is considered to be female, Yang is considered to be male.
Yin is considered to be passive, Yang is considered to be active, and so on.
Yin and Yang in a way are just sort of the placeholders for any kind of opposition of that sort.
Now obviously in Western thought, in many places talking in terms of opposites is a very common thing to do.
What's interesting about the notion of Yin and Yang, however, is that the opposites are inherently linked.
There's a fundamental relationship just in talking about these various kinds of oppositions.
So to take an example, suppose you talk about the size of someone and you say, well he's tall.
Well tall doesn't mean anything except relative to shorter people.
The idea of being tall or short is a function of the way in which different people are related.
The idea of being active or passive in a certain context.
If someone takes the initiative they're active, if someone follows they're passive relatively speaking.
But again, there has to be this relationship before you can even start to utilize these terms of opposition.
Effectively, Yin and Yang are viewed as always necessarily together.
They depend on each other completely.
In fact, one way that they're sometimes translated is benefactor and beneficiary.
One aspect in effect does something for the other and the other receives it.
But traditionally the notion of Yin and Yang come from the recognition that there's a sunny side at any given point on a river bank and a shady side.
This points to something else that's very important about the concepts of Yin and Yang.
If you think about where the sunny side is, this is clearly not something that you can pinpoint for once and for all.
Over the course of the day what sunny is going to vary.
A basic principle that is assumed as part of this whole image of Yin and Yang is that opposites change into one another.
Even in the case of something that seems to be very much all of one type of quality, the other quality will emerge.
For example, a baby is very young.
But a baby gradually gets older.
In the sense you might say that the sunny side of youth gradually moves and it moves gradually away from the baby.
Whereas old comes into focus as something that would be appropriate.
Also, these terms are very much a function of a particular time and place.
So it might be that on one occasion you take the initiative, on another occasion someone else does,
and you wouldn't say, well in this relationship I'm the strong one and this guy is the passive one or the other way around.
In fact, people are constantly interacting in ways that bring one or the other of these opposites into focus.
And this is precisely as it should be.
In fact, if you think of the diagram of Yin and Yang, usually it's presented as a white patch and a black patch moving into each other,
but there's a dot of the opposite color in the midst of each.
And the suggestion is there's always a kind of movement toward the opposite, no matter what the quality is.
You can think about somebody being at the height of power.
Well, obviously there's one thing that can be said about the height of power, which is there's nowhere but downhill from there.
And that's the kind of intimation that the Yin-Yang notion is meant to capture.
That no matter where you are at any given moment, there are various forces in flux.
And what might seem to be the most important and salient features of your situation right now are probably not going to continue to be the most important as the situation moves forward.
Now, this is fairly abstract and it's applied in lots of different particular cases.
But in general, the idea of interdependence, things hanging together, all qualities being a function of context and all these qualities being a function of change
is a way of articulating at least a kind of basic level of pattern within the Tao.
Now, another term that is important in understanding basic Chinese ideas about reality is the word qi.
This might be a good point to say something about transliterations of the Chinese language.
Since Chinese is written in characters, the sorts of transliterations that we have that spell out the pronunciation in Roman letters are always a little bit off the mark.
For one thing, dialects of Chinese are tonal and we don't have a kind of natural way in Roman lettering to characterize that.
But also, there are different systems for transliterating.
Characters themselves, although they have sounds associated with them in given dialects, do not indicate the sounds so precisely.
So, we have in the spelling of qi, for example, one system that spells it qi, another system that spells it ch apostrophe i.
And at this point in time, you'll find texts largely dependent on whether they're from the People's Republic of China or Taiwan that vary on which of these approaches they're going to take in transliterating.
This is just to decide because I think that anyone who attempts to read some of these things in translation might be a bit thrown to see that things that really in English wouldn't look like they're the same pronunciation at all actually are.
So, anyway, back to qi.
qi is the fundamental energy that gets configured into particular things.
Each of us is a configuration of qi.
Every gram characterizes qi as follows.
qi is quite concrete.
It is the breath in our throats.
It is the source of life dispersing into the air at death.
We breathe it in and out and feel it rising and ebbing in our bodies as physical energy, swelling when we are angry, failing in a limb which grows numb.
We smell it as odors, feel it as heat or cold, sense it as the air or atmosphere of a person or place, as the vitality of a poem, or as the breath of spring which quickens and the breath of autumn which withers.
We even see it condensing as vapor or mist.
Actually, the character for qi, in effect, is a kind of ideogram of vapor coming out of something.
qi is directly associated with the breath.
But the idea is that throughout the universe, energy is flowing and that when you have something that seems to be stable like a human body or anything around us, this is just a case where the qi has condensed and maintains this configuration for a while.
Now, the way this has a lot of relevance to philosophical understanding is, first of all, there's no mind-matter dualism in Chinese thought.
To think back to what we said before about mind-matter dualism, Descartes is our paradigm example in the West of someone who believed that the mind, the thinking substance is one thing, the body was something else.
qi is actually understood as both spiritual and material.
What makes us particularly refined is light qi, but we're all combinations of both light qi and heavy qi.
And the notion is that there's a kind of primordial origin of things from which the qi emerged and the closer we are to that origin, the more spiritual and refined our qi is.
And the further we are, the more dispersed and heavy the qi is.
And for some thinkers, particularly in the Taoist tradition, the goal of spiritual cultivation is really to promote the development of light qi in order to get closer back to this original source.
The notion is that if you can relate back to the original source from which all your energy comes, you yourself will be filled with energy.
So someone who's very spiritual and has this very refined spiritual energy is deriving that energy more directly and immediately from the primordial source from which everything comes.
Another feature of this theory of qi that has some philosophical relevance is the idea that we're in constant communication with things around us, with other beings, with ourselves, mutually, in society.
The idea of Western thought or any kind of thinking that presupposes that individuals are, in a sense, separate from each other, is that influence, in a way, needs to be explained.
The whole question of whether or not there can be action at a distance became a huge debate in Western thought when people were trying to formulate certain kinds of scientific laws for the first time.
The notion of qi basically means that we're all configurations of a flow of energy. So it shouldn't be surprising when there are influences from one person to another.
Music is sometimes used as a model of this. The fact that we're influenced by sounds coming from a distance seems just a very clear manifestation of what's happening to us all the time.
Because we're part of the flow of everything, there are all kinds of influences flowing through us at various points, and different schools have different perceptions of what the best thing to do is under those circumstances.
But this basic idea of mutual influence and relationship to everything is pretty fundamental.
This also means that the distinction between us as human beings and the rest of nature is not extreme. Energy flows between us and other things in the natural world, given that we're all qi.
And this is one of the reasons why it's quite possible to think analogically between features of the natural world and our own situation. I have more to say about that in a minute.
One other feature of qi and something that I think reaffirms the point that my body are not considered two different things in Chinese thought.
qi is used as a basic term in medicine when someone has a disease of some sort. It's diagnosed in terms of the flow of qi and a healthy flow of qi through the body is the ideal of health.
So again, there's a sense of something that might be viewed as physical, but it's energetic and is understood to be spiritual at the same time.
It isn't just that other things in nature can influence us. We can influence other things in nature as well.
In fact, Chinese thought frequently makes reference to a trinity of levels of influence, heaven, earth, and humanity.
And there's the notion that human beings can, in a sense, reestablish equilibrium in the universe. This is a particularly strong belief among the Taoists.
Their belief being that if we somehow reengage ourselves with primordial qi, get closer to the original source of things, that the equilibrium of everything can be better connected.
The idea of our mutual influence with nature has something to do with the propensity in Chinese thought for analogical thinking, a topic about which David Hall and Roger Ames have written quite a lot.
In general, in China, there's a tendency to understand things by means of analogies.
So one of the things that's rather striking, I suppose, to a Westerner reading Chinese philosophy for the first time, might be the fact that a lot of texts tend to be vignettes or even stories.
And the stories aren't necessarily about a particular philosophical problem directly. It's more a question of you interacting with the text, figuring out what it has to do with your situation.
This is true, certainly, of the Yi Jing, one of the oldest classic books of Chinese thought. The Yi Jing is basically, or started as a divination manual.
And actually, it didn't even have to be written down. Many times, the people that were diviners were blind people who had memorized the Yi Jing.
And there are various ways of casting the Yi Jing, some having to do originally with cracks in the scapula of animals that had been cooked, later having to do with use of yarrow sticks, even coins.
But the idea is to come up with a configuration of solid and broken lines. There are 64 possibilities, and each of these correlates with a moment in change.
And the text basically consists of images and then commentaries on the images and a judgment, again, having to do with this particular configuration of change.
When people consult the Yi Jing, again, there's not a sense that it tells you precisely what to do. Instead, what one does is look for something analogous in one's situation.
And insofar as it's called the book of changes, I mean, literally, that's what Yi Jing means, what one is doing is trying to get something like a snapshot in one's mind as a way of looking at what is concretely happening in my situation.
For example, if you get one that has to do with the problems of rapid change or some dramatic change that's happening too fast to do anything about, it might be kind of clear to you what in your situation might lend itself to that interpretation.
If things are relatively smooth sailing, again, you'll get some kind of impression of that from the various things that the Yi Jing tells you.
And it's not as if the Yi Jing is dictating. In fact, you could call this a kind of interactive book insofar as the Yi Jing presents something and it's up to you to figure out how does this apply to my situation.
In general, Chinese thought abounds in this kind of ways of looking for analogies between one's own situation and the situation that's being described.
So again, when Chinese philosophers tell a story, you have to figure out, well, where does that plug in with something analogous to my situation?
This whole idea of looking at oneself in relation to others is really fundamental. I think it's hard to stress it enough.
As we proceed in talking about Chinese thought, I'll mostly be focusing on two schools until we get to Buddhism, that of Confucius and the Taoist school that I've been mentioning.
But in both cases, there's a very strong sense of the need to imagine yourself or imagine your situation as being in some ways analogous to something outside of you.
Confucius, for example, suggests that it's very important to be appropriate, but appropriate often has to do with feeling out the other person involved in a relationship, what's appropriate given the person that they are.
Again, there's always a sense of trying to compare something that is maybe concrete in the text with something that is concrete in your situation.
They aren't identical. It isn't a rule or a principle like Kant might have suggested we look for in trying to figure out what to do.
But instead, we use our imaginations. There's a very strong emphasis on using one's imagination in analyzing philosophical problems.
Some have suggested that this has something to do with the Chinese language. The characters themselves lend themselves to interpretation often in many different ways, and the context is what makes it clear which of those ways really applies.
Similarly, whole texts or bits of texts relate to one, but it depends on where you are.
And to kind of go back to a theme that we started with, the whole orientation of Chinese thought is beginning where you are in the here and now.
So I have my set of concerns, I consult the yijing, say, and what results is my thinking through my concerns from a new perspective.
Again, the fact that everything is changing has a lot of implications for our own sense of selves and our own sense of what we're doing.
My own situation is continually changing. And one of the things that I might consult the yijing for, or one of the reasons why I might engage in analogical thinking,
is in part to get attempt to start to attune myself to some of the things that I might not have been noticing.
You might observe in life that oftentimes the sort of things that become problems are things you weren't really paying attention to.
These are various techniques of recasting the situation so that you do attend to some of the things that you might not necessarily have been focusing on,
because these in fact might be important.
In general then, what we're going to proceed to do is talk about how these themes, the idea of focusing on the here and now,
locating ourselves in nature and focusing on change, play out in two traditions.
The two traditions, as I mentioned, Confucianism and Taoism, can be contrasted in the following way.
The Taoist tradition tends to focus very directly on the sense of our being one with the universe,
and are re-establishing our connection with these fundamental natural principles and flow of energy.
The Confucian tradition, on the other hand, tends to focus much more on the immediacy of human experience.
So the relationships that it focuses on primarily are human relationships.
How are human beings getting along well? How are they not getting along well?
What kind of social organization will secure life, will help people?
What kind of social organization inherently brings about damage?
It's not that these visions, in fact, are completely detached from each other.
I think it would be quite reasonable to say that the legacy of both of these traditions continues to be felt very influential in Chinese thought today,
and people can combine emphases from both.
But nevertheless, the idea is we live in a world where we're related to absolutely the whole,
and the Confucian tradition focuses on starting with human experience as the basis for dealing with these relationships.
The Taoist tradition focuses more on how we ourselves are connected to the whole,
but both of them try to figure out the answer to a basic question.
How do we live, given that this is where we're starting?
Thank you.
Thank you.
