In this lecture, we'll be considering the two major proponents of what are sometimes
called the idealistic and the realistic schools of Confucianism.
Those terms are, in a way, misnomers, but at least they indicate that there's a kind
of division with regard to attitudes towards certain things and Confucius' basic ideas.
The proponent of what's called the idealistic school is Mencius, or Menza, who lived a few
generations after Confucius in the spring and autumn period.
His situation was a little different from Confucius' in that already it had become pretty obvious
that going back to the previous dynasty, which had once been stable, something that Confucius
thought would be really a good idea to do, was really not possible.
War at Fairhead continued.
It was so widespread by now that even the dream of stability wasn't very clear in people's
minds anymore.
So in a way, Confucius' message struck him as all the more important to try to promulgate.
Apparently he did visit a number of rulers, but it doesn't seem that any of them wanted
to hire him, presumably that being something that he would have liked.
And he spent the last decades of his life teaching.
Mencius enlarged Confucius' vision, but basically attempted to transmit it.
One of the things he does that's a little bit different is put more emphasis on ye over
lee.
In the Anilex you get a certain amount of emphasis on the details of the procedures in
appropriate ritual.
Mencius tended to focus more on the inner person, and in general I would say that's
a kind of tendency that one can see if you want to make a comparison between Confucius
that emerges from the Anilex and the way Mencius articulates Confucius' ideas.
In other words, if he's emphasizing ye, what he's emphasizing is the way of externalizing
benevolence.
If benevolence is viewed as a translation of Wren, we come very closely to Mencius'
idea of what Wren is about.
Confucius sometimes used the word Wren so that it seemed like the general core of being
a good person, being an exemplary person.
And in specific cases you might be talking about benevolence, but on the whole it was
almost similar to exemplary.
With Mencius the focus is much more on benevolence, kindness, acting compassionately.
This notion of we for Mencius was also a kind of inner sense of good manners.
So again he takes a little bit more of the emphasis away from the external practices
and more on the interior person you might say.
The reason he's sometimes called idealistic is because his views about human nature were
rather optimistic, especially given the time and place that he lived.
There are fairs all over the place, but nevertheless Mencius believed that human nature is basically
good.
Now here Mencius is continuing to challenge the Moas.
I mentioned Moza briefly last time.
Moza's view was that we need to understand human motivation in order to organize society
well.
And his idea was what we really ought to try to encourage is universal love, treating
people essentially the same.
So his programs would be much more designed to get away from ritual and get away from
anything that's going to make you focus on those close to you to a more general conception
of social welfare you might say.
Oddly enough though he was a proposing universal love which might sound rather pie in the sky,
he also believed in sanctions.
He was oddly a very much a law and order sort of person and even had a kind of military
unit himself.
He thought these weren't really conflicting because as Moza saw it, most of the time people
do have the desire to get what they want.
And this is going to be a problem when people want the same things and can't all have them.
So his idea was if you just sort of look at human desires, what they basically are motivated
by, they have some desires, they fear certain things, and these are the kind of ways to
organize society.
Menchus didn't agree with much that Moza said.
And one of the things he certainly disagrees with is the idea that what we ought to do
is tap into human beings' desires and fears in order to figure out how to organize humanity.
Menchus believed that human beings inherently had the wherewithal to develop virtue.
In fact he argues that we have motives aside from the sort of selfish motives that Moza
seemed to think were primarily important.
Crucially human beings have a faculty called Shin.
Shin is translated heart and mind where these are not considered to be two different things
but one.
We might consider it a sort of feeling intelligence or emotional intelligence at the same time
as thinking intelligence all going together.
These aren't divided in the Chinese language.
And according to Menchus the fact that human beings have this ability means that unlike
animals they have a lot more control of how they respond to these other kind of motivations
they have.
Moreover we're all born as he views it with the seeds of goodness.
Menchus in the book called Menchus describes what he means by this.
Menchus said suppose a man were all of a sudden to see a young child on the verge of falling
into a well.
He would certainly be moved by compassion not because he wanted to get in the good graces
of the parents nor because he wished to win the praise of his fellow villagers or friends
nor yet because he disliked the cry of the child.
From this it can be seen that whoever is devoid of the heart of compassion is not human.
The heart of compassion is the germ of benevolence, the heart of shame of dutifulness, the heart
of courtesy and modesty of observance of the rights, the heart of right and wrong of wisdom.
Man has these four germs just as he has four limbs.
When these are fully developed he can take under his protection the whole realm within
the Four Seas but if he fails to develop them he will not even be able to serve his parents.
Now a lot's packed into that story but what Menchus is proposing first of all is let's
just imagine a situation where you see a young child about to get into a position of real
danger.
He thinks it's natural anyone would feel moved to intervene and although it may well be that
this will win commendation or win the admiration of the parents and may even be that the person
doesn't like to hear the screams of a child who is on the verge of falling into a well,
nevertheless those aren't the important thing.
What moves him is really the spirit of compassion and this is something that is instinctive
in us.
Menchus talks about these four seeds of goodness and some of them we've talked about already.
For example Wren is one of them which we can translate as benevolence, Yi is another
one, Ritual Propriety or Li is another one and he adds to this list Wisdom or Ji.
Now it might seem kind of odd to say well these are already tendencies within us.
I mean certainly we aren't born already knowing rituals so it would be hard to say that we're
fully proper in a ritual sense at birth and that's not what Menchus is saying.
Instead he's saying that these four virtues actually build from something that's fundamental
within us in the first place.
That we have natural tendencies that are fulfilled when we develop these four virtues.
So it's not reasonable to say as Mozart does that people are mainly motivated by fear and
desires that are very selfish.
Instead we have other motives stemming from the fact that we have the heart-mind and as
a result of that these motives make goodness a kind of natural thing.
So we have native moral tendencies you might say and he does acknowledge that they're
germs or seeds.
They aren't something that just automatically are going to come to fruition.
It's absolutely essential that they be cultivated.
So like Confucius he thinks cultivation, education, all these things are very important.
Learning the code of your society in terms of ritual forms.
Learning how to use words in a way that really communicates.
All these things are essential for someone to grow up as a mature member of the moral
community but there's already a disposition in us that is directed in the right direction.
So one doesn't need to view moral development as Mozart does as something that basically
has to be controlled by means of external force.
People don't have to be forced to be good.
One has to cultivate tendencies that they already have from the beginning.
In fact he goes so far as to say that anyone could be a sage.
Not meaning that anyone at any moment suddenly might turn out to be a sage but that with
proper cultivation anyone no matter where they start can develop sagacity.
The ability to really see fully into the world around them.
And this again depends on these germs.
So what society ought to do is make sure to cultivate these things.
But by nature our tendency is working in the right direction.
Now as I mentioned many people found this a rather optimistic view.
At the time that Mencius was teaching a lot of people were desensitized by the sorts of
things that had been happening just in terms of general unrest and instability.
These things continued actually beyond Mencius time.
It was a rather long period of confusion and turbulence in China and the thinker who represents
what's often viewed as a kind of opposing school, Shunze, who lived a few generations
later was even more in a troubled period.
And in fact he had a real political life himself.
He did have a rather high position in a particular court but the ruler that he was working for
got assassinated and that ended his political career there.
So he had some real hands on experience you might say with some of the uglier sides of
power conflicts.
He didn't worry so much as Confucius did about proper succession.
In effect he just takes dictators to be part of the picture.
But nevertheless he's concerned about good ways to rule and bad ways to rule.
So he too views himself as someone who is continuing the Confucian tradition.
His focus tends to be rather pragmatic and this is one of the reasons that he is viewed
as realistic.
Pragmatic in the sense that he saw a lot of the things that societies had to do to be
aimed at really basically fulfilling fundamental needs.
He thought societies had to be quite organized if people were even to have enough to eat.
It isn't obvious in an agrarian society like China that people are going to have enough
to eat.
There could be some real concentrated effort to make sure that food gets dispersed.
He's pragmatic too in defending ritual which might seem a little bit surprising but he
thinks that it's important that ritual play the role that it does in our society.
One of the reasons I think it might seem slightly surprising on the surface is that
in general ritual would often have to do with things like funerals and so on.
And the idea of ancestors and the ancestors' spirits sometimes were a focus of these rituals.
It's certainly not that Shunze was encouraging superstition.
He in fact was very anti superstitious.
So whenever he was defending ritual it would be very much in pragmatic terms what it does
for us.
And his point was it's not really that in having a funeral ritual or having an offering
to the ancestors that one is talking to another world.
But this helps us to channel our emotions.
As human beings we have natural emotions in response to certain upsetting events.
And if we have a ritual this enables us to respond in a way that is controlled and actually
made beautiful.
He points to tradition as is typical in Chinese thought and points out that the rituals were
invented by human beings, the sage kings, again the wisest human beings of the tradition.
And they were invented precisely for this reason to deal with our real situation here
and now.
Interestingly he finds music to be one of the kinds of means that is particularly pragmatic
in this regard.
And here again he's arguing against the Moas.
The Moas because they are concerned with bringing about a certain kind of social order and also
with concrete results tended to downplay the advantages of ritual and music.
In fact they tended to think that far too much was spent on these things.
That if rulers wanted to concern themselves with their society they should be a lot more
concerned about everybody getting enough to eat than with having rituals that bring the
community together.
But Shunza claims that bringing the community together by means of rituals and music is
actually a very fundamental need as well.
He comments, when music is performed in the ancestral temple of the ruler and the ruler
and his ministers, superiors and inferiors listen to it together.
There are none who are not filled with the spirit of harmonious reverence.
When it is performed within the household and father and sons, elder and younger brothers
listen to it together.
There are none who are not filled with the spirit of harmonious kinship.
And when it is performed in the community and old people and young together listen to
it, there are none who are not filled with the spirit of harmonious obedience.
What Shunza is suggesting here is that the harmony of music actually serves to harmonize
the community.
By listening to music with other people in other positions within society, we're brought
to the thought of harmony.
You might consider the way different instruments harmonize together or certainly sometimes
a voice and instruments.
There's a kind of way that coordination often of many people is brought about and turned
into something beautiful.
Music is a kind of image for this cooperation where people are freely moving, and you might
consider too that dance would often go along with music.
People freely move, but nevertheless it's coordinated.
And this is a kind of vision of social interaction, of a harmonious kind of relationship.
Music also tends to sharpen the senses.
It draws attention to itself.
We tend to focus on music when we're seriously listening to it in these kind of formal settings.
And this, according to Shunza, served a very vital purpose in society.
It allowed people commonly to think about elements of different sorts, whether you're
thinking about human beings in different roles in the community or thinking about the
elements of nature, all these things working together in a kind of harmony.
When our bodily forces are harmonized, the fact that we feel like moving along with music
at times would suggest that music is not only reminding us of what it's like to harmonize,
to conjoint ourselves cooperatively into some larger kind of event, but also it draws us
in.
We're aware of our belonging to the larger audience of our community.
So Shunza thinks that it's important to keep in mind that human beings have other needs
besides having enough to eat, important as that was, and that it's vital to satisfy emotional
spiritual needs and to give people a real sense that it's possible to have harmony and
really be satisfied at the same time.
Of course, Shunza was well aware that a lot did need to be done socially in order to ensure
that people did get enough to eat.
His policies in general are not entirely opposed to the Mohist policy in that he thinks coercion
is necessary too.
He thinks both hierarchy and coercion are necessary.
The reason he thinks this is he doesn't think that we're going to automatically end up agreeing
how to work together unless there's some kind of plan.
So he thinks it's important to have a hierarchy.
You need some kind of organization so that you can make a plan.
Of course, you could have a situation where everybody gets together agrees something needs
to be done and make a plan collectively, so it would seem.
But Shunza doesn't think that usually works.
People start to quarrel.
One person has one idea, another person has another idea.
This doesn't get anything going.
So it's really important to have people who are actually supervising.
And inevitably he thinks in order to avoid quarreling and actually get some work done,
it's going to be necessary to have some people directing other people.
Like Confucius, he doesn't see anything inherently wrong with that.
But he does think that hierarchy should be based on merit.
I'll say more about that in a minute.
As far as coercion is concerned, he also thinks there are a lot of situations where people
aren't just going to naturally end up doing some of the work that needs to be done.
Some work having to do with flooding, for example, really requires getting the whole
community out.
And people might not automatically end up joining in the effort or they might have pressing
reasons that lead them to other things.
So in fact, he thinks there are times when conscription is appropriate.
What's important is if you're going to conscript people to, for example, build dykes, do certain
things to prevent flooding, say, that it be at a time that doesn't conflict with parts
of the growing season, again, we assume that most people are farmers, parts of the growing
season where they have to be on hand.
But it's not unfair to insist that everybody contribute to these efforts.
He doesn't think taxation is inherently unfair either, although he thinks there ought to
be limits, and his limit is 10%.
And he is perfectly satisfied to acknowledge that goods are going to be unequally divided.
He simply thinks that certain things need to be fair.
And one of the things that he urges is that there be minimum standards.
At the very least, there ought to be some minimum support that everybody receives.
With regard to fairness, he also thinks that it's crucial that the right people be in the
right jobs.
So he urges meritocracy.
Now this fulfills a certain emphasis of confusions as well.
After all, thinks a ruler should be a real ruler.
Something's wrong if someone isn't fulfilling their title.
But he wouldn't go so far as schoonza.
Schoonza thinks that abolishing hereditary titles is the way to go.
That one of the reasons why too often there is the wrong person in the job, or a person
who isn't really fulfilling their title, is that people just were born into certain positions.
So his view was that those kind of inheriting titles should just be abandoned and that meritocracy
should be the basis for putting people in positions of responsibility.
The state has a responsibility to look after the least well off at the same time.
So there's a kind of sense of benevolent hierarchy.
Those who are in positions to be in charge of other people ought to share in this responsibility.
It's not an idea of some people just ordering others around, certainly.
But the general vision is that the right people ought to be in the right jobs.
In fact, schoonza in this connection emphasizes something which we'll see again in Daoist thought
as well.
The notion that a ruler who's done a good job of getting the right people in the right
jobs doesn't have to do much.
Schoonza believes that if a ruler has selected people according to meritocracy, selected
people who are right for the job, then there's no need for micromanaging all the time.
I mean, that kind of problem comes about because the wrong person is in the job or because
there aren't clear senses of who's going to do certain jobs.
Again, this notion of the attunement of names comes back.
If people really have a clear idea of what they're responsible for and they're really
doing it, then things ought to work pretty smoothly.
The way in which schoonza apparently differs from Menchus most decisively is in his claim
that human beings are fundamentally evil or base.
The translation usually renders this evil, but I think it's important to understand that
what schoonza means here is not that human beings are inherently sinful.
I think in the West, if we have a concept of original sin, we tend to see evil and
original sin perhaps as the same sort of thing, especially if you're talking about human
nature.
What schoonza is really looking at is what kind of psychological motives we have.
And he's saying, well, we've got certain motives and these are raw materials.
And he's not overly impressed with what they'll do on their own.
The main problem is the tendency to selfish desires.
He doesn't see anything to be wrong with that.
It's just that in themselves, selfish desires are going to conflict.
They might conflict in the individual, but they'll certainly conflict among individuals.
So conflict is going to be inevitable.
And there have to be clear rules for dealing with conflict, at least on the level of desires.
He doesn't think desires will automatically organize a society.
In this respect, he's countering, in effect, the greed is good philosophy insofar as the
idea of greed being good is that just from having basic selfish aims, somehow things
will work out so that everybody will end up satisfied.
That according to schoonza is not very likely.
What he thinks has to be the case is that you have an organization.
And for this to happen, we have to cultivate people.
Now this is interesting because on the one hand it looks like schoonza and menches couldn't
be farther apart.
Menches claiming we have these natural tendencies that need to be cultivated, but nevertheless
will bring about a certain desirable moral end.
Each person is naturally instinctively drawn to the sorts of things which are really a
virtuous character.
Schoonza, on the other hand, thinks, well, no, basically if you look at what we start
with, we start with a lot of selfish desires and some kind of external coordination is
necessary.
But what does he recommend?
Actually, the very same thing that menches recommends, cultivation.
Schoonza's idea is that the fact that human beings can't automatically be expected to
organize themselves on the basis of their desires is certainly no reason to despair.
This is exactly the point where human beings intervene, where education becomes important.
So there's a more apparent difference, I think, between the two thinkers than maybe initially
meets the eye.
Menches' vision is that the human being's inner nature is drawn to a certain kind of
ideal.
In this respect, he resembles, in certain ways, the thinker Aristotle in the West.
Aristotle believed that human beings, any being in nature, has its own sense of what's
good for it and a natural inclination to pursue that.
And of course, he doesn't think that without society, without education, without learning
certain sorts of things, that we're going to get to that goal.
What he does think built into our nature is this kind of inherent tendency to seek
out what's good.
Others might disagree with that and think there's more problems to becoming good than
simply fulfilling your nature.
Certain Christian thinkers, for example, who stress the conflict between the spirit and
the flesh, would tend not so much to focus on these tendencies to move toward the good,
however you happen to conceive of it, but instead would focus on the fact that there's
a conflict inherent in us.
You might say that Schoonze is more like these thinkers.
It's not that he thinks automatically each of us internally will be conflicted, but he
thinks automatically, unless some order, unless we use our mind-heart to organize things,
just dealing with the kind of level of our basic desires, yes, things will end up in
conflict.
So again, there's a kind of emphasis in both thinkers on using the mind-heart to cultivate
certainly the next generation, but also to cultivate ourselves.
And to do this, in effect, what we need are the very things that Confucius claims that
we need.
We need to focus on the images that come to us from the classics, a sense of who really
is exemplary.
We need ritual and music.
These are particularly helpful, again, much as Confucius says, because they encourage
people to cooperate without any kind of aggressive external force, pushing them in a certain
direction, motivating irritated responses to that, but instead people spontaneously feel
like cooperating.
That kind of way of enriching and cultivating ourselves strikes both thinkers as completely
appropriate.
And history actually mentions for a long time was the dominant strain of Confucian thought,
the idea that human beings actually were good fundamentally, appealed to a lot of people
after his time.
Perhaps this has more to do with the fact that some of Shun's students ended up in political
positions that ended up sort of undermining his credibility or undermining the desirability
of affiliating with him for a while.
Later in time, the vision of Shunze became more dominant.
But I think both of these effectively are part of the Confucian tradition as it's received
now that, and as we look at it, we see that even though the particular things that are
focused on are somewhat different, that actually they converge in the really important things,
that yes, we need to coordinate ourselves, yes, developing virtue is exactly what we
ought to concern ourselves with both in ourselves and in our children, and somehow trying to
deal with the way human beings naturally are as part of that picture.
The main difference between them is really just what they emphasize.
Menchus emphasizes that which in us is naturally tending toward the goal that is really moral
maturity, Shunze emphasizes those things in our nature that tend to obstruct it, but
it's really the same vision of moral maturity that they're offering.
Thank you.
