This video is brought to you by Aura.
Hi, welcome to another episode of Cold Fusion.
In 1770, Hungarian author and inventor Wolfgang von Kemplen
built an unveiled a self-operating chess-playing machine called the Mechanical Turk.
In demonstrations around Europe, his chess-playing invention won most of its games against actual human chess players
and it's even said that it went on to beat players like Napoleon and Benjamin Franklin.
Naturally, the invention was extremely popular, a marvel of its day.
However, it was actually just some guy under the table secretly operating the machine.
In other words, it was a hoax.
Some 250 years later, in 2016, Amazon pulled a similar stunt.
Their checkout system, called Just Walk Out, allowed customers to simply grab items from the store and leave.
Under this system, customers didn't have to manually scan their items at the checkout.
The transactions and logistics were automatically taken care of behind the scenes by AI.
An elegant combination of computer vision, sense of fusion, and deep learning.
Or was it?
Just like the Mechanical Turk, all was not as it seemed.
Amazon's so-called AI technology was actually powered by a thousand people in India
watching and labeling videos to ensure accurate checkouts.
Now, human's labeling data is often how AI models are first trained and that's fine.
But the point is, the advertising was misleading.
Even by 2022, these 1,000 people were still manually reviewing 70% of transactions
in 20 Amazon Go stores, 40 Amazon Fresh Grocery stores, and two Whole Foods stores.
Although some saw it as dystopian, Amazon promoted their Just Walk Out technology
as a utopian magical solution powered by AI.
And herein lies the problem.
Companies often leave out critical information in the fine print.
It wasn't until 2023 that Amazon mentioned the use of the 1,000 people in India.
And it gets worse.
According to a report by the information, other companies were swindled too.
Quote, 30 stores operated by other companies in the US, sports stadiums, 12 airports,
and one university all used Amazon's Walk Out technology.
And this is where things become murky.
When companies promise revolutionary technology, but don't follow up on them,
it creates distrust, but it can even spoil it for those who are doing legitimate work in the field.
With the AI revolution that we've seen over the past couple of years,
there needs to be a more critical look at what's happening with AI.
In this episode, we'll see the reasons for the AI hype and its consequences.
We'll look at if there is indeed an AI bubble and what real-world impact that might be having.
This includes companies releasing half-baked AI products,
but also simultaneously replacing actual humans with AI.
It's a dichotomy of an industry, so sit back and relax as we make sense of it all.
One use of AI technology that absolutely nobody is thrilled about
is the fact that it can make scammers' lives easier.
AI can help generate convincing texts that try to trick you into clicking a phishing link.
And then there's the spam emails and robocalls.
You've all experienced it, but why does it happen?
It's because your information has been sold to data brokers.
They're making a fortune from selling your information to robocallers and scammers.
They can know a lot about you, including your name, phone number, and address.
But there's a simple way to stop this. That's where today's sponsor, Aura, comes in.
They can identify data brokers and submit opt-out requests on your behalf.
Brokers are legally required to remove your information if you ask them to,
but they make it super hard to do.
Let Aura handle that for you.
Aura also does so much more to protect you and your family from online threats that you can't see.
It's really easy to set up, so you don't have to download several different apps
to get things like parental controls, antivirus, a VPN, password management,
identity theft insurance, and more.
And you get everything at one affordable price.
Visit aura.com slash coldfusion to get started on a two-week free trial.
Offer only available in the United States.
Okay, so let's continue.
No, it's not just you.
The term AI is really being thrown around everywhere.
For older Cold Fusion viewers, you'd know that I've been covering AI for the good part of a decade now.
Before 2022, the word artificial intelligence was limited to industry verbiage and obscure research papers.
The general public didn't know or care.
And even as late as 2021 when I covered GPT-3, there was a lot of people that thought I was just making it up.
How could a computer possibly talk like that?
Well, as you all know, after 2022, especially following the launch of chat GPT,
it was a different story.
From your smartphone to LinkedIn to your local government site,
a lot of organizations today will boast the term powered by AI.
While in a lot of cases it makes sense, the overuse of the term
and it being thrown around so casually is a symptom of something called AI washing.
AI washing, simply put, is when companies create a fake buzz and mislead investors by
providing manipulative information about the capabilities, limitations, or risks of their AI products,
or simply wholesale lie about how and when they're using AI.
According to Goldman Sachs, a record 36% of S&P 500 companies mentioned AI in their Q4 earnings reports.
If the biggest companies in the world are hyping it up, there's no doubt that smaller companies are following suit
and some without tangible results backing up their claims.
And the investments are there to match too.
From 2015 to 2022, global corporate AI investments have increased seven times.
A lot of companies have seen tremendous growth in the recent AI hype,
and this puts pressure on other companies to integrate AI into their business model
or their products in order to compete.
And that's even if it's not really AI.
Monkey see, monkey do.
For example, the Canadian investment firm, Delphia, claimed that it had built an AI to
predict upcoming companies and industry trends, despite not having any such capabilities.
The SEC caught wind of the scam and has since ordered them to pay US$225,000,
and this was for false advertising and misleading statements about the use of AI.
And I have a feeling that this is just the start.
I previously talked about the Wirecard fraud, where CEO Marcus Braun boasted about having
advanced proprietary AI throughout their fintech products and services.
In reality, it was just spreadsheets.
In the end, there was $2 billion missing from the books,
but that was a story for a different day.
You might have also heard about the NPU, or Neural Processing Unit.
It's a dedicated processor specifically designed for AI tasks, among other things.
They're becoming increasingly common in the world of PCs and laptops,
and Microsoft has even claimed that we're now in the age of the AI PC,
but recent reviews of the current crop of these products have left consumers with a bad taste
in their mouth.
Let's talk a bit more about AI.
Yes, the Snapdragon processors dominate here, but AI is still very nascent.
Many people either won't use these tasks or that much,
or these tasks themselves just don't work that well yet.
For example, they demoed generating images of animals,
and they highlighted how fast the processors were versus Intel.
But when I looked closely at the images generated, they were all garbage.
The AI dogs all had very lopsided eyes.
So who cares if one of these processors is faster than the other
if they are both generating garbage?
Right now, I just wouldn't advise anyone buy a laptop based on its AI capabilities.
A news analyst from Computerworld has mentioned that these AI PCs
aren't, quote, all they're cracked up to be.
And if you're expecting something transformative when you buy one from the start of 2024,
you're going to be disappointed.
They might one day deliver a lot of cool features, just not yet, end quote.
But are there consequences of such misplaced promises,
other than distrust from customers?
Companies that missed the mark with AI product launches are constantly trying to save face.
Even the most popular companies in the world are not immune to mistakes.
Perhaps the biggest consequence of AI washing is a certain B word
that might be lurking around the corner.
Almost as soon as AI started going Uber mainstream from late 2022,
a lot of people immediately likened the phenomenon to the dot-com bubble
or even the crypto fiasco.
In fact, some people still do today.
Even when we talk about the dot-com bubble,
it's not the world wide web that was the problem.
Because of course, you're using it right now.
Instead, it was mostly the e-commerce side of things which overpromised,
reeling in investors but under delivered, leading to a crash
when everyone realized that the companies that they invested in weren't making any money.
With AI, there's no doubt that we'll see some more investment in the space
and monumental growth too.
According to Oppenheimer, no, not the one you're thinking of,
who's a chief global equity strategist at Goldman Sachs Research,
we believe we are in the relatively early stages of a new technology cycle
that is likely to lead to further outperformance.
Nvidia, who designs the chips that are powering Big Tech's AI revolution,
is tentative proof of this.
Their stock is up 80% this year alone, perhaps excessive,
but it's indicative of what the market thinks of AI.
Mark Cuban, who made his fortune during the dot-com era,
also doesn't see AI as a bubble.
In a recent interview with Lex Friedman,
he expressed that the biggest sign that we're not in a bubble
is the lack of IPOs in the AI sector.
Also, the absence of companies with no intrinsic value going public
and the lack of, quote, funky AI companies is a key indicator.
He noted that the current market doesn't exhibit such characteristics,
and I think that I largely agree with that.
There's obviously some bad players in the industry
who are just trying to make a quick buck,
but there might be more to it, and here's what I mean.
There's a known pattern for emerging technologies
called the Gartner hype cycle.
It describes how humans tend to be overzealous
about a new revolutionary technology.
We overestimate and overshoot its impact,
hype it up until the market crashes,
and after the crash, the real companies with the real value
come through and spearhead the development of the new technology
until it's mature.
If we look at the Gartner hype cycle for AI,
it seems like we're at the closing stages
of the peak of inflated expectations
and are slowly entering the trough of disillusionment.
This interpretation of the current market
means that there's going to be a lot of disappointment ahead.
The real applications of AI will come after the hype and fatigue fades.
But this time could be a little bit different
because at its core, AI has the ability to mimic cognitive labour,
a change that no previous technology has been able to do
without intrinsic human intervention.
Whereas, as pointed out in a previous podcast episode,
during the dot-com bubble, there were a lot of people
simply making a random website and going public
and investors would throw money at anything
with a dot-com at the end of its name.
There's been a lot of organisations
that have been rushing to launch AI products
or replace humans with AI altogether.
But the ones who are hastily adding the ever-popular,
quote, powered by AI, gimmick, are failing badly
and there have been some spectacular AI failures.
For example, a parcel delivery firm called DPD
enabled an AI online chat for answering questions.
For one customer, it was not only useless
at answering relevant questions regarding his order,
but instead, when asked, it provided him with a poem and swore at him.
This amazing poem came forth about a DPD chat pot.
Who wasn't able to do anything? It was quite amazing.
It appeared to even disregard its own rules
and started swearing and even started dissing its own employer,
adding, DPD is the worst delivery firm in the world.
I would never recommend them to anyone.
In Australia, a group of academics used AI-generated material
as part of their complaint submission
to the Australian Parliament against four of Australia's biggest banks.
Of course, the AI made up a whole bunch of information,
including scandals that never existed
and implicating Deloitte when they had nothing to do with the original complaint.
Someone on the team didn't read the entire submission
before it went to the Australian Government,
so it was a huge embarrassment
and the academics were forced to apologise.
This is just one of many examples
and I'm going to include a website
that keeps a running tab of these AI blunders.
But on the other hand, there are companies
who are integrating AI successfully.
And this is where we come to the other kind of broken promise
when it comes to AI.
It's not CEO's over-promising AI's usefulness,
but under-promising instead.
In other words, we were told that AI would be our assistance
and create new jobs, not replace us.
But what if that's just not true?
Not about replacing the human in the loop.
In fact, it's about empowering the human.
It's an assistant.
It's an assistant.
This clip from Satya is a bit hard to believe now,
even though later he did mention the flip side.
Yes, I'm sure a lot of us use ChatGPT
to help get work done on personal projects,
but AI eventually creating more jobs than it would replace.
Maybe not so fast.
You may have noticed that since 2022,
there's been a lot of tech-related layoffs.
The narrative is that this is happening
due to the over-hiring during the pandemic times.
And that would make sense for 2022 and even 2023,
but in 2024, we're still seeing mass layoffs.
Now, if companies were just struggling to make a profit,
the explanation would be as simple as the common business cycle.
But strangely, some of the biggest companies in the world
are seeing record profits.
They're almost cyclically shedding workers.
According to reports,
tech companies fired 165,000 people in 2022, 260,000 in 2023,
and so far, the projection is 270,000 in 2024.
So if companies are doing fine,
why are workers being kicked out the door?
Well, marketing professor and author Scott Galloway thinks,
quote, there's something else going on, end quote.
In his recent blog post dissecting the impact of AI
on corporations, he mentions, quote,
AI is playing a larger role in layoffs
than CEOs are willing to admit, end quote.
The normal way we think about job replacements caused by AI
is that Joe Blogs is working at his computer,
analyzing company figures or something like that.
And then suddenly, the next day, he's replaced by an AI.
But the truth is, it's a bit more nuanced than that.
As companies slowly get better at understanding
how AI can aid in their operations,
they'll create better teams and structure with higher outcomes.
Basically, instead of three people doing the work of three,
you'll have one person doing the work of five with AI.
The problem is that none of these companies
are being sincere about it.
Because if you're a CEO and you've been hyping up AI
as the single greatest thing to happen to the industry,
and then you follow it up with a memo
that you've laid off 30% of your staff because of AI,
the hypocrisy becomes clear.
But in 2024, it seems like the truth is slowly coming out.
And there's hints everywhere.
IBM made headlines when CEO, Arvind Krishna,
mentioned that they're planning to pause hiring roles
that could be replaced with AI.
Same with UPS, where recently their CEO, Carol Tom,
acknowledged that AI is playing a part in employee layoffs.
And this came after UPS had the largest layoff
in its 116-year history, 12,000 workers.
In both cases, spokespeople later clarified saying,
quote, AI is not replacing workers, end quote,
which is basically PR talk to save face.
In fact, a Shopify employee
broke their nondisclosure agreement
to expose that the company has been secretly firing employees
because of AI.
The shift is even having an impact far outside the tech industry.
TV and media producer Tyler Perry
was building an $800 million studio expansion
but paused its construction after he saw the results
of open AISsora, an AI video generator.
He made the remark, quote,
I am very, very concerned that in the near future,
a lot of jobs are going to be lost, end quote.
In the last couple of years,
you probably would have heard this phrase a bit.
AI will not replace humans,
but humans who utilize AI will replace humans who don't.
There's definitely some truth to it,
but some jobs will be at risk regardless.
We don't have to imagine this.
It is already happening.
Megacaps like Meta and Alphabet,
they are shrinking their workforces
and shrinking their hiring.
It's this idea that senior AI researchers or data analysts,
they can do more with gen AI
than an army of junior engineers who code.
A recent report from McKinsey found that
around 12 million U.S. workers
may need to switch jobs by 2030.
Lower-wage workers are 14 times more likely to be impacted.
STEM, healthcare, builders, and professional fields
will continue to add jobs,
but generative AI could change work significantly
for occupations like customer service and sales
and office support.
There's been repeated reports of how AI
will be adding hundreds of millions of jobs
in the next decade
and how it's going to positively impact GDP.
While by some miracle, this could happen.
Right now, as has been the case many times in history,
the train will leave the station without telling us.
Whether we're aware to jump on board or not is the question.
So wrapping this all up,
I do have to mention that in no way
am I saying that all forms of AI
and all of these giant corporations are elaborate hoaxes.
In fact, on this channel,
I've been making videos about AI progress
for the better part of a decade now,
and I've seen exponential progress right in front of my eyes,
and so will many of you.
We may have hit a temporary bottleneck
when it comes to compute,
but all it takes is a breakthrough in model efficiency
and the curve continues upwards.
But I just think that it's important
to still have a cautious approach
when it comes to looking at all sides of a story.
I'm also working on a video
that's all about the positive real-life impacts of AI,
so hopefully that's going to balance things out a bit.
So far, it seems like the promises of AI
are yet to be fully realized.
Whether that's creating and not taking jobs,
solving global issues,
or even providing us with a dependable AI customer service spot
that doesn't swear at us.
With such big and bold promises
from these companies over the years,
it's important for all of us to ask ourselves,
do we have technological gold,
a Trojan horse,
or a chess master hiding under a table?
Anyways, that's about it from me.
My name is DeGogo,
and you've been watching Cold Fusion.
If you did like that episode,
feel free to subscribe.
There's plenty of other interesting stuff on the channel.
All right, so I'll catch you again soon.
Cheers, guys.
Have a good one.
Heaven help us make a better future.
A better future.
Heaven help us make a better future.
Cold Fusion.
It's missing.
