Hi, welcome to another episode of Cold Fusion.
Over 230 years, through world wars, the rise and fall of nations and industries, revolutions
and uprisings, Bering's Bank persevered.
Founded in 1762, Bering's Bank was an English institution associated with class, longevity
and strength, so much so that even the Queen of England had an account with them.
Then, in 1995, this grand banking legacy was destroyed, brought down by a single rogue
trader by the name of Nick Leeson.
So, let's explore how a 28-year-old from Hertfordshire was able to single-handedly destroy an institution.
You are watching Cold Fusion TV.
Nick Leeson was born in Wardford, Hertfordshire, to a middle-class home.
He was a confident but unimpressive student.
Despite his average educational performance, he was eventually able to secure a job with
Morgan Stanley.
He worked in their futures and options department, giving support to the traders on the frontline.
In 1989, two years after starting with Morgan Stanley, Nick Leeson approached his supervisor
and asked to be promoted.
Leeson wanted to be a trader and he felt that he deserved the promotion.
Unfortunately, his manager didn't agree and the request was turned down.
But Leeson knew what he wanted and, subsequently, he quit Morgan Stanley.
On his quest to become a stock trader, he would come across Bering's Bank and send in his
application.
Apparently, he'd never heard of the bank before submitting the application.
At that stage, I probably would be happy to say that I'd never heard of Bering's.
But it was a famous old bank.
So, there's no Bering's in Watford.
Bering's was no ordinary bank.
It catered to the most affluent class of people.
In the banking industry, the Bering's name was respected.
It was the safest of all banks and they could raise capital very easily.
Though, behind the scenes, its operations were struggling to keep up with the modern
banking world.
Leeson described the securities trading department of Bering's as being in stark contrast to
modern banks like Morgan Stanley.
Just a totally different environment.
There was, you know, Morgan Stanley, everything was new.
You know, all of the equipment was new.
The furniture was new.
At Bering's, everything is, you know, just tacky, I suppose.
I can't describe it any other way.
From his position as one of the bank's bookkeepers, it didn't take him very long to find flaws
in how the bank operated.
Bering's bank was crumbling during a time when most other financial institutions were
thriving.
Feeding on the good standing that comes with two centuries of global trading, it would
survive though, much like it always had.
But what Bering's wouldn't survive would be hiring Nick Leeson.
While many in the industry, including Leeson, possessed the intelligence to succeed, Leeson
also had a confidence and a way with people that he would wield like a secret weapon.
He was charming, friendly, and personable to his colleagues.
But not just for the sake of being polite.
He saw his co-workers, not as potential companions, but rather a means to an end.
Despite working at banks for multiple years, he never considered his co-workers his friends.
He did not like them, he did not respect them, but he knew that sometimes he needed them
to get what he wanted.
It's very easy for me to get on with people, but I don't necessarily have to like you
or any of the people that I work with to get on with them.
So I come in, I do my job, I do it to the best of my ability, and then at the end of
the day, if you're going to ask me out for a drink, I'm not going to go out for a drink
with you because I don't like you.
Nick Leeson impressed his superiors at bearings with his keen eye for identifying and solving
issues within the bank.
Not long into his employment, he was sent overseas to chase down massive sums of money.
These were debts that were long overdue, but never followed up on.
Bearing's bank had a habit of making deals that would fall between the cracks, and it
was Nick Leeson's fresh eyes that would hunt down these deals and claim back what the bank
was owed.
Leeson managed to find close to £100 million, the equivalent of twice of that today when
factoring inflation.
He describes this kind of mismanagement as being fairly typical for bearings.
Things were looking good for Leeson.
He was impressing his employees, and while in Jakarta, he met a fellow bearing staff
member by the name of Lisa Sims.
For the first time in his career, he found a colleague that he genuinely liked, and
in 1992, the two of them married.
But same month, his years of hard work finally paid off when bearings offered him the position
of a trader.
He would be in charge of a newly founded futures division in Singapore.
This was the opportunity that Leeson had been waiting for, and quite possibly, the worst
decision that bearings had ever made.
Approved to trade in Singapore, and having convinced his wife Lisa to move, it was go-time.
Being primarily on the Nikkei, Japan's top 225 company stock index, Nik thoroughly enjoyed
the stress and pressure of futures trading, essentially betting on if the price will rise
or fall.
If the market went the way he predicted, he made money.
If not, he rapidly lost money.
He was confident in himself and beloved by his staff, but later that year, the market
began fluctuating violently, and Leeson's team started making mistakes.
These bad bets were adding up, and if they weren't rectified, bearings stood to lose
large sums of money.
Out of the fear of losing the job that he worked so hard to obtain, and fuelled by his
own self-confidence, Nik decided to hide the losing bets from his employers back home.
In order to do this, he altered the software of a separate hidden account so that his bosses
in England couldn't keep track.
He named this account the 5 eighths account.
After Leeson kept his losing trades active, but hidden, he assumed that inevitably he'd
be able to cancel out the losses with future wins.
But there was only one problem with this, margin payments.
While the losing trades remained open, payments still had to be made in order to keep the
trades going.
He was going to need external funding.
He just needed enough money to keep the failed trades going, and when the market turned around,
he'd be home free.
Leeson would hide his mistakes, and then when the market went his way, he would fix his
mistakes in private.
Nik had to keep digging into a deeper pit of lies.
His bosses over in England could never find out what happened.
He asked his superiors for funds to cover stock futures that he'd bought for clients.
Only this time, the clients didn't exist.
Trusting that Leeson had the bank's best interests in mind, the branch over in England
happily sent him ever-increasing amounts of money, without ever thinking to double-check
where the money was actually going.
Surprisingly, for a time, the system worked.
Leeson described living with the lies as easy after the first two days.
From the first time I do anything, I'm not expecting to survive anything more than two
days.
To me, it's obvious.
If they can't see it after two days, then who says they're going to see it after two
hundred days?
Five hundred days?
A thousand days?
I don't get confident, but you're getting away with it.
As Nik Leeson continued to cover up his trading mistakes, Bering's itself was making massive
losses, and that was just the amount they knew about.
Something had to be done, so they recruited Peter Norris.
He was to oversee operations.
From the moment he began looking at the bank's records, Norris was shocked at what he found.
The books were a mess.
How shocked were you by the lack of control in that when you got in there and began to
work there?
I was shocked because I didn't feel that it should have been allowed to reach that point.
He saw a bank on the brink of collapse with ever-increasing debt and a loose grip on its
standing as a powerful player in the financial world.
He brought in a team to clean up the mess.
But the dire situation that shocked Norris was merely a fraction of the problem.
He was yet to find the hidden account in Singapore that would eventually collapse the entire bank.
Meanwhile, Leeson's plan to gradually cover his losses and emerge victorious had not gone
to plan.
By the end of 1992, his losses had only grown, now amounting to £4 million.
Seeing no way out, there was only one thing to do.
Gamble even harder.
Going against the bank's rules, he bought hundreds of additional futures in hopes of
covering his losses.
He bought so many orders that if the market was to move in his favour, it would completely
wipe out his debt.
He believed he could make his money back without anyone ever finding out what he had done.
At this point, he was struggling to sleep at night.
But surprisingly, it worked.
By July of 1993, he had covered his losses.
Leeson described the past nine months as a living nightmare, but he had done it and come
out relatively unscathed.
Unfortunately for all involved, Leeson had not learned his lesson.
In fact, what he had learned was how to commit fraud and get away with it.
Rather than take away a valuable lesson in risk management, Leeson saw an opportunity
to get filthy rich.
Nick was convinced by his past successes that he would eventually be able to trade out of
any amount of losses and maintain his reputation as an industry legend.
In his mind, he was a genius that had beaten the system.
But in reality, what had happened was just dumb luck.
Meanwhile, back in England, Bering's was recouping losses and the work of Peter Norris
was paying off.
Things were going well and the bank was recovering.
But the work wasn't over, so Bering's brought in a new head of in-house trading, Rob Baker.
Baker was a smart man and he valued tight oversight unlike his predecessors.
He was cynical of profits that couldn't be easily accounted for.
Because of this, Nick Leeson's department quickly caught his eye.
You see, Bering's bank was paying Nick Leeson to fund requests for new clients and they
noticed that some of these clients, who actually in reality didn't exist, were not keeping
up with their fees.
An internal audit was ordered and in July of 1993, the auditors flew to Singapore.
By the end of 1993, Leeson had found himself in the same trouble as last time, only this
time doubling up his strategy didn't work.
By the time Baker came face to face with Leeson, his secret account was now hiding losses
of 94 million pounds.
Nick would sometimes lose a million pounds in a single day.
Rob Baker saw through Leeson's confidence, recognizing a struggling and immature man
who didn't take too kindly to being overseen.
But what he could not have predicted was what was truly going on behind the scenes.
Leeson was now extremely worried.
He understood that if the auditors found just one document referring to the secret 5 eighths
account where his losses were hidden, his entire scheme would unravel.
But luck would be in his favor again, as the auditors surprisingly found nothing.
Leeson would later state that it was general incompetence from the bearing staff that allowed
him to go on undiscovered.
But Rob Baker has a different theory.
Nick was supposedly making the bank a bunch of money, so they didn't bother to question
the fact that Nick was both the head of Singapore Trading Operations and in charge of the Singapore
accounting.
And despite the strange accounts not paying any fees, bearings thought, hey, if it's
making us money, don't fix it.
By September of 1994, the secret 5 eighths account was hiding losses of 160 million pounds.
Leeson's fraud entered new levels of complexity.
He decided to use the secret account to buy futures from himself at extremely discounted
prices, allowing him to fake massive profits.
Nick was now in a deep, vicious, unsustainable cycle.
It could only continue so long as he had access to the fund that bearings would send him for
fake clients.
His life became a runaway train.
In secret, he was losing millions daily, but in public, he was becoming the star trader
that he always wanted to be.
Neither could exist without the other.
At this time, Leeson became known as the king of the exchange.
He was making a name for himself and had convinced the world that he was a success.
In December of 1994, Leeson was flown to New York.
Here, bearings held a traders conference and Nick was the star.
After all, according to the records, he had made the bank 28 million pounds that year
alone.
He was the poster boy of bearings bank and celebrated for a success.
But some of the other traders weren't as excited.
They had done their own maths and something didn't add up.
But the bearings bank executives paid no attention to these doubts.
The bank was on the way up.
It even got to the stage when Nick was asking for hundreds of thousands of pounds per day
for margin payments and without question, it was given to him.
By the end of 1994, based solely on lies, confidently told and expertly hidden, bearings
bank had transferred 75% of their entire capital into the hands of one man, Nick Leeson, 330
million pounds.
The pressure had become too much for Leeson and he had finally reached breaking point.
How could he live a lie so massive?
On a Christmas trip to Ireland, he told his wife that he did not want to return back to
Singapore.
But Leeson didn't understand why he would turn down such a great opportunity for their
family.
Nick couldn't bring himself to tell her the truth.
So he returned to Singapore in the new year.
Why lie?
I'm his wife.
Why should he lie?
I mean, I suppose lots of wives think that when they find out their husbands have been
having an affair and they think, well, you know, they've been leading a double life.
And that's what it feels like.
Not that Nick had an affair, it feels like Nick was leading a double life.
There was no economic or political factors impacting the Japanese market.
So Nick Leeson bet on stability and for a while it was working.
For a couple of weeks he was making a profit as the market remained steady.
If this kept going, his losses could be erased and he would be victorious once again.
But on January 17th at 5.46am, a massive earthquake struck the Japanese city of Kobe.
It killed 6,000 and displaced 45,000.
The Japanese Nikkei Stock Index, in which Nick was trading, absolutely crumbled.
It was bad, you know.
But again, it's living to fight another day, really.
I mean, you know, without the choice of running away from it, you know, I had to, bearings
were still paying me money, don't forget, they were still paying me masses of money,
you know.
I mean, we'd ask for sometimes for $100 million, they'd pay it.
With the market running away from him, he was desperate.
He made one final bet, buying thousands more futures contracts in an attempt to prop up
the market.
He was hoping that this move would be substantial enough to fight against the crash.
It was another failed gamble.
In a single day he lost a further £50 million, but he continued down this path.
He asked the bank for more money which they would provide on the basis of falsified profits,
fictitious profits manufactured from the secret 5 eighths account.
While bearings continued to believe Lee Sin's deception, they were happy with his falsified
profits and trusted that he was doing well.
They believed that he was taking advantage of the chaotic market since the earthquake
and making huge sums of money for everyone involved.
At one stage, auditors found a £50 million loss that Nick forgot to hide.
Frantically, Nick forged a bank loan document with scissors and glue to cover it up.
Amazingly, the auditors believed the document, even though it had, from Nick and Lisa at
the top, the fax signature from their home machine.
Then, finally, after all the close calls, audits, unimaginable debt, and luck, both
good and bad, Lee Sin's time was up.
On the 17th of February, a single clerk in Singapore noticed some discrepancies in Lee
Sin's accounts and brought them to his attention.
After failing to deflect the clerk's enquiries for a week, he knew that this time he couldn't
make this one go away.
Feeling that the walls were finally closing in, Nick told the clerk that his wife was
unwell.
He had to go and visit her, and he'd be back in 45 minutes.
Of course, this was a lie.
Nick frantically rushed home to collect his wife, packed up his belongings, and they both
drove to the airport and boarded a flight to a luxury resort in Malaysia.
That week, with Nick gone and not being able to provide any more distractions, the bearings
officers from London were finally able to access one of Lee Sin's accounts.
It was a horrific disaster.
They knew straight away that bankruptcy was inevitable.
Bearings appealed to England's central bank for support.
They were desperate for a bailout before the markets opened again on Monday.
But it was impossible.
Lee Sin's losses had multiplied to 830 million pounds, the equivalent of US$2 billion today.
It was clear that the bank couldn't be saved.
After two long centuries of banking, bearings collapsed.
On the 20th of November 1995, Lee Sin was arrested in Germany and extradited to Singapore.
He was charged with two counts of deceiving the bank's auditors and of cheating the Singapore
exchange.
He received a six and a half year prison sentence, but he was released after four years for good
behaviour.
In all of this, Lee Sin maintains a dismissive and blameless attitude towards the events
that caused the crash.
In his mind, the fault lies with those who ran bearings and not him.
Why didn't those people who ran bearings come to you and say, what are you doing?
Because they're stupid.
They don't understand the business and they should never have been in the position that
they were in, especially people like Tony Hawes.
He was supposed to be controlling the global treasury function.
He was supposed to understand derivatives.
He didn't.
And he would pay the money every single day and would accept pretty ridiculous explanations
from me.
It wouldn't happen at Morgan Stanley.
At bearings, they had a lot of idiots basically in every one of the controlling functions.
And you were creating a large amount of profits?
Fictitiously, yeah.
It's a complete amazement, but as you get to know the people at bearings, you can then
understand the amazement.
A lot of them are just bumbling fools.
Although his arrogance is distasteful, the law was inclined to agree with him.
The courts found bearings to be responsible for the deficit in internal auditing and risk
management.
Their carelessness allowed the fraud to spiral out of control.
But this shouldn't distract from the fact that hordes of people lost their jobs and
their money during the bearings' failure.
In the fallout from the collapse, Dutch bank ING bought bearings for a single pound.
They later sold off various assets.
Today, bearings exists only as a cautionary tale, a lesson to banks across the globe that
accountability and careful oversight comes before blind trust and the thrill of profit,
and a reminder to long-standing institutions that nothing is eternal.
Lyssen's life has been consistently strange since his imprisonment.
Being somewhat of a household name for older generations, he has dipped in and out of the
public eye, even competing in the 2018 season of Celebrity Big Brother.
So that my friends is the wild and twisting story of Nick Lyssen, a story of how one man
got himself into an ever deeper hole until he destroyed the oldest bank in England.
So thanks for watching, if you enjoyed the episode, be sure to subscribe to Cold Fusion.
I cover anything in science and technology, business and history.
So what do you guys think about this all?
Let me know in the comments section below.
If you do want to discuss the video a bit further, head on over to the Cold Fusion Discord.
So this has been Degogo, and you're watching Cold Fusion, so until next time, cheers.
Have a good one.
