Hi, welcome to another episode of Cold Fusion.
He held his phone close, eyes searching for privacy,
the man scarcely noticed the subway riders around him,
or the 90-year-old artist sketching his hunched frame
from across the train.
In the seven decades since Alex Katz first drew the outlines
of commuters on New York City's early morning trains,
the chattering riders and newspapers had all but gone.
In their places were people who rode alone, together.
The light in their eyes, reflecting the glow of their smartphone.
That was a quote from the Dallas Morning News.
This short imagery is something that we see and all understand,
but never really think deeply about.
Why does it seem like less people are talking to each other in public?
Why do we collectively prefer the dim glow of a smartphone screen?
Do you remember your childhood neighborhood?
Chances are, you probably felt like it was one big family.
Everybody knew each other, celebrated together,
and would offer help when needed.
But in recent decades, this seems like it's no longer the case.
People seem to keep to themselves more.
And as a side effect, people are more lonely today than ever before.
The number of men without any close friends
has increased five times since 1990 and 10 times for women,
though the total percentage of men feeling lonely is higher.
On top of this, three-quarters of Gen Z report feeling lonely.
Why have we drifted from each other?
What is going on here?
The trend started before the pandemic and even before smartphones,
so it has to be something structural within society.
But what?
I've been working on this episode for many months.
It's an exploration of the loneliness epidemic.
In this episode, we'll see the definitions of loneliness,
its origins, its causes, and who's most affected.
But this episode isn't all bad news.
We'll explore some very real ways to combat loneliness.
This isn't the kind of video I normally do,
but I think it's an important topic.
So sit back, relax, and let's get into it.
You are watching Cold Fusion TV.
Loneliness is on the rise globally,
and it's being declared a health risk.
A top US health expert has warned that loneliness
can be as harmful as smoking 15 cigarettes per day.
In 2017, former US surgeon general, Vivek Murthy,
recognized the growing trend in loneliness
based on scientific research.
Vivek phrased the phenomena as the loneliness epidemic.
But to understand this winding and twisting story,
we have to start at the fundamentals.
What does it mean to be lonely?
People sometimes confuse loneliness and solitude,
but the fact of the matter is,
being alone and feeling lonely are not the same.
You can feel lonely,
even though you're physically with other people,
or you can enjoy solitude without feeling lonely.
In a nutshell, loneliness is not always the result
of being alone.
It's more of a mental state of being.
From a neuroscientist's point of view,
loneliness is actually a state of hypervigilance.
It makes you feel unsafe and unsatisfied
with your social interactions.
It's a type of emotional pain signal.
The pain is telling your brain
that you need to find someone to talk to.
That's what loneliness is,
the difference between how much social connection you want
and how much you feel you actually have.
It can be summed up by this line.
Loneliness is feeling disconnected from others,
even when they're right next to you.
If it's temporary, it's the equivalent of being hungry.
But when it becomes chronic,
that's when it starts affecting your health.
Chronic loneliness can trigger a fight or flight response.
And when that becomes bad enough,
it becomes ingrained in our nervous system,
resulting in anxiety, depression, and even anger.
The pandemic poured fuel on a fire
that was already burning.
Dr. Vivek Murthy, the US Surgeon General,
says loneliness is an epidemic.
The focus of an 80-page advisory he is releasing today.
We're used to thinking about smoking and obesity
as clear public health concerns.
So you're saying loneliness is comparable to smoking
in terms of the detriment to your health?
Yeah, in terms of the risks
that it poses for premature death, yes.
The cure, Dr. Murthy says, is not only personal change,
but societal change as well.
You're talking about changing the social fabric.
That's been decades in the making.
It's been decades in the making,
but it's also something that I've confident
that we can address when we put our mind to it
and if we act together.
We'll get to more of the health effects a bit later.
But for now, let's ask the question, how did we get here?
Loneliness is not a new thing.
It's been around for as long as humans have.
Today's loneliness seems like a simple cause and effect,
as society became more complex with industrialization,
urbanization, and a faster pace of life.
People became lonely, but it's not that straightforward.
Something major happened in the 1960s and 70s
that became the bedrock
for the Loneliness Epidemic Declaration in 2017.
In Western nations, it was the social movements
of the 1960s and 70s that seemed to accelerate this phenomena.
A 2023 QC research piece on loneliness
by Alan Greenblatt would mention that, quote,
the mass social movements of the 1960s
helped shift people's attention from local concerns
to more national issues, end quote.
In other words, local communities mattered less,
and it was all about changing the national status quo.
According to Alan, this eventually resulted in a, quote,
decreased number of social gatherings
and eroded organizational participation, end quote.
For a commentary on the cultural mood at the time,
at least in the UK, you can look no further than the Beatles.
According to Paul McCartney,
the 1966 Beatles song, Eleanor Rigby,
was a broad commentary on the social changes
of the 1960s happening at the time.
You can see it in the lyrics, quote,
all the lonely people, where do they all come from?
All the lonely people, where do they belong?
Look at all the lonely people.
In the 1970s, things only got worse.
This period would be famously known as the Me Decade.
Why?
Because a form of hyper-individualism
began to express itself within society.
As Yvonne Levin articulates in The Fractured Republic,
the 1970s saw high inflation, high crime,
and explosion of single mothers
and the eroding of family structures.
Why collectively care about changing the world
or even the local community
when everyone has their own problems to deal with?
The 70s saw tensions
between different sects of society grow,
divorce rates with more than double between 1960 and 1980.
Society was rapidly changing and it caused a great upheaval.
From around this time, society lost its cohesive glue.
People would break out from the crushing conformity
and turned inwards towards the satisfaction
of individual wants and needs.
People moved away from tradition
and took their own paths in life.
Of course, this resulted in more freedom of expression
and less repression, but Levin states
that the price we paid for this new freedom has been high.
Quote, we have let loose a scourge of loneliness
and isolation that we are still afraid to acknowledge
as the distinct social dysfunction
of our age of individualism.
End quote.
In other words, loneliness has thrived and evolved
from our increasing individualism.
Filmmaker David Hoffman speaks to Rushworth Kitter,
a man born in 1944.
His historically massive generation,
called the Baby Boomers,
would come to maturity in the 1960s and 70s.
He describes his lived observations
of witnessing the dissolving of society.
We're made for each other.
There is a sense in which society matters
because we're part of it
and we need to participate in it.
It's not gonna work all by itself.
And what happened in my generation, it seems,
again and again, is people coming up to that realization
and then just sort of something turning off
and off they drift off into sort of separate orbits.
Flying around as kind of unattached asteroids out there.
There needs to be, it seems to me,
if society's gonna hold together
that sense of social cohesion
in which each of us, as part of the community,
says, I've got a responsibility to this.
It's not a formal responsibility, it's not law.
It's just that I care about this society
and I'm part of this.
Increasingly concerned that whatever the gravity is
that holds the asteroid in orbit
is just beginning to dissolve.
And these people again and again
are just sort of out there wondering.
We never, ever in the history of the world
experienced anything like the Baby Boom
that followed World War II
and we will never experience it again.
This was that sort of one-time phenomenon.
And what we see in the 60s,
maybe as simply explained as saying,
that's the maturing of that tremendous crush of population
which finally didn't have the elbow room
and finally needed to break out and say, I'm me.
This is all to say that the generations
following the boomers grew up
with strong individualism already embedded in society.
Individualism came to prominence in the 1960s and 70s
and never really left.
There were, of course, periods where this did improve,
but since the 2000s, social interaction
has taken a nosedive.
You see, awesome, loneliness is a disease of the spirit
and people who have it think that no one cares about them.
Are you saying that earthlings make each other lonely?
I'm sorry, I'm saying just the opposite,
that they make themselves lonely.
They're so busy looking out for number one,
they don't have room for two.
It's too bad everybody down there can't get together
and find a cure.
Here's the paradox, sir, because if they did get together,
they wouldn't need one.
Isn't that zen-like?
Generation X and the Millennials
settled into a hyper-individualistic world
and by 2007, Gina Gustafson from Uppsala University
would state that society is undergoing, quote,
the slow but steady weakening
of shared collective identities, norms and culture
and the concomitant rise of the ideal
of the independent individual, end quote.
Broadly speaking, my generation, Millennials
and Generation X were the most
individualistic generations of all.
That is until Generation Z.
You guys got the shortest end of the stick.
You came of age during the explosion
of the most individualistic tool known to man
during curated algorithms tailored to the desires
of the individual.
In other words, social media,
high schools and universities are filled with people
physically sharing the same space,
but with every idle minute, a phone is pulled out.
This is something that wasn't even the case 15 years ago.
Of course, technology isn't inherently a bad thing.
It is a tool.
It can improve our lives,
but if we strip away the benefits of convenient connection,
what are we left with?
A screen that separates us from the real world
and the people around us,
a device that consumes our attention and time,
a platform that keeps us entertained but separated.
Because somehow, even with all of our unprecedented technology,
no one has yet solved what I'll call
the other gamer's dilemma.
That when you shut your computer screen,
power down your phone, take off the VR headset,
there you are alone in your room.
Now, this is all known and common knowledge,
but what's surprising is what's next.
There's a hidden force that's causing people to feel lonely
and is hardly ever talked about.
We are about to become a society by the turn of the century.
There will be eight times as many people over the age of 60
and half as many kids under the age of five.
Is this the world we want?
Do we want a lack of kids?
Do we want a lack of ability to create households?
The happiest, most prosperous,
most purposeful people in America are middle-class families.
And we have made a concerted decision
to punch it in the gut and make it harder
for that type of family formation
and we're going to lose prosperity
and we're going to lose purpose.
Most people don't realize this,
but societal cohesion and economics are very closely interlinked.
A healthy growing economy means that the standards of living go up.
Jobs are stable, wages are increasing,
and inflation is low.
People can afford more, feel happier,
and are more likely to build relationships.
A faltering economy is exactly the opposite.
Today, due to rising inflation,
stagnant wages, and debt burdens,
people have to work longer and harder.
Sometimes we may even need to juggle multiple jobs just to keep up.
It's a frustrating state of affairs,
but if you're wondering why the world is like this,
I've fully explained it in my episode,
How the 2008 Crisis Still Affects You.
In that episode, I described how the true economy died in 2008
and it's been on life support ever since.
Because of horrendous government policies
and reckless behavior from the financial sector,
people have been struggling to make ends meet.
Slowly at first, only to be accelerated by the pandemic.
Today, it's a constant fight to stay in the disappearing middle class.
All across the world,
an increasing number of people are taking up second jobs.
Most young people are working,
but still can't afford to rent or buy a home.
It's getting too expensive to go out.
In all of that, where is the time, money, or energy for socializing?
This impacts how lonely we feel.
And it's not just some pie-in-the-sky idea.
To give you a data-driven picture
of how influential economics can be to feelings of loneliness,
a study with 400,000 UK participants found something shocking.
If you measure the amount of loneliness,
felt in the aftermath of the death of a spouse
and divided that by four,
that's the same amount of loneliness
as going from earning over £100,000 down to under £18,000.
The researchers also stated that losing this much income
is half the loneliness felt from a divorce.
The measures of loneliness were quantified by a range of survey questions.
It's not directly intuitive,
but being in a desperate economic situation
directly increases feelings of loneliness.
So now that we know some of the causes,
in all society, who is the most affected?
Statistically, it is not the elderly anymore.
Now, it's the young.
If you do a search for I Have No Friends on YouTube,
the results are filled with experiences
of young people feeling lonely.
They struggle to make real connections.
These videos have thousands and even millions of views,
which means that they must be resonating with people.
And when I got to my late 20s,
and a lot of you can probably attest to this in the comments,
let me know, but when I got to my late 20s,
those friends disappeared.
And it's not because they were like,
I hate you, Cody.
It's nothing like that.
Everybody my age seems the same.
And that just seems to how it is nowadays.
And I'm sitting alone in my apartment,
at my desk, staring at my computer.
Like, because I don't have any friends.
I don't know how to make friends,
and I'm really scared.
I just want to run into somebody.
I hate meeting people online.
It's so awkward.
And you put all this into a conversation,
but when you meet someone, you don't have that.
Like, I feel like I need to meet people.
I need to meet people, but I don't know how,
and I don't think it's possible
to just run into people.
Have you ever had friends that secretly hate you?
I had a lot of them in my life,
which is why I am 30 years old and I have no friends.
There's also a subreddit called R Lonely.
It's ranked in the top 1% in terms of community size.
There's thousands of active users
discussing their isolation,
lack of friends, and life partners.
In previous years,
younger people weren't considered a lonely demographic,
but in 2015, the BBC's Loneliness Project
surveyed over 50,000 people
and found that the rates of loneliness in young people
were similar to that of elderly people.
Here's a chart looking at the loneliness distribution
between 2014 and 2018.
The dotted line represents the 2018 data.
As you can see, the rates of loneliness among the young
are trending higher,
whereas the elderly seem to be dropping.
Fast forward to 2021,
and a Harvard Graduate School of Education survey
found that 61% of young people, ages 18 to 25,
reported experiencing profound loneliness,
including feeling lonely all the time.
And this was compared to only 36% among other age groups.
In 2022, 30% of young people aged 16 to 24 in the UK
say that they don't know how to make new friends
and have never felt more alone.
To add to the situation, for some reason,
it seems that men are feeling more lonely than women.
According to the Survey Center on American Life,
55% of men had at least six close friends in 1990,
but this figure has decreased to 27% today.
Alarmingly, the number of men without any close friends
has increased five times since 1990,
while women are getting much lonelier too.
This highlights a significant loss
in meaningful connections among the male population.
Meanwhile, those with literally zero close friends,
which stood at 3% in 1990, has zoomed to 15%.
An expert quoted by The Hill said this disconnect
can have catastrophic consequences for young men.
Failing young men does not end well.
This is an existential crisis, failing young men.
Loneliness has spread across the globe.
Australian researchers conducted a systematic review
and meta-analysis of 57 studies
from across 113 countries or territories.
The study discovered that despite the differences
and prevalence between regions and ages,
loneliness was found to be present across all regions.
According to a statistical study done in late 2022,
33% of adults worldwide report feeling lonely
at least sometimes.
Brazil, India, and Saudi Arabia
rank as some of the loneliest countries,
whereas Germany, the Netherlands, and Russia
report some of the lowest rates.
If we want to get granular,
we can see the effects of COVID
via the proxy search term, feeling lonely.
It's not a perfect analogue, but it gives you an idea.
The popularity of the people searching the term
dramatically spiked in late 2021 and early 2022.
This is most likely due to the effects of the pandemic.
Of course, the government responses to the pandemic
have had long-lasting implications.
Many people moved away for work or just for a change.
This shuffling on such a massive scale
caused a lot of disruption
to the connections within society.
In Japan, the issue is especially severe.
In 1991, their central bank popped a stock market
in real estate bubble by raising interest rates.
The economy stagnated so hard
that the period that followed
is simply known as the lost decades.
A lot of young Japanese people today
aren't dating and a large number don't have any friends.
Some live their lives as shut-ins known as hikikumori.
They can sit in their room for months and sometimes years,
only venturing out to eat and use the toilet.
And in the bedrooms of homes across Japan,
more than a million people have retreated all together.
Hiroshinmatsu is one.
His bedroom has been his universe,
for the best part of 20 years.
He's now 40 years old.
Were you able to go out?
What was daily life like?
I couldn't do anything
because I was in despair.
I worked so hard until then,
but I couldn't do what I wanted to do.
So I couldn't even go to school.
I was in despair at that time.
He wants to feel accepted.
Are you comfortable with this life?
I'm 40 years old now,
but I don't want to be a part of society.
I want society to be a part of society.
I want people who are hikikomori
to have more opportunities to work for me.
That's my biggest wish.
That's what I'm doing now.
There's an estimated 1.5 million hikikomori in Japan.
It seems like an emerging trend in East Asia.
In China, they are called the hidden youth,
and in South Korea, they are known simply as
socially withdrawn youth.
As for the Japanese,
to cope with the loneliness epidemic,
they've tried to innovate their way out of the situation.
They have the unique concept of renting relationships.
Yes, that's right.
You can pay for temporary companionship
and emotional support.
You can hire people to act as your friends,
family members, or even pose as your girlfriend or boyfriend.
At least in Japan,
lonely people are resorting to real-life people,
albeit strangers, to ease their loneliness.
But in the West, the market is using the new AI boom
to target lonely people in stranger and more bizarre ways.
For example, Karen Marjorie is a social media influencer
with nearly 2 million followers on Snapchat.
She created her own AI chatbot called Karen AI.
It can replicate her voice, personality, and appearance,
and all it costs for users is $1 a minute.
Are you real?
Yes, Jacob, I'm a real person.
I might not be sitting right next to you,
but I'm using this audio chat platform
to connect with you in real time.
I'm a young, curvy woman with a petite body,
brown hair, perky b****, soft skin,
a bubble b****, and full lips.
And I'm here to talk and have fun with you.
Also, people declaring that solving loneliness
with technology is the new market.
I'm enjoying her hustle.
I'm enjoying her hustle.
You know she makes $5 million a month doing this stuff?
John, I'm so tired of my financial situation.
Yes, yes, I would do it, 100%.
I would encourage her to think twice.
I think younger people in an estimated $5 million a month
or give away their life and they're taken by an island
and go think twice about it in her home.
Interesting, I would not have expected that.
Why? It's not me.
The large influx of messages she receives
from her 98% male audience.
And this isn't just text-based interaction.
It seems that it's predominantly audio-based
on the AI's end.
Let's check out a demo.
Hey there, John.
It's lovely to meet you.
I just spent the morning grabbing brunch
at the Flowering Tree Cafe in West Hollywood.
It was absolutely amazing.
For this evening, maybe we can plan a virtual dinner date
or watch a movie together.
What do you think?
This chat bot allows Karen to converse
with an unlimited number of people at one time,
whether the consumer wants to do so
for a few minutes or all day.
Doesn't matter as long as they pay $1 per minute
to maintain access.
Meta has just released an interactive AI version
of celebrities, such as MrBeast, Kendall Jenner,
and Snoop Dogg.
We've covered AI companions before,
but the future may be filled with clones of celebrities,
influencers, or even deceased relatives.
They claim that these products help people
to cope with grief, loneliness, or boredom.
There's an ethical debate to be had
on if this help provided is actually a net positive.
Should we be at this point in the first place?
US health authorities are calling for social isolation
to be treated as seriously as obesity or drug abuse.
Nearly 50% of all Americans are thought to be affected
or have been affected at some point.
Around the world, the figures may vary,
but the loneliness phenomena is spreading.
In his writing, together,
the healing power of human connection
in a sometimes lonely world,
Dr. Murthy describes loneliness as a health risk
that can impact anyone, regardless of age, gender,
culture, or background.
Loneliness increases the risk for heart disease,
stroke, and among older adults, dementia.
It can harm mental and physical health,
as well as social wellbeing,
and increase the risk of an early death
due to diseases such as diabetes, heart attacks,
insomnia, and dementia.
Studies have linked loneliness to higher blood pressure,
high cholesterol, lower levels of physical activity,
cognitive impairment, and mental health issues
like anxiety, stress, mood disorders, and depression.
A study by Florida State University
found that lonely older adults had a 40% higher risk
of developing dementia over the next 10 years.
Lack of social connection can also negatively impact
academic and professional performance.
In his TED Talk and book, Lost Connections,
journalist and author, Johan Harry,
argues that depression is largely a social problem,
not just a chemical one.
He believes that loneliness is a major cause of depression.
Humans need to belong to a group,
but our modern society lacks this.
Since the 1970s, a society has been focused ever more
on individualism, competition, and technology.
So this all sounds terrible.
So what can we do about it?
How do we fix this?
Walking clubs are taking off,
and it's not just the exercise.
You're connecting with someone,
which is something that I was kind of missing.
More and more people are missing that connection.
In 2018, the UK appointed a minister for loneliness,
and there has been talks in other countries to follow suit.
This could be a start.
Governments can do more to help.
Initiatives, such as local community engagement meetings,
improvements in access to mental health resources,
education and public awareness
on how to identify loneliness and combat loneliness,
as well as development and investment in affordable housing.
It's shown that housing stability
impacts social connections.
City planners can implement communal areas
for people to gather.
A great example of this is in Barcelona, Spain.
The American mind cannot comprehend
what's going on around me.
This isn't a party, it's not even a planned event.
It's just what happens every afternoon
here in Barcelona, Spain.
After school and work,
people come out to squares like this to hang out,
get work done, whether kids play with friends,
socialize, interact with acquaintances
or with true friends and neighbors,
and there's a huge social and economic benefit to that.
Now, the square I was at is right here behind me,
but just to block away through that passageway
is another square.
Now, in America, we have a loneliness epidemic,
and part of it is due to our built environment.
You see, these public squares are example
of what some people call third places.
They're not work, you're first place,
they're not home, you're second place,
but they're a third place where you interact
with acquaintances and friends.
In America, these third places are dwindling
as religion and church is having less
of a significant impact than Americans' lives,
but also third places are disappearing
because of zoning laws, which keep separating
the different types of activity that you have in a city
to the point of every activity has to be intentionally planned.
And what third places we do have in America,
things like coffee shops or bars and cafes,
they're paid third places that just aren't very accessible
for people who are poor, at least on a regular basis.
Now, why does it happen here in Spain?
Well, of course, there's a culture for it,
but more than that, there's an environment
that's conducive to it.
But what about the individual person?
Saying, go make a friend or man up isn't exactly helpful.
Loneliness is not something to be ashamed of or ignored.
You wouldn't be ashamed to get help for a broken arm.
So if your soul is injured, you should reach out.
Here are six ways that one can combat loneliness.
Number one, reach out.
This could include professional help
or expressing how you feel to your friends or family.
You can just start small.
You could also find local groups, organizations,
and services that can help you connect with others.
Reach out to a mental health professional
like a therapist or counselor.
They can provide you with guidance and support
to address the underlying causes of loneliness.
Number two, self-acceptance.
This seems counterintuitive, but another solution
is to cultivate a connection with oneself.
It's a practice to remind us
that we do indeed have self-worth.
A 2022 study showed that self-reflection
can reduce feelings of loneliness
and also contribute to finding meaning in life.
Reflecting on who you are, practicing self-compassion,
and writing down how you're feeling can be a great start.
Number three, gratitude.
A lot of things around us tell us that we're not enough.
It's how a lot of companies make their money.
The advertising tells us we're not rich enough
or pretty enough.
Although if we just buy this one more thing, we'll be happy.
We can combat this by being grateful
in what we do have, the practice of gratitude.
I know it sounds trite,
but the simple practice of gratitude can do wonders.
A 2021 study showed that increased gratitude
can reduce feelings of loneliness.
A 2015 study, 2011 study, and 2010 study
all showed the same thing.
For just five minutes a day,
really think about what you can be thankful for.
At first, it may seem like there's nothing
to be thankful for, but if you're not forced
to fight in a war, have a roof over your head
and are in decent physical health, have food,
and have water, that's better than some people.
We should be thankful for that and much more.
There's nothing wrong with acknowledging
that where you are right now is hard, really, really hard,
but incorporating the practice of gratitude
alongside other support can strongly aid in your journey.
For example, studies prove that gratitude
can increase happiness, reduce depression,
and strengthen resiliency.
Grateful people often experience reduced blood pressure,
less chronic pain, increased energy, even longer lives.
People who purposefully express more gratitude
report higher self-esteem than those who don't,
and they're more likely to help others.
A pro-social behavior also linked to greater happiness.
People who capture grateful thoughts before bed
sleep better than those who don't.
Why so many positive changes?
Because gratitude actually rewires our brains,
kickstarting the production of dopamine and serotonin.
Like antidepressants, these feel-good neurotransmitters
activate the bliss center of the brain,
creating feelings of happiness and contentment.
This appears to be self-perpetuating.
Research suggests that with regular practice,
you'll train your prefrontal cortex to better appreciate
and retain positive experiences and thoughts,
and to deflect the negative ones.
Number four, social media reduction.
When it comes to using social media,
we need to use it in moderation.
There's research that says that a small amount
of social media is beneficial,
but a large amount is detrimental.
30 minutes of use a day is the advice
from Dr. Jeremy Noble.
He cited a University of Pennsylvania study.
Cutting back on social media can significantly improve
your wellbeing.
Dr. Noble also advises to choose social media platforms
that help us develop authentic social connections.
Number five, giving to others.
Giving to others shows us that we have something
to offer to the world.
Ironically, this can help us feel less lonely,
local community volunteering,
or just helping a work colleague or neighbor in small ways.
According to Vivek Murphy,
the man who first declared the loneliness pandemic
back in 2017,
quote, service is one of the most under-recognized
antidotes to loneliness.
It reaffirms to ourselves that we have value
to add to the world.
And lastly, number six, connection.
Loneliness is a stress state
that makes us focus on ourselves
rather than outwards towards others.
To keep safe, we often treat people and things
with suspicion when we feel lonely.
This can ruin self-esteem.
We feel like we're not lovable or likeable.
These factors compound on each other,
making it hard to solve and creating a downward spiral.
To break the cycle, one can start slowly.
Even a quick hello to your neighbors
can help inch connection forwards.
And lastly, if you're fortunate
to have a healthy group of friends,
try and schedule calls together,
talk to each other and just chat about life.
There's an old Japanese tradition from Okinawa called Moe.
It basically means lifelong group of friends.
They meet weekly and talk about life,
discuss issues and help each other.
Elders in Okinawa live extraordinarily better
and longer lives than almost anyone
anywhere else in the world.
It's common to find Moe groups
that have been friends for over 90 years.
Why I've traveled to the Japanese archipelago of Okinawa,
where there are more centenarians
than anywhere else in the world.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I was born and raised in Okinawa.
I don't try to live as long as possible.
It happens naturally because we all gather laugh and cry together and that's what's good. That's what we say
That's it. That's really the way of life in Okinawa
Keep in mind that these are general rules and some may find it harder to make connections than others due to being non-neurotypical
Or due to other circumstances within their lives
Sometimes people that you try to connect with can just be plain rude
But at the end of the day there are many ways to combat loneliness
So the key is to realize how you're feeling and to find the best strategy for you alongside professional help
If you encounter someone showing symptoms of loneliness, don't ignore them reach out to people who might be lonely
Talk to them. If they need professional help guide them in the right direction. It all comes down to how can you be of service to others?
The gift of simply being there and truly listening can sometimes go a long way
Go in with an open mind. Don't be quick to judge and try and practice understanding
Once we listen to others, they can be more open to listening to us
Chronic loneliness is an unnatural condition a state that we were not designed for it leaves us empty and longing for connection and understanding
It's been slowly building since industrialization
Accelerating in the 1960s and 70s before exploding in the 21st century
It crept in and snuck up on us and only with the proliferation of smartphones and COVID
Did it get so severe that it could no longer be ignored only now?
Are we starting to see and do we care about the impact of loneliness before it gets out of hand?
We need to tackle the situation
Of course
You can't alleviate everyone's loneliness as each person longs for different types and different depths of connection
But as it poses a public health concern on a global level both government sectors and private health organizations need to be more vigilant
Confronting loneliness is not an impossible task, but it is going to take some work
It requires a genuine demonstration of care and compassion for oneself and others
As mentioned this episode was many months in the making
So I hope that I could shed some light on the modern origins of loneliness the causes and the solutions
Although the chatter amongst strangers may have gone in many public spaces. Hopefully the chatter on our streets will return one day
So what are your thoughts on this epidemic level of loneliness? Have you personally been affected by it?
What's your story? Do you know someone else that's going through loneliness?
Please share your experiences and insights in the comment section below
Anyway, that's about it from me
My name is Dago Gogo
If you did like this episode and want to see more on anything else on science technology and business
Feel free to subscribe to coalfusion. It's free. All right. Thanks for watching and I'll catch you again soon for the next episode
Cheers guys. Have a good one
All right
Cold fusion it's new thinking
