What questions is biology concerned with?
What are the fundamental questions
that biology is trying to answer?
Well, biology is a huge field.
So I would say that different people
will have different perspectives
on what they think it's going to answer.
I will give you my favorite kind of slant on this question.
So I think that specifically developmental biology
is kind of the most magical of all the sciences.
And the reason I say that is because there
you can see in front of your eyes
how a quiescent oocyte,
a little blob of chemicals and egg, right?
Becomes through the process of embryonic development
becomes a whole organism in the case of the humans.
It will be a human being
with complex metacognitive abilities
and all kinds of a highly developed sense of self
and intelligence and all of that.
But all of us were once a little drop of chemicals.
And it is that smooth, gradual developmental process
that shows the emergence of mind
out of physics and chemistry.
And I can't think of a more profound problem than that.
And I think that's, to me,
that's what the majority of biology is studying.
Why do you think we should study biology in the first place?
Well, if we want to understand ourselves,
if we want to understand the world around us,
we are an example of biology.
Most of the things we're interested in
are relevant to by either examples of biology
or impinge on our nature as biological beings.
Yeah, I think we have to understand that question
of understanding what does it mean to be an embodied mind?
What does it mean to be a mind in this universe
with a physical body and the ability to interact with others
through various interfaces?
That's biology.
What else is there?
That's most of it.
So essentially, then,
are we concerned about the question of mind and what is mind
and how to better understand it?
And biology is just one lens of looking at it?
I think that's a fair statement.
I think that, I mean,
there are many interesting questions, of course,
but to me, the question of what does it mean
to be a mind in a physical universe
is an extremely important and interesting question.
And I think biology is a great lens.
It's an essential lens.
There are other lenses on that question
that we can approach it through artificial intelligence.
We can approach it through mathematics
and various other things,
but I think biology is a really essential lens on it.
You think it would be a worthwhile thing to investigate
what we mean by the mind in the first place?
Because you mentioned artificial intelligence.
You mentioned mathematics,
but these things are created through the human mind
in the first place.
So I think understanding what the mind is in the first place
would be more fundamental,
as opposed to looking at a true artificial intelligence
or mathematics,
since these things emerge from the human mind
or from human thinking or from thought in general.
So could we explore what we mean by the mind in the first place?
We can, although I want to push back on this idea
that these things emerge from the create,
that these things are created by the human mind.
I don't actually believe that.
I think that's, I think that's, I mean, it might be true
and it's certainly a few that a lot of people have,
but I don't hold to that.
I think that there are fundamental aspects of reality
with which different observers or different minds
will see in different ways.
And I don't believe we create the truths of mathematics.
I think that artificial intelligence is just a way
that we've developed to recognize
and interact with aspects of intelligence
that are unconventional intelligences
that are all around us in various embodiments
that's actually typically pretty hard for us to recognize.
But yeah, I don't think these things
are inventions of the human mind.
Sorry, what I meant by that is, of course,
like two plus two equals four,
that's in a way, you know, a discovery
as opposed to an invention when it comes to the question of
is maths discovered or invention?
So I get it from that perspective.
And what I meant from the artificial perspective
is that, you know, we've created the computer.
And then eventually we've reached a point
where there's machine learning algorithms
that can learn and AI and so on.
That's what I meant by that.
Or am I wrong about that?
Yeah, yeah, I understand.
I mean, I think that when,
here's what I think we mean when we say we created a computer.
There are, there are events going on all around us.
Some of these events are profitably interpreted as computations.
So we have gotten to the point where we have a pretty good set
of theories of how to interpret some of these events,
including the events going on inside of a computer
and some other things that we can interpret these as the results
of computation.
So that's very useful.
But so I'm sort of shifting the focus on the observer
and the interpretation of various events by an observer.
So somebody else can see the same events and interpret them
in a different way that has nothing to do with computation.
And in certain cases they will have more utility.
And in other cases, the computer view will have more utility.
So I think the same, you know,
what we're discovering are interfaces to what I really think
are a massive, maybe infinite pool of these kind of Platonic
affordances that include various laws of number theory
and other aspects of mathematics and the different, you know,
laws of computer science, what we discover are interfaces
to these things, physical embodiments that let us take advantage
of these things.
And why do you think we need to study that in the first place?
Like what's the ultimate goal, I guess,
or why are we studying these things in the first place?
Well, I guess that's part of the broader question
of why anybody studies anything, right?
There are practical, you know, there are, of course,
practical applications.
So if you want to have more, you know,
kind of an easier life and more free time
and deal with some of the vagaries of life, including disease
and various, you know, birth defects and disorders,
it's very helpful to have science and to understand engineering
and to be able to address some of these things
so that we could have a better embodied existence in life
and reach our full potential, right?
So these are practical applications, you know,
we're sort of born into this world having limited control
over how we arrive here and what kind of embodiment,
what kind of limitations.
So having science and engineering is a nice way
to sort of rise above those completely arbitrary limitations.
That's kind of the practical side of things,
but there are also kind of, you know,
these fundamental aspects with a search for meaning,
you know, why are we here, right?
So what is the point of all the blood, sweat,
and tears through a certain amount of life
if we're not going to try to gain a better understanding
of what's going on and how things work
and, you know, what we can do
and maybe what we should do and things like that?
Hmm.
And this kind of goes back to our previous point
that ultimately we're concerned about the human mind, right?
Understanding the human mind.
Well, I'm not specifically concerned about the human mind.
I'm concerned about mind in general.
Mind in general, of course.
The human mind is great,
but I think it's just one sort of cluster of points
in this enormous space of possible kinds of minds.
And I'm interested in all of them.
I'm interested in diverse intelligence.
I'm interested in different kinds of minds
and how to recognize them, how to relate to them,
and so on.
Mm-hmm.
And when you mentioned human potential,
what do you think the human potential is?
Because to me, it seems like if we went around the globe,
there's a lot of disorder, you could say.
We're destroying plants.
We're destroying animals unnecessarily.
There's war between us.
And to me, it seems like it's necessary for us to somehow,
I don't know, work together, you know,
cooperate between one another.
And yeah, what are your thoughts on that?
Yeah, I mean, I will preface this by saying that
I'll give you my thoughts.
I'm hardly an expert on what all of humanity should be doing.
I have no idea what the, you know,
I don't have any way of knowing what anybody should be doing.
So I'll just kind of give you my thoughts,
but, you know, take everything with a grain of salt here.
I think that there are two separate questions here.
So one question is the real question of individual potentiality.
So when you were born, how does one exercise
one's cognitive and morphological freedom?
So you're born in a particular body,
which may be a healthy body for a particular species,
or it may not be.
And so you've got certain limitations of physical embodiment
and of cognition that are there because of how you happen to be born.
And so for those of us who are, you know, human and above,
we may be able to say, to look at different potentials and say,
you know, wouldn't it be nice if things were different,
if I was in a different body, if I had a higher IQ,
if I had a healthier body, if I had a longer lifespan,
if I was able to do other things.
So part of that human potentiality is just to see,
can we expand the range of freedoms really?
I consider this the kind of the full meaning of the word freedom.
It's not just, right, there's local freedom,
which is being able to do all the things that are possible for me to do right now.
But there's a kind of a second order of freedom, which is, yeah,
but maybe I can also alter myself and my surroundings and my future
in a way that will enable me to do bigger and more interesting things.
So I'm interested in that kind of second order,
second order freedom through technology, regenerative medicine and so on.
There's that issue, but then there's the issue of society,
which is what happens when numerous individuals packed onto a single planet
start all exercising their various freedoms.
And we know what happens, right?
From the most basic interaction between animals and then hominids
and then modern technological humans,
obviously there's a lot of conflict.
So it's kind of beyond my pay grade to say how to reduce conflict on a global scale.
I have no idea, but I do believe that ultimately technology is really the only way past that
because ultimately the idea is to expand the physical space
and to expand resources to the point where there will be no point in competition,
there will be nothing to compete for.
So just imagine, right, in some level of future,
if you could have all the energy you needed from some sort of cheap source
and you could expand off-world, there really wouldn't be very much to...
And of course, I'm sure it would still happen for various reasons,
but I think there'd be a lot less conflict if we were to kind of remove those limitations.
And I'm just simply exploring here, but to me it does seem that we do have the science,
we do have the technology, we do have the scientific understanding
to be able to, I don't know, perhaps provide the basic resources that we need for human survival,
namely nutritional requirements, clothing requirements and shelter for all of us.
It seems to me that we do have the technology and the science to be able to do that,
but our fundamental problem is that we can't seem to, I don't know,
cooperate between one another and share this.
And that's, to me, it seems like the need for power, the need for greed,
the need for ambition and so on.
So to me, it seems like that would be like a more fundamental thing to concern about,
but I don't know, I'm just simply exploring.
What are your thoughts?
Yeah, well, the first part, I actually have no idea if we do or do not.
Then there's the question of what are fundamental needs?
So if it turned out that we could provide some level of living for everybody,
the question would be, is that, and if the requirement for that
would be to cap, right, so this kind of like, okay, so in order to have a certain standard for everybody,
nobody gets to go beyond a particular level.
So I'm not a big fan of those kind of schemes.
I think they turn out really badly in the end.
But I actually don't, I have no idea what we can or can't provide.
I do know that if we're going to be, you know, realistic about these things,
there's really what this always boils down to is some kind of,
I mean, I'm not even sure, you know, if we're looking for policies,
you know, in the end, either we are going to evolve beyond the need for such things,
or we're going to be exerting control over each other to make sure that something does or doesn't happen, right,
some sort of control.
I think it would be nice to get past that.
I think I just, those things tend to work out badly.
And I think technology will give us, ultimately, right, will give us the opportunity to go get around a lot of those limitations.
Not all of them.
There will be some things that are fundamental because we are within ourselves not fully aligned.
So each of us internally has, you know, sort of on mutually unsatisfiable constraints.
So I think, you know, technology is not going to fix that.
But the more capabilities each of us has to rise to our potential without having to exert will on somebody else,
I think that's the way to go for mature species going forward.
And what do you think are the limitations that technology can help us transcend?
Well, there are there are many let's start with, let's start with the fact that there's a huge pressing biomedical suffering out there.
So, so many people are limited in what they can do, because they have they're in various disease states right there and they're in pain, different limit limitations of the body so.
So that's that's enormous I get I get phone calls and emails pretty much every day now that are in the from people in the most unbelievable circumstances.
And so that's that's kind of to start with and it's not just for humans I think that relieving that for for the animal kingdom in general is huge right it's not just about us it's about a lot of beings with with significant sentience that are that are really having very suboptimal lives.
So, I think that needs to be addressed first, and then there's the broader issue of limitations so I think whatever whatever the current standard kind of IQ ranges for humans is arbitrary.
Nobody, nobody really, you know, this is kind of the important thing to realize about evolution that it doesn't optimize for any of the things that we value it doesn't optimize for happiness it doesn't optimize for the right level of intelligence it doesn't do any of
that way they tend to optimize for basically successful reproduction and biomass that that's that's it. So, so, you know, when people wonder, wonder about well, you know wouldn't aren't they're going to be real real problems if we all let's say increase our intelligence or something like that.
The level of intelligence we have is not some magical perfect complete level that somebody picked because it was good for us, that just happens to be where evolution stopped at the time that we became modern humans there's nothing to say that that level is better or worse than some other
level so so intuitively I think that we should have the freedom to to increase our understanding of the world of ourselves so so increase intelligence increase, you know, maybe maybe longevity is a part of it and I'm not not sure.
But, yeah, these limitations that we have of body and mind are completely arbitrary no nobody set this up as like the the optimal point for us that we can't go past is just totally arbitrary.
Mm hmm.
And I guess that's it then isn't it we're just trying to explore these these questions. And you also mentioned happiness and well being and trying to do that.
This is the question. What is intelligence.
There are many definitions. I, you know, I don't believe that anything has just one possible way of looking at it. But for me, the most useful, the definition of intelligence that I have found most useful is basically a
that was put out by William James which is some degree of competency of reaching your goal by diverse means. So, to think about it another way, think of the spectrum and this is this is I wish I could remember who who came up with this kind of analogy I don't
remember who said at first but I think it's very good. It's the spectrum between two magnets trying to get together.
And Romeo and Juliet trying to get together. What's the difference the difference and then everything in between including autonomous vehicles of various kinds of animals, the you know minimal active matter and things like that.
It's a huge spectrum and the question is, given a set of goal states for the system, how much ingenuity is it going to put forward in getting those goals met in different circumstances when you start putting barriers in this way and things like that.
There's an extremely simple systems like magnets where you put a barrier and they're just going to stand there pressed up against the barrier they're never going to walk around and do things like this, versus systems like like like humans who have very very complex repertoires and
social spaces and physical spaces of doing things despite all sorts of perturbation and then everything in between. So for me, intelligence is purely functional it is not directly.
It is not directly tied to any of the other things we're interested in so let's say consciousness or anything like that.
It is it is purely functional competency and problem solving that's that's what I think is a useful view of intelligence.
What it's mean about the question of intelligence is, if we look at nature, if we look at the order of nature, it's quite intelligent.
And it also seems to me that humans are part of nature, our nature themselves. And then the question is, can we somehow tap into that intelligence that we observe in the natural world and use it.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, I think that step one, which a lot of people still have trouble with is really coming to grips with the notion of diverse intelligence, really, really coming to understand that we're not magical we're
not separate from the world around us that we did we as adult humans developed from a single cell.
Yeah. And so there's this smooth continuous process of, of increase of cognitive capacity over time, we are both evolutionarily and developmentally we are directly linked to to physics we were a blob of physics and chemistry at one point.
So, there's this there's this field of diverse intelligence which is trying to develop an understanding of, of how to recognize how to relate to and how to create other kinds of unfamiliar intelligences.
And this is this is a critical part of, of really using the intelligences all around the step one is to recognize that it's possible. And there are a lot of people that get very upset about.
You know, they've got this, they've got this term called anthropomorphism which I which I think is a is a magic is a you know it's basically mad you're basically saying that that humans have this sort of magic glow and that you shouldn't be kind of painting this onto onto
anything else where we're kind of different. I think that's a fundamental mistake I think step one is to understand the wide range of diverse intelligences, and then seeing what we can what we can learn in our interaction with them.
When you say diverse intelligence, like for example, for me the example of an orange tree comes up an orange tree produces oranges not apples and it's intelligent to produce oranges.
I kangaroo does something very well compared to an elephant. I'm like 11 might be greater doing something as opposed to another person. So, is that what you mean by diverse intelligence that each organism each.
No, no, okay, what do you know not really I mean that's that's that's that's part of it but but I would I would emphasize two things. One is that intelligence isn't just the idea that something does.
It reliably achieves a particular outcome. I don't that that's not enough for intelligence or that that you can get from a kind of feed forward emergence so so you know, there are many systems that follow very simple local rules and and when you sort of crank through the crank forward
in time, something very complex comes out. Yeah, that that by itself is not intelligence. Intelligence is, in my view, the key thing about intelligence is the ability to get to the same goal, despite perturbations.
So the question, the question now is, if, if we put various barriers in your way and whatever problem space you're working with, how much ingenuity do you have to do other things to take different paths to use different tools to change
your environment to do whatever you have to do to get to achieve the same result. This means that this is as an important implication. This means that you can't just see intelligence from the output, basically, and a lot of people, a lot of people
just characterize diverse intelligence this way they say, Oh, well, then you can say anything is intelligent, you know, here's a, you know, a reliably, for example,
something like something like a fractal we have a very simple formula you sort of crank through and you reiterate that formula you get this amazing beautiful picture, right look at that complexity that there you go you can call that intelligence.
That's a mischaracterization that's a straw man intelligence and diverse intelligence doesn't say that just having a complex outcome or even a reliable outcome is intelligence intelligence is the question of,
what do you do when the circumstances change do you have any ability to be flexible to solve various degrees of problems in another way. So, so for example, you know when your example of the kangaroo, just watching a kangaroo egg become a kangaroo isn't
necessarily intelligence that's just before the emergence but when you if you were to find out that, wait a minute, I can take this embryonic kangaroo like you can with human embryos and many other kind of embryos and cut it in half at an early stage,
and I don't get to have bodies I get to normal monosagotic twins, because each, each one even though you should you stuck it in a weird region of anatomical morphospace can go around and get to the place where it needs to go meaning regrow the half that's missing and you still get a kangaroo,
or when you have a salamander, and you've artificially forced the cells to be gigantic, you still get the same size salamander because fewer cells will get together and in fact we'll use new molecular mechanisms to build the organs of the correct shape and size
even though the parts are all wrong. So, now now that's that's the beginnings of intelligence the ability to change what you do to use different tools at your disposal to still get to the exact same goal, despite unpredictable novel circumstances that's problem solving
which is key, which is key to this. So, and so, and so that that's intelligence and what I mean by diverse intelligence is being open to recognizing new types of problem spaces so all kinds of things individual bacteria solve problems in in
physiological space and metabolic space slime molds solve problems in more for space and and in the chemical space humans of course solve problems in three dimensional space but also in linguistic space.
There are lots of different agents from minimal active matter to different kinds of animals and algae and bacteria and humans and you know some engineered systems on the eyes and so on.
That's diverse intelligence is being open to testing these things to see how much ingenuity they have under different perturbations, because a lot of people seem like they think that you can have feelings about this.
They'll look at a system that can't be intelligent that's you know whatever this or that. Well you can't just have these philosophical preconceptions you have to do the experiment. Somebody has to make a claim I think it has this level of intelligence in this problem space of reaching
this goal with this level of ingenuity and then we can do experiments and we can see how you're right or wrong because it have that capacity or not. This is this is meant to be an empirical science you can't we can't we can't have feelings about these things.
We have to we have to do the tests.
And you mentioned earlier on increasing human intelligence.
And why do we need to increase human intelligence would be my question. And then.
Yeah, let's begin with that question perhaps.
I have a simple, simple way to think about it. Let's say that.
Let's say that the evolution has gone slightly differently. And our generic level of of intelligence across the globe, the average was what we would currently call like 40 IQ points.
That was right that let's say we come to earth in there at all all the all the humans have an IQ of about 40. Would you say that in that case there's a need to increase intelligence.
Well, I wouldn't limit intelligence just IQ as well.
I understood but the whatever I don't I don't mean this I don't mean you know the current way of measuring and I'm just you know, a rough idea the cognitive performance so so so you know no no no art science literature of we every everybody has an IQ of what we currently associate with roughly the
level of 40 will go below I don't care 20 whatever at that point would you say that there was some benefit of increasing intelligence.
Well, I get what you're saying but my my my my that was just a like my fundamental question was, let's just say we do have the highest intelligence that we can.
What I don't know what that's but there's no so we're already I think we've already lost the game here. I don't believe there's any such thing as highest level that we can.
We have stopped evolution has stopped us at a particular level which we call plus or minus 100 right that's just what we call it, but it might have stopped earlier and it might have stopped later this is completely arbitrary is what I'm saying.
So, if you think that at a level of 40, it would have been good to go up. I'm saying the current level is not some magical special level that just happens to be where the dice stopped.
And so, for the exact same reason that you would raise it at 40 or 20, you would, you would want to raise it now. Some people might say no some people might say actually intelligence makes it harder to, you know, they say look at these animals having a lovely, you know,
it's better not to worry about the meaning of life and whatever. Okay, fair enough, I think that's, I think that's a terrible perspective but but some people do think that way.
I think we want to increase our intelligence for the exact same way that if you if we were at 40 we would want to increase our intelligence.
So, one of the fundamental problems though, we should use our intelligence to to solve. For example, it seems to me that, no matter who you are, we all care about this inward sense of happiness, joy, peace, even intelligence wisdom.
I think we all want that health and good food. What's the fundamental question that our intelligence can help us solve.
I think that, well, it's a good I mean you're basically asking I think you're basically asking for the meaning of life, because or helps us the question I'm asking.
I think so. While I'm certainly not going to claim to have the answer, certainly not for anybody else but I think that, look, when the intelligence is really low, then in a given system then it doesn't have the capacity to to to be concerned about these things right
I have this I have this concept of a cognitive light cone so the cognitive light cone is the size of the biggest goals you can possibly pursue, both in space and time.
So, so, so for really low consciousness, sorry intelligence level, your cognitive life cone is very small you're only interested in the things that are happening right now you know kind of in a certain radius.
And if your cognitive light cone is huge, you might be interested in things that are happening planet wide and that are going to be true 100 years from now and then everything in between right you got this, this this different below it.
So, I don't know I think I think the higher level of of intelligence that you have, the more capacity you might have to actually solve this problem and to, and to ask what what is the, what are the things that we should be caring about I mean part of part of
part of intelligence is is being able to set your own goals right that's a, that's a very nice capacity is not just to be a goal directed system but actually be a meta goal directed system actually be able to set your own goals.
And I think having more intelligence might let you do that better.
Right, and to have a better have a bigger perspective on, I mean we're so incredibly limited right the amount of information that we can process the amount of care.
I mean, I'm really interested in part of, and I've worked on a couple of papers with a few Buddhist scholars and we sort of think about this this issue of capacity to care.
So the current standard human is able to physically sort of care in the linear range about some number of other beings, right, it's not a super huge number but but you know you, if you know something happens to, to 1000 people and, and you know you're either
very sad or very happy about it, and then you find out that oh it's actually 10,000, you're not 10 times sadder or happier right we don't we can't scale that way. It's just after certain after certain point is just numbers you can you don't really, you know, you're not really linearly caring that much.
So one of the things that I think would happen with with an increased cognitive light cone is an increased capacity for practical care. So, so that you would actually be able to be in a functional way engaged in the well being of, of much more
many more other beings than than we are capable of now that I think is a is a critical thing to expand. And so when I say when I say expand intelligence, I don't just mean this kind of like, you know, some sort of ability to calculate or some kind of a technological capacity I'm not actually
talking about that at all. I'm talking about the the the ability to, to, to care more broadly to expand that cognitive light cone, so that you are able to mean think about, and think about this cognitive light cone right so so you've got to you've got a, you know, a tick or something, and the cognitive
light cone is tiny it's sort of all it really cares about is the local concentration of whatever chemical is attracted to. It has very little memory going backwards very little anticipatory power going forwards that cognitive light cone is very small.
Look at a dog right a dog has more memory going back a little bit of anticipation more anticipation going forward it might care about the people in the immediate family, but there is no way you're going to get that creature to care about what happens to 1000 individuals
and it sounds over five months from now. It's impossible. It's never good it's never going to happen. And so, in order for a being to be able to care about bigger, bigger issues, including more of other beings, you have to expand that cognitive light cone and I'm not sure
that can happen without I don't know any way that that could happen without an expansion of intelligence.
Could we use the word compassion or love even for what you just said that. Yeah, I think I think that's I think that's absolutely right.
The reason the reason that that I use care and concern and things like that is because I think it fundamentally has to be functional. So compassion and love I agree with you that fundamentally yes that's it it's compassion and love.
But but but a lot of people when they hear compassion and love they think it's an emotion right so so they think it's a feeling that I have and about other stuff. The feeling to me is far less important than what you actually do.
So, so to me, this idea of this is why my whole framework is sort of built around this goal directed this idea that you goals are not how you feel about stuff they're what you actually physically work towards.
They're what you expend energy, effort and intelligence to achieve. So, so, so yes, it's it's compassion and love.
It's actually care and concern in the sense that you should actually be working towards this if it's a if it's a it's a it's a you know kind of an emotional state that stays locked within you and doesn't actually impact anybody.
But you know that's that's that's useless. I'm talking about actionable ability to actually mean goals are things that you're actively capable of pursuing, not to not not not emotional states that you are capable of having, but actual goals that you can work towards.
An actual practical thing that we do, as opposed to just thinking about and not doing something we're concerned about actual action, right.
Yeah, I mean, thinking about it can be part of it. It's, it's think of the.
I think the word goal captures it pretty well if, if you say to me, my goal is, I don't know, my goal is to is to have world peace.
My next question is amazing what do you well so so how are you how are you working towards that goal. And if you say, well, I've, you know, I've sort of, I feel really nice.
I feel emotionally like it would be a great thing to have. That's it.
Well, you don't have that as a goal, you know, you might have had that as a thought or whatever but that's not a goal. You're you're you're you're you're nothing about your.
Nothing about your functionality is aimed towards that goal. A goal is something that is a state towards which you are capable of working. And some of these goals, you know, you're never going to explain world peace to a dog and
you're never going to explain the goal of guarding your house to to an aunt and and things like this. It's all of these, you know, every every creature has this kind of some kind of cognitive light cone that limits what goals are they possibly capable of pursuing.
Now, this raises a question for me. And it seems to me that the highest use of intelligence. I'm purely speaking here about the human mind, because I cannot speak for the Beatles I cannot speak for the insects I cannot speak for the dog.
I'm, I can only speak for the human mind, as that seems to be what I have access to.
It seems to me that the highest use of intelligence is to be able to exactly like you said solve any problem, but personally and also globally. And if I were to look at the largest global problem that we have, it's what you said earlier,
it's world peace. And to me, it seems like the reason why there is no world peace is because we we've divided ourselves psychologically, for example, it is clear that nationality divides people, that's what war is religion divides people.
I'm a Christian, you're a Buddhist and so on. And we have the psychological division between us. Same with politics. Same with all these things. And to me, if I were to ask, what is a good use of intelligence, it seems to me that it's necessary
to understand the fragments, the limitations, the conditioning, the beliefs that I have within me, as these create, as that creates division, and this division creates a psychological psychological barrier between me and you between I'm a whatever
country and your whatever country I'm a X religion in your Y religion and so on. And to me it seems like this psychological barrier is what is preventing us from cooperating between one another in the first place.
And if I were to ask, what is the highest use of intelligence, it seems to be to understand this mind to understand what is happiness to understand what is fear, because anything I did, anything that I do out of fear will create disorder
outwardly. Anything that I do out of anger will create a disordered action outwardly so it seems to me it's fundamental to understand what these emotions are, and why am I conditioned why my why do I have certain beliefs, why do I have certain prejudices as without understanding
that, whatever I do outwardly will be a disorder, internal disorder indicates an outward disorder. So to me it seems like I might be wrong about this but I'm just simply exploring that it's necessary to understand the inward, because without understanding
the inward, whatever we do outwardly will be a reflection of though.
Yeah, I think I think that's perfectly reasonable. I got a question though, you know, just to kind of help us calibrate our expectations with respect to world peace so imagine, imagine a world in which the earth was covered in a
population that lived in complete peace at a level of, you know, I don't know, you know, some sort of, let's say, let's say Bronze Age, or before that let's say, you know, something something earlier than that.
100,000 years, nothing happened, like literally nothing happened, no art, no science, no no no exactly the same at the end as they were at the way in, but total world peace, you know, no no no conflicts, just like, you know, peace but but but but absolutely nothing
happened, maybe go go back earlier maybe hunter gatherers or something right 100,000 years, nothing happens, and nothing's ever going to happen that's that's that's how they're going to be.
So does that sound like, would you say would you say that that was, I don't even know the vote, I don't have the vocabulary for it even but is, is that fine, or would you say there's something missing.
If if that's just how it was world peace but absolutely no product no advancement of any kind.
That was exactly my point as well, and which I didn't make make clear to me, when there is a sense of peace, when there is a sense of leisure, when there's a sense of happiness.
I'm still going to act, I'm still going to pursue knowledge, I'm going to explore technology science but I'm going to be doing it in a much more intelligent way.
So, in fact, I can, I can be way more intelligent.
If I am peaceful if I'm not doing something out of fear, if I'm not doing something out of greed, if I'm not doing something out of a sense to earn a livelihood, I'm going to have the leisure to actually pursue my genuine intellectual curiosity.
And I think we know what happens when you do this.
You're going to have excellence in whatever you pursue, whether it's pursuing basketball, whether it's pursuing the questions of biology, whether it's coming up with great design for rockets, whatever it is, I feel like we're going to be far more intelligent.
If we do reach this level of peace, if we do reach this level of happiness, if we do find out what is intelligence and how to truly use it, because then we have the leisure, the time to truly pursue our genuine intellectual curiosity.
And when you do for the love, you're going to excel, you're going to do so much better than if you're doing it out of fear.
So to me, it's the most practical thing there is.
I agree. It sounds great. And again, I have zero training or expertise in any of these issues. So I probably don't know what I'm talking about, but it seems to me that I don't know of any examples where that's happened.
So I know of examples where there have been long periods of peace with zero progress and many examples of progress that has had a lot of conflict.
I don't know what is an example of a long period of significant peace with significant progress. Maybe that exists. I have no idea.
So it would be great. That certainly sounds like the way to go. I agree with you. I don't know if that happens. I don't know how to make it happen. I don't know.
Well, to me, the only reason why I said that is because to me, it seems like these are the questions that intelligence should try to solve.
These are the questions that we should use our intelligence to pursue. Maybe these are the wrong questions, but it does seem to me that these would be quite beneficial for all of us, not just for some of us.
Yeah, yeah, I would agree with that.
So is that ultimately then what we should? Well, not we should.
Is that ultimately then what the question of biology is trying to answer?
I think what question things are trying to answer is a very person specific.
Yeah, I don't know. For some people, probably, and for many others, no. I mean, I think there are many people working in biology who would say it's got nothing to do with any of that.
There are people working in molecular biology. There are people working in just all kinds of aspects of life that they would say to them has nothing to do with any of this.
So I think that's a very dependent question on who you're talking to.
Right. But like, I think if we look at the definition of biology, I think it's the story of life, right?
Sort of.
What is it actually?
Well, that's a good question. That's great, except then that if you didn't already know what it was, and you looked it up in the dictionary and it said it's the study of life, you go, Well, that doesn't help.
Let me look up what life is because because because then then then you'll try to find out what life is, and either it will if it's if it's smart, it'll say whatever it is that biologist study that's life right which puts you into a nice circular kind of definition but that's actually the most honest
or it will try to it will try to make some kind of some kind of definition and I frankly have never heard of a good definition of life that's useful for moving your research forward.
I think that this is one of the I mean there's certainly there's certainly people who work on this and who have interesting ideas on this.
I do not, I don't spend any time trying to define life or think about what life is is or isn't I'm much more interested in the spectrum of cognition then then then what's living and versus non living.
But, but but I think it's very clear that in the natural universe, there is a class of systems, which are very good at scaling cognition from very basic things that physical systems do up through very complex kind of cognitive capacities, and we call those things
a lot of little life that's that's, you know, that that's that's basically what we do. So, yeah, I think, you know, you could you could you could say that that biology is is the study of mostly naturally evolved cognition
amplifying system something like that.
You know, that might be a definition that that that I might get behind.
And the reason why I said that was I think every knowledge branch has certain questions that they're trying to answer. For example, mathematics a certain questions.
There's of course multiple questions, but there's a specific amount of questions that mathematics is trying to answer. Same with physics, same with ecology, same with religion, same with philosophy.
And I feel like it's the same with biology or any, any knowledge branch. So my attention behind that question was to see, Okay, so for concern about biology, what are the questions that biology is trying to answer.
I mean, that seems like the whole point of studying a knowledge branch is because you're interested in certain questions, and you pursue them. And whatever questions you pursue, you can put a label on as a biologist or, you know, religion or whatever it is.
So that was the intention behind asking that question. If that makes sense. I might be wrong, but I'm just exploring.
Yeah, no, it makes sense. I mean, there are there are many, many questions in biology, you know, as far as the, the, the, the origin of living things and the, the organization of living things and
there is, there are, I think there are as many views of biologists, there are biologists, I think everybody has a different perspective on what and I think I think physics is the same is the same way.
You know, there are certain people that study physics and think that they're studying very profound philosophical questions and then other there's other physicists would think this is that's ridiculous and they should just be calculating and figuring out better ways of calculating physical events.
So they're different different lenses on the whole enterprise.
What are the questions that plague you, like what are you obsessed with? What are the questions that you're trying to answer? What makes you move every single day? Why do you do what you do?
Yeah.
Well, the question, I mean, the central question that underlies everything that I do is the question of the scaling of cognition.
I want to understand how tiny little minds work together to become bigger emergent minds and all the ways that that happens, all the ways that that fails to happen, all the ways that that goes wrong, all the ways that we could exploit it for various positive uses and so on.
As far as my own personal motivation, it's kind of two things.
Long term, I'm really interested in very foundational questions about what are the right ways to think about cognition and what are the useful lenses with which to recognize and relate to intelligences in our world and to link some of that to thought and physics and computer science and other things.
And then there's the very practical stuff, which is that I think that the right way to work in this field is to couple it tightly with empirical experiments that end up being useful.
So these are a lot of the kind of fundamental philosophical things that we work about eventually have implications to how we develop therapeutics for birth defects, for traumatic injury, for cancer, for degenerative disease.
And so, so part of my lab is very kind of basic and fundamental and and part of it is very practical applications to biomedicine that to try to, you know, try to try to elevate the condition of humans and others right now as soon as you know basically as soon as we can.
So essentially it's theoretical understanding philosophy, whatever, and also the practical aspect of things.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, and it's, you know, it's, it's, it's a lot to bite off and it's, it's very hard and so I don't know in the end how successful will be in either in either direction but I feel like we found a good, a good mix of things a good balance point where where the things we do on the
conceptual side actually change the way we do experiments which allows us to discover new things that hadn't been seen before and transition them into things that are in on the clinical path.
So that's, that's, you know, that's, that's what I'm interested in.
And this raises the question of consciousness then what is consciousness.
Well, yeah, it's a, it's a hard problem. What I'm going to, what I'm going to say first is that I don't do a lot of work on consciousness. I don't consider myself a consciousness researcher.
I don't at the moment have a new theory of consciousness. I know a lot of people do so there's, you know, maybe, maybe half a dozen to a dozen different theories of consciousness. I don't have a new one.
I don't have that much to add to it that people much smarter people than I have have already weighed in on this on this question so so I can say a few things about it but I don't want to give the impression that that I have a kind of a whole
new set of set of ways to look at this I one one thing I feel strongly about is that most of what we do which is a lot of really useful conceptual advances in various fields and practical applications can be done without thinking about consciousness at all.
I think that's I think that's important because consciousness is a really hard puzzle I don't think it's a non issue the way some people think you know it's a non problem.
I think I think it's actually a very important puzzle, but I think that by figuring out what you can do. I mean, the whole point of I forget who said this to but somebody said science is the ability to say something without having to say everything.
And that's really important compartmentalizing to the way that yes we can make progress on things without worrying about this very difficult question of consciousness I think that's really important is to figure out all the things where we can actually make progress without having to all first solve
this. So that's what we do. I very rarely talk about consciousness and any of the things that I write because I don't think it's required to to to move the ball forward and in these various areas.
But I do think that at some point we are going to have to we are going to have to face it. And I think just just the only just just a couple of things I can say about about consciousness.
One is that what's unique about it is in what makes it difficult is that for every other kind of science.
We may not have the answer we may not have the great, you know, sort of a great final theory, but we know the format in which the theory is going to give us answers.
It'll be a number or it'll be some set of observations or it'll be some, it'll be, we know what we're going to get a good a good theory of gravitation a good theory of computation a good theory of whatever we know what the output of these things is going to look like.
We may not know what the answer is but we know what it's going to give us that like the here's the kind of thing or theory of consciousness. It's very hard to imagine what it's going to give you because if we had a if we had a let's let's imagine we had a we had a really good a really
good successful theory of consciousness. And I showed you some kind of a system, maybe it's a, it's a, you know, it's a it's a natural animal or maybe it's one that we've engineered in some weird way.
And you and we'd say okay so use your theory of consciousness on this creature.
What does it output, because if it's going to output things about brain states, or it's going to physiology or it's going to output things about behavior.
It's not a theory of consciousness as a theory of physiology or it's a theory of behavior. So, so the question is, what does a good theory of consciousness actually output now.
The only thing to think about this is that what it actually outputs are, and this is what I think a good theory of consciousness will do.
It should output a protocol, a set of steps to put you in the same mental state to whatever extent that's possible as whatever the system you're talking about.
I think C.S. Lewis once said that if you want to describe someone being scared, don't talk about how scared they are tell me something that will scare me, and then I'll know what their state of mind is right.
So the idea is, the idea is that it doesn't it doesn't output publicly observable facts what it what it outputs is a is a protocol for putting you in a state where you can experience whatever it is and then you'll know that's what the state of consciousness is to whatever extent that's
Now that that has an important corollary which is that for all other sciences, you can do, you can do research and you can do those sciences in third person meaning that you do it, and you don't get changed by it.
So you can do an experiment and whatever you learn whatever happens to the experiment you're still the same going in and coming out of me maybe you've learned something but but but you don't have to change as part of the experiment.
So all of physics all of chemistry all of standard biology is predicated on the fact that you as an observer are separate from the system.
I don't think that you can study consciousness that way. I think the consciousness is not a thing you can you can study behavior that way you can study physical physiology that way.
But the only way to really study consciousness is to have from is to experience those things from the inside which means that you are your own experiment, which means that you are not going to be the same coming out as you are going in.
This is, you know, in sort of classical kind of a weird analogy but in classical in the sort of pre scientific terms. This is the difference between chemistry and alchemy.
The difference is that chemistry is a regular third person science you can do your experiments and you're you're the same alchemy wasn't supposed to be that alchemy was supposed to be the transformation of this of the experimenter.
You are changing and, and, and, you know, and that puts huge limitations on what you can actually achieve I think it's very limited what you can actually achieve in the true, true study of consciousness.
So, so that's that's kind of one one set of thoughts on that the the other the other set of thoughts is this and we're doing we're doing kind of a paper on this now.
If you think about the, let's say half a dozen of the most popular theories of consciousness, and you look at what they say about why it is that brains are associated with consciousness you know so they all have some kind of, you know, so one theory might be
about the microtubules and the kind of quantum processes in these microtubules and another one might be about the magnetic field of the brain, and another one might be about the way that the neurons to process information in a particular way.
Yeah, so the vast majority of those those theories, they actually don't pick out the brain as unique I mean every every cell in your body does most of the things your neurons do, and especially with with our study of bio electricity and and, and those those those related
we now see that most of what your brain does goes on in every part of the body. So, that suggests that for most of those theories, for the exact same reason you are committed to thinking that the brain is associated with consciousness.
You should be committed to other organs in your body being associated with consciousness, and there are there is no particular way that I've seen so far where one of these theories explains why it has to be the brain it can't be any of these other organs it has to be the brain.
And they sort of assume it's the brain they talk about neurons and, and then you ask them what's a neuron out well it's an electrically active cell well guess what every every cell in your body does some of that.
So, so the typical kind of the typical resistance to that people will say, well that's crazy, I'm the only one in this body I don't feel my liver is conscious.
You don't feel right, you don't feel that I'm conscious either you only feel that you're conscious your if your liver is conscious you don't have access to that any more than you have access to mine.
And of course, we don't think it's it's it's it's linguistically competent we don't think it's verbal but neither is your right hemisphere usually.
There's really no way for you to know what other consciousnesses are in your body and I'm not saying they're there because because the evidence to obtaining evidence for consciousness is extremely hard if not impossible.
But there's no way to rule it out for the same reasons you think if you think brains are conscious you should be, you should be taking very seriously the idea that you may have other body components there are as well.
So that's, that's, you know, those are about the extent of useful things I can say about consciousness.
Michael, I know we're running short in time but do you have room for one more question.
If we can do it in three minutes I do yeah.
That's going to depend on you. I guess, what do we absolutely know for certain when it comes to science.
For certain. The one thing we know for certain is that we don't know anything for certain.
I don't think we don't think we know anything for certain I think I think Descartes, he gets a lot of flak at the right, you know, nowadays but but I think he was on the right track in that I do think that we can.
We can make certain personal conclusions about our own existence. That's it. Everything else is is is is up for is up for grabs.
Yeah, wonderful.
Well, Michael, it was a pleasure. Thank you so much for taking time to do this.
Interesting conversation. Where should people go to find you to learn more about you. I know you've done podcast before link all these of course but yeah where's the best place for people to for people to go.
Yeah, well, there's nothing to learn about me but learning about the work is good, which is, you can go to www at dr Mike 11.org. So that's, that's the website that has all the papers, the data, the software, the videos, the inspiration resources, everything is there.
So you can learn about the work there.
Wonderful. Well, look, thank you so much for taking time to do this.
Thank you so much.
Yeah, good conversation. Cool. Take it easy.
Thank you.
Thanks.
