Welcome to this next module which is on empathy.
So we've done awareness, balance, clarity, deliberate action, and you might be wondering
why empathy is one of the five core areas we've selected to be empowered despite circumstance.
And with us today is an expert in empathy, Daniel Schmachdenberger, who is a real expert
in this area.
And he has such a unique background in the social sciences and sociology and personal
growth as well as in the science of cognitive behavioral therapy and the cognitive sciences.
And so it's a real pleasure to have Daniel here guiding us on this journey of empathy
and helping us better understand how critical empathy is in being empowered despite circumstance.
Before we dive in, I want to share a little bit about Daniel's story and what's led him
here.
And so Daniel is a true visionary.
And among the group of friends and colleagues we associate with, Daniel will be introduced
as one of the smartest guys I know and consistently, and that's how I like to introduce Daniel
as well.
He's really a brilliant guy and has been working on global issues.
So he's the founder of Critical Path Global, which is a think tank focused on really solving
some of the world's hardest problems.
And through that process, Daniel's arrived at empathy being one of the critical pieces
to solving many of these global problems and getting into the core values of humanity,
right?
And so to kick things off, Daniel, I'd love to hear your perspective on why empathy and
why you feel it's so important.
Thanks for having me, Andrew.
What empathy is first, and then we can get into why it's so important.
Empathy is often described as the ability to take another person's perspective, the
ability to feel what another person's feeling, sometimes described as vicariously experiencing
someone else's experience.
And so that has to do with both caring about somebody else and about getting it, both of
which are really critical, right?
Sometimes there's a distinction made between empathy, sympathy and compassion, which are
all very related, and I'm not going to make that distinction right now because it's not
done in a universal way.
Those words are used in different ways, you know, by different groups teaching it.
And so I'm just going to talk to the positive function that they all collectively represent,
which is the ability to put ourselves in another person's perspective to sense what's
going on with them, to be able to feel into what it would feel like, what the underlying
needs would be, and then to be able to actually communicate the sensing of what you're getting
so that they can feel heard, feel seen, feel gotten.
That allows you both to know what an appropriate response would be.
And so often, if someone is feeling something and you don't have any particular thing you
can do to help, any particular solution, just empathy by itself, just expressing that you
really feel what's going on for them and you get it, offers a healing for them because
it offers a healing from feeling separate, from them feeling alone, like maybe nobody
gets what's going on.
And sometimes without anything else to offer, without any solution, that by itself creates
a space in them where they're like, ah, somebody gets what's going on for me, somebody cares,
and there's a healing that starts to occur from there.
So when you say empathy is like a sense, like feeling or hearing, and if that's the case,
are some people just better at it than others?
I would say empathy is fundamentally different than what we typically call senses when we
think about our five senses seeing, hearing, tasting.
You can't avoid that, right?
If something's coming into your field of vision, you don't have to actively try to do anything
to see it, and you can't even really get away from it, right?
It's basically a hardwired physiological capacity.
Empathy is something different than that.
When I say I feel what's going on with you, I empathize with what's going on with you,
I'm not actually feeling what's going on with you, not feeling it as a sense.
What's happening is I'm imagining it, right?
It's a projection of experience, which requires me thinking about what's going on for you,
thinking about your past and your position well enough that I really get some depth and
some detail, and trying to draw on similar related experiences that I've had so that
I can be like, oh, what did it feel like when I was in going through that loss or hardship
or whatever it is, or when I can empathize with that too.
What's so interesting about empathy is that it requires our thinking and our feeling both.
It requires thinking into ourself and thinking into our own experience and thinking into
the other person, right?
It requires really listening to what they say, listening to not just what they say,
but what else you're hearing behind what they say, listening to the underlying needs, the
underlying feelings and motives.
Empathy really utilizes our entire human capacity.
Because you're practicing really empathizing with someone else, you're practicing a very
whole brain, whole being experience.
And that's why some people can seem better at it than others is because it's really a
developed capacity.
And some people's lives have helped them develop that.
They had parents that were naturally good at it.
They had teachers or inclinations, and other people haven't learned it as much.
And the cool thing is it is developable.
It really is one of the main criteria of emotional intelligence and something that anybody can
practice at.
That's a great perspective.
When I think of people who are empathetic, I often think of people like my mom who are
very loving and caring and have gotten into their heart and they really lead with their
heart.
What I'm hearing you say is it's actually beyond that.
It's a full spectrum.
And you're right.
It includes a cognitive ability as well.
It's the ability to imagine what that person's experiencing.
And so I really like this idea of building this full spectrum of empathic capacity and
integrating that.
Have you ever had an experience with your mom or anyone else that you had fit in that
category where you knew that they really cared about you and you also felt not gotten?
Yeah, totally.
And so the kind of support they were offering felt like, hey, maybe you really don't give
the benefit of the doubt that I'm capable or maybe you don't really know what I'm going
through.
So even though they're caring and that feels good, you also feel missed in a way.
Yeah.
You feel the love, but you're also a little frustrated because they don't get it.
And so the full picture of empathy that we're really interested in is a sense that someone
really gets what's going on for you as best they can that they're like, wow, I really get
why you're doing exactly what you're doing.
And that if I was in your shoes, I'd be doing the same thing and I get what you need and
I care.
Right.
Right.
Which is where awareness comes in, right, in practicing, cultivating awareness and understanding
the ripple and desires, energy, emotions, behaviors.
And when we get good at that ourselves, it helps us be able to understand what others
are going through, right?
Yeah.
The more aware we are of our own experience, hey, when I'm feeling something, what am I
usually needing that's not happening underneath that?
What are the stories and I'm maybe telling myself and the meanings that are happening
is I have more insight into my own process than my ability to empathize with someone
else has a lot more depth to it, right?
So here's a question.
So when you're empathizing with somebody, does that mean you think they're right?
Good question.
See, doesn't mean that you think their perspective is objectively true.
It means that you get their perspective, right, that you get, oh, wow, seeing it from where
they're coming from.
I can totally see that there is a partial rightness, there's a partial truth to where
they're coming from.
They're not just crazy, right?
Even if there's some data that they're missing, even if there's some data they have that's
distorted, hey, if that was the data I was operating on, I'd be feeling what they were
feeling.
I'd be behaving the way they were behaving, right?
And I really care.
And I get that deeper than their perspective, whether they're right or wrong, that there
are underlying needs that are real, right?
So maybe their perspective isn't wholly true.
There's some data that's missing or distorted.
But what they're needing that feels like it's not being met, you can say, wow, I totally
get that you need that.
I care about that.
And then you can say, well, there's some truth to their perspective, even if there's
some stuff missing, and maybe there's some truth to their perspective that was missing
from my perspective before, right?
And so maybe neither of our perspectives are right.
Maybe they're both partial.
And maybe a perspective is, by definition, always partial.
That's what it means, right?
You're looking at the building from the west side, someone else is from the east side,
and you describe what you see, and there's a conflict, and who's right?
Well, they're both partially right.
What does the whole building look like?
There's not one snapshot that gives you that.
The ability to move into different perspectives that allows you to see the whole thing, not
any perspective by itself.
So what I'm hearing you say, the big part of empathy, is understanding this concept
of perspective, and really building that muscle to be able to see from other perspectives
rather than being certain about your own perspective, or even certain about what you think their
perspective is.
Totally.
There are a couple key things that you said in there.
The ability to take another perspective isn't something that our perspective does, right?
Perspective is kind of synonymous with ego, hey, my perspective is this, yours is that,
this is the basis for us to have conflict, right?
But my ability to take your perspective, it's not my perspective anymore, I left mine.
I left what I think is true, to be able to come into yours.
If I didn't, I didn't empathize that well.
I'd say, yeah, I kind of get what they're coming from, but they're still stupid.
If I've really empathized, and I'm like, wow, I so get it, in their shoes, I'd be doing
the exact same thing.
Seeing it the way they see it, going through what they went through, and if I don't feel
that yet, then I still have some judgment on them, that's antithetical to real empathy,
to real compassion.
And it means that we believe we're fundamentally superior to them and we're not, right?
And so we can say, wow, I want to offer them things that will add perspective for them,
that will enrich their perspective.
But when we leave our perspective to take someone else's, we become bigger, because
we recognize that we aren't just our perspective, we're the capacity to take any perspective.
And that's why the practice of empathy, besides making relationships work better, is one of
the most powerful personal growth, and you could call it spiritual growth things that
someone can do, because if you want to call the capacity to take any perspective, you
can call that kind of higher self or consciousness or awareness itself, right?
That's independent of the particular perspective it's looking through.
And in order to really empathize with someone, you have to step out of your own perspective
into that capacity.
You know the Dalai Lama has this really beautiful, brilliant saying that you can either be kind
or you can be right, but not both.
And it doesn't mean that being kind means you're wrong, but if you're seeking to be
right in a dichotomous right-wrong dynamic, you're also seeking to make someone else
wrong, which is not commensurate with kindness.
So, he says you can be kind or you can be right, but not both.
And you can be kind or happy, but not both, because if you do the right thing, right-wrong
game, you're going to be in conflict.
Personal relationships are going to suffer.
And whether you feel like you won or not, you're still alone.
But kind and happy go together really well, right?
And so, part of empathy is recognizing that connection matters more than content, right?
So if I'm focused on being right about a particular topic with you and I think you're wrong and
this topic is so important and I'm willing to fight you over it, I'm willing to harm
the connection between us for some particular piece of content.
I've made the content matter more than connecting to you, right?
But our ability to do anything together, my ability to get this idea across or any other
idea at any time depends on our connection.
And so, if I'm willing to harm the connection between us for some particular piece of content,
not only will I lose here, but I'll lose everywhere else.
And so, part of the emotional intelligence connected to empathy is recognizing that the
feeling state of other people and your connection to them matters more than any content, because
the content has to travel across that connection.
And so, you always want to nourish that connection as the basis for any content moving.
So, an empathy ninja would be one who approaches situations in relations with others with this
idea that that connection is priority number one.
Yeah.
Interesting.
And even if you really care about this idea and you want to influence them or having them
change their perspective, what's the chance that you're going to succeed if they feel
attacked by you and defensive versus they feel understood by you, cared about, and safe
enough to open, and then they want to hear what you have to say?
That's great.
So, another part of empathy, it's this two-way thing, it's sensing into where they're coming
from.
So, really hearing them without just hearing that they're wrong and dumb, right?
But really hearing where they're coming from, feeling it, and then being able to communicate
that back so they know that we get it.
And then also being able to communicate what we want to share with them, feeling into how
they're going to receive it.
And so there's this idea that I want to communicate in a way that doesn't elicit their defensiveness,
but that elicits and engenders their interest and their empathy.
Part of empathy is also being able to invoke empathy from others.
Because if I really feel into how you're going to receive what I share, I'm going to share
a lot more effectively.
So, empathy is both directions and communication.
Yeah.
Well said.
So, Daniel, does empathizing with somebody mean that you're sacrificing your perspective
and that you're giving up what you believed in order to understand them?
Only temporarily.
It doesn't mean that you're acknowledging your perspective as wrong or invalid.
And it doesn't even mean that you're in an act in any particular way necessarily different
than you would have before understanding them.
It means that you're willing to put your perspective on hold for a minute to really hear theirs
and then being able to factor both or all.
Then you get to assess what really do I see as true here and how do I want to act factoring
all of that.
And it may be that what you had originally held, you still hold, but you hold it with
more awareness of how it affects the other people, maybe more softness, right?
And it may be that your original perspective was missing some things.
And so it's not about sacrificing your own perspective.
It's about just letting go of being completely identified with it for a moment.
And what you identify with instead is the care for the highest good of all, the care
to really be connected to what's true, right?
The capacity to take any perspective.
And then as you've taken the other person's perspective or all the people's perspective,
now you have a meta-perspective, right?
Now you aren't the identity that's in this limited perspective.
You're the consciousness or the awareness that can hold all of them and care about all
of them.
And now you get to decide how do I want to act and how do I want to position myself
and hold truth factoring all of this?
So you aren't sacrificing your perspective at all.
You're going to add to it.
You're just going to put it on hold for a moment.
It's almost like you become the referee in a sporting event where you move out of your
player position, become that referee, and you're seeing all the perspectives and your
role is to be objective and to do what's right.
That's one way of looking at it.
And you kind of switch being in potential competition conflict with the other person
to actually the referee saying, hey, y'all are on the same team and you forgot that.
So Daniel, you're obviously somebody who's focused on major global issues.
And in doing that, you've identified there's no shortage of really important things to
be tackling right now.
And so how do you feel empathy?
Feel empathy for the voiceless, the animals, the trees that are being chopped down or going
extinct, or for people that don't have a voice, social injustice, how do you feel the weight
of that empathy without disempowering you, without feeling bad because of it?
How do you stay empowered with empathy?
I think it's one of the deepest questions any conscious person is going to ask.
And I think it's an ongoing balance, which is how can I have my heart as open as possible
to really feel the pains, the pleasures of other people and other life forms to really
care and not be hardened.
And at the same time, to feel really empowered in my own personal life and not crushed by
the weight of the collective suffering that I don't necessarily know how to do anything
about in this moment.
And how do I take all of that suffering and all of my care for it and then harness that
into something useful?
And a couple insights that I'll share and I'll share that this is an ongoing wrestling
match for me and every really conscious person I know.
So it is not like a simple and then you're done kind of answer is the only reason that
seeing the pain of another hurts is because you care, right?
So whenever you're empathizing and you're feeling the pain of what's happening to people
in a war-torn area to starving kids to animals in a laboratory or factory farm and you hurt,
if you didn't care about them at all, it wouldn't hurt.
And so underneath the hurt really is love and so you want to feel it and then you want
to come back to underneath that is love and then you want to come back to, hey, I'm feeling
this for a purpose, which is to see how I can guide my life to be of more use to the
greater good.
And so the couple keys are connecting that experience of suffering back to the experience
of love and then the experience of the ability to be useful to it.
And you're not going to be able to be useful to all of it, but that's why there's seven
billion of us that all have different callings, right?
And so you can feel the pain of all of it and then you got to come back to, so what is
mine to heal?
What's mine to solve?
And your passion, your dharma will be solving part of it, right?
And then be able to channel all of that feeling into how you show up and with passion.
You know, and there's one other part that's really important is if we get really involved
in activism and caring about the rest of life and collective life, then it can be easy to
focus on the suffering and wanting to feel it and wanting to be able to do something
about it in exclusion of focusing on the beauty in life as well.
And that's a mistake.
And so in activism, there's the saying that if you're not outraged, if you're not heartbroken,
you're not paying attention.
And it's true because if you know what's happening in any war-torn area around the world, if
you know what's happening with child soldiers, or you know what's happening with coral reefs
dying off, or like you're heartbroken and you should be.
And if you're not, you're not paying attention or you're dead and inside, right?
You need to allow yourself to feel again.
But the mystic and the artist say, if you're not overwhelmed with all at the beauty of
existence, you're not paying attention.
And that's equally true, and you've got to hold both of those, that reality is overwhelmingly
beautiful and there's tremendous pain in it, and how do you hold both of those?
And so the keys to feeling the pain and not being burdened by it is feeling it in balance
with the beauty and then connecting that pain back to the love and back to the empowered
possibility for you to act and make a difference.
And if we look at, you know, game-changers or history people who have felt that weight
of the world got clear on what was theirs to heal and acted on it, and the joy and the
life that they led with, like look at Nelson Mandela, right?
Who despite really challenging circumstances, his empathy actually led him through that.
It was his love that fulfilled him and allowed him to really fulfill his mission.
And so there's something to be said around feeling that pain also plugs you into your
purpose, and that feels great.
That feels like waking up every day and being on a mission.
Exactly.
What bothers you in the world the most?
What hurts the most when you see it?
And what lights you up the most, what you feel the most joy around, are both key indicators
to your purpose.
So version two is all about this next phase of the human endeavor, this version two of
humanity upgrading to a better version of ourselves.
And so why is empathy, in your opinion, one of the core pillars for upgrading the human
species to a better force on this planet?
There's a lot of ways we're empathizing with others personally and then even, you know,
abstractly as a whole species or a whole planet, is really directly beneficial to us
as individuals.
One of the first things is empathy is a really powerful way to heal our narcissism, right?
When you really get into someone else's perspective, you get out of your perspective being the
only way to see the world.
And when you really feel the collective challenges and struggles in the world, then it doesn't
mean that you neglect your own and you lose empathy for self, empathy for self is part
of it.
It just takes context where you aren't the center of the whole universe anymore, right?
You're an integrated part of it and you care about your experience and your wants and your
challenges and you care about those for others and for a collectively larger set of others
as you keep being able to expand your circle of care.
And so the narcissism of being this tiny center of the universe actually gets healed through
that empathy.
There's a huge element of it.
And it actually means some of our own hurt bothers us less, doesn't mean we feel less
connected to it, but it's less all-consuming, right?
Another element is that we said empathy is about not just caring about but also getting
someone else's perspective.
So there's this cognitive element of the ability to take other perspectives.
This is actually a cognitive capacity, right, that not just being able to see through someone
else's eyes is good for the interpersonal relationship, but it also means you're going
to see things about the world you didn't see before.
It's going to make you more astute, more flexible in your perceptions, more aware in business.
If you take on multiple people's perspectives, hey, from a user experience point of view,
what does this look like from a customer advocate point of view, from a point of view of this
particular kind of person, it's actually going to give you huge insights into how to be creative,
into how to problem solve.
And then even deeper than that is that your identity expands radically to not being this
thing that is in conflict with and in disagreement with other people, because when you're just
your perspective, there's a lot of people that are fundamentally in conflict with you.
But when you're the capacity to take your perspective and theirs, then there's nobody
who's fundamentally in conflict with you and nobody that you can't relate with.
And so empathy is huge for our own personal development and huge for interpersonal development.
And when we look at all the pains in the world, if our empathy was tuned up, whatever we were
doing that contributed to causing those pains would be something we would have to take more
responsibility for and not do if we really got the effects more and we cared more.
Yeah.
So final question, Daniel.
Empowered despite circumstances is our byline for version two.
How does empathy help you become empowered despite circumstance?
I think if you look at the circumstances that you have challenges with and that you're seeking
to have less challenge with, that you're seeking to feel empowered in response to most of them
have to do with other people and other people's perspective wants.
And so most of us are having a challenge with what somebody thinks of us or someone
not wanting to go along with us on something we want.
And imagine if you take all the people out of the world and you've got the rest of the
world but with no people in it, there's most of the blocks that you had felt to what you
want are gone, but also everything you want is gone or the vast majority of it is.
And so when we talk about empowered despite circumstance, a lot of it is how to relate
to other people more effectively and how to relate with more empowerment regardless of
where they're at and where they're at isn't exactly where we'd want them to be, right?
And so what empathy does that empowers you despite circumstance with regard to other
people is when you can really get where someone else is coming from, then the story you made
up about they're just doing this to hurt me and they're nasty and life's unfair and all
of that story is being stuck in your own perspective.
And when you can take their perspective, take other perspectives, that story drops and the
negative perspective and judgments on that person drop.
Even if you don't condone what they're doing, even if you think that it's based on misinformation
or some of their own wounding, okay, so it's based on misinformation and their wounding,
I can still empathize with that.
And even if I'm going to work to stop it, it doesn't bother me in the same way anymore.
And so when I really can get where someone else is coming from, I can accept things as
they are radically more and be less bothered by them.
And at the same time, I'm more effective, I have more capacity to help change things
for other people because when I really get, hey, they're only behaving that way because
they're trying to meet a need and they don't know a better way to meet that need.
And when I really felt into them, I can kind of feel what they need, I can feel what they're
going for and I can care about, I can want it, I can align with it.
Now rather than being in a fight with this person, I can be an ally and I can say, hey,
what I get is that you're really caring about such and such, I care about that too, can
I help you with it?
And so empathy gives us the ability to accept things as they are better and the ability
to change them better simultaneously.
Well said.
So in conclusion, we've learned several things today.
We've learned how empathy is full spectrum.
It's not just emotional muscle, it's cognitive muscle, it's the ability to be able to relate
with people.
Also, there's empathy for yourself, there's empathy for others.
There's empathy for the planet.
And so there's this broad range of capacity within this conversation called empathy.
And it helps us in connecting with people.
As you said, a lot of the reasons we're disempowered is because of conflict with others.
And so with empathy, that is one of those core tools to help us better interrelate.
It's also, as you mentioned, one of the core tools to get clear on what drives us, what's
that sense of purpose, right?
It's going to ignite us with passion.
That secret sauce of the Gandhi's and Nelson Mandela's of the world who have really changed
things is that tuning into really what you want to do, what you want to create in the
world is another thing that comes from this muscle called empathy.
And so this has been great.
Thank you so much, Daniel.
And we look forward to having you back and continuing to share all the great work that
you do.
Thank you, Andrew.
I appreciate it.
