Introduction. Acquiring Wisdom.
There are these two young fish swimming along and they happen to meet an older fish swimming the other way,
who nods at them and says,
morning boys, how's the water?
And the two young fish swim on for a bit,
and then eventually one of them looks over at the other and goes,
what the hell is water?
David Foster Wallace.
So it seemed like it represented many different ways,
but there's this self part.
You know, if you think this is the center of everything,
your perspective, you start here,
this is the water, this is the expanse that the fish swims in,
that he doesn't know he's in,
because he has no idea that there is anything without.
This is his existence,
like before we discovered oxygen,
what was air?
What was air compared to space?
Did we know what space was compared to atmosphere?
From our frame of reference,
what we were standing on was flat,
and what was above us was expansive.
To explain that as a human being,
it's probably how do I get what I think of myself to match what other people see?
That way they think I am the way that I am,
regardless of what is going on.
I can't remember what it was like to think from this perspective.
It was so long ago.
I think that in this part,
in most wisdom is considered man,
as lonely and confused within the expanse of existence,
that an organism that is aware of itself can be.
And just to keep it simple,
it seems like for most people,
their success as a reproductive organism,
it would be somebody who gets a lot of women,
or somebody that has a lot of money,
or something like that.
So when they imagine what success will be like,
this is man, flesh,
just an organism that is navigating a reproductive game.
As far as free will and autonomy is concerned,
this person believes they have absolute free will,
because they choose who they have sex with.
They make the choice of who they're having sex with.
They're not making a choice of whether or not
they have to have sex to feel validated,
or a rush of dopamine
for achieving the human reproductive behavior,
which is ejaculate or orgasm.
So sure, you might be choosing who you're having sex with.
You might have the autonomy over who you're having sex with.
If you have free will,
go fall in love with someone you find very unattractive.
When you think about how attractive you are
to the people around you,
and what qualities draw you to people,
you're not consciously aware that
you're making those decisions based on reproductive urge,
which you find most replicable,
which are both sexual selection and natural selection.
Outside of this understanding
is I find to be overridden by religious directives.
So all of this might guide your functioning,
say, as a younger person, your sexual behavior or something.
As you get older, though,
and through experience,
you might realize that this was for naught.
That maybe saving some of that
or delaying some of this gratification
may have kept you or gotten you maybe a little higher
than you wanted to,
or that you might have achieved something greater
if you were concerned with other things.
That's experience and wisdom.
The aggregate, the sum of all of this experience
is that there's more to life than just this experience.
You go through all of this
and you come out on the other side knowing,
okay, maybe I could have gone without that.
That's typically what people find out.
However, you're very drawn to that sort of impulsive behavior
because if you just think simply as genetics, as DNA,
that makes more copies of DNA.
And as long as more copies of DNA are being made,
then we're good.
All threatening people with the extinction of their DNA does,
makes them breed impulsively and create more DNA.
Just a byproduct of their behavior.
Outside of this is religion,
which doesn't really make much sense to a whole lot of people.
I doubt it even makes a whole lot of sense to religious people.
But there are rules embedded in here
that override all of these things
and keep you from having to experience the vicissitude
of trying to get fucking pussy all the time
and how worthless it might be in the long run.
That's not why it was designed.
It's just something that gives you a higher purpose
and overrides man, flesh, and regulation.
The ability to say no.
The only actual free will, free won't, to reject the wrong.
What is wrong?
Some people think there's this arbitrary list of rules
that you have to follow that are random,
unconnected, cut your penis tip off,
pray to the invisible man, give him some money,
say the words, do the dance, celebrate Christmas,
hate gay people, whatever they think the rules are,
somehow fit somewhere into overriding to the next level,
just level up from what to do
when you're not just behaving in a reproductive manner.
So you've already got fear of the afterlife
keeping you from being sexually promiscuous.
You're already delaying gratification with monogamy.
So there's a big plus, monogamy.
Just an extension of the impulsive self.
This is still an unregulated sense of control.
Within this, you use their religion to justify this behavior,
which is lies, betrayal, darkness, wickedness,
concepts that we have independent of God, lies, darkness.
Because from this position, lying is a necessary
for navigation of the system,
because the system's out to get you,
so you have to lie your way through it,
which isn't true.
That's just someone that can't understand the simple behavior
that rewards you in the long run.
The rules of religion and ideology,
as far as culture is concerned, create regulation.
And if you just understand,
you need some level of regulation to build upwards.
You need foundations and angles and approaches
and support for this to happen properly
without it collapsing on you.
You need regulation.
You can't just get a bunch of boards and a bunch of hammers
and start nailing them together
and wonder where the fucking skyscraper is,
because the bitch will fall over.
You have to have technology and practice and shit like that.
These things are learned over several generations,
written down and recorded on tablets and religions
and mythology and things like that,
and just passed down.
We sort of take for granted.
However, this is still, like I said,
an extension of reproductive behavior.
This is still like low level.
Now, at some point,
there's a possibility that you might realize
that there's more up here.
If you really are into getting to understand the religion,
you might take a journey through some sort of
higher level of God or self.
I'm sure a lot of people that are spiritual, spirituality.
The feeling that it is out of the self,
it is independent of self,
but it is still an extension of self.
This is where you get lots of theories about egg theory.
We are one consciousness.
Our mission to raise consciousness.
A lot of people, I think, get this confused for like,
okay, this down here judges people,
and this up here allows people to be themselves.
It's like a realization that God's not real,
but not denying the feeling that is the source of God,
main character syndrome,
an echo of this reproductive behavior.
Down here is all your neurotransmitters
and your feedback loops, dopamine, serotonin,
ephedrine, adrenaline, these things, these neurotransmitters.
So if you've ever been able to identify yourself here
as an organism that is capable of trapping itself
in the belief that the feelings that it has somehow
inside that can't be rationally explained
aren't a product of this being kept at bay by culture,
social standards, etc.
Then you have to identify yourself within a species.
Whatever path you take,
whatever higher level of study you do,
if you reach this concept of,
so however you reach it, if you do,
and you know what it means,
and you reach this point of,
here you see the like,
learning truth, this barrier would be like,
if you break through this barrier
into the awareness that you exist as a part of something larger,
then you can start, you break through this barrier
and you land in truth, self, like I am, darkness.
You just break through these layers of social expectation.
Who am I?
What is me?
What is purpose?
And you hit this like,
I wouldn't say it's nirvana yet.
You hit this light up here, the enlightenment phase,
which when you first hit, seems endless.
You know, this thing seems endless,
but it's not until you crack into nirvana
or like a boundless conscious realm,
where the way that you process the information that you have
is based nothing on the way other people would have you process
the information that's available.
You can only get here through parallels,
drawing conclusions, making bridges between concepts
that you wouldn't otherwise would not think of.
This is so far beyond the person that's telling you,
you don't get no bitches, you're an insult.
These things down here to this person are huge.
This removed your ability to choose who you're having sex with.
You have to have sex with someone other than who you want to,
you know, this kind of shit.
And to somebody who's concerned about those things,
it will affect their decision-making into the future.
But somebody that's already risen out of all of these perceptions
of self within culture, within a species, within society,
and shit like that, that knows itself, that knows the truth,
that understands what is real, what is true.
It's arbitrary, you know, it goes out compared to the amount of effort
you're willing to give it.
It opens up the ability to process in parallels.
These are called parables, metaphors.
The better you are at understanding the connection between the two,
the better your outcome will be with the information.
You know, so like a lot of these things that I talk about,
I had figured out by, you know, 2022,
it was exciting because it gave me something to explain to people.
Still hitting zeros on people that are willing to understand
what I'm talking about.
It's not their fault.
It's not necessarily my fault.
I'm just getting better at explaining it.
But there are some things that I do beyond, you know,
just figuring out those immediate things.
I let my mind wander to many different things.
One of the cool things that, you know, I did early last year was,
I understand that we think of concepts like numbers in base 10.
I had reached a place where I could, you know,
chill out on thinking of religion or, you know,
the solar system and shit like that,
because I didn't think anybody was ever going to,
I don't think anybody's ever going to get that shit.
But I started to let my mind wander towards the potential
of different counting system.
How would I comprehend something like that's not base 10 counting?
We understand whole round numbers,
like 10 as a round digestible,
dividable, even number that we can comprehend.
But there were times when they went by other systems like base 7.
I don't know exactly.
Some base 6 or something like that is how we got the 360 degree turn
of circle or something like that.
Like 36 divided by 6 is 6.
And when you start dividing by numbers like that
and they become round that you are able to build
more complicated, intricate calculation systems out of them,
which is, you know, being able to go beyond
what we can just normally hold in our head.
Not to complicate that too much,
but I just was thinking, man,
I wonder what it would be like to think in a different base.
Like to think in base 6 or something like that.
And so I would just change my mind to think
and process numbers in like base 6.
What is even base 6?
Is that even a thing?
I initially found out because I was doing like base 7,
I was like wondering what it would be.
21 would be like a whole number.
Just like 30 is a whole number.
7 would be like 10.
But when I would think of these things,
I would think of it as like 7 out of 10.
It's very hard to understand that 7
would represent the same amount as 10
or something like that.
Imperial and metric systems
are good things to compare here, I think.
Because some people understand that
these are all divided by 10.
One meter, a thousand meters, a kilometer,
one, and then it goes backward,
0.1, 0.01, 0.001,
a decimeter, centimeter, millimeter.
It just moves the decimal.
It can be 750 kilometers.
A kilometer is a thousand meters.
You have to do a bunch of conversion and shit
to understand what's going on
unless you can just see them in 14 stone.
Okay, well, that's about 180 pounds.
I don't know if that's correct,
but you can do the conversion back and forth,
which is where I'm stuck here.
How can I just see it in a way
where I just say I was used to kilometers
and somebody just came up and explained miles.
And I didn't know how to do the conversion.
I don't know if that's a way,
if I'm explaining that correctly,
but I found out that like,
I mean, it was really difficult.
I found that having that base six or something like that,
if I think of three as half of six,
like I think of five as half of 10,
then I can work from there.
I also noticed that like seven base seven
would break down into four, fours and threes pretty easily,
which I found really interesting
because I was also thinking a lot.
I also had the orbits and stuff in my mind quite a bit.
We'd measure time in that sense as one year as one orbit.
However, we have like an extra day left over,
which means that we're like using an incomplete base system.
If we could figure out a base that was even,
then you would be able to calculate that out
and not have to have the extra leap day.
The extra leap day was like a,
it's like a band aid for something
that doesn't fit the base six system.
So instead of looking at one orbit is 365 days,
this unit is one.
That is split into 12 months,
with four weeks and seven days.
Feet, inches, miles, yards, an inch is this long.
Feet is 12 of those.
Yards, miles, a fucking, a lot of those.
1,200, 5,800 and 20 something.
50, 230.
How many feet in a mile?
52, 80.
Oh, feet 52, 80.
Nice.
I was like, huh, I really was putting my mind into this mode of,
okay, are there any other ways to break this down?
I know that this is moving.
This would create almost like a coil.
If these four didn't add up to four of these,
to the point where it was an extra 0.25 days,
where you had to just add one day,
is there any way that you could find this place?
Quack, okay, cut it like a spring.
Now I've got one, two, three, four of these movements.
How many different ways can I break that up?
Well, I can actually do it into three.
If I just considered these motions to not be one,
I just considered all of this to be one.
So if the four cycle was one, what does that mean for a base seven?
Well, I could cut it into three.
How many ways could I cut it into three?
Well, not only could I cut these into three instead of four
and have something like this for one,
this to make one instead of this to make one.
So three would equal one full cycle,
whereas it used to be four plus an extra day.
I still have 12 months in each year to work with.
So each one of these circles from above
could be split different ways.
Could this be a three-month block or a three-section block
three times?
What if I spread them out over these three?
What if I spread them out over four?
What if I did four over three or three over four?
What if I changed the minutes to 70 seconds
or an hour to 70 minutes?
This is where it got wild.
But then I got into thinking,
what's wrong with as a symbol,
why not different variables or variations of, say,
like a long line of connected?
I don't know, it's hard to explain.
If you chopped it up into different sections
and symbols start to look like just different patterns
of this spring understanding.
How many different ways could you calculate out information
from that perspective?
And I got pretty far into a lot of it,
but there's nobody to discuss this stuff with.
I have no idea if it has any value.
I'm just exploring this thing up here quite by myself,
it feels like, which is okay for now.
It's just, I know that people are going to ask me
why I didn't do it a different way.
And I'm doing it the only way that I know how
in the nicest, most patient way,
without trying to take any of the value of the understanding
away from anyone that could possibly understand it.
I just don't know.
I feel like I'm going to be stuck up here alone my entire life,
which I'd rather be up here alone.
But because of no idea how cool it is.
I want people to understand me.
I don't want people to not understand me.
It feels like, it feels like a curse
for trying and doing a good thing.
It feels too much of a curse to be...
I don't know.
I'm just glad I'm me, you know.
I used to not feel that way.
You must convince yourself of the following.
People get the mind and quality of brain that they deserve
through their actions in life.
Despite the popularity of genetic explanations
for our behavior, recent discoveries in neuroscience
are overturning long-held beliefs
that the brain is genetically hardwired.
Scientists are demonstrating the degree
to which the brain is actually quite plastic.
How our thoughts determine our mental landscape.
They are exploring the relationship of willpower to physiology.
How profoundly the mind can affect our health and functionality.
It is possible that more and more will be discovered
about how deeply we create the various patterns of our lives
through certain mental operations.
How we are truly responsible for so much of what happens to us.
