This is Anna. She owns a middle-sized food chain around town.
Like many professionals today, Anna uses IT in her work.
Smart Software gathers data from all the restaurants in her chain to present it as graphs and tables
so Anna can see the whole picture and make decisions on business management and expansion.
To manipulate these programs, Anna usually contacts Jim, the software developer.
It always takes time and effort from both Jim and Anna to communicate and understand each other's needs and limitations.
And if for some reason Jim quits, Anna is in trouble.
All that work invested into essential comprehension would have to be done once again with a new developer.
Life gets much easier when MPS comes around.
JetBrains MPS is an open-source tool to express your domain specifics in the form of a programming language.
Here's how it works.
A language designer creates a unique domain-specific language
containing all the essential knowledge it is designed to perform the exact set of actions that Anna needs for her work.
It also comes in a form familiar to her.
Let's say Anna needs to offer a discount for a certain kind of customers in one of her locations.
She can set everything up herself, using comprehensive commands and getting a clear visual representation.
MPS then generates real code from her DSL and runs it inside her management system.
Each DSL is unique to suit the customer's specific needs.
Now, Sam, a data scientist, utilizes her specific DSL in her scientific research to create charts from her data in a tabular notation the way she is used to.
Now, Bill, a mechanical engineer, can use his own DSL at the factory he works in to communicate with embedded systems.
This approach dramatically increases productivity, simplifies work and improves communication.
It leads to fewer bugs too, since a DSL is constrained to perform the exact set of actions.
In most cases, you don't even need a developer to use it.
DSLs let domain experts reduce complexity and focus on the solution by using appropriate tooling for a specific domain.
Please visit our website at jetbrains.com.mps to learn more about it.
It's time to focus on what you do, not how you do it.
