It's 3,100 BC. And finally today, we can talk about civilization.
Well, that's a loaded term. What defines civilization? Opinions differ. For my money,
it means centralized government, secure borders, settled conditions, artistic
accomplishment, some technological know-how, permanent structures, extensive
contacts abroad, and elaborate social hierarchy, all underpinned by a feeling of
confidence in one's cultural identity. By my reckoning, Egypt is the first
civilization, at least as far as civilization in the West is concerned.
Never mind the absolute monarchy, the, to our minds, gloomy emphasis upon death,
or the colossal labor expended on building the pyramids to protect the
royal dead, all useless because they were all robbed, or the childlike hieroglyphics,
the bizarre religion with its cult of cows, monkeys, cats, and hippopotamia.
There's so much about Egyptian daily life that strikes, in me at least, a familiar cord.
Maybe it's because the Egyptians are the first people to leave us a record of their
personal feelings, or because they're the first people to depict themselves having
fun relaxing, or because they were attentive to animals, even if they were a
bit wacko about them, or because they believe that society only works if
everyone plays their part. The other side of history, or our side of history, I
think in one sense the latter, but you must be the judge. The Greek historian
Herodotus famously described Egypt as the gift of the Nile. That's beautifully
poetic, and absolutely op-one. The Nile rises in the highlands of East Africa, but
it was only its last 750 miles that constituted the ancient kingdom of Egypt,
divided into Upper and Lower Egypt. Upper Egypt describes Southern Egypt from
Wadi Haifa to Cairo, and Lower Egypt describes everything north of Cairo. From
June to September, the Nile floods Egypt's farmland every year, thereby causing
agricultural labor to come to a standstill. However, the flooding also
brings with it minerals and nutrients, and these help fertilize the soil. Not for
nothing, the Egyptians called their country Kenet, or Blackland, in reference
to the soil, as opposed to Deshret, which incidentally gives us our word desert,
meaning red land. Roughly speaking, there was fertile soil extending five miles
either side of the riverbank, and once the waters of the Nile had receded each
year, it required organized labor to clear the broad band of silt that was
left behind. So the irrigation canals had to be cleared out, the dykes rebuilt,
and the land resurveyed. To get these tasks accomplished, the administration
conscripted a large labor force, or Corvée, each year, though if you're well
off you could get out of it by appointing a deputy to do the work on your
behalf. Egypt, we might say, was the gift of organized labor, and in time too
that labor force was put to work during the flood season, when men couldn't work
the land, transporting and carving stone for the Pharaoh's grandiose building
projects. Until the early New Kingdom, about 1600 BC, there was no wheeled
transportation in Egypt and no horses, so travel on land was either by foot or by
donkey, which meant that boats were preferred, both for travel and for
transporting goods. And since, providentially, the prevailing winds almost
always blow from the north, you'd use your sails going south against the
current, and simply row with the current going north. I first acquired a taste for
Egyptology when my parents took me to see the mummies at the British Museum as
aged about seven. But what left the deepest impression was not actually a
mummy, but the perfectly preserved body of a desiccated Egyptian male. He'd been
buried directly in the sand, approximately 3,400 BC. He is called
ginger because there are wisps of ginger-colored hair on his skull. He was
buried in the fetal position with funerary gifts that were clearly intended
to serve him in the afterlife. Ginger left a lasting impression on me. I didn't
become an Egyptologist, but I did become a time traveler thanks to ginger. He is
why I'm standing here today. Top of the morning to you, ginger. In becoming
fascinated by the Egyptians, I was merely one in a long line. In particular, I'd
been preceded two and a half thousand years ago by Herolysis, one of the first
Westerners, if we can call him that, to visit Egypt and the first to describe
their practices. He begins his account of Egypt by stating categorically, the
manners and customs of the Egyptians are in most respects the very opposite to
those of other peoples. For example, the women go to the market and sell goods
while the men stay at home and do the weaving. Women urinate, standing up,
whereas men urinate, sitting down. The Egyptians ease themselves inside their
houses, but they eat out in the street. Although Herolysis admired the Egyptians,
he obviously regarded them as very odd, and that's because he was looking, of
course, at Egyptian culture from the perspective of a Greek. He does,
nonetheless, make some accurate observations. He notes that the Egyptians
are excessively pious, that they always wear freshly laundered linen, that they
practice circumcision, and that their priests are shaven. And he also gives us
an extremely detailed account of the mummification process, which he clearly
observed first hand. I'll be talking about mummification in the lecture on
being dead in Egypt. What I want to do in this lecture is to give you some idea of
what it was like to be an Egyptian, what kind of world you would have inhabited,
and how you would have seen and interpreted that world. Let me begin,
however, by saying just a few words about Egyptian history. The earliest
inhabitants of the land we call Egypt can be traced as far back as the early
Paleolithic period to around 200,000 BC, though there's circumstantial evidence
to suggest that Homo erectus passed through the country about 1.8 million
years ago when migrating from East Africa to Europe and Asia. And at the end of the
last glacial period, about 20,000 years ago, then Egypt was a grass-covered plane.
And it was around this time that Egyptians began to establish temporary camps in the
vicinity of the Nile. For thousands of years, life was pretty static, hunting
and fishing with a sole means of survival. Technical progress was limited to
improvement in the manufacture of flint tools. Then, around 6,000 BC, permanent
settlements began to form along the Nile. Animal and plant domestication now
became the chief means of survival. One of the cultures that flourished within
this, the so-called pre-Dynastic period, the period before the kings, was
Bedarian culture. Bedarian culture is so named for the region of El-Bedarian near
Sohaq in Upper Egypt, though it also existed further south at Heraconpolis
and further east at Wadi Hamarat. It provides us with the earliest Egyptian
evidence for agriculture, sometime between 4,400 and 4,000 BC. This is actually
very late in absolute terms. As we saw in the previous lecture, the Natufians were
practicing agriculture perhaps as early as 11,500 BC, and over the next 3,000
years, agriculture had become well-established throughout the Mediterranean.
Bedarian culture is known mainly from symmetries. The most characteristic
grave deposit is the so-called rippled bowl, so named because its surface is
undulating slightly as a result of combing the clay. The effect is intentionally
decorative. The shape is simple, the surface brown often with a black top, and
the wall of the vase very thin demonstrating a high degree of technical
accomplishment. Luxury items, including bracelets, combs and hairpins, were also
deposited in the graves, as were female statuettes. Fine tools, including arrow
heads, axes and sickles, were also deposited. So in conclusion, this is a
culture that we have no difficulty in recognizing as related to our own, with
its sense of community, its appreciation of fine objects, its attentiveness to
physical appearance, its belief in an afterlife, and its social stratification
as evidenced by the uneven distribution of wealth in the graves. It was not,
however, a civilization. To earn the title, civilization, a society has to have
achieved a level of cultural, political and technological sophistication, which
certainly wasn't the case in this period. It was a semi-legendary king called
Menes, who around 3,100 BC somehow converted a land still largely
populated by tribes of nomadic herders into a unified upper and lower Egypt,
thereby forming the first nation state in history, with his capital at
Memphis near Cairo. And from now on, for about 3,000 years, with a few hiccups
here and there, Egypt will remain stable and unified. That's not a bad record.
Egypt succumbed first to the Persians in 525 BC, then to Alexander the Great in
332 BC, and finally to the Romans in 30 BC. I'm going to be focusing primarily
upon the period that Egyptologists call the New Kingdom, specifically the period
from around 1570 to 1070 BC. That's to say from the 18th to the 20th dynasty.
The first pharaoh of the 18th dynasty, Ahmose, the first expelled a foreign
people called the Hixos, who had been ruling the north of the country.
For the first time in its history, Egypt came into contact with other
civilizations of the Middle East. In fact, though, since Egypt throughout so much
of its history was so static, it's difficult to be precise as to the
consequences of that. So let's now try to put ourselves inside the heads and
shoes of an Egyptian. To begin with, I believe you would have experienced a sense
of security and predictability that was unlike anything we can possibly imagine.
There were many reasons for this. After all, you lived in the most prosperous
country in the world, whereas Mesopotamia was dependent on the weather, you were
dependent on the Nile, which, if you controlled it, guaranteed your harvest
every year. No other ancient people were so fortunate in terms of environment.
Second, you lived in a theocracy. That's to say, the ultimate authority in your
land was invested in the gods, whose supreme representative on earth was the
pharaoh who was, moreover, a god among his people. The well-being of the pharaoh,
both in this life and in the life to come, was an expression of the well-being
of all his people. So you would have taken a very personal interest in his
health and welfare. But though the pharaoh was divine, he was not distant. In
fact, there was a very good chance that you would have set eyes on him many times
in your life. Now, that's because he regularly sailed up and down the Nile
in a barge. And because you, like most Egyptians, probably lived within a few
miles of the river. So what did it mean to live in a theocracy like ancient
Egypt? I think it meant being self-confident and assured of your
place in the world. That feeling of self-confidence and assurance was bolstered
by the fact that your neighbors in Libya to the west, Nubia to the south,
Palestine to the east, were desperately poverty-stricken and culturally backward
by comparison. Probably too, when their harvests failed, they came to you for
grain as we read off in the Book of Genesis when Joseph's brothers come to
Egypt for grain. Living in a theocracy also meant that ultimate power in all
things resided with the pharaoh. It was therefore the pharaoh who was the
supreme judge. There was no equivalent to the law code of Hammurabi in Egypt with
prescribed punishments for specific offenses. Judging from various documents
that deal with lawsuits and trials, it seems that Egyptian law was mostly based
on precedent. Though the pharaoh was the supreme judge, each local community had
its own court and most cases were decided at the local level. Murder, treason and
tomb robbery were all capital offenses. We also hear of mutilation, specifically
the cutting off of the nose in the case of officials who abused their office. The
next point to note, a very obvious point that leads off from what I've just
said, is that having one pharaoh as your king, you would have identified yourself
as one people. It's not clear when the notion of nationhood, of ethnicity, which
we take for granted today, first crept into human consciousness and became a
basis for ideology, but the Egyptians were among the first, if not the first, to
claim cultural homogeneity. And that's all the more remarkable in light of the
fact that Egypt was in reality racially mixed. But as they conquered, they
absorbed, without it seems, seeking to make Egyptian ethnicity an exclusive
preserve of the conquerors. They achieved a homogeneity based on a distinctive
lifestyle and a shared set of values rather than on any notion of blood
relatedness. So when you went about your business, you would have known that you
were part of a great community with whom you shared much in common. And this
meant you all had to pull together, quite literally speaking, because if Egypt
was to survive, then you all had to cooperate. You had to work with your
fellow Egyptians to conserve the Nile floodwater by building dykes and
canals. And you had to be fair in sharing the water with your neighbors. This was
the first time in human history that cooperation on such a scale had ever
taken place. Incidentally, it's estimated that the population of Egypt went
from about 850,000 around 3000 BC to four to five million by the late New
Kingdom. That's to say around 1100 BC. So we're talking about cooperation on a
truly vast scale. One of the things that you would have shared with your fellow
Egyptians is an extraordinarily keen appreciation and awareness of death. I'll
be devoting an entire lecture to the Egyptian way of death. It's enough to
say here that the Egyptians probably lavished more of their GNP on death than
any other culture that has ever existed. The gods presided over your health and
welfare as well as that of the land as a whole. Though there wasn't a lot you
had to do to win their favor. That was the business of the priests. You would
have been intensely conservative and traditional. Tradition was the watchword
of Egyptian society. The high point, we might say, of Egyptian civilization was
the fourth dynasty, the period from 2575 to about 2465 when the power of the
pharaoh was at its height. And after that, things slowly ever so slowly began to
go downhill. The fact that Egypt was a very conservative society meant that
there wasn't much opportunity for bettering yourself. As we'll see, being
a scribe or being in the army did offer some opportunity for social and
economic mobility, but the vast number of Egyptians had no chance whatsoever of
bettering their lives. Quite possibly, however, you would have thought that
that was as it should be. But even though you might have looked back somewhat
wistfully to that period, to the period of the pyramids, let's say, you would
still have been aware of the extraordinary stability and tranquility of
Egyptian society. Take Egyptian art. A fixed, canonical style evolved at the
beginning of the Old Kingdom and remained remarkably consistent throughout
Egyptian history. So much so that you would have to be an expert to detect any
change at all, even over hundreds of years. There was absolutely no place
for individualism, originality, or creativity in Egyptian art, or for that
matter, in Egyptian society. Unlike the Greeks, who learnt so much from you and
who were constantly changing the way they did art, as an Egyptian, you saw no
need at all to change your way of representing the world. The language of
Egyptian art is constructed on axial symmetry, on proportion, on geometrical
shapes, principally the rectangle and the square, and on the frontal and the
profile viewpoint. All that in itself argues for the conservatism of their
art. But art is just one manifestation of Egyptian conservatism. The gods
established your world for all eternity, so it's best to leave things as they
are. Just do what your fathers and your forefathers have always done. That is
the best way to guarantee your future. And keep free of foreign influences.
Foreigners have nothing to teach you. There's no point in travelling abroad
unless you're one of the few Egyptians who are engaged in international trade.
You certainly don't go abroad to expand your horizon, so to speak. A few other
observations. You believe in beauty, proportion, balance, order, eternal
truth, and repose. What you call marks, often represented by an upright feather
and personified to as a goddess. The accidental, the ugly, the obscene have
no part in your idealized vision of the world. You're extremely sensual. You
cultivate your senses and you enjoy the good things of life. You're a keen
observer of animals and of nature in general. You venerate animals in ways
that would impress even the most ardent animal rights activist today. The
practice of mummifying cats provides compelling evidence of your particular
affection for felines. Of course, what I've just presented is an over
simplification. Not everyone living in Egypt throughout this whole period of
3,000 years thought this way. It's all too easy to depict ancient Egypt as a
static monolithic culture. Such a view is a gross over simplification. And
eventually too, Egyptians were no longer able to remain aloof from the peoples
around them. But I still think there's a validity to the characterisation. I
just painted for many Egyptians at most times in their history. The Egyptians
have left us more information about their daily lives than any other ancient
people. That's due in large part to the dry sands of Egypt, which have preserved
scenes of daily life depicted in their tombs. Even delicate objects like
papyrus, paper and fabrics have survived. Another reason why we know so much about
the Egyptians is because they were highly literate. Or at least there was a group
of Egyptians, the scribes who were literate. Ordinary Egyptians for the most
part could not read or write. The script which scribes wrote in is called
hieroglyphic, which derives from two Greek words meaning sacred carving. It's so
called because many of the surviving texts in hieroglyphic accompany paintings
and relief sculptures in tombs and temples. The hieroglyphic script is a
combination of ideograms and phonetic signs. It's totally different from
cuneiform though it may be that there was influence from Mesopotamia.
Ideograms are signs that depict objects like man or river, whereas phonetic
signs represent either a part or the whole of a spoken word. The hieroglyphic
script probably began to be used around 3,500 a bit later and continued in use
for about 4,000 years. It could be written from left to right or right to
left or top to bottom. The last piece of hieroglyphic writing that we know of,
a short inscription on one of the walls of the temple of the goddess Isis that
formerly stood on the island of Philae. The inscription is dated 24th of
August AD 394. Did the stone carver know that he was at the end of a dying
tradition? I'd love to know. Knowledge of hieroglyphics died out until 1822 when
a Frenchman called Jean-François Champollion deciphered the script thanks
to the Rosetta Stone, a trilingual inscription in Greek, hieroglyphic and
demotic. The inscription is actually quite boring. It deals with tax
concessions for Egyptian priests. But its decipherment opened up a whole world.
We know so much more about daily life in Egypt as a result. Incidentally, the
Rosetta Stone is one of those contested treasures that scholars and governments
argue over endlessly. It was carved by the Egyptians in 196 BC, discovered by
the French in 1799 and purchased from the Ottomans by the British in 1801. It
actually has a short inscription in a fourth language, English, that reads
captured in Egypt by the British army 1801. Since that period, it's been on
display in the British Museum. So where is its rightful home, Britain, France or
Egypt? I'll leave you to decide that. Though one interesting suggestion is that
it should rotate between the three countries under the auspices of a
UNESCO committee, which deals with the repatriation of cultural artifacts.
A wealth of literature in a variety of genres has survived, along with other
writings including advice on how to reach the afterlife, magical texts, private
correspondence, business documentation and so on. There are romances, often with
a moral attached, teachings on how to become wise, meditations upon the
transitoriness of life, love poetry, victory hymns, hymns and prayers to the
gods. One of my favorite pieces is the so-called Song of the Harper, so-called
because in the preface, it says that it was inscribed on the image of a
harpist that stood in the tomb of one of the pharaohs. It probably dates back to
the 11th dynasty, around 2100 BC. It reads as follows, Be of good cheer.
Forgetfulness is advantageous to you. Follow your heart's desire, all your
life. Anoint your head with myrrh. Clothe yourself in fine linen. Do things while
you are here on earth. Do not grieve until the day of lamentation overtakes you.
Enjoy life and do not grow weary of it. No one takes his possessions out of this
life and no one who has departed returns. This is the Carpe Diem theme that we
associate primarily with the Roman poet Horace. Enjoy the day. Seize the day.
And yet, the theme was invented by an unknown Egyptian 2000 years earlier than
Horace. Egyptian civilization was the gift of climate and geography, as
Herodotus first noted. As well as fertilizing the land, the Nile was a
major thoroughfare for communication, travel and transport. At the beginning of
this lecture, I asked you to reflect on whether you could conceive of adjusting
to daily life in ancient Egypt or whether it seemed impossibly remote,
impossibly other. Whatever your answer, I think we can all agree that a society that
is literate enables us to reconstruct the pattern of its daily life in a way that
we simply can't from a society that is illiterate. Thanks to the written records
that the Egyptians have left behind for the first time in history, we can now begin to
investigate what it meant to be part of a family, which is the subject of our next lecture.
