We don't know the origins of the family, but they're almost certainly as old as the
human race. As far back as we can look in the dim recesses of time and as far forward
in this course as we shall go, the norm will be the extended family. That's to say three
or four generations living together along with all the unmarried relatives. But it is
Egypt that has provided us with the earliest evidence about what it was like to be a family
member. Egypt also provides us with the earliest evidence about the world of human emotion.
This is due to the fact that we now have a variety of writings as well as pictures and
objects that tell us a great deal about daily life. The writing indicates that the Egyptian
spoken Afro-Asianic language related to the Semitic and African languages spoken today.
It's as if we have at our disposal an electron microscope whose magnification is so much more
powerful than anything we've been able to use before. Much of the writing comes from
a workman's village called Der El Medina in the Valley of the Kings which flourished
during the New Kingdom. I'll be talking about Der El Medina in the lecture about being an
Egyptian worker. It's probably provided us with more information about daily life in
Egypt than any other archaeological site. So let's suppose you're an Egyptian male.
You're about 20 and you want to get married. 20 was a typical age for a man to get married.
The girl that you have your eye on is considerably younger than you are. She's about 12 or 13.
Very likely she's only just started menstruating. We can only guess how you met. Maybe in the
fields. Maybe just walking through the streets. But arranged marriages don't seem to have
been the norm in Egypt. And the love poetry suggests that the Egyptians put a high value
on emotional attachment. And it may well be that most Egyptian marriages were consensual.
Here's a sample from a poem that has parts assigned both to the man and the woman. The
woman says I quote your voice rejuvenates my limbs like fat mixed with honey. And the
man replies I am exhilarated without beer. Your limbs are like something drenched in
cinnamon oil. Exhilarated without beer. What a praise of a girl that must have been. So
we certainly can't rule out the possibility that the two of you would have been in love.
At any rate you pop the question to her and she agrees to marry you. So far as we know
there's no wedding ceremony. There's not even a word in Egyptian that means to marry.
You simply begin living together. An Egyptian marriage was a private arrangement involving
only you and your bride and if they happen to be alive your two sets of parents. We don't
even know whether your marriage had to be officially registered. All it seems that the
two of you have to do is announce to your family and friends that you consider yourself
to be hitched up together. That however doesn't make the arrangement any less binding. You
draw up a contract involving the transfer of property and henceforth you are both financially
obligated to one another. As in many societies today one of the main reasons for getting
married is to produce an heir who will look after you in your old age and attend to your
burial. As an Egyptian male you're no different although there's no evidence in our records
that you would inevitably have preferred a boy to a girl which was very common in many
ancient societies. If your wife becomes pregnant shortly after you begin living together well
and good. If she doesn't don't give up hope. There are a number of possibilities open to
you. For instance you could purchase a magic spell. Magic played a very large part in the
lives of Egyptians which will help her to conceive. You could recommend that she pay
a visit to the local shrine of the cow headed goddess Hathor. Hathor was particularly closely
associated with women. She was the one who listens. She commonly received dedications
in the shape of female sexual organs, female breasts and penises which indicates her involvement
with fertility. You could adopt or finally you could purchase a slave girl with the express
object of impregnating her and producing offspring. This last was a risky strategy however because
the chances are that the slave girl will give herself heirs and then your wife will become
jealous which is exactly what happens in the book of Genesis when Abraham impregnates the
slave girl Hagar. Probably you and your wife will both want to have a large family typically
as many as six or seven children that we sometimes hear of as many as ten or more. As the father
you can even apply for paternity leave when your wife gives birth. A journal from Der El
Medina which records workers absences tells of one worker who was given three days paternity
leave to be with his wife. Some of your children will be stillborn or die in infancy statistically
speaking. At another worker's village called Al-Lahun the bodies of infants aged only a
few months were discovered in wooden boxes that had been buried under the floors of a
number of houses testifying to the high level of infant mortality. Numerous health hazards
beset newborn children and infants not only diarrhea and anemia and the like but also
snakes and scorpions. Your wife too will be at risk every time she goes into labor so
you'll want to provide your children with every protection available. Your children are
particularly at risk during the night because there's always the danger that a demon will
snatch them away. If you decide that your family is large enough you have enough children
one tried and tested method of contraception is for your wife to smear her vagina with
crocodile dung. That was surely effective as a deterrent if not as a contraceptive.
Once your wife has produced a sufficient number of offspring then her status and yours was
assured since Egyptian society revolved very much around the family and on producing heirs
to carry on the family line. Egyptian women had the right to inherit bequeath own land
and operate their own businesses. They could bring a lawsuit serve on a jury or testify
in a trial. They could work on the land sell wares in the market weave cloth professionally
but they have no real role in public life. As a husband you're expected to treat your
wife with respect. She held the title nebet pair which means ruler mistress lady of the
house which was a highly complimentary form of address. There's a piece of so-called wisdom
literature composed in the New Kingdom known as the instructions of Annie which urges husbands
to demonstrate due deference. Don't say to your wife where is it or get it or when she
has put whatever it is in its right place the author urges. It is a joy when your hand
is with her. What a wonderful image when your hand is with her and when she dies your wife
will probably share your tomb and you'll spend the rest of eternity together. Respecting
your wife didn't mean you had to be faithful to her however. It was your legal right to
have more than one wife even though this practice is likely to have been confined to the aristocracy
not least because having more than one wife can be financially ruinous. If on the other
hand your wife commits adultery she can be burned alive whereas her lover even if he's
married to another woman will get off scot free. Since you're a lower class Egyptian
your sons and daughters will have to go out to work at a very early age. Your sons will
labor in the fields whereas your daughters will tend livestock and perform domestic tasks
if you're a farmer which is one of the commonest professions. Everyone in your family has to
be productive in some way. Your children don't have a lot of time to play with their toys
but when they do they play with rattles tops dolls with movable limbs exactly the same
items that we find in other ancient societies such as Greece and Rome. If you're rather
better off your sons will receive education from an early age. You might even get them
a private tutor whom you share with other families to cut the cost or you may succeed
in having them admitted to a state sponsored school attached to a temple or to a government
office where they will receive an apprenticeship. The hope is that your sons will be literate
because that's the only way they will be able to climb up the social ladder. Some scholars
have estimated that as few as one percent of the population could read and write. Your
daughters won't receive any formal education though they may learn how to read and write.
Maria El Medina the village I mentioned has supplied us with letters written by women.
Your elder son will probably follow the same career path as you did and indeed as your
father did before you which is a further indication of the traditional and highly conservative
nature of Egyptian society that we talked about in the previous lecture. It'll be the
responsibility of your elder son to look after you and your wife in old age and to
attend to your funerary arrangements when you die which was arguably the heaviest responsibility
of his entire life. Pre-modern societies tend to place a great deal of emphasis on what
are known as rights of passage. Rights of passage mark the transition from adolescence
to adulthood. They also provide help at what is generally regarded as a dangerous liminal
moment when a young person is betwixt and between these two statuses. Oddly we know
of no such rights that were practiced in Egypt just as we know nothing about any wedding
ceremony. Some scholars have argued that an Egyptian boy's transition from childhood
to adulthood was marked by the ceremony of circumcision but the evidence for circumcision
is inconclusive except in the case of the priests even though the Greeks certainly believed
that the Egyptians practiced it widely. It certainly wasn't however practiced at the
workers village at Der El Medina and there's no evidence that girls had to undergo circumcision.
It isn't only your wife and children who are living under the same roof. Very likely your
grandparents are living with you too if they happen to be alive. In addition you'll have to
provide house room for all the family members who are unmarried including widowers, divorcees,
very few people would have lived on their own in Egypt because it was the duty of their
families to protect them. Life expectancy was low probably in the 30s for both men and
women though that wouldn't prevent you from trying to ward off the effects of aging. Cures
for balding include rubbing boiled hedgehog spikes into the head and for wrinkles try
smearing the body with pulverized bitter almonds. The medical text that recommends this treatment
ends proven to work a million times. Yeah right as the saying goes. If you were lucky
enough to be well to do you'd also have one or more domestic servants. Servants performed all
manner of menial tasks including cooking, grinding, baking, washing, spinning, weaving, gardening
and so forth. The big question is were they actually slaves? This isn't the first time in our course
when we've talked about slavery. It almost certainly existed in Mesopotamian society.
For all we know slavery in its various forms may have been universal throughout the Mediterranean
from the early Bronze Age onwards. It merely required settled conditions and Egypt certainly
provided those. Even so we hear remarkably little about slavery in Egypt. True domestic
servants were tied to the household and could be sold along with it. True too they were sometimes
beaten though this doesn't necessarily mean that they were slaves. We should also note that many
domestics even if they were slaves would have been better off economically and socially than a lot
of free Egyptian peasants particularly if they served the nobility. As an aside scholars now believe
that the image of slaves being whipped as they built the pyramids is a fantasy dreamed up by
Hollywood. Buildings of that complexity and immensity surely required a willing labor force.
More likely then, much more likely in my view, the administration conscripted a corvée of free
Egyptians to build the pyramids just as they conscripted free Egyptians each year to clear
the irrigation channels, mend the dykes and so on. An Egyptian family comprised not only the living
but also the dead because your dead relatives are a living presence in your life. You venerate them
regularly in your home and you provide them with food and drink at their tombs. You do so
because they are powerful. They can perform both benevolent and harmful actions. Numerous petitions
to the dead have been found inscribed on papyri, on a steely, a stone shaft that is, and offering
bowls. You might request their help or you might plead with them to withdraw their malign influence
if you suspect that they're responsible for your recent run of bad luck.
You commence your petition to the dead by trying to get on the good side of them, reminding them how
much you love them and by expressing the hope that the gods are taking good care of them. Then
comes your request, please heal so and so. Please let my child be born healthy. Please settle my
dispute with ex in my favor, of course. Egyptians believed that there were two sorts of dead,
the blessed dead known as the arkhu and the damned known as the mutu. Even the arkhu, however,
could be malevolent, especially if you didn't tend their graves or bring them offerings periodically.
So the welfare of your family depends to a large degree on the relationship that you built up
with your dead relatives. It wasn't just the dead whom you have to be wary of in the home,
you also have to watch out for rats, snakes, scorpions, crocodiles, and hippopotami. That's
why Egyptians rested their heads several inches above the ground at night in the curve of a wooden
headdress. That way, scorpions and snakes couldn't bite them, at least they couldn't bite their heads.
The records from Der El Medina speak of a scorpion charmer whose speciality, as the name
suggests, was the curing of scorpion and snakebites by means of magic spells and amulets and perhaps
too by means of herbal remedies. Magic spells could not only cure you, but also harm your enemies.
As a further protection against rats and the like, it's useful to own a cat or a dog,
Egyptians, as we'll see in the lecture on religion, were very sensitive to animals,
so it's likely that you treated your pets very well. You might even choose to bury
a much-loved pet with elaborate ritual. As a working-class Egyptian, you probably live in a
single dwelling, albeit one that shares party walls with neighbors on two or three sides.
We never hear of multi-story buildings that provided accommodation for several families,
so we can't rule out the possibility that some did exist. There's no evidence to suggest that
your wife and the other women are sequestered in a separate part of the house, as was the case
in ancient Greece. You sleep in a bed with a coarse linen sheet thrown over it. You eat sitting on
a bench with the food set out on a reed mat. I'll talk more about houses in the lecture on being
an Egyptian worker. It's time now, however, to get out of the house. Let's say you have the day
off, so both you and your wife will want to be looking your best. Though you're not well off,
your wife still loves to use an assortment of cosmetics and perfumes. Whenever you attend
a social gathering, she wears a cosmetic cone on the top of her head filled with scented oil
that slowly drips over her. She applies coal or eyeliner to her eyes. The favorite colors are black
and green and red ochre to her cheeks. Very likely you, the husband, wear eyeliner as well.
She uses plenty of oil and cream to prevent her skin from cracking because of the hot sun and the
sandy wind. She removes unwanted hair with a pair of tweezers. We have tweezers from Egypt,
dated as early as 3100 BC. To help her put on her makeup, she has a mirror. Mirrors are among the
commonest objects found in Egyptian tombs. Its disc would be made of highly polished bronze,
which creates a reflective surface. She wears a figure hugging, semi-transparent linen dress
that comes down as far as her ankles. It's usually white and it's sometimes pleated. She also wears
a variety of what we would call today bling, brightly colored, fairly cheap jewelry, which was
believed to have magical properties. This might include a pectoral, which she wears over her
breasts, a collar, a diadem, armlets, bracelets, anklets and several finger rings. The Egyptians
didn't use precious stones for jewelry. Instead, they used semi-precious stones, glazed compositions
and colored glass. You yourself wear a kilt that comes down either to the knee or to the calf.
If you were a man of rank, which I'm sorry or not, you'd wear it folded in such a way as to
create a front piece in the shape of a triangle, and then you'd also carry a thin staff as a sign
of your rank. On formal occasions, you'd wear a longer kilt and perhaps throw a pleated shoal
over your shoulder, and both you and your wife wear sandals. You both wear earrings too.
Partly because of the prevalence of head lice, you both keep your hair quite short.
Your wife wears a wig made either of human hair or sheep's wool, decorated perhaps with beads of
carnelian or phyans, and held in place with beeswax. A phyans is made out of a
glassy paste formed of crushed quartz, which is then fired. It was extremely popular for jewelry.
There's a wide range of wigs and hair pieces for her to choose from,
and you too wear a wig occasionally. On formal occasions, you wear a shoulder length wig
with the hair tucked behind your ears. You're probably beardless, though you might sport a goatee
with a thin moustache. Your children shave their heads and wear sidewalks. Most of the time, you
went barefoot, but on special occasions, you wear sandals woven of palm fiber with a thong
passed between the first and second toes, exactly like a style of sandal that is popular today.
What about your diet? There are, in fact, elaborate dietary laws in Egypt, including a ban on eating
either pork or fish, but they don't extend to you because you're at the bottom of the social scale
and eat whatever you can get your hands on. You particularly enjoy beef and waterfowl. There's
a wide variety of the latter to choose from, including ducks, geese, cormorants, cranes,
ibises, flamingos, and herons. Mice and hedgehogs are a particular delicacy, though you only get
to taste them once in a blue moon. As for fruit, you eat apples, apricots, and pomegranates. You
also consume nuts and dates. There are lots of different vegetables for you to choose from,
including celery, radishes, lettuces, and also lots of different types of bread as well.
Overall, however, your diet is very restricted. Herodotus says the workers who built the pyramids
lived on bread, onions, and beer. Beer is the most popular drink at all levels of society,
though wine, which was more expensive, is also consumed in large quantities.
To supplement your diet, you may go hunting, fishing, or fouling. You'll do so with bows and
arrows, with throwsticks, lassoes, and weighted ropes to catch game. Later in the day, you like to
have your friends over for a gathering, say. If it's a special gathering, and you have the
money to do so, you might hire some professional singers and dancers to liven things up.
In tomb paintings, we see musicians playing the equivalent of harps, liars, lutes, flutes,
oboes, drums, and tambourines. You might even hire a magician. Around 2600 BC, a magician called
Deidi performed a trick whereby he decapitated a goose, a duck, and an ox, and then
magically replaced their heads. At the party, your wife sits with the other women and you sit with
the men. If you don't feel like hosting a party, you could always frequent a tavern, but that's
only if you're a man. Only disreputable women and prostitutes frequent taverns. They certainly
weren't the kind of place where married couples hung out either. Alternatively, you might decide
to play a board game. The most popular board game was known as Senet. We don't know the exact rules.
We do know that the players had to move their pieces along a rectangular board of 30 squares
divided into three rows. Before going to bed, you might read or be read too. A number of Egyptian
classics have survived, the most famous being the Tale of Sinui, which is thought to be
dated to around 2000 BC. The most complete version of the tale was found at the workers village
in Der El Medina. It tells of a man who flees from his homeland, perhaps out of fear of the
pharaoh, but eventually returns home. There was no theatre or any other form of public
entertainment available to you. So your entire life was focused on your home and on your family.
Finally, if you and your wife decided to divorce, and divorce seems to have been fairly common,
she'll in theory be entitled to one third of the marital property. You might even be one of those
jerks who ejects his wife from the house without warning. A few Egyptians seem to have done
precisely that. One of the workers at Der El Medina claimed that he had looked after the wife of
one of his co-workers on two occasions after she'd been thrown out of her husband's house.
First for 40 days, and then for 20 days. And what's more, he wanted to be reimbursed from
her husband for all the food that he'd provided her with. In general, however, a divorced woman
would return to her parents if they were still living or to the house of one of her brothers.
It can't have been easy because there would have been loss of social status,
as well as impoverishment to deal with. We hear of one Egyptian father who promised his daughter
that if her husband threw her out, she could live in his storehouse. We don't know what happened
to children generally in the case of divorce. To conclude, the family was the cornerstone
of Egyptian life. It provided a support system that is unlike anything most of us can imagine today.
In many ways, it was more like a community than a family, a community that provided security,
identity, emotional support, role modeling, education and recreation. To be sure, with so many
people often living together under one roof and with so few sources of distraction outside it,
other than those provided by religion and work, it must have been a bit stifling at times and no
doubt two squabbles erupted, not least between the different generations. But overall, it provided
each of its members with a sense of belonging that can only have enriched their lives.
In the next lecture, we're going to talk about religion, about the observances that were performed
on behalf of the gods, about the duties of the Egyptian priesthood, and about the revolutionary
attempt to introduce something akin to monotheism in one of the most conservative societies of all time.
