Childhood hasn't always existed, at least not in the way we think of it.
Ancient peoples would have been staggered by the attention that children receive today.
Even the form in which we know it has been with us for just over a hundred years.
There's a moment in J.M. Barrie's Peter Pan when Tinkerbell might be dying, but will
recover if the audience declares its faith in fairies.
Peter Pan says to the audience,
Do you believe in fairies?
Say quick that you believe.
If you believe, clap your hands.
When the show first opened in London in 1904, the producers were so anxious that the audience
would simply sit on their hands that they primed the orchestra to clap.
In actual fact, the whole audience broke into applause.
The successor to all this sentimentalising is Toy Story 3, which deals with the defining
moment when a young adult male gets rid of his toys before going off to university.
A rite of passage if ever there was one.
Let me state categorically that an audience of Greeks would not have declared their faith
in fairies, nor would they surreptitiously have wept at the end of Toy Story 3 as many
grown men have done, reliving their own fond farewell to childhood.
The Greeks certainly didn't romanticise childhood.
I think it's extremely unlikely that any of them would have looked back nostalgically
on their childhood in the way so many of us do today.
For them it was merely a stage of life to traverse on the extremely hazardous path to
adulthood.
I say hazardous because so many of them didn't make it through.
In fact, this is going to be a rather somber lecture because there's no way of talking
about growing up Greek without acknowledging the fact that a very sizable number of children
were either stillborn or died in infancy or early childhood or adolescence, and not to
mention the fact that many women died giving birth as well.
And that was true, of course, not only of Greece, but also of Egypt, Mesopotamia, Persia
and Rome, and all the later cultures we're going to be talking about right up through
medieval times.
Though we don't have any statistics to go on, it's highly unlikely that neonatal mortality
was anything lower than 25%.
Let's suppose, however, that you survive the trauma of birth.
It would now be up to your father to decide whether to raise you.
If he didn't like the look of you, if you were misshapen or if you didn't respond to
the appropriate stimuli, the likelihood is that he would expose you.
If you happen to be a girl, he might choose to expose you anyway, irrespective of your
fitness, since boys were preferred in Greece, as is the case in China to this day.
I have a Chinese wonderful adopted daughter who was exposed, so this particular circumstance
has special poignancy for me.
One of the reasons why girls were exposed more often than boys was because they had
to be provided with a substantial dowry to attract a suitable husband.
This meant a considerable drain on a family's resources, especially if there was more than
one of them.
They were also less productive because they could only perform limited work in the home
and in the fields.
The lesser value placed on girls is eloquently expressed in Herodotus' comment on the Spartan
king Cleomenes, who I quote, died childless, leaving only one daughter behind.
And in a throwaway line by the comic writer called Posidipus, if you have a son, you
bring him up even if you're poor.
But if you have a daughter, you abandon her even if you're rich.
I'm sure that brought guffaws from the audience.
So if the decision was taken to abandon you, your father would instruct a slave or possibly
the midwife who delivered you to carry you from the house and abandon you to your fate.
Let's hope that you're left at a much frequented spot or that some compassionate individual
sees you and takes pity on you.
That's what happened to Edipus, who was retrieved by a herdsman and handed over to a childless
couple.
If you were born in Sparta, the state took the decision whether you were fit to rear.
You'd be inspected by the elders of the tribes, and if they gave you the thumbs down, you'd
be taken to the so-called place of exposure, the apophetae, where birds of prey and wild
beasts and the elements would do their work.
The elders had in effect condemned you to death, and it was illegal for anyone to retrieve
you.
Different city-states had different laws.
In the city of Ephesus, for instance, on the coast of Turkey, exposure was banned except
where, and I quote Plutarch, the ankles have become enlarged as a result of famine.
While in Thebes, in Mainland Greece, it was illegal in all circumstances.
Let's now suppose that you've survived birth and been deemed fit to rear.
One of life's hurdles over, but don't think you're out of the woods yet.
Your childhood will be beset with hazards from beginning to end.
The first few days will be particularly critical, so critical that you won't be given what
sociologists call a social persona.
That's indicated by the fact that you won't be incorporated into the oikos or oikir,
the family or household, for about five days after your birth in case you don't survive.
Given the absence of hygiene, the dangers of infection, and the variety of ailments to
which you might succumb, it was a pragmatic decision.
It perhaps helped to limit the emotional involvement of your parents in you, their newborn, until
you had demonstrated the capacity to survive the crisis of birth.
Immediately after birth, you'll be wrapped in swaddling bands from head to toe, and these
bands will remain on you for about 60 days and be changed only infrequently.
Serranus, a Greek physician of the 2nd to 3rd century AD, author of a work called Gynecology,
recommended the use of, I quote, soft woollen bands that are clean and not too thread bare,
some three or four fingers in breadth.
Well at least there was a nod here to hygiene in the recommendation that the bands should
be clean.
On the 5th day after birth, you'll be officially incorporated into the oikos in a ceremony
called the amphidromia.
Or at least that's what happened at Athens, we don't know what happened elsewhere.
The ritual performed at the amphidromia bears a superficial resemblance to a Christian christening
or a Jewish Brit.
Like many Greek rituals, however, it took place in the home, not in a church or synagogue
or temple and no priest officiated.
It takes its name from the fact that the newborn baby was carried around amphi, the half at
a run, dromei.
The ceremony seems rather comical to us perhaps, the father circling around a fire at a trot
holding a baby that's no doubt balling its head off, but I'm sure it would have had deep
religious significance for the Athenians.
That's because the half was the centre, literally and metaphorically, of their home and Hestia,
the goddess of the half was the protectress both of the home and of family life.
It was in effect a rite of passage, the first of many that you will undergo on the road
to adulthood.
Rites of passage provide among other things a support mechanism as you pass often in the
company of those in your peer group from one stage of life to another.
The juncture between one stage and another was believed to be particularly fraught with
danger, which is why it was necessary to invoke the gods for support.
In this case, you're passing from the womb to the outside world.
Of course, you're exposed to danger.
The amphidromia was both a solemn and a joyful occasion attended by relatives who would bring
gifts for the newborn.
They also give you the newborn charms to strap around the baby's body so as to protect it
against bad luck or demons or the evil eye.
The Greeks had no medical explanation for why so many of their newborn children died,
so they ascribed them to external factors.
Like other ancient peoples, and indeed like peoples living in the Mediterranean today,
you as a Greek believed that some individuals could harm a newborn baby just by looking
at it with the evil eye.
Even today in Greece, people spit when they see a baby, especially if they think it's
a beautiful baby, so that if anyone with the evil eye stares at it, they'll be distracted
or won't think it's so beautiful.
The amphidromia ended with a sacrifice followed by feasting, like most Greek rituals.
Then on the tenth day after your birth, assuming you survived, you would be given your name.
Most firstborn boys were named after their grandfather, as is still customary in Greece
today, indicating the importance of continuity in the family line.
A coda to all this so to speak.
The Greeks did not practice circumcision.
They thought that an uncircumcised penis was more dainty, quote unquote, as the historian
Herodotus puts it.
Sad to say, there was a very good chance that you would die in the first year of your life.
Evil diseases caused by a lack of clean drinking water and the absence of a hygienic human
waste disposal system were probably the chief causes of infant mortality, as they are in
the developing world today.
Add to that the fact that many women became pregnant again, very soon after parturition,
which depleted their nutritional reserves and reduced both the quantity and the quality
of their milk.
And for that reason, well-to-do families would usually hire a wet nurse to breastfeed their
newborn.
Close ties often developed between wet nurses and their charges.
In the odyssey, it's the nurse Euryklaia, who first recognises Odysseus when he returns
home to Ithaca in disguise.
And in Ischulis' Orestia, the most sympathetically drawn character is Chylissa, the nurse of
Orestes, who fondly reminisces about the chores she performed on his behalf long ago.
A babe in swaddling clothes, she says, can't tell you what the matter is, whether it's
hungry or thirsty or wants to go to the potty.
Babies can't control themselves, it just comes out and you can't do anything about it.
You learn to tell the future in my profession, but heaven's above, I was wrong often enough
and then I had to wash its clothing, I was a nurse and a washerwoman rolled into one.
Talking about potties, we actually have one from Greece.
It was found in the Agorah in Athens and it's made of terracotta.
It was potty state of the art when first invented.
It's in two parts, the baby slips its legs into the upper part with its bottom perched
over the lower receptacle, which can be conveniently removed and instantly replaced without having
to remove the baby from the upper part.
We also have babies feeding bottles, also made out of terracotta.
They have a hole to pour the milk in at the top and a spout to drink out of at the side.
Serranus, whom I mentioned earlier, recommends that the bottle be provided with what he calls
an artificial teat, probably made out of leather or cloth, to simulate the experience of sucking
on a real teat.
One of these bottles has the word mammo on it, meaning mummy, and another says drink,
don't drop.
We can well imagine that many of these bottles were thrown to the ground in fits of infant
temper and got smashed.
If you were an Athenian boy and you survived to the age of three, you along with all the
other Athenian boys of your age would be brought to the Anthesteria.
The word means flower festival, which took place in early spring.
You'd be given a wreath to wear on your head, a small cart, and most importantly a small
jug known as a cous.
Wine was the gift of the god Dionysus, a very important gift in the eyes of the Greek,
a source of release from cares and restraints, but also a source of great danger unless consumed
in moderation.
The drinking of wine was invariably accompanied by religious rituals, so the Anthesteria marked
your introduction to one of the most important gods, as well as your formal inclusion into
the community of Athens, and it was another rite of passage.
Parents whose children didn't make it through this important stage of life sometimes placed
a cous in the grave in compensation, and these jugs are very poignant because they're
illustrated with scenes of children playing.
From deposits in graves and from pictures on vases, we know that favourite children's
toys included hoops, miniature carts, models of horses on wheels, and models of boats spinning
tops, and perhaps most beloved of all, dolls with movable limbs.
Though a few of these toys may have been bought in the market, the majority were probably
homemade.
There were of course no children's books, instead children were told stories about heroes
and the gods, in other words, they were told myths.
Heroes had an important educational value, as well as constituting a type of legacy that
was shared by all Greeks.
We don't have anything like that today, and we're the poorer for it.
That's because they could be interpreted in a wide variety of ways in order to convey
whatever moral the teller wished to pass on.
The games included knuckle bones or astragaloi, the word for the ankle bone or the hawk of
a sheep, which was played by both children and adults.
Knuckle bones are found commonly in graves, which suggests that they were a very personal
item for the deceased.
Probably you'd toss a stone and then try to pick up and balance as many knuckle bones
as you could on the back of your hand, just like the American game of Jax today.
Another popular boys game was known as the cooking potter, a version of pig in the middle.
The child who was designated the cooking pot had to sit in the middle, while his playmates
circled around him, taunting him and hitting him till he managed to kick one of them, whereupon
the one who had been kicked took his place in the centre.
Ball games were also played, even though it was impossible to produce a completely spherical
ball.
A pig's bladder would be blown up and heated in the ashes of a fire to make it as spherical
as possible.
Popular pets included birds, dogs, geese, hares, goats and even monkeys.
Even the low life expectancy in the Greek world, a very significant percentage of children
grew up fatherless, which is the primary meaning of orphanos, which gives us our word orphan.
An equal number probably grew up motherless, as we've seen many mothers died when giving
birth.
It's been estimated that the incidence of maternal mortality in prehistoric societies
and that would include Greece for our purposes, even though it was highly literate, was between
10 and 20 percent.
Madea in Euripides' play of that name sums up the situation well by saying, I'd rather
stand in battle line three times than give birth once.
In Athens at least, some orphans received public support, namely those whose fathers
had died fighting for their country.
Whether you were a boy or a girl, you'd spend a great deal of time in the company of your
mother if she was alive and inevitably to that of your household slaves.
That's because your father would be out of the house most of the time, either in the
agorah, the commercial and political heart of the village or city, or he might be serving
on the council or attending the assembly or away serving in the army.
Though we can hardly talk of Greece as a matriarchy, it's likely that in some families
the mother's influence in the absence of the father was quite pronounced.
We don't hear of any schools in the Greek world until the 5th century BC.
Prior to that, if you had any formal education, it would have been provided by a private tutor,
even in the 5th century.
Probably only a minority of Greeks could afford to have their sons educated.
As an Athenian, you probably began your formal education around the age of seven.
We don't know much about the type of people who would have been your teachers, but it
seems they had little status, quite possibly the majority of them were slaves.
Your curriculum consisted of reading, writing, physical training, and learning to play a
musical instrument.
You learned to write on a waxed tablet using a pen called a stylus.
A key element in your education was memorization.
A character in Xenophon's treatise called the Symposium claims that his father made
him learn by heart the entirety of the Iliad and the Odyssey.
There are some 27,000 lines in all.
The most popular musical instrument was the lyre or kithera, an instrument somewhat similar
to a guitar.
It's unlikely that you would have been taught how to draw, or indeed that you had been taught
mathematics.
Athenian education seems very limited, judged by our standards, and yet it clearly paid
off.
Overall it produced the likes of Aesculus, Euripides, Sophocles, Socrates, Plato, just
to mention a few individuals who didn't turn out too bad, all things considered, though
that may have had more to do with the city they inhabited than its educational system
as such.
If you came from a wealthy family around the age of 16, you might undergo what we would
call tertiary education.
The principal subjects you'd be taught were rhetoric and philosophy.
These were essential for anyone who wanted to make a name for himself in public, whether
by speaking in the political assembly or in the law courts, or more informally at drinking
parties known as symposia.
I'll be talking about them in a later lecture.
As a topic we can't ignore about growing up Greek, however dispassful it is to us, namely
that some Greeks condoned pedorasty.
It's certainly true that in aristocratic circles, friendships between an older man and a younger
man were perfectly acceptable, even admired, particularly if there was a pedagogical element
involved.
The fact that Zeus himself was a pedorast may also have given pedorasty a certain cultural
acceptability.
Zeus abducted a youth called Ganymede to be his cup bearer on Mount Olympus.
The fact remains, however, that an increasingly hostile attitude towards pedorasty evolved
over time and in 5th century Athens, for instance, pedorasty was a very severe offense punishable
by death.
So far I've been talking exclusively about boys.
What about girls?
The fact is that girls received minimal education.
Most would have been instructed in the running of the household by their mothers, but little
else besides that.
A fragment of a lost play by Menander states, he who teaches his wife how to read and write
does no good, he is giving poison to a horrible snake.
In other words, it's better to leave girls uneducated, that way they'll cause less trouble.
This attitude even prevailed in Athens, which we would expect to be more enlightened than
most Greek communities.
A few aristocratic Athenian girls were sequestered at the sanctuary of Artemis Brauronia, Artemis
at Brauron, on the coast of Attica, where they performed religious rites, including
that of acting the bear, whatever that precisely means, but it's not clear that they received
an education in our sense of the word.
Probably some girls learnt how to read by default, so to speak, but we don't hear anything
about their formal education.
The only possible evidence for girls' education comes from the poetess Sappho, who lived from
the 7th to the 6th centuries BC, who's thought to have been associated with a school for
young women that flourished on the island of Lesbos, the origin of our word lesbian.
It's not completely clear that that's what it was.
Sappho was clearly attracted to some of the girls under her charge, but there's no evidence
to indicate that she ever expressed her feelings towards them physically.
The one society that did educate its girls was Sparta, to which I want to turn next.
But before I do so, I want to emphasise that we see Sparta entirely from the outside.
We have no literature from Sparta to help us build up the picture of daily life.
We learn about Spartan education, mainly from the biographer and philosopher Plutarch, who
was describing a system that had become defunct hundreds of years before he lived.
So, let's now suppose you're a Spartan boy and that you've survived the process of selection
at birth, I mentioned earlier.
At the age of six, you'll leave your parents and be subjected to a system of state education
that manifested all the worst features of a Victorian boarding school.
Its object is to instill discipline, obedience and low cunning in you.
It probably had the further consequence of turning you first into a brat and then into
a bully.
At twelve, you're placed in the equivalent of a barracks and kept on a minimal diet so
as to encourage you to steal without being caught.
There's a famous story of a Spartan boy who got caught with a fox.
He had stolen that he was hiding under his cloak.
Rather than admit to his crime and undergo shame, the boy denied the charge while the
fox gnawed his entrails, so causing him to die.
Then at sixteen, you'll enter a sort of military police known as the Crook Tire.
And for a period of about two years, you'll live in the wild in Messinia, the region to
the west of Sparta, and you'll have to fend for yourself while also intimidating the subjected
so-called hellot population.
Sparta was a very rigid, disciplined and conservative society.
I seriously doubt that the Spartans had much trouble with juvenile delinquents.
Not so the Athenians.
We hear of a group of vandals who went around Athens at night, disfiguring the faces of
the herms and smashing their fallacies.
A herm was a stone pillar surmounted by a carved head with an erect phallus that served
as a boundary marker.
It was otherwise uncarved.
The crime may have been intended as a prank, but it had serious consequences because it
was regarded as an extremely bad omen, and it was committed on the eve of the departure
of the Athenian naval expedition to Sicily in 416 BC.
The vandals, whatever their motive, were never caught.
To conclude, as you were growing up Greek, you would have experienced death at close quarters,
almost certainly losing a brother or a sister, as well as one or both of your parents, and
perhaps several close friends of your own age.
You would also have come to recognize that you were the member of an exclusive group,
and you would have accepted unquestioningly that not all people were human in the fullest
sense of the word.
In the next lecture, we're going to examine the plight of slaves who remained irrespective
of the years they attained children in the eyes of their owners, boy, being the form
of address most commonly used of male slaves, as was a practice too, in this country, under
slavery.
