Death was my first love, specifically how the Greeks faced up to death and what they
did on behalf of their dead. It was the subject of my PhD at University College London and
it became the subject of my first book, The Greek Way of Death. The Greeks, I concluded,
treated death as a rite of passage. We've met rites of passage before in this course,
they're set in place to help you negotiate your passage from one state of being to another,
in this case from being moribund to being integrated into Hades, the world of the dead.
Between these two states of being is a liminal place or condition, betwixt and between, when
you're neither one nor the other. The word liminal derives from the Latin word
limen, meaning a threshold. While you remain on the threshold, you're in great danger.
To help you across the threshold, society constructs rites of passage which enable
you to pass from one status to another, from here to there, as the Greeks put it.
In this case, the rites of passage facilitate your passage from this world into the next.
They're absolutely critical because if your relatives don't perform them on your behalf,
you cannot enter the underworld that the Greeks called Hades.
Bury me as quickly as possible, says Patroclus to his friend Achilles in the Iliad,
so that I can pass through the gates of Hades. Otherwise, you'll be left to wander endlessly
up and down the banks of the underworld river known as the Styx.
Before we talk about rites of passage, however, I'd like to make some general observations about
death in Greek society. In the midst of life, we are in death, says the Book of Common Prayer,
used by the Episcopal Church. Although we know that fact intellectually, we can be
forgiven for ignoring it most of the time. Jessica Mitford in The American Way of Death,
published in 1963, an exposé of the abuses perpetrated by the undertaking industry, said
that the Americans sublimate death, whereas the British ignore death. The Americans create
the fiction that they're dead are in a home, when the truth is that they're being handled
by professionals, whereas the British generally shun all contact with the body except at the
funeral. I think that hits the nail in the coffin, squarely on the head. Both societies fail to
confront the existential phenomenon of death head-on. In both societies, death generally takes
place in a hospital. The very opposite was the case in ancient Greece. As a Greek, you would have
faced death head-on, and I admire you for it. The dying, other than those who met their death
away from home, including those who met their death on the battlefield, almost invariably had
their family members around them. And it was their family, not professional undertakers, who took
care of them once they were dead. In fact, the Greek word for a funeral is chidaea, which literally
means a caring form. The word is still used today by the Greek Orthodox Church. As a Greek, you
would care for the bodies of everyone in your family who died, especially if you were a woman.
Given the much lower life expectancy in antiquity, if you survive to adult years, it's almost
certainly the case that you would already have experienced the deaths of several family members
and of some of your friends. And since the corpse was prepared for burial in the home,
you would have lived quite literally cheek by jowl with death. There were many other ways in
which death made itself visible to you in the Greek world. First, since Greek communities were far
more closely knit than ours are, you would have been much more aware of the death of a neighbor
or an acquaintance or a distant relative than is the case in our society, besides which the Greeks
were far more demonstrative in their expressions of grief than we are. So you would have heard
them grieving for hours on end. The Greeks didn't go in for the famous British stiff upper lip.
They believed in letting their hair down in more ways than one. I remember a friend of mine telling
me that when he learned in his early teens from a relative that his father had just died,
he began to cry, whereupon he was sharply reprimanded and ordered, peremptorily,
to act like a man. As a Greek, you would have been appalled. You would have thought it was
disrespectful to the dead to show no signs of emotion. So when Achilles in the Iliad learns of
the death of his dear friend Petroclus, he completely falls apart, at least by our standards
of subdued grieving. He tears his clothes, beats his breast, rolls about in the dust,
goes without food or drink for several days. He's a complete basket case. True, he holds himself
largely responsible for his friend's death. But the point is that no Greek would have thought
his behavior unmanly. On the contrary, they would have regarded it as entirely appropriate.
Manifestations of grief were regarded as a mark of honor to the dead. They were a way of saying
to the dead person that life without them now has no meaning. The dead, you believed, actually took
pleasure in witnessing your display of grief, irrespective of whether it was completely sincere.
Another way in which death would make itself felt was by the monuments arranged on either side
of all the roads that led out of your city. The most prestigious burial ground in Athens,
which was known as the Keromikus, which means the potter's quarter, is on the west side of the city,
just outside a major gate in the surrounding war. It lies along a public thoroughfare,
and it probably stretched for several hundred yards. Roads leading out of Athens' 140 or so
deems or townships were also lined with tombs. The funerary monuments that adorned the tombs
were the nearest ancient Greek equivalent to the advertising billboards or hoardings that
grace our major highways today. They sought to arrest the attention of passers-by and to
impress upon them the prestige and importance of the families that could afford to erect such
monuments. Many of the monuments in fact had epigrams commemorating the dead that address
the traveler. One of the most famous of these epigrams by the poet Simonides,
marked the communal grave of the 300 Spartans who died fighting the Persians
at Thermopylae in 480 BC. I've cited it before, but it deserves repetition, it reads,
Go tell the Spartans, stranger passing by, that here, obedient to their law, we lie.
That's what I call looking death, straight in the eye. So there's a kind of paradox at work here,
unrestrained wailing on the one hand and dignified calm on the other.
One of the most characteristic motives that we find on Greek tombstones is the handshake between
the living and dead. Both figures invariably exhibit the dignified calm that I just mentioned.
And that's what Greek tragedy is all about too. It's about looking death squarely in the eye.
As a Greek you knew that terrible things happen and you knew too that by confronting them head
on you'd be a lot better able to deal with them and get on with life. I'd say the Greeks got it just
right. I'm going to ask you to try to put yourself in the sandals of a dying Greek. It's an unpleasant
thought I know, but there's no escaping it if you want to fully experience the other side of history.
Let's assume you're dying in your home surrounded by your relatives including young children.
There won't be any physician at hand to give you painkillers. A physician may have treated you in
the earlier stages of your sickness, but once it became inevitable that there could only be one
outcome, the medical profession had nothing to offer you. It's also extremely unlikely that a
physician would be called in to put you out of your misery by euthanasia, a coined word of
Greek etymology meaning good death, but which has no ancient Greek equivalent. In fact the
Hippocratic oath, which was probably widely adopted, enjoined upon those physicians who took it
quote, not to administer a poison to anybody who asked for one and not to propose such a course.
So let's hope your final illness is short and painless.
The poet keeps has a wonderful line in Ode to a Nightingale.
I have been half in love with easeful death. The Greeks conceived of easeful death in the
form of the god Apollo who came to strike them down with his so-called gentle arrows. A beautiful
image I always think. Well that's the best that he or any other of the gods has to offer you.
They certainly don't have any consolation to give you. In fact once they see the end is nigh,
they'll give you a wide berth. You're just about to become a rotting corpse as far as they're concerned.
In Europe it is play the Hippolytus when Hippolytus is dying, the goddess Artemis to whom he has
devoted himself exclusively all his life and with whom he's had a very close relationship,
bids him farewell, explaining to him that it's not lawful for a deity to be present at a death
because the pollution that a corpse releases would taint her. Well we've met the concept of
pollution already in the lecture on Greek religion and I'll have a bit more to say about it in a moment.
The one god who may have taken some slight interest in the fate of the dying is the healing god
Asclepius. When Socrates passes from this world to the next in Plato's dialogue the Crito he has
this to say, I owe a cock to Asclepius, I see that it's paid. A cox were sacrificed to Asclepius.
Socrates may be indicating that Asclepius eased his passing, although it's possible too that he is
merely suggesting philosophically that death is a cure for life.
So you expire and immediately the women in your family begin keening and
allulating so that everyone in the neighborhood knows of your demise. It's the women too who
will now take charge of your body and prepare it for burial. They close your mouth and eyes,
tie a chin strap around your head and chin to prevent your jaw from sagging, wash your whole
body, anoint it with olive oil, clothe you and wrap you in a kind of winding sheet leaving only
your head exposed. Then they lay your body out on a couch with your head propped up on a pillow
and your feet facing the door. This done they sing dirges in your honor. This is the scene that is
depicted on the very earliest Greek vases with figurative decoration. It's called the
prophecies which literally means the laying out of the body and it represents the first stage
in the process that will take you from this world to the next, from here to there, as the Greeks
put it, the first rite of passage in other words that they perform on your behalf. Meanwhile,
relatives and friends will call at the house and join in the grieving.
The second rite of passage is the ekphora. Ekphora means literally the carrying out of your body,
specifically from your home to your place of burial. According to Athenian law, the ekphora
had to take place within three days of your death, though in hot weather it's likely that it would
have taken place much sooner. The ekphora had to take place before sunrise so that it wouldn't
create a public nuisance. If you happen to be wealthy, your body would be transported in a
cart or carriage drawn by horses. We also see this scene depicted on the earliest vases with
figurative decoration. Alternatively, professional undertakers might be employed to bear your corpse
and break up the ground for burial. They were known as ladder men, climaque of foroi,
because they'd lay your body on a ladder which they then carried horizontally. But if professional
undertakers are employed, they don't have any physical contact with you before this. The Greeks
would have been shocked and appalled by the idea of handing over your body to professionals
to prepare it for burial. It's your relatives too who will conduct the burial service such as
it is. No priest will be present. Priests were debarred for exactly the same reason that Artemis
absented herself from the dying Hippolytus so as not to incur pollution because if they incurred
pollution they might transmit it to the gods. We know absolutely nothing about the details of the
burial service. Truth to tell we don't even know if there was a burial service as such. If any
traditional words were spoken they're not recorded. Both inhumation and cremation were practiced
though cremation being more costly was seen as more prestigious. If you're cremated once the fire
dies down your relatives will gather up your ashes, place them in an urn which they then will bury
along with your grave gifts. The commonest grave gift was pottery. In fact that's why
so many high quality Greek vases have survived intact because they were placed intact in the
ground. Over time however the Greeks became more stingy. Chances are if you die in the fourth
century BC say all you'll get is a couple of oil flasks known as leekithoi filled with olive oil.
Olive oil was regarded as a luxury item. Some Greeks however were so stingy that they purchased
leekithoi with a smaller internal container to save them the expense of filling the whole
vase with oil. I suppose they thought you wouldn't notice. Then after your grave has been filled in
they erect a grave marker over it. The third and final rite of passage having been performed
all the mourners return to your home for a commemorative banquet. Because as we've seen
your corpse was regarded as a source of pollution of the Greek word miasma which means much the same
in English you had to be buried outside the city walls. A burial within a settlement was extremely
rare after the eighth century BC and the same was true of Rome. The earliest Roman law code,
the law of the 12 tables dated around 450 BC contains the provision the dead shall not be
buried or burned inside the city. We can't be sure but the origins of the belief in pollution
may be connected with a kind of primitive sense of hygiene. Your relatives and anyone else who had
come into contact with your corpse were debarred from participation in any activities outside the
home until your corpse had undergone purification. A reintegration into the community for mourners
didn't take place until several weeks after the funeral. Your relatives also had to take measures
to prevent the polluting effect of your corpse from seeping into the community and that included
providing a bowl of water brought from outside the house so that visitors could purify themselves
on leaving the house. So you're dead and buried and you're ready to enter Hades. That's no big
deal you just need to get Karen to ferry you across the River Styx. Don't forget to pay him
what I mean is I hope that someone put an obol in your mouth that's a Greek coin worth one sixth
of a drachma just enough for a one-way ticket across the River Styx to Hades.
What happens to you once you cross to the other side? Truth is we don't really know. The only
semi-detailed description of Hades is provided by Homer who suggests that the quality of life down
there was cheerless albeit devoid of any terrors. He characteristically describes the dead as
strengthless and witless. Whatever you've done in this life you'll end up in the same place as
everyone else. You don't have to face a postmortem judgment like the Egyptians because the Greeks
didn't have the concept of heaven and hell. It's true that deep in the bowels of Hades
there was a drafty region called Tartarus to which were consigned those who had insulted
the majesty of the gods like poor old Ceasifus who perpetually has to roll a stone uphill
which perpetually rolls down again but that wouldn't include you. Your crimes are much too petty
to warrant the attention of the gods and merit that kind of punishment.
Over time however the Greeks became increasingly dissatisfied with the concept of equal misery
for all. They began to hanker for the good afterlife. So from the 6th century BC onwards
they gradually came to believe that those who had been initiated into certain secret
rites could expect a more blessed existence in the hereafter. A more blessed existence
than those who had not been initiated. We don't know exactly what they meant by blessedness.
It's a state of being that never actually gets described. The most prominent of these rites were
the Eleusinian mysteries so named for Eleusis an Attic township or deem some 13 miles from Athens
on the Attic coast. All Greek speakers were eligible for initiation including women and slaves.
Our word mystery in fact comes from moustes meaning an initiate. The inclusion of slaves was
very unusual in the Greek world. Greek religion on the whole enforced social distinctions
by making it plain that if you had money to throw around you'd be more likely to get the
attention of the gods but not in this case. Initiation came at a snip.
The one category of people who were excluded apart from non-Greek speakers were murderers.
Fair enough I'd say. Eleusis reached the height of its importance in the 4th century BC
but it was still important in Roman times. In fact such was its prestige that it numbered
several Roman emperors among its initiates including Hadrian and Marcus Aurelius.
Your initiation would take place in a windowless building known as the Telesterion or place of
initiation which at its maximum size held about 3,000 people. What you witnessed inside however
is a complete mystery. In fact the rites were so sacred that the Athenian state imposed the
death penalty on anyone who divulged them. The poet Aeschylus almost got executed on this charge.
There's no evidence that once you've been initiated you are required to conform to any rule of life
so far as we can tell the Eleusinian mysteries like all other mystery religions promised eternal
bliss on purely ritualistic grounds. Because they admitted women slaves and all Greek speakers
the Eleusinian mysteries were arguably one of the first universalist type religions in human history.
Universalist is putting it a bit too strongly. You had to be able to as I say speak Greek or at
least to mouth a few Greek words. For this reason these mystery religions presented a
serious rival to Christianity. Christian writers went to inordinate lengths to suggest that
initiates witnessed lewd and immoral acts but their testimony is heavily biased and should
probably be discounted. Whether or not you had been initiated into the mysteries a being a dead
Greek meant being part of a continuing family. The so-called handshake motif which I mentioned earlier
and which frequently appears on gravestones symbolizes that fact perfectly. Either the two
figures are parting from this life or greeting one another in the life to come. We can't tell
which and it actually doesn't matter. What the motif demonstrates is a belief in human fellowship
that outlasts death and is eternal. The sense of connectedness between the living and the dead
was further conveyed by the fact that it was the duty of your relatives to visit your tomb at
periodic intervals and supply you with food and drink typically wine and cakes which they would
deposit on or beside your funerary monument very much as the Egyptians used to do the same sort
of thing on behalf of their dead. This practice suggests a very different belief than the belief
in Hades which I talked about earlier. It suggests that the dead remained in proximity to the
grave or were at least capable of visiting it periodically but who said that beliefs about
the afterlife have to be consistent. I want to conclude with a few words about the feelings
engendered by special categories of the dead. I'll begin with those who died young. Hardly
surprisingly those who died young elicited special pathos. In the early so-called archaic period
aristocratic youths who died at the height of their physical powers were commemorated by
statues of naked standing youths and known as Kuroi. Since Kuroi were also dedicated to the
god Apollo the dead were in effect assimilated to the youthful god physically perfect and ageless
for eternity. The Greeks mark the tombs of those who died at marriageable age with a stone marker
in the form of a vase containing the lustral water that a bride bathed in before her wedding.
Pathos indeed. Another category of the special dead were murder victims who were considered
to be both vengeful and malignant. So if you were a murderer you'd be well advised to take
precautions against your victim notably by performing a ritual known as mascalismus.
That involved cutting off your victims hands and feet and stringing them around your neck
because murder victims were malignant you could invoke their assistance in a lawsuit.
You would do this by inscribing a lead tablet with the names of the persons you wish to curse
inscribed upon it. A typical curse might read eye curse the eyes the ears the hands the feet and
the heart of my neighbour Nicodemus. You'd then deposit the tablet in the murder victim's grave
in the hope that he or she would deliver it to the underworld or phonic powers the underworld
powers were always looking to do mischief. A much more powerful category than murder victims
were the heroic dead. A hero was someone whose life had been unlike that of ordinary mortals. Not
because he had been good but because his life experience had been extraordinary. Many heroes
in fact would be judged to be criminals by our standards. Oedipus became a hero at the end of
his life because he committed two of the most terrible crimes imaginable even though he did so
involuntarily. He had killed his father and married his mother. A hero's physical remains were
powerful but only in the vicinity of the grave. If you summoned a hero in time of danger he would
come to the rescue of your city. You'd do this by means of a blood offering because heroes liked
to drink blood. The 196 Athenians who died fighting the Persians at Marathon in 490 BC
all acquired heroic status. They were collectively buried on the battlefield at Marathon just 26
miles from Athens under a mound erected in their honour. The mound or sores as it is known is rightly
venerated to this day. To conclude the Greeks retained close emotional ties with their dead whose
welfare depended on the efforts that they the living performed on their behalf. Even so their
connection with their dead was much weaker than that which existed between the Egyptians and their
dead and they certainly did nothing to preserve their dead physically. When Socrates was asked
whether he wanted to be cremated or buried he replied anyway you like so long as you can catch
me. That's my philosophy exactly. In the next lecture we're going to turn our attention from
the Greeks to the Persians. We're going to investigate both the lives and the mindset of the
Persians as well as the mindset of the Greeks in relation to those self-same Persians. This will
take us to the roots of the east-west dichotomy which exerts such a powerful influence upon our
mindset to this day.
