Imagine working down a mine 10 hours a day and then being shackled for the other 14 as
you try to catch a bit of sleep or simply huddle with your fellow slaves to keep warm.
If you happen to be in a more quote unquote favorable situation, imagine hearing with
unimaginable dread your master's heavy tread and knowing that he is about to force himself upon you
yet again as he has four nights in a row. Or imagine you're feeling sick, too sick to get up.
You know, however, that if you don't get up and do your job, your master or your supervisor
will leave you to die. Whereas if you do manage to struggle up from the ground,
you'll have you beaten yet again for failing to do your job properly. Your bruises haven't
completely healed from last time either. I'm not going to try to justify Roman slavery.
It was every bit as inhumane as Greek slavery. But as in Greece, so in Rome, slaves fulfilled
many roles and encompassed a variety of statuses. And not all of them lived lives of abject misery
like the poor wretches I described a moment ago. We can also ask the same question of the Romans
that we did of the Greeks. Could they have achieved all that they did without a slave under
class? Opinions differ as they do with Greece. And yet despite the similarities, there were also
profound differences between the two systems. The chief one being that a much larger proportion
of Roman slaves achieved freedom after putting in years of service. The commonest way to become a
Roman slave was by being captured in war. Rome's wars typically resulted in the enslavement of
tens of thousands of people, sometimes many more. The first great influx of Greek slaves into Rome
occurred after the defeat of the Macedonians at the Battle of Pidna in 168 B.C. Perhaps as many
as a quarter of a million Carthaginians were enslaved following the destruction of their city
in 146 B.C. And another large influx occurred after the Mithridatic wars in the 80s B.C.
However, the largest influx of all, perhaps half a million, was of Gauls following Julius Caesar's
conquest of Gaul in the 50s B.C. These numbers indicate that we're talking of a vast slave force,
far larger than at any other time of human history. Violent criminals were enslaved as well, typically
by being condemned to working in the mines or the quarries, or by being trained to fight as
gladiators. We talked a bit about the horrors of working in the mines and quarries when we were
in Egypt. Many slaves too, known as Werny, were houseborn and grew up in a Roman family. Lastly,
some Romans, when they were reduced to destitution, sold themselves into slavery to survive, though
this practice seems to have become rare by the 1st century A.D. As a Roman, you would have regarded
owning a slave as your birthright, just like a Greek. If you were wealthy, you might have owned
hundreds of slaves. A certain Pedania Secundus, who was prefect of Rome under the Emperor Nero,
staffed his townhouse with no fewer than 400 slaves. Well, if all 500 or so senators owned
as many slaves as Secundus, which they may well have done, then the group as a whole would have
owned 200,000 slaves. As I suggested in the first lecture, it's quite possible that there were
as many slaves in the Roman Empire as there were free. The cost of a slave varied considerably
according to his or her looks, age, education and ethnicity. The slave industry was well regulated
according to the best traditions of Roman bureaucracy. You had to pay a sales tax when
you purchased a slave, and a record of every sale had to be kept in the public archives.
The slaves came, moreover, with a guarantee. If a slave you'd bought turned out to be defective,
let's say he or she suffered from epilepsy and the vendor hadn't disclosed this fact,
or if he couldn't write and the vendor had said he could, you, the buyer, were entitled to a full refund.
So, let's imagine that you're a Greek slave and that a Roman has just purchased you. The Romans
particularly liked Greek slaves. For them, owning a Greek slave was rather like employing an English
butler. Greek slaves carried themselves with an air of superiority. They probably spoke Latin with
a posh, that's to say, heavy Greek accent, and they were obviously jolly intelligent. All the
slaves in the household of the Emperor Augustus, whom his biographer Suetonius mentions by name,
were Greek. Let's say you've been purchased as a domestic. That's not such a bad deal.
You'll probably live in the house, perhaps a very nice, swanky house. Let's hope your owner is a
decent sort of chap because there's no legal limit to the cruelty you might have to endure from him,
if he's not. Just think of that brute, pedious Polio, one of the knights. Polio was ready to
toss one of his slaves into a pond filled with lampries, merely for breaking one of his crystal
goblets. The Emperor Augustus happened to be having dinner with him at the time and so the slave
threw himself on Augustus' mercy. Augustus was so disgusted by Polio's cruelty that he ordered
him to smash all his crystal goblets and have his pool filled in. Although the anecdote was
preserved as proof of Augustus' magnanimity, it also reveals what your master might be capable of,
if provoked. The way your master and mistress treat you will depend largely on how skilled you are.
If you can read and write, you might land a plum position as personal secretary,
taking down correspondence to dictation and reading out loud. Or you might become a
pied-a-gogos with the task of looking after your master's son or sons, accompanying them
when they left the house and perhaps teaching them as well. If you're big and burly, you might be the
janitor or doorkeeper. That too is a position of trust because you'll have to know whom to turn
away from the door and whom to let in. If you're female, then the best position to hold is that
of nurse or personal attendant to your mistress. Most well-to-do households have nurses since
Roman mothers tend to regard child rearing with disdain. We don't quite know why that was.
It may have been that they simply preferred to be independent of their children. Being a nurse or a
personal attendant to a Roman child means that you'll be trusted completely and therefore be
treated decently. And not only that, but once your charge has grown up and become an adult,
you'll forever remain an important figure in his or her life since that person will have spent
so much time in your care. Another very important job to land is that of chief cook. Whenever your
master holds a party, it'll be your hide that is on the line. Lower down the food chain, so to speak,
come the cleaners, the gardeners, the handymen, the fetches, the carriers and so forth.
And talking of fetches and carriers, bear in mind that if you live in a city like Rome,
everything perishable has to be bought the day it's going to be eaten because there's no way of
keeping food fresh. So if you're a fairly quick witted girl, you might be sent out to the market
each morning around dawn to do the shopping. You'll be expected to barter and haggle. If you pay over
the odds, you'll be reprimanded sharply. And when you come back, you may be the one who's sent out
again to fetch water from a public fountain because the chances are that the house doesn't have
running water in Pompeii. The percentage of houses that had their own water supply was probably as
low as 10%. At night, you'll likely bed down on a heap of straw with a blanket on top, either in
the kitchen or the hallway or up in the attic. If you're an attractive girl, however, as I
indicated earlier, you may have to submit to the sexual desires of your master.
The satirical poet juvenile tells of a female slave called Pescus, who was regularly beaten
by her mistress because her mistress suspected her of servicing the sexual needs of her husband.
Pescus had what we might call the worst of both worlds. And there were no doubt many slaves in
her situation. So what can you do in a situation like that or in any other situation where you're
abused? You can't go to court because you have no legal rights. The only thing to do is mutter
under your breath, pilfer food, engage in slander, spread false rumors, a feign ignorance when you're
questioned, and generally drag your feet. In numerous ways, you could in other words be
covertly insubordinate. It might not seem to amount to much in our eyes, but it would have
brought you perhaps some small measure of satisfaction. Though as a slave, you can't
legally marry, you are entitled as a domestic to establish a family unit of sorts. However,
your owner is entitled to separate you and your partner if he chooses. And of course he's
entitled to sell either one of you at any time too. In addition, any offspring you might produce
automatically becomes his property. It wasn't until very late in the imperial period that
legislation was introduced to protect slave families. The law code of Theodosius, dated
to the 5th century AD, decreed that from now on, if slaves were separated from their families,
they had to be reunited and placed with one owner. If you're really lucky, you might rise to the
level of one of those slaves who manage the affairs of their master or mistress as managers,
bailiffs, debt collectors, captains of merchant ships, and so forth. Similar to the Greek slaves
who lived apart, as the phrase is, whom we met in an earlier lecture. One of the reasons why the
Romans employed slaves in these roles was because they could punish them severely if they were
dishonest or incompetent, which they couldn't have done to citizens. And another is that
Romans were unwilling to forfeit their independence by placing themselves at the service of an employer.
There were lots of other jobs you might perform semi-independently as a slave. If you're a Greek
slave and sufficiently qualified, you might be hired out by your owner as a physician or teacher.
Greeks dominated the medical and teaching professions, and in those roles were able to
build up considerable reputations. It was partly that snobbish thing that worked in their favour.
A Roman would have had much more confidence in a Greek physician or teacher than one of any other
ethnicity. He'd know that he could trust him from the accent alone. You might also work for your
master as a potter, a painter, or other kind of craftsman. That way, you'd also lead a fairly
independent life. You'd have to pay a large part of your earnings to your master, of course, but at
least you'd have job satisfaction. Finally, you might be a prostitute working for a pimp master.
For many women who worked in the sex industry in Rome, life must have been a living nightmare.
Many girls would have begun their careers before they entered puberty. They'd work
long hours and be subjected to all manner of verbal and physical abuse.
Of course, they could always live in hope that one of their rich clients would fall in love with
them and buy their freedom. A character called Ascultus in Petronius' novel, Satyrican, reports
that he freed a female slave who had shared his bed so that, in his words, no one else could wipe
his dirty hands on her breasts. Ascultus was a true romantic. Mainly, however,
this kind of fantasy was the stuff of fairy tales. Equally miserable was the lot of agricultural
slaves who worked on large estates and who had no personal contact with their owners. As a result,
they weren't human in his eyes, which meant he could, with an easy conscience, work them to death.
They slept in chains at night in a kind of prison known as an agastulum. A pliny the elder who
owned over 4,000 agricultural slaves prided himself on the fact that he didn't keep them in chains,
but he was the exception that proved the rule. Just how badly agricultural slaves were treated
is evidenced by the fact that it was they who repeatedly rose in revolt. Agricultural slaves
from southern Italy made up the bulk of Spartacus' army in the greatest slave revolt of all from
73 to 71 BC. Estimates as to the size of his rebel army vary between 70,000 to 120,000.
Other deadly occupations in the literal sense of the term included working in the quarries
and working down the mines. The Greek historian Polybius records that as many as 40,000 slaves
worked in the Roman silver mines near Cartagena in southern Spain. Although this is just an
estimate, it's probably not wide of the mark. The fact that mining slaves never rose in revolt
is probably a reflection of the fact that they lived in intolerable conditions and didn't have
the strength to do anything but get through just one more day. Finally, some slaves were the property
of the state. It was their job to do such tasks as repair the roads, maintain the aqueducts and
load and unload cargo in ports like Austria at the mouth of the river Tiber and many of them too
slept in chains. The Romans were firm believers in the efficacy of corporal punishment. They
regularly beat their children for misbehaving and they would have had no hesitation in giving you
a disobedient slave a severe beating as well. As in Greece, if your evidence was required
in a court of law, you had to give it under torture and no doubt for the same reason,
either because you were deemed incapable of distinguishing truth from falsehood or because
it was believed that you would happily purge yourself just for the hell of it.
Whether you're a male or a female, your master was also entitled to condemn you to death without
recourse to a trial. He will probably have you crucified, the form of execution that was reserved
for traitors and insurgents as well. It's one of the most horrific forms of execution ever devised
by man because it's not only extremely painful but also long drawn out. Crucifixion was an industry
in the Roman world. If a Roman had a slave he wanted to crucify, he'd engage the services of
a contractor who specializes in crucifixion to provide the planks, the ropes, the chains, the
nails and other necessities. The contractor will also loan him a team of whipmen who will strip
the slave, flog him till he bleeds and then nail him to a cross. He'll be scorched by day
and frozen by night while the blood slowly, oh so slowly, ebbs from his body. His legs will be
broken so that he'll experience acute pain as he vainly tries to support the weight of his body.
When at last he dies, perhaps after as many as 48 hours, his corpse will be left on the cross
to be picked at by dogs and birds of prey as a warning to other miscreant slaves.
Then the body will be taken down from the cross and dragged off by a hook to be dumped
in a shallow grave. When Marcus Lycinius Crassus eventually crushed the slave revolt
led by Spartacus, he crucified 6,000 slaves along the Appian Way leading out of Rome.
A more humane form of execution because it was relatively instantaneous was being burnt alive
or being fed to the lions. All this said, over time some modest improvement in the lot of slaves
did take place. The Emperor Claudius, who reigned in the middle of the first century AD,
decreed that if a sick slave was abandoned by his or her owner, the slave was to be automatically
freed. And half a century later, the Emperor Hadrian decreed that a slave was not to be
automatically put to death if his master was murdered as had been the case up to that period.
Hadrian also abolished a gastular, the slave prisons used for agricultural and industrial slaves.
Some scholars have suggested that the Romans lived in perpetual fear of their slaves.
True, there was a Roman proverb which stated, every slave we own is an enemy whom we harbour.
It's true as well that the Romans must have been the object of constant gossip by their slaves,
not least because their slaves would have known all their sordid little secrets.
But I hardly think the average Roman would have feared being murdered in his bed. It's
been calculated that the odds of that happening were about the same as the odds of being struck
by lightning. There was a much greater chance that one of your slaves might run off. We have
a number of public notices describing in detail the appearance of runaway slaves and offering
a reward to anyone who finds them. Many runaway slaves did no doubt manage to blend in and evade
arrest. Perhaps there was even an underground railway of sorts so that runaway slaves would
know that there were safe houses where they could take refuge in. If a runaway slave was caught,
however, he or she would be brutally punished. He or she would also be branded on the face
and have to wear a metal collar around the neck. As with the Greeks, so with the Romans,
we have to face the unpalatable fact that even their most advanced thinkers were incapable of
conceiving of a world without slaves. Why was that? Just the very human inability we meet
time and time again to think outside the box. The philosophical movement known as Stoicism,
which had great appeal for elite Romans, urged kindness to all, including slaves,
and recognition of the fact that they, too, are human. Seneca, himself a Stoic, wrote in one of
his letters, serrisunt imo homines, which translates, they are slaves, meaning according to popular
reporter, according to their status, on the contrary, they are men. A revolutionary sentiment?
I hardly think so. At first, neither Seneca nor any other Roman philosopher ever recommended
the abolition of slavery. This is all the more remarkable in light of the fact that
we know of at least one leading philosopher who was himself a former slave, namely Epictetus.
Second, I seriously doubt whether Seneca would have classified all slaves as human. I suspect he
was thinking of that very small elite circle of slaves with whom he and others of his kind
enjoyed intimate relations, his manservant, as we would call him, and his secretary or scribe,
the person who no doubt wrote the letter to dictation. Similarly, the Christian Church,
though it accepted slaves among its ranks of worshipers, never took the imaginative leap
of recommending the abolition of slavery. In short, the ancient world never produced a single
abolitionist. And yet, to a much greater degree than the Greeks, the Romans extended to slaves
the possibility of eventually achieving their freedom. As a domestic, you earned a small wage
called peculium. And if you saved your wages, perhaps for as few as seven years in some cases,
you could at the end of that time hand your slave savings over to your master or mistress and
respectfully ask for your freedom. Providing your savings was a way to compensate your master or
mistress for the loss of their investment and to provide them with the means of making a new
investment. The system clearly reduced the desire to revolt, at least among privileged slaves,
because it meant they had an interest in maintaining the status quo.
The process by which you were awarded your freedom was called manumission, which means literally
to send away or dismiss with the hand. Mito, I send, Manu, from the hand. If your master or
mistress consented to free you, and he probably would, you'd be formally given your freedom
in the presence of a magistrate known as a pretor who would present you with a cap of freedom
to signal your new status. Incidentally, when Brutus and his co-conspirators slew Julius Caesar
in 44 BC, they minted coins depicting a cap of freedom between two daggers to indicate that they
had rid Rome of a hated master. And you might also receive your freedom from your owner by the
terms of his or her will. On becoming a freedman, you take the name of your previous owner. He now
officially becomes your patronus, our word patron, whose literal meaning is stand-in father. Tyro,
for instance, who was the personal secretary of Marcus Tullius Chichorro, I took the name Marcus
Tullius Tyro. You'll be expected to maintain regular contact with your previous owner and will
be legally bound to work for him for several days each year. You'll join his retinue when he makes
public appearances and be expected to be supportive of him in his attempts to advance his political
career. In theory, if you behave disrespectfully towards him, he could revoke your freedom.
The service due to him was known as obsequium, from which our word obsequious derives from the
Latin verb sequo, to follow. So, though you're now a libertus, a freedman, our word liberty,
you are still under a lasting obligation to your former master or mistress.
How will you survive as a next slave? Well, with luck you've learned a trade or profession that
will enable you to become self-sufficient. If you haven't, and if you worked for a poor family,
you'll probably end up being a day laborer, hiring your services out as best you can.
But let's assume the best. As an artisan or artist of some sort, you could earn a decent living,
but we know for a fact that many artists received their training as slaves.
If you're really talented, or perhaps really unscrupulous, there's no limit to the fortune
you might achieve. Two extremely wealthy and powerful freedmen were Pallas and Narcissus.
They worked as secretaries under the Emperor Claudius. Pliny the Elder says that they each
owned an estate worth in excess of 200 million cestresses. There's no way to equate that sum
with modern money, but it's safe to say that they would have made the top of the Fortune 500 list,
each with his own large, private jet. One of the most memorable characters in Latin literature
is a filthy, rich freedman called Trimalchio, whose famous dinner party is the centerpiece of
Petronius' novel, The Satirican. Trimalchio is flamboyant, boastful, and uneducated. He's a vulgar
parvenu, and as Roman readers of Petronius' novel, we cannot but despise him for his vulgarity,
and there must have been lots like him. No matter how much money you make, however,
you'll never escape the opprobrium of being a former slave. You'll be excluded from holding
any official post. The one exception is that of, say, we're Augustalis, and officiate in the imperial
cult. And no self-respecting Roman will rub shoulders with you in public. However, if you father
a son, your son, known as a libertinas, son of a freedman, will automatically become a Roman citizen,
and none of the opprobrium that attaches to you will rub off on him. It's a fact that owing to the
prevalence of manumission, a substantial proportion of the Roman population in the imperial period
was descended from slaves. Many of them too became quite distinguished. The poet Horace for
one was the son of a freedman. The historian Tacitus, writing about the first half of the
first century AD, claims that most knights and many senators would ascend it from slaves.
To conclude, there's little doubt that if you had to choose between being a Greek slave
and being a Roman slave, you'd choose to work for the Romans. At least the drudgery of being a slave
was for many of you, relieved by the hope of one day becoming free. And hope is what keeps people
alive and gives their lives meaning. The Romans, unlike the Greeks, understood that their slave
population included many highly talented and enterprising individuals, and that these people
could greatly benefit Roman society once they had earned their freedom. In the next lecture,
we're going to examine the lives of those who served Rome in another capacity, the common
soldiery that guarded its borders.
