As we've seen, the Roman Empire is a pretty good place to live, whatever your religious
belief happens to be. We, the Romans, are a tolerant lot, and can accommodate any god
imaginable, Egyptian, Mesopotamian, Celtic, so long as he or she doesn't demand human
sacrifice. We're one big happy family. We don't object to your worshiping Yahweh either
if you happen to be Jewish. The only thing is, kindly have the courtesy to pay your
respects to our gods as well, the gods of the Roman state. It is our empire, after all.
So be a good citizen and acknowledge our gods. Well, that of course is what put the Jews
in a quandary. They could only worship the one god. It put the Christians in the same
quandary as we'll see in our next lecture. It's that quandary that is the subject of
the next two lectures. In today's lecture, we're going to be talking about the Jews.
The Jews are a remarkable people. As we've seen, all the peoples we've investigated
so far have believed in many gods, the Mesopotamians in Baal and Ishtar, the Egyptians in Osiris
and Isis, the Greeks in Zeus and Hera, the Romans in Jupiter and Juno, and in many more
gods, of course. The Pharaoh Akhenaten had made a brave attempt to introduce something
akin to monotheism, but it had gone nowhere. But the Jews worshipped the one god, and how
they came to this discovery is a mystery. At first, they said that their god was better
and stronger than all other pagan gods, and then later they said he, they clearly thought
of him as a man, was the only god. It was he who had created the earth and human beings.
And not only that, but he was their god, and they were his people, no matter how much they
suffered. That was an entirely new idea. When the Romans began to conquer the Mediterranean,
they found thriving Jewish communities in many cities. The Jewish population of Judea,
the Jewish homeland, represented only a fraction of the total. The Jews were a Mediterranean
people. This was partly due to the fact that when Cyrus the Great liberated the Jews,
who had been transported to Babylon, many of them chose not to return to Judea.
The Greek geographer, Strabo, writing in the early first century AD, asserts that they,
quote, had reached every town, and it is hard to find a place in the world in which this race
has not penetrated, and where it has not established a hold. It's important to understand that the
Romans were not inherently anti-Jewish. They didn't persecute the Jews. On the contrary,
they were hospitable to them. By the first century BC, the Jewish population of Rome is
thought to have numbered as many as 50,000 out of a total of one million.
The oldest synagogue in Europe was found at Ostea, Rome's port at the mouth of the river
Tiber. It dates to the middle of the first century BC and was occupied continuously until
the 4th century AD. So, what was it like to be a Jew under Roman rule? Well, obviously,
it could mean many different things. It could mean being a Pharisee, that's to say, being a
member of the sect that sought to live by the letter of Jewish law. The Pharisees get a very
bad rap in the Gospel. They're presented as sticklers for detail. We shouldn't, however,
assume that they were all hypocrites, as they are sometimes seen in the Gospels. Like Orthodox
Jews today, they wanted to interpret the law as punctiliously as they could. Or it could mean
being a Sadducee, a member of the somewhat liberal Jewish faction that was sympathetic to Greek
culture. Or it could mean living in what we would call today a ghetto in the suburbs of Alexandria,
thoroughly assimilated to Greek culture. Or it could mean being a member of the Essene movement,
living a monk-like existence in the Judean desert, convinced that Jerusalem was a sink
of moral depravity. The Dead Sea Scrolls, which include the earliest known copies of the Hebrew
Bible, are thought to have been the property of a community related to the Essenes. Or it could
mean being a Jew who believed that Jesus was the Messiah, and that the Second Coming was at hand.
Or it could mean being a Zealot, a religious and political activist, bent on resistance to the
might of Rome. Whichever of these identities was yours, and I admit there were overlaps,
there would have been some friction between you and the non-Jews with whom you interacted.
We shouldn't entirely blame the Romans for this, as I've indicated. The Romans weren't
inherently unsympathetic towards the Jews. Their administration was at times very inept,
and this was certainly true of the province of Judea in the decades leading up to the
Great Jewish Revolt, as we'll see. But it wasn't official policy to bait or antagonize the Jews.
In fact, for the most part, the Romans were quite content to leave them alone.
And yet, there was an intractable problem, and it was that, above all, which ultimately led to the
Great Jewish Revolt, namely the problem of trying to accommodate monotheism within a polytheistic
milieu, a milieu in which polytheism served to bolster and confirm the political authority
of the ruling power. In some ways, Judaism was more at odds with Roman polytheism than Christianity
was. That's because, number one, for bad images, and number two, it possessed sacred texts that
incorporated rules for life and promoted the idea of a national history. All this, as I've said,
put the Jews on a collision course with the Romans. It meant that if you had been a practicing Jew
living anywhere within the borders of the Roman Empire, you would have been not only at odds with
the prevailing system of belief, but also unable to participate in government, even at the lowest
level. Religion and politics were inseparably bound together in the Roman world. And as a Jew,
you couldn't hold political office, because if you did, you would have been required to participate
in Roman religious observances. For the same reason, you couldn't serve in the Roman army
without compromising your belief, because you had to take an oath of allegiance to a God, namely
the Emperor. So you were an outsider. And by that, I don't just mean that you were in a marginal
position, culturally speaking. It would be simplistic to think of the resentment of the Jews
towards the Romans purely in terms of religion, however. Many Jews, especially peasant Jews,
were feeling extremely hard pressed financially, particularly as the result of increased taxation
from 86 onwards. We may recall the question put to Jesus by a Pharisee designed to catch him out.
Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar? That came from a place of deep anger and resentment. Jesus
was extremely nimble-footed to avoid the snare of being either an insurgent by saying no, or a
collaborator by saying yes. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God the things
that are gods. In other words, no comment. Being an outsider is never a comfortable position to
occupy. You tend to be an object of suspicion and resentment, even to those who have no other
reason to be hostile towards you. One place where anti-Jewish sentiment came to a head
was Alexandria in Egypt, which had the largest population of Hellenized Jews outside the province
of Judea. Jewish immigration to Alexandria had begun under Ptolemy I, who ruled Egypt from
323 to 283 BC. Most Jews living in Alexandria were almost as Greek as they were Jewish.
They spoke Kini, Koine, the type of Greek that spread throughout the Hellenistic world,
the world whose foundations were laid by Alexander the Great.
A striking indication of this is the translation of the Jewish scriptures into Greek for the benefit
of Jews who were unfamiliar with Hebrew. The translation is called the Septuagint. Septuagint
is Greek for 70, the point being that 72 learned Jews from Jerusalem had undertaken it. But despite
the fact that the Alexandrine Jews embraced Hellenism, it was in Alexandria that there occurred
the first recorded outbreak of violence against Jews in the Roman Empire.
The immediate cause was a state visit to the city by Agrippa I, King of Judea in AD 38.
Agrippa was a friend of the Emperor Caligula.
Well, let's imagine you're an Alexandrine Jew. You turn out to wave and cheer when Agrippa arrives.
The Greeks, however, dress up a well-known local idiot called Karabas, his name means
cabbage, and parade him around the city. They do this because they don't think Agrippa deserves
the title king. There are no Greek kings at this date. What have the Jews done to deserve a Jewish
king? The Romans are just sucking up to you. We can just imagine the mutterings of discontent.
So all this understandably infuriates you being Jewish. To make matters worse, when the Greeks
realize they've gone too far and offended the Emperor's friend to save face, they demand that
you erect statues of Caligula in your synagogues. And when you naturally refuse to do so,
the Roman governor of Egypt, affaring the Greek population, brands you as aliens.
The Greeks respond by forcing you to migrate to an exclusively Jewish quarter of the city,
which now becomes the first compulsory ghetto in the Mediterranean world.
This isn't the end of the affair. The governor also orders that 38 members of the Jewish Council
be publicly flogged, and he forces Jewish women to eat pork. Though, to the credit of the Romans,
the governor is later recalled to face charges in Rome. The only thing you can do now is to
appeal to the Emperor, but the Greeks appeal as well. And in the end, nothing comes of it.
Nothing comes of it. You feel so humiliated and frustrated that in AD 41 you launch an attack
on the Greek community, aided by your fellow Jews from other parts of Egypt and Syria.
The Emperor Claudius, who has succeeded Caligula, receives embassies in Rome from both parties
ostensibly to congratulate him on his succession, but in effect, requesting him to arbitrate in
the dispute. Claudius responds in measured tones. He writes a letter in which he gives a stern
warning to both sides. I quote, I tell you once and for all that unless you put a stop to this
ruinous and obstinate enmity between you both, I shall be driven to demonstrate what a benevolent
Emperor can do when turned to righteous indignation. He also makes it clear that the Jews have to
repay toleration with toleration, and they are not to agitate for more privileges than they already have.
So why were the Alexandrian Greeks and the Jews at odds with one another in the first place?
The underlying cause was rivalry about their respective statuses. The Emperor Augustus had
imposed a poll tax on the inhabitants of Egypt in which he distinguished between Greeks, whom he
exempted from the tax, and non-Greeks, whom he required to pay it. And this put the Jews in
the same category as the Egyptian Felahin, something they deeply resented.
But there were also deeper causes. As I indicated earlier, Jews couldn't hold any government
office because Tidusso would have implied their recognition of the official gods of that city.
Refusal to worship the gods of the city was, in the eyes of the Greeks, expressive of a disregard
for Greeks as a whole. As a contemporary Greek writer called Appian wrote, if the Jews belong
to the citizenry, why do they not honour the gods whom the Alexandrines respect?
Though the tensions between Jews and Greeks were particularly acute in Alexandria,
they also existed in other Greek cities as well and were exacerbated by what I want to talk about
next, the great Jewish revolt which broke out in the Roman province of Judea in AD 66.
The Roman general Pompey the Great had first imposed indirect rule on Judea in 63 BC, some
130 years previously. He had established it as a client kingdom, that's to say a kingdom ruled
by a king who took its orders from Rome. The most important and most powerful of these kings was
Herod the Great who came to the throne in 37 BC. It was he who began construction of the
second temple in Jerusalem. It was made of imported white marble and had loads of gold
ornamentation. The first temple had allegedly been built by King Solomon, nearly a millennium earlier.
If you'd been living in Judea under Herod the Great, you might have felt pride in his
ambitious building program, but as a devout Jew you would have felt distinctly uneasy about the
direction that he was taking your country. Herod was a Hellenized Jew with the emphasis upon
Hellenized rather than Jew. Judea was home to a large number of Greeks and many Jews spoke
Greek just as they did in Alexandria, which is why the Gospels were written in Greek. So
your unease would have had some foundation. Herod died in 4 BC and after a decade of trying to
run the country through minor kings, the Romans finally imposed direct rule on the province.
That was in AD 4. To initiate direct rule the Romans took a census and that's where all the
problems began. As a Jew you now have to count how to the Romans. You hadn't much like Herod,
but at least he'd been one of your own sort of. Now foreigners are directly running your country,
telling you what to do and making it increasingly difficult for you to follow
traditional observances. You have to take an oath of allegiance to their emperor, endure military
occupation, undergo taxation and submit to the Roman prefect in matters of public order.
To add insult to injury the man in charge of the province is a junior official, not a senator,
but a member of the equestrian or nightly order who takes his orders from the governor of the
neighboring more important province of Syria. On the positive side you're exempted from taxation
every sabbatical year, i.e. one year in seven. That's a stop to your religious observance. Also
you don't actually have to recognize the divinity of the emperor as all other peoples in the empire
have to do. You merely have to offer prayers and sacrifices for his well-being. That's an important
concession to your religious beliefs, but it isn't enough.
What makes the situation inflammatory is that the prefects, later they're called procurators,
whom the Romans send out, don't seem to know diddly squat about your religious traditions.
Pontius Pilate, who was the prefect from AD 26 to 36 and prefect at the time therefore of Jesus'
ministry, is particularly useless. He introduces Roman legionary standards into Jerusalem that bear
the head of the emperor on them. This is an infringement of the commandment against graven images.
So you stage a sit-down or rather a lie-down at one of the first recorded instances of
non-violent civil disobedience in history. The stand-off lasted five days. On the sixth day,
Pilate threatened to hack all the Jews to death unless they gave up their protest.
They refused a budge. Eventually Pilate removed the standards, but the damage had been done
and very soon the grumbles began to take a very serious turn.
You hear whispers yourself about the possibility of a revolt. In synagogues, in shops, in homes,
revolt becomes the leading topic of conversation. What fuels it, apart from the tacklessness of
the Romans, is Jewish intractability, coupled with a belief in the coming of the Messiah,
the anointed one. You may not be in favor of rebellion yourself, but more and more of your
friends are talking it up. They're talking about it as if liberation is something that's easily
achievable. They're pointing out that the Romans don't have many men stationed in Judea and that
the only reason why they can rule the province at all is because they're in cahoots with the Jewish
high priest and the Sanhedrin, the court of law. By the late 50s and early 60s, it's clear that the
province is becoming ungovernable. The opposition groups have given birth to a phenomenon that we
are all too familiar with today, namely terrorism. More specifically, urban terrorist cells.
We learn about this from Joe Cephas, the Jewish author of a work called The Jewish War. Joe Cephas
calls the terrorist Sikarii, a Latin word meaning dagger men from Sikar, dagger. He tells us that
the Sikarii, I quote, committed murder in the heart of the city in broad daylight.
Their favorite modus operandi was to mingle in the crowd at festival times, concealing their knives
under their clothing. Then when they were in proximity to their victim, they would secretly
stab him and melt back into the crowd. As their victim fell to the ground, they pretend to express
horror and outrage like everyone else around them, so they'd never get caught. Their first victim
was the quisling high priest Jonathan who had collaborated with the Romans. Joe Cephas doesn't
identify their other victims, but it's likely that the principal targets were Jews who advocated
compliance with Roman rule, collaborators in other words.
These assassinations created a climate of fear in which those who saw themselves as
potential victims, quote, hourly expected to be killed. As an innocent bystander, so to speak,
you probably came to believe that it was more dangerous to oppose the Sikarii than it was
to go along with them. So you kept your head down and waited on events. The Sikarii weren't the only
resistance movement bent on overthrowing Roman rule either, however. Another resistance group was
the zealots, barely distinguishable from the Sikarii. They were also those who Joe Cephas labels as
deceivers and imposters, those in other words who posed as messiahs and promised deliverance
from political oppression. The deceivers and imposters were somewhat similar to the Sikarii,
the difference being that they used pseudo-spiritual methods to seek their ends. So you would have
become aware in the years leading up to the revolt that a showdown with Rome was becoming inevitable.
The great Jewish revolt breaks out in AD 66 with the massacre of the Roman garrison in Jerusalem.
However, a Jewish resistance is quickly undermined by internal divisions among its ranks. Eventually,
the extremist elements take over. Indeed, as I've indicated, it's the fanatical wing of
Judaism that was bent on revolt in the first place. Many Jews flee to Jerusalem, which the Romans
begin to encircle. The militants insist on fighting on, even though their cause is hopeless, which
means that many thousands of innocent people will die. In the spring of AD 70, the Romans start to
assault the city using battering rams, catapults and towers. After a siege that last five months,
they capture it. And when the Romans finally break open the gates, as Josephus tells us,
they slaughtered everyone they met, choking the allies with corpses and soaking the city in blood.
This was carnage on a grand scale. The Roman impratitus ordered that the city walls be raised
to the ground and that only its three towers be left standing. He also ordered that 500 Jewish
prisoners were to be crucified each day, and he only rescinded the order when the Romans ran out
of wood to make crosses. Many survivors were sold into slavery. Others were reserved for the circus.
It would be their fate to die either fighting each other or being mauled by wild beasts.
The temple was burnt down as well. We don't know whether deliberately or accidentally.
All that remained after the Romans had done their work was the great platform on which it once stood,
the Temple Mount, as it is called. Once the Romans have quelled all resistance,
they immediately heard you and the entire population out of Jerusalem. Desperately,
you gather your family together, even those who are sick and elderly, and start walking.
You've managed to grab a few of your valuables to take with you, but the Romans strip search you
and confiscate everything at the gates. If you have a donkey, they also confiscated.
Even as you're leaving, the Romans set fire to the city, and from the hills around Jerusalem,
you see flames lapping around the temple. The flames burn all night, and by dawn the city
has been largely destroyed. Some Jews living in Jerusalem managed to escape through the
underground tunnels before the Romans took the city. Let's say you're one of them.
Your best hope is to flee from Judea and find refuge elsewhere. The Romans are hunting you,
and they'll cut you down if they come across you. But there are many cities with Jewish communities
throughout the Roman Empire, and one will surely receive you. As you flee to the coast, say,
some of your family, your elderly parents, perhaps literally fall by the wayside,
but there's no turning back. You don't want your children to become slaves or worse,
so you just have to move on. You bid farewell to the promised land and become a refugee,
and so now begins the second diaspora. That's if you make it to safety, for there will be many
dangers along the way. You'll stick together in a group, but you'll still be extremely vulnerable
to Romans and to predators both on sea and on land, especially if you're a child or a woman
or if you're elderly. Many of you will perish along the way, and if you do make it to safety,
you'll never forget what happened. The images of the slaughter and the burning down of the
temple will haunt you forever. But it will not shatter your faith, and it's your faith that
will keep you going no matter what, because you know for a fact that God will not abandon you,
even though that's precisely what the Roman Emperor Titus claimed. That's why he refused to
accept a victor's wreath for defeating the Jews. There's no glory to be gained by defeating
a people abandoned by their God, he said. But you know otherwise. You know for a fact that one
day your descendants will return, and when they do return in 1948, they will recall the events of
AD 70, which is why the Jewish people today regard the Temple Mount as the most sacred place on
earth, specifically the western or wailing wall. It's a place that marks the destruction of the
Second Temple only six years after it had been completed. The last center of Jewish resistance
to fall to the Romans was Mossada, a spectacular, near impregnable stronghold that rises 1300 feet
high in the Judean desert, which the Zealots occupied. Near impregnable just isn't good enough
when you're dealing with the Romans, however. They eventually scale Mossada by building a ramp
using Jewish prisoners as laborers. When they break in, they discover that the defenders,
960 of them in all, have engaged in mass suicide rather than face the terrible consequences
of falling into their hands. First, the men killed their wives, and then 10 men were selected to
kill their companions before lots were cast by those last 10 men to determine who should kill
the other nine before killing himself. It had taken the Romans four legions, 20 units of
auxiliaries, as well as units from their client kingdom of Nabataea to crush the revolt, one
seventh of their entire military force. Josephus says they took 97,000 prisoners and slew
1,100,000. But who was counting? To conclude, being Jewish under Roman rule meant being an
outsider, even though it's important to note that there was not just either a single Jewish
identity, a single Jewish mindset, or even a single Jewish way of life. In the next lecture,
we're going to explore the experience of another people who were equally adrift of
mainstream Roman culture and equally uncomfortable with the polytheistic media, namely the early
Christians.
