For the remaining lectures, I'm going to invite you to join me and my ancestors in
ancient Britain.
Britain has been very well excavated and yielded a wealth of information about daily life.
This is in part due to an incredibly useful research tool that archaeologists have at
their disposal.
We might even call it a research weapon.
This course is emphatically about ordinary men and women, and now for the first time
I can talk about ordinary people, not only making, but also discovering history.
Ordinary people have of course from time immemorial being discovering buried treasure,
but increasingly it has been the discoveries of ordinary amateur archaeologists that have
helped professional historians to construct a far more detailed and nuanced picture of
life in Britain.
What's made this possible is the metal detector, the research weapon I just mentioned.
We all know about metal detectors, we encounter them every day in airport security, but they
have many other uses in prospecting, in a variety of military operations, searching
for land mines for instance, and in archaeology.
It costs thousands, if not tens of thousands of dollars to conduct an excavation and there's
always the possibility that the excavation will yield little of value.
One however can comb a wood or a beach or a field or a river for the price of a metal
detector, that's to say for well under one thousand dollars.
You can use a metal detector all over Britain, there's a lot of public land including the
entire coastline, though if you use it on private land you'll have to get permission
from the landowner first.
In 2010, according to a report by the British Museum, there was a record year for discoveries
due to metal detecting, which helped archaeologists and historians to piece together scraps of
information about settlement patterns, warfare and trade over the course of thousands of
years of English history.
In 2010, a stunningly beautiful Roman cavalry helmet intended for show in a procession rather
than for practical use, was found in Cumbria in the north of England by an unemployed student.
It was sold at Christie's for three million dollars, the proceeds being shared between
the student and the landowner.
From 1997 onwards, most valuable items found by metal detectors belong to the crown, so
to speak, that's to say they become public property.
However, a single items of bronze aren't covered by the law, which is why this was an exception.
It's thanks to the labours and the enthusiasm of countless ordinary men and women armed
with metal detectors that our picture of life in early Britain has been transformed.
Another technique is field walking, meticulously walking back and forth over a designated area
looking for traces of human activity such as sherds of pottery, arrowheads and the like.
Archaeologists also use aerial photography to detect settlement patterns that are only
visible from the air.
Aerial photography is now being supplemented by what are called image maps of high resolution,
far superior to the satellite imagery that was available even just ten years ago.
So, what's been going on in Britain since the beginning of human history some five or
six million years ago?
Nothing at all until 750,000 years ago, that's when the first humans arrived.
And then about 15,000 years ago, less than a small drop in the bucket of human history,
hunter-gatherers moved across from France and Spain and settled in a cave in the Cheddar
Gorge in Somerset, where as we noted in the first lecture, they practiced cannibalism.
Cannibalism didn't start farming until about 5,000 or 4,500 BC.
That's to say at least 2,000 years later than in Mesopotamia.
My ancestors, like me, were late developers.
The earliest construction at Stonehenge, one of the most famous monuments of the late Neolithic
period, dates to 3,000 BC.
What I'm going to be doing in this lecture is to focus on the Iron Age, so named because
around 800 BC, iron began to replace bronze as the metal of choice for blades, including
knives, swords, sickles and the like.
I'm going to be talking about the first people whom we can identify culturally as inhabitants
of Britain.
Culturally, I mean the first people who constructed what we can call a society.
We call these people the Celts, although we can't be absolutely certain whether they were
in fact Celts, biologically speaking.
They do, however, seem to have had a strong family resemblance to the Celts living on
the continent in Europe.
It used to be believed that Celtic tribes living in Gaul, roughly modern France, invaded
Britain during the Iron Age.
In the 1960s, however, another theory evolved, that the similarities between Britain and
continental Europe in the Iron Age would do primarily to cultural exchanges and immigration.
In other words, that the Celtic takeover was a slow and relatively peaceful process that
didn't involve invasion and conquest.
So who were these Celts, these people who were related to the Brits at least culturally,
if not biologically?
Of the extreme tracks of Europe towards the west, I cannot speak with any certainty, wrote
the Greek historian Herodotus with commendable honesty.
It was two centuries after Herodotus penned those words, around 300 BC, that the Greeks
first encountered the Celts.
And from then onwards, they employed the Celts as mercenaries in their armies.
In fact, the name Celt comes from the Greek word keltoi, meaning fighters.
Celt writers describe the Celts as tall, blonde and muscular.
They weren't a homogeneous ethnic entity, however.
Rather, they were an amalgam of peoples or tribes identified chiefly by a single language,
albeit one with different dialects.
We know of their language from inscriptions, coins and place names.
Not a single major Celtic archaeological site has come to light in Britain.
I can't tell you how frustrating it is to know you have Celtic blood in your veins
and be so ill-informed about your ancestors.
It's so frustrating that you might as well make something up, which is exactly what a
Scotsman called James MacPherson did in the 1760s.
He forged the works of a supposed Highland Bard called Ossian.
MacPherson fooled everybody, even celebrated historians like Edward Gibbon, author of Decline
and Fall of the Roman Empire.
And he also helped fuel the Romantic movement.
But that's another story.
Enough to note, the power which the Celts have exerted over the Western imagination.
Amazingly, there are five Celtic languages that are still spoken in Britain today, albeit
by very few people.
In a modernized form, they are Irish, Scottish, Gaelic, Welsh, Cornish and Manx.
This last language is confined to the tiny island of man.
MacPherson made up his poem in Scottish Gaelic.
In the whole of Europe, there are in fact only two major Celtic sites.
One at Halstatt in Austria, with finds dating from the 7th to 5th centuries BC.
And the other at La Ten in Switzerland, with finds dating from the 5th century BC to early
1st century AD.
And despite the fact that the Celtic world, we certainly can't call it an empire, extended
from Britain in the West to Turkey and beyond in the East.
This in itself tells us a lot about the way you would have lived as a Celt yourself, in
dwellings that have left few traces in the archaeological record.
And there's another problem.
And much of what we know about the Celts comes down to us through the filter of the Romans.
Roman writers encountered the Celts, or Gauls as they called them, mainly in the region
that they called Gaul.
It roughly corresponded to modern day France and Belgium.
The Romans tell us that there were 30 Gaelic tribes in this region.
The largest had over 200,000 members and the smallest 50,000.
Julius Caesar conquered Gaul in 52 BC and he kept their chieftain, Vercingatorix, prisoner
for six years so that he could eventually lead him in triumph through Rome before having
him strangled to death.
Caesar's conquest of Gaul sounded the death knell to the Celts living on the continent
as far as their freedom was concerned and soon afterwards the Celts living in Spain
were conquered as to where the Celts living around the River Danube.
Only the Celts in Britain remained free.
Let's suppose you're one of them.
You live in a society that is very hierarchical like all the societies we've examined.
You're protected, sort of, by an overlord who owns a large estate.
Land ownership is key to social and economic status in your society.
In return for his protection you have to serve in his militia whenever he calls you up.
You don't get much military training but you're naturally tough and wiry.
Above your overlord are the tribal chief and his chieftains.
At the bottom are the slaves.
Probably aren't many of them however and you certainly don't own any yourself because
you're dirt poor like most Celts.
According to the Greek historian Diodorus Siculus the British Celts exported slaves
to the Roman Empire.
That was probably the principal function of slaves, items of export.
If you happen to have a smattering of education you may be a priest known as a druid or a
seer or a craftsman or a bard.
A bard's were an important feature of Celtic society.
There was a strong tradition in oral composition just as there was in the Greek world in Homer's
day.
What if you're a Celtic woman?
What's life like for you then?
Well you're treated much the same way as you would have been in most of the other societies.
We've been investigating thus far which is to say you're under the thumb of your father
or husband.
Julius Caesar who writes about the Celts in his commentaries on the Gallic Wars claims
that men had the power of life and death over women just as they did in theory in Rome.
But he also tells us that when Celts got married both the bride's family and the bridegroom's
family contributed the same size dowry and that when one partner died the survivor received
all.
Well if that's true you'd be better protected financially than in most ancient societies.
You're also free to go about in public more because there isn't much distinction between
public and private spheres of life in Celtic society.
Unless you're a noble woman you probably work in the fields.
However if you happen to be the daughter of a tribal chieftain you could when your father
dies take his place.
One of the most famous Celtic so-called queens was Boudicca or Bodicea who ruled the Iceni
a tribe in East Anglia and who led the resistance to the Roman invasion in the 1st century AD.
You probably live in a hamlet or small village comprising only a few houses.
Your hamlet is surrounded by a ditch and bank perhaps surmounted by a wattle fence.
This is to keep intruders and marauding animals outside and your animals inside.
It's otherwise undefended.
You live in a round house supported by uprights made of timber and stone.
The walls are made of wattle and daub.
That's to say interwoven twigs covered with clay or mud.
There are plenty of cottages in Britain today made of the same sort of materials.
The conical roof of your house is thatched with reeds or straw a type of roofing still
used today in cottages.
There's a fire burning constantly in the center of the floor.
That's where you cook and where you huddle to keep warm in the winter.
You have virtually no furniture worthy of the name apart from a table or two made out of
logs of wood.
You squat or recline on a pelt.
At night you sleep on the floor close to the fire.
Your principal diet is porridge or vegetable stew which you supplement with mushrooms,
carrots and blackberries.
In the autumn your community will occasionally slaughter a sheep or a cow or a pig and have
a feast.
You drink beer and wine importing your wine from Gaul, modern France.
I don't recommend English wine even today though I suspect it has improved a bit over
the past two thousand years.
Somewhere in your hamlet there's a deep pit that serves as a silo for the storage of root
vegetables.
There's also an above ground granary where you keep parbaked grain for the winter and
from time to time you meet up with the folks living in the neighboring hamlets either for
religious purposes or when you face a common danger.
Most likely you work the land either as an arable farmer or as a pastoralist.
In other words you either grow wheat and barley or you rear cattle, sheep and pigs.
In your spare time you may hunt boar and deer as well as foxes and wolves.
You might also do some fishing in a wicker coracle that's a tiny cone shaped boat that
you could carry on your back.
A lot of you too would be miners, boat builders, carpenters, wheelwrights, potters, tanners,
coopers and last but by no means least smiths.
Women too were in specialized industries including spinning, dying and weaving.
So that's how you lived as an ordinary British Celt.
If you happened to belong to the aristocracy you'd reside in a heavily defended fort often
built on a hill.
Forts functioned as territorial capitals.
They had ramparts and gated entrances.
They were surrounded by earthworks and sometimes by stone walls as well.
The biggest settlement of all was at Colchester in the southeast of England.
It extended several square miles.
In the century leading up to the Roman invasion, which we'll be talking about in the next lecture,
there were the beginnings too of a primitive road system adjoining one community to another.
But many people would have traveled by river in a dugout canoe.
Despite the frugality and simplicity of your lifestyle you're not isolated from the rest
of the world.
The finds from Celtic burials indicate that traders had contact with continental Europe.
The richest Iron Age burial, which was found at Wellin Garden City, a short distance to
the north of London, contained wine and silverware from Italy and platters from Gaul.
A trade was mainly by barter, though from 200 BC onwards iron bars assessed by weight
became common currency.
And then from 120 BC, as some of you started to use coins made of gold, silver, bronze
or tin, crudely imitative of Greek coins of the same period.
Since coins were often inscribed with the name of the tribal chief who minted them,
they mark the introduction of writing to Britain.
That's about 5,000 years after writing had been introduced in Mesopotamia and Egypt,
were my ancestors late developers or what.
Nor were you without a keen appreciation of art, as we see from the fact that your craftsmen
produced some truly spectacular works of art.
They were particularly skilled in the art of enamelling.
They delighted in creating flowing curvilinear patterns.
At first sight, these lines appear to be abstract.
But look closely and you'll see that they're actually birds and animals.
A particularly fine example is the so-called Wandsworth Shield.
It's a circular bronze shield boss of the 2nd century BC that was dredged up from the
River Thames.
Examine it closely and you'll see that the Repusse decoration around the edge, that's
decoration that is beaten by using a hammer, which at first sight looks like plant motifs,
eventually resolves itself into two fierce-looking birds with outstretched wings.
Whether you were male or female, you would have loved to wear jewellery made of gold,
silver and bronze, such as neckbands known as torques, anklets, bracelets, belts and rings.
If you were a nobleman, you'd also decorate your horse with ornamental harness rings.
A smiths could also make you an assortment of brooches and pins since buttons wouldn't
be invented for well over a millennium.
And while we're talking about your personal appearance, I might also mention that you
used soap, unlike the Romans.
I can just see a fierce-looking Celtic warrior picking up a bar of soap before he got into
his Iron Age bar saying, be gentle with me.
Whether you're a man or a woman, you wear your hair long.
If you're a woman, you wear a loose-fitting long dress, perhaps with a shorter mantle
on top.
If you're a man, you may wear loose-fitting breeches, the forerunner of the trousers I'm
wearing.
The world that you inhabit as a Celt was, in many ways, a deeply troubled one.
This was, at best, a temporary state of affairs, and you would have feared other Celtic tribes
as much as you would have feared invaders from abroad.
That was why you had to be warlike.
You were famed for your bravery.
A sculpture known as the Dying Gaul in the Capitoline Museum in Rome makes this point
very well.
It depicts a man lying on his shield, supporting the weight of his upper body on his right
arm.
He's been wounded in the chest, and he's almost at his last gasp.
He has spiky hair.
The Gauls deliberately spiked their hair like modern-day punks, perhaps to make themselves
look more terrifying.
And that's how we know he's a Gaul.
The sculpture is an homage to Gallic courage, a valiant warrior calmly facing death.
Incidentally, plucky Gallic resistance to the might of Rome is celebrated to this day
in the comic strip books that tell the adventures of Asterix the Gaul.
Asterix comes from a tiny corner of France that was never conquered by the Romans, according
to the humorous suggestion of the author Rene Gossini.
There's also a great story that the Greek geographer and historian Strabo tells about
a meeting between some Celts and Alexander the Great that took place on the banks of
the River Danube.
What do you fear most?
The only thing we're afraid of, came the gruff reply, however, is that the heavens might
fall on our heads.
I'm not sure whether they were displaying their ignorance or just being ironic.
One of the reasons why you and your compatriots were such formidable fighters is that your
smiths were manufacturing iron weapons at a time when most peoples were still reliant
on bronze.
Iron was first introduced into central and northern Europe around 1200 BC, but it didn't
begin to oust bronze until the 8th century BC.
Making iron is an extremely arduous and lengthy process.
You first dig the iron ore out of the ground, then you roast it, crush it, mix it with
charcoal and heat it in a furnace to produce what is called the raw bloom, and you then
reheat it and hammer it into shape.
As a Celtic soldier, you'll carry an iron-tipped spear and a wooden shield.
Spears were more common than swords.
If you're wealthy, you'll be armed with an iron sword and wear a helmet made of leather
or bronze.
You don't wear much armour.
Instead, you paint your body to make it look more frightening and fight naked.
You fight more as a rabble than as a disciplined army.
You're also very skilled in the use of the war chariot.
It's thanks to their skill and ardour in battle as well as to their weaponry that your cousins
in Europe expanded throughout the Mediterranean to Belgium, France, Spain, Portugal and Ireland.
Isolated Celtic settlements have even come to light in Russia, Poland and the Ukraine.
What about your religion?
Well, you're a polytheist like most ancient peoples.
In fact, there are some 400 deities or more accurately, perhaps spirits, to choose from.
These spirits inhabit the natural world just like you.
They favour streams, rivers, hills, lakes, oak, groves and other natural places.
They're attended by priests known as Druids who practice human sacrifice, or at least
that's what the Romans allege.
We also have some archaeological evidence to back this claim up.
Detached heads of young adult males have been discovered in a stream in London dating
from 800 BC to AD 100.
It's possible that these were offered to a river deity.
Other detached heads have been found in pits and wells.
These may have been intended as offerings to the underworld deities.
And there's yet more evidence of possible human sacrifice.
Witness the fate of Lindow Man, so named for the discovery of the perfectly preserved body
of a man in his mid-twenties in a peat bog at a place called Lindow Moss, just outside
Manchester in the Midlands.
Lindow Man died violently.
He had been struck on the head twice with an axe.
Then a rope was tied around his neck and gradually tightened.
The type of execution we call garotting, which I described in an earlier lecture.
We can't be sure, but it seems like a ritual killing of sorts.
Lindow Man is so well preserved that when he was first discovered in 1984, the British
police thought he was a recent murder victim.
The truth is, however, that he was either murdered or sacrificed over 2,000 years ago
in the early 60s BC.
You believe in a life after death, though we don't know much about it.
You cremate your dead and inter their ashes under circular barrows.
When the Romans began their conquest of Britain in the 40s AD, they immediately banned the
Druids.
They couldn't abide human sacrifice, though quite possibly they merely drove them underground.
Druids were a very important part of your society outside of religion, because they
served both as judges and as keepers of the law.
They've become the stuff of legend and neo-pagans dress up as Druids to this day and perform
what they think are druidic practices, absent human sacrifice, especially at mid-summer
at places like Stonehenge.
Given the fact that the Celts occupied more or less the entire island of Britain, it's
odd that so few Celtic words have survived in the English language, particularly in view
of the fact that DNA analysis suggests that the main genetic strain among the English
is Celtic rather than Anglo-Saxon.
Words of Celtic origin include whiskey galore.
As in whiskey galore, the title of a very funny novel, gob, as in shut your gob, bog,
as in I'm going to the bog, meaning I'm going to the restroom, glen, as in the single-malt
whiskey glenfiddic, bard, another name for Shakespeare, clan, as in Scottish, and slogan,
as in slogan.
What the Celts did contribute to the English language, more importantly than individual
words however, were certain aspects of the verb such as I am going to do something or
I'm about to do something, a subtle variant on the Anglo-Saxon I will or shall do something.
To conclude, the Celts have never disappeared, they never left Britain, they're the human
substratum to our continuing story.
They'll be in our next lecture when the Romans arrive, and they'll be there too when the
Romans leave.
And as we shall see, paradoxically, given their reputation for violence, it was they
who kept both Christianity and classical learning alive.
In the next lecture, we're going to talk about the first of the many invasions that
Britain suffered.
