Bad luck. You're a Roman legionary, and you've just been sent to one of the most remote and
inhospitable of Rome's provinces. I mean, of course, the province of Britannia from
which the word Britain comes. Think of all that rain and those perpetually gloomy skies,
and guess what? The weather wasn't any better 2,000 years ago. I really feel for you.
This lecture isn't primarily about being a Roman legionary in Britain, however. It's more about
being a Britain under the Romans. In other words, it's about looking at history through the eyes
of the people whom the Romans conquered, the people, in other words, on the other side of history.
The Romans left an immense legacy behind them on the island, and it's that which helps us to build
up an extraordinarily rich picture of what daily life in the province was like. There were probably
between two to three million of you Celps living in Britain at the time of the conquest, close
cousins, as we saw in the last lecture of the Gauls who were living in what are today France and
Belgium. And during the course of the Roman occupation, which lasted about 350 years, that figure
about doubled in size. We know this from aerial photography, which I talked about in the previous
lecture. That in itself suggests that the British Celps generally prospered under Roman rule.
I'm going to ask questions like, what were your thoughts when you realized that the Romans were on
their way? How did you make peace with the fact that you were a subjugated people? And what was your
reaction when you learnt three and a half centuries later that they were abandoning you to your fate?
The first time you got wind of the fact that the Romans had you in their sights was when Julius
Caesar made two brief incursions in the years 55 and 54 BC. Caesar was in the middle of his eight year
campaign to subdue all Gauls. It wasn't much more than a reconnaissance mission and it didn't achieve
anything long lasting. In fact, it was pretty much a shambles, especially the first incursion, even
though Caesar, as was his won't, claimed it was a great victory. Well, how could the senators tell
back in Rome whether it was or it wasn't? We've all heard of spin.
You didn't have to bother with the Romans again for nearly a century. You certainly weren't ignorant of
Rome's growing power in the interim, even though you had no first hand experience of Rome's might.
You may even have traded with them. The traders in Britain were importing luxury goods from the Roman
Empire and in turn exporting hunting dogs and slaves, as well as tin and silver. It's also possible
that if you were a nobleman, you might have encountered a Roman or two through the exchange of
ties of hospitality. So these were two cultures, like so many we've met in this course, which even
before the conquest were already in conversation with each other, at least to a limited degree.
In AD 43, however, everything changed overnight. That was when the Emperor Claudius undertook an
invasion whose objective was nothing less than the conquest and permanent occupation of your island.
As an aside, Claudius' decision to do so was largely prompted by the fact that people regarded him
as an idiot, and he wanted to prove the contrary by securing a military victory. And Britain seemed
a soft target. In other words, the course of British history was dictated to some extent by the
insecurity of one man who said individuals don't matter. So let's suppose you're living in Southern
England. You hear from the grapevine that an invasion is a foot. It can hardly have taken you by
surprise. The Romans had long since subdued your cousins in Gaul. You may have wondered what had taken
them so long. So the Romans are finally coming. Are you quaking in your Celtic boots? Not necessarily.
You might be thinking that you had something to gain from the arrival of the Romans. When the natives
undertook a revolt against the Romans in AD 60, many of them actually sided with the Romans. You and
your lot were always squabbling with some neighboring Celtic tribe, and with luck you might get the
Romans on your side. For most of you, however, it probably seemed like an invasion from outer space,
although you probably took pride and comfort in the fact that you were a warlike race.
Claudius arrived with four legions and as many auxiliaries, about 40,000 men in all. Talk about
overkill. We don't know the size of the force that the Brits were able to mount, but it would have
been considerably smaller. The Roman army was also a professional army, as we've seen. You, as a Brit,
were a farmer who had been conscripted at a moment's notice. You might be warlike, but you weren't
part of a disciplined fighting machine. The Romans wore protective armor. You had little or no armor.
You have a spear for thrusting, but you only possess a long sword, a which you use mainly for slashing if you're
wealthy. True, you probably wore war paint, but that hardly intimidated chaps like the Romans. And before you
can get close to the Romans to engage in hand-to-hand combat, many of you will fall to the javelins they hurl
at you. And if you do get close, you'll be at a considerable disadvantage with your long sword, because
it'll be unwieldy. Every time you want to strike at the enemy, you'll have to bring your arm back in a wide
arc, whereas the Romans, with their shorter swords, will be able to get past your guard with quick-stabbing
movements. A Claudius lands on the coast of Kent. You put up a determined fight, but after only about
two days, the Romans prevail and you have to retreat. You suffer a serious reversal at a town which the
Romans pronounce as Camelodunum, your main settlement in the region. You have to observe the humiliating
spectacle of seven of your tribal chieftains surrendering to Claudius, who enters Camelodunum
riding on an elephant of all things. Claudius now makes Camelodunum the capital of his new province,
renaming it Colchester. Then after only 16 days in the island, he heads back to Rome. His army proceeds to
extend its grip westwards and northwards. There's nothing you're able to do but make limited incursions.
Seven years later, the Romans start work on a brand new settlement which they call Londinium, London. They build
the settlement on both the north and the south banks of the River Thames, though the main part of it lies to the
north. It was a good spot to choose because the river was broad enough to allow sea-going cargo ships to dock there.
And in time, it would become the hub of the extensive network of roads that the Romans would build, some 8,000 miles,
13,000 kilometers in awe. There had only been a few scattered villages on the site of London before.
So this is where we come to the next part of our story. Instead of being a proudly independent people,
you're now living under the yoke of Rome. How did you make peace with this fact?
Well, you don't. Not at first. The Romans weren't always very tactful towards their subjugated peoples,
and they could be, and they were in your case, highly abusive. And soon, they start throwing their weight around.
They confiscate your property and impose heavy taxation on you. Instead of co-opting your aristocracy onto their side,
they treat them with contempt. That wasn't very smart of them. The historian Tassada states,
the Britons bear conscription, tribute, and other obligations to the empire without complaint, as long as there is no injustice.
They can't stand injustice. They can endure being ruled by others, but they can't bear being treated as slaves.
As a Brit, I agree 150%. We glimpse in Tassada's observation an anticipation of that most jingoistic of English songs.
Rule Britannia. Britannia rules the waves. Britons never, never shall be slaves.
So, the consequence of this injustice is that you become restive, and in AD 60, your restiveness leads to a revolt.
The leader of the revolt was a woman, Boudicca, sometimes called Bodicea, chieftain of a British tribe known as the Aikini,
though other tribes joined in the revolt as well. When Boudicca protested to the Romans about their high-handed treatment
of her people, they flogged her and raped her daughters. Imagine your response to this shameful treatment of your queen.
You're inflamed with rage. Under her banner, so to speak, you destroy the Roman settlement at Londinium and then launch an attack on Camelodunum.
You inflict a number of defeats on the invaders. Torture anyone among your ranks who sympathizes with them and almost, almost force them out of your island.
Tassada tells us that 70,000 Romans and native supporters were slaughtered by the rebels.
The revolt lasted several months, but in the end, you're no match for the Romans. The retribution, meted out by the Roman governor Suetonius Paulinus, was horrific.
Thousands of Britons were killed, including many women, because women had joined the revolt. Boudicca herself either committed suicide or died as a result of illness.
The province was all but ruined. In the end, however, the Romans held back from doing their worst.
Once the revolt was over, the Romans went on to conquer Wales and push north towards Scotland. They never conquered Scotland, however, and they never really bothered with Ireland, although they did land on Irish soil.
They chose as the northern frontier of their province, the line that runs from coast to coast between the mouths of the river Tyne on the east to the Solway on the west, a line 73 miles in length.
It was here that the Emperor Hadrian ordered the building of his famous wall when he visited Britain in AD 122.
It became the most heavily fortified border in the Roman Empire. It was garrisoned by auxiliary units that were domiciled in 16 forts.
Let's spare a thought for the Romans who were posted to this most inhospitable part of the Empire. They might have come from anywhere in the Empire.
One tombstone commemorates a certain Barathees who came from Palmyra in Syria and married a British girl who took the Latin name Regina.
Imagine being sent from Syria to northern Britain. Imagine the culture shock quite apart from the weather. One can hardly think of a worse fate.
No one described the mindset of a Roman legionary better than W. H. Ordon in his poem entitled Roman War Blues, which I alluded to in the lecture about being a Roman soldier.
Ordon's legionary spends his time wondering if his girlfriend is sleeping with the neighbour and dreaming about the time when he can just gaze up at the sky.
So the revolt is over and you as a Brit now have to make your peace once and for all with the fact that the Romans are here for the duration.
What do you do? Well, you want to thrive, don't you? So you'd better start learning at least a smattering of Latin.
You can't enlist in the Roman army as an auxiliary, for instance, without being able to understand commands in Latin.
Dex pie, sin pie, dex pie, sin pie. Right, left, right, left. Short for dextra, right, sinistra, left.
Being superstitious, as I've noted, the Romans were, they always began marching with the right foot. Consiste, halt.
Serving in the Roman army was one of the best ways to get ahead, not least because on your retirement you and your descendants will be awarded Roman citizenship.
The downside, however, is that you'll be posted abroad as a security measure, like poor old Baratis was from his homeland.
As a Brit, you'd better familiarise yourself with Roman coinage as well. You had some coinage of your own, but that isn't worth anything now.
At least if you're going to be doing any trade with the Romans, that is.
Coins circulated mainly in the towns. It wasn't till around AD 200 that you began to use them, however.
Nearly 2,000 hordes of Roman coins have come to light. Most of them thanks to the painstaking work of those amateur metal detectors I was talking about in a previous lecture.
One of the biggest hordes, nearly 5,000 coins in total, came to light in 2003, a few miles from Oxford at a place called Chalgrove.
Roman coins are extremely useful for archaeologists because they can be dated to the exact year of an emperor's reign.
So if you find a coin in a grave or anywhere else, it tells you the earliest possible date of the burial.
You'll also need to adjust to the Roman system of weights and measures, which is used throughout the empire.
The standard of weight is the libra, or pound, which is divided into 12 oz.
The system is still in use in the States today and was in Britain till the 1970s when the metric system replaced it.
Incidentally, libra also means the scales that are used in weighing, hence my astrological sign.
And last but not least, in order to flourish under Roman rule, you're going to have to acknowledge the divinity of the Roman emperor, like everyone else living in the empire.
I might mention that the Romans in turn will pay you the compliments, so to speak, of adopting many of your gods.
And later, when the Roman empire becomes a Christian empire under the emperor Constantine, you're going to be under some pressure to become a Christian yourself.
That doesn't necessarily mean you'll give up your own gods when you become a Christian.
As a canny Brit, you'll probably want to hedge your bets like people elsewhere in the empire.
There's proof of this religious schizophrenia, as we might call it, in the so-called Mildenhall treasure, which was unearthed by a plow near Mildenhall in Suffolk in 1942.
The items are all made of silver, and they're a spectacular example of the kind of craftsmanship that was produced, presumably by native workers in Roman Britain.
What's interesting for us is that the treasure combines Christian with pagan motifs.
The so-called great dish, for instance, is engraved with pagan gods, whereas the spoons bear the Cairo monogram, the first two letters of the name of Christ, plus the letters alpha and omega, another Christian symbol.
Whether you like it or not, whether you intend to throw in your lot with the Romans or not, the landscape is changing under the imprint of the Roman military boot.
The Roman intent is to Romanise Britain, that's to say, to civilise the country.
A Latin word, of course, derived from the word kiwis, meaning a citizen.
They do this in part by building roads, constructing villas, erecting public bars.
I say they, but in fact it's you who do much of this work.
The Romans conscripted many of you to work as labourers on their various building projects, in other words.
In addition, they introduce, or perhaps we should say impose, their gods, their art, their culture, their laws and their language.
The chances are that you would have been a farmer living in the countryside under Roman rule, as you had been before, and if so, you would not have encountered the Romans on a daily basis.
In fact, you might not have set eyes on a Roman from one year to the next.
Even so, you would have learnt a thing or two from them.
You would have learnt the importance of crop rotation, for instance.
Your tools would have improved, enabling you to increase your level of agricultural production.
Your plowshare was now made of iron, with a better design, and you use an iron clad spade.
You've been taught how to drain your land when it becomes waterlogged, and how to keep the soil damp by building wells when it becomes too dry.
The Romans no doubt shook their heads in disbelief when they arrived and saw how backward your farming techniques were.
What other kind of work would you have been doing under Roman rule?
Britain was rich in minerals, including tin, silver and lead, so mining was very important.
So too was quarrying. The Romans needed plentiful supplies of stone for all their construction projects.
An occupation with considerable social status was that of blacksmith.
Virtually everyone would have been dependent on blacksmith services – householders, farmers, traders, soldiers and clerks.
You manufactured padlocks, keys, crowbars, frying pans, knives, nails, wall hooks, grid irons, spades, sickles, plowshares, axe heads,
steel eye for writing with, balances, window grills and so on.
Other important craftsmen included builders, carpenters, leather workers, glass workers, and of course there were shopkeepers.
A Britain, as Napoleon said disparagingly, is a nation of shopkeepers.
Only about 10% of the population of Roman Britain lived in towns.
It was the Romans who first urbanized Britain. Previously, as we saw in the last lecture, there had hardly been any towns worthy of the name.
Now however, there were many of them, all with streets laid out according to a grid plan.
The centre of each town was the Forum, just like every other town in the Roman Empire.
This was a colonnaded courtyard which served as an assembly ground for public gatherings and as a marketplace for selling wares.
The Roman origins of modern cities in England are preserved in names that end in Chester or Sester or Castor from the Latin word castra,
meaning a fort, Manchester, Doncaster, Leicester, Lancaster, Chester and so forth.
Daily life in Britain under Roman rule was indeed civilized, especially if you were one of those who lived in a town,
though it also improved to some degree in the countryside as well.
There was now clean drinking water thanks to the aqueducts which the Romans built that brought clean water from springs, often far away.
There were also sewers and bathhouses. The most elaborate bathhouse was at Bath, so named for its Roman bath.
There was also a chance that you would see some Roman style entertainment. The Romans built both theatres and amphitheaters in the province.
Archaeologists haven't identified any formal circus, however, so we don't know whether you would have been able to enjoy the thrills and spills of chariot racing.
As for food, your diet would have been pretty simple at first. You would have eaten coarse bread with beans and pea potage or porridge as you had done before.
Meat, as always in antiquity, was a rarity for the vast majority.
In time, however, if you were successful living under Roman rule, and many of you were, you came to adopt Roman culinary tastes,
including those stuffed dormice and milk-fed snails. Yummy, yummy.
And if you prospered, you didn't just eat like the Romans, you started to live like them as well.
Some of you did so well under Roman rule that you were able to build expensive villas in the countryside,
decked out with mosaics, wall paintings and, yes, that wonderful Roman invention, underfloor heating, just as if you had been living in Rome itself.
More important than all of the above, however, was the fact that whatever your station in life,
thanks to the Romans, your country was now secure from invasion. They deserve a lot of gratitude for that.
Another mark of civilization is the fact that the Romans introduced writing, though I doubt that many of you became literate.
We find examples of Latin on tombstones, altars, mosaics, pottery, dedicatory slabs, graffiti, tablets and so forth.
I mentioned in an earlier lecture the discovery of wooden tablets at Vindalanda, one of the forts along Hadrian's Wall.
The tablets came to light in the 1980s and they provide invaluable evidence about the life of soldiers in the province.
They date to the late 1st, early 2nd century AD and they include requests for more socks and more underpants, subligaria.
What is more essential for surviving the harsh British winter than socks and underpants?
Even more movingly, at least from my point of view, is a letter from a centurion to his commander which ends with a kind of PS to the effect,
my fellow soldiers don't have beer, please order some to be sent.
Let's hope the Romans had the good sense to adopt the British custom of drinking their beer warm.
From the late 2nd century AD onwards, the towns were beginning to fortify themselves with walls.
Though this was partly a matter of civic pride, it also reflects the beginnings of a breakdown of law and order outside the urban centres.
So we now come to the final part of our story. How did you feel once you got wind of the fact that the Roman Empire might not be eternal?
You would have realised that something was up when in the late 3rd century AD you saw the Romans building defensive forts on the southeast coast of England.
They're known as the Saxon shore forts because they were designed to protect Britain from the Saxons, the Angles and other Germanic tribes that were beginning to sweep across the Empire.
Other forts were built along the northeast coast.
To make matters worse, these Germans were joining forces with the old enemy, the Scots and Picts, who lived north of Hadrian's Wall.
So it came home to you that from a Roman perspective, Britain was just an outpost on the periphery of their empire.
The Romans now had more pressing things on their minds and in the late 3rd century AD they began withdrawing their troops.
No doubt they told you at first that it was only a temporary measure. They didn't want you to panic after all, but you probably realised that the writing was on the wall.
You may even have experienced a short-lived sense of relief.
Britannia was going to be free at last, but most sensible people would I suspect have been a bit sad to see them go.
A Roman rule had lasted for 365 years.
I don't want to paint too rosier picture, but it's inevitable that strong ties would have built up between some Britons at least and the occupying power over such a long period of time.
But sadness, if that's not too strong a word, was just a part of what you would have felt.
Anxiety, if not panic, soon began to set in.
We know this for a fact because from the 4th century onwards, panicky Brits began burying their valuables in the ground.
That's the time when the Mildenhall treasure was buried.
And from the beginning of the 5th century onwards, the number of buried hordes of valuables sharply increases.
More and more people start moving to the cities, believing them to offer more security.
The economy more or less collapses.
Mining and quarrying, which require a good deal of organisation, both go into decline.
Then, in 410, the last of the Romans get on board a ship and wave goodbye to you.
The country is plunged into uncertainty.
No more Romans to do the heavy lifting and preserve law and order.
No centralised administration, no army.
What on earth is going to happen next?
That's what you and everyone else is asking.
In the next lecture, we'll find out.
We'll look at the period immediately following the withdrawal of the Romans,
which culminated in the invasion by my direct ancestors, the Angles and Saxons.
