Today's lecture is largely about anxiety and insecurity.
We all know about anxiety and insecurity.
They are our daily companions, we're anxious about weapons of mass destruction, terrorism,
environmental disasters and a lot more besides.
When we're fearful, we're more accepting of the limitations that are placed on our
freedom and hence more compliant.
Generating fear is a form of social control.
It's difficult to resist the conclusion that the Church in the Middle Ages understood this
axiom very well and that it sought to frighten you to increase its power and authority.
One of the ways it did this was by proclaiming that it and it alone could save you from eternal
damnation.
You had to believe exactly what it, the Church, taught.
There wasn't any room for deviation.
If you deviated, you'll be denounced as a heretic, excommunicated and damned.
You might even be burnt at the stake.
Say you'll have to put your faith in the Church because only the Church will intercede with
God on your behalf.
How the Church interceded is, however, somewhat mysterious because it communicates with God
exclusively in Latin, a language which you don't understand, being poor and uneducated
as you are.
True, you had to learn the Pater Noster, the Lord's Prayer, the Aue Maria and the Nicene
Creed in Latin, but some of what the priest says when you attend the Church service is
barely comprehensible.
Most everyone living in the Middle Ages seems to have been stalked by the fear of hell
and eternal damnation.
That's not to say that belief in hell no longer exists today, but it is not something to which
churches, which ever church you might belong to, gives particular emphasis, whereas the
medieval church never lost an opportunity to bang on about it.
It taught you that if you commit one of the seven deadly sins, gluttony, greed, envy,
lust, pride, sloth, wrath, you'll be tormented for all eternity, period.
Your fate will be decided at the Last Judgment.
What happens at the Last Judgment is often depicted either above the screen, which divides
the chancel where the choir sits, from the nave where the congregation sits, or in the
carving over the main west entrance.
There's a marvelous example at Chartre Cathedral in northern France.
Saint Peter is shown welcoming the Blessed into the gates of heaven on the left, while
Satan drags the souls of the damned into the jaws of hell on the right.
It's enough to make you think twice about coveting your neighbor's wife.
That's for sure.
A particularly chilling feature of the medieval picture of hell is that the punishment is
made to fit the crime.
So for instance, if you're guilty of the sin of gluttony, you'll be fed a solid diet
of toads and serpents.
The most vivid literary evocation of the pangs of hell are to be found in Dante's Inferno,
the first book of what is rather misleadingly referred to as the Divine Comedy.
The second book of the Divine Comedy is entitled Purgatory.
A purgatory lies somewhere between heaven and hell.
It's a halfway house where you're cleansed of your sins.
It's a place where you'll be sent temporarily to be punished for your sins if you've died
in the state of grace before being admitted to heaven.
A state of grace is a difficult concept to grasp, but it basically means being in a good
relationship with God.
If you can persuade the church to intercede on your behalf, however, the length of your
penance, the penance you have to undergo in purgatory, will be shortened.
Intercession generally takes the form of prayers being said on your behalf.
And it was for this reason chiefly that people living in the Middle Ages bequeath considerable
sums of money to the church.
You could also get your sentence in purgatory shortened by going on a pilgrimage.
If you go on a crusade, you could get it quashed altogether.
As if hell and damnation weren't enough to be getting on with, there was also a heady
brew of demons, goblins, werewolves, vampires, changelings, fairies, elves and gnomes, all
too ready to tempt you and drag you down to hell.
Another belief that the church promoted was that relics have the power to work miracles.
A relic is a bone of a saint or something that a saint has touched or come into contact
with.
A belief in relics is very much alive today, though it's not something that gets much attention
in the U.S. since not many relics have made their way over here.
Relics are stored in special containers called reliquaries, often very elaborately and expensively
crafted.
Relics had been venerated from the beginnings of Christianity.
In fact the origin of the idea goes back to classical antiquity.
The bones of the Greek hero Oedipus for instance were believed to protect Athens in times of
war.
Relics became central to church teaching in the Middle Ages.
The reason why you would go on a pilgrimage was in part to gaze upon, meditate upon and
if you were extremely important perhaps even touch a relic.
That's why Chaucer's pilgrims are visiting Canterbury to gaze upon the shattered skull
of Thomas Beckett who was martyred in 1170.
So strong was the belief in relics that the Council of Nicaea which met in 787 decreed
that no church should be consecrated if it didn't possess any relics.
And say you wanted to acquire a relic for your church.
How do you know which ones are authentic?
That was a major problem in the Middle Ages because there was so much money to be made
from selling relics.
There were so many churches that claimed to possess a piece of the true cross that John
Calvin, the founder of the Christian movement called Calvinism, wittily commented that you
could build an entire ship out of them.
Another way to rake in money was by selling so-called papal indulgences.
If you were somewhat simple minded you'd be the ideal target for a pardoner, so-called
because he would persuade you that you could actually secure forgiveness for your sins
by purchasing a parchment with a papal seal attached to it.
We meet a pardoner in the Canterbury Tales.
Chaucer openly despises him.
He is, by his own account, a full, vicious man.
And as far as he's concerned his dupes can go to hell, quite literally.
The pardoner particularly prays on poor widows who can't afford to feed their children.
When the church first came up with the money-spinning proposition of selling papal indulgences to raise
money, it only promised commutation or diminution of the penance that you have to pay in purgatory.
Over time, however, a papal indulgence could buy you complete exemption from your sins.
Thereby enabling you to bypass purgatory altogether.
You will, of course, attend church every Sunday without fail, a very different experience
from what it is today.
There's no seating in the church, so you'll either have to stand or kneel throughout the
service.
Men and women are separated from one another.
Either the men stand at the front of the church and the women at the back or the men
stand on one side of the aisle and the women on the other.
You'll spend most of the service on your knees.
Pews wouldn't be introduced until the 15th century.
The only time you'll stand is when the Gospel is being read.
As the only form of lighting comes from candles, it's a rather gloomy, or we might say atmospheric
experience.
There's no heating, so in wintertime you'll probably want to huddle up to your neighbour.
As the liturgy is conducted in Latin, you'll have only a vague sense of what is being said.
You'll only hear a sermon four times a year.
As you can't read, the church uses illustrations from the Bible to instruct you.
Illustrations in the form of stone statues, carved fonts, wall paintings, monumental brasses,
and from the 12th century onwards, stained glass.
All of which serve as the basis for Christian teaching.
A stained glass is one of the greatest accomplishments of the Middle Ages.
The impact of this imagery upon you as an illiterate person is profound.
Unless you happen to be wealthy, which of course you're not, it's the only type of visual
imagery that you will encounter in your entire lifetime.
It dazzles you, and it lightens the drudgery of your existence.
As Roy Strong has strikingly put it, we encounter more images in a day than a mediator.
Any evil villager would have seen in a lifetime.
Your response to the imagery is therefore intense.
Unlike anything we can identify with today, you experience those scenes as real.
To you, they're photographs, so to speak, of things that actually happened.
Not merely imaginative reconstructions.
Let's now suppose you want to become a clergyman.
All ranks of society were recruited to become clergymen, including the very poor.
You'll probably become a parish priest.
Parishes were the building blocks of church organization.
There were about 8,500 parishes in England in the time of Chaucer, each with its own
parish priest.
Your salary will depend on the wealth of your parish, but probably you'll earn only a pittance.
You'll be expected to be able to read and write in Latin, but given the low level of
literacy, the church might well accept you into its ranks, even if you can't.
That means you'll have to conduct a service whose exact meaning you only hazily understand
yourself, as Roger Bacon put it.
You and others like you would be reciting, I quote, like parrots and magpies.
To show you're a priest, you'll have to have a tonsia.
That's to say, you'll have to shave your head on top, and you won't be permitted to
grow a beard or moustache either.
You're not allowed to marry, although a lot of the clergy unofficially broke that rule.
You might even become a priest if your morals are somewhat lax.
We hear of priests being accused of poaching, gambling, theft, assault, and shame upon them,
visiting taverns, as well as perpetrating many crimes of a sexual nature.
Let's now imagine your life as a medieval monk or nun.
First off, you'll have to renounce your personal possessions and withdraw from the world.
The word monk in fact derives from the Greek word monos, meaning alone.
Though your life will be devoted to prayer and meditation, you might become a teacher,
a physician, and a particularly valued role, a scribe.
As a scribe, you might have been one of the monks who produced beautiful illuminated manuscripts
like the Book of Kells, which we talked about in our lecture about the Vikings.
The scribes were still copying out manuscripts in Chaucer's Day.
There are a number of different orders or groups of monks, each with its own rules and
separate administration, though the goal of all the orders is spiritual perfection.
The Carthusians and Cistercians, for instance, are austere, whereas the Benedictines and
Cluniacs are more relaxed.
You could, and still can, of course, tell which order a monk or nun belongs to from
his or her habit, that's to say, by the distinctive clothing that they wear.
The founding father of the Western monastic movement was a Roman nobleman called Benedict
of Nursia, who was born in the late 5th century AD.
Benedict's famous rule, as it was called, it was actually a set of rules, became the
cornerstone of the monastic movement throughout Western Europe.
Benedict prescribed in minute detail, virtually every detail of your life.
He forbads you from muttering disrespectfully or engaging in unseemly laughter.
He also forbads you from eating meat unless you are very ill.
As a monk or nun, your daily life will be punctuated by the daily cycle of the divine
office into which a 24-hour period is divided.
The divine office are the prescribed prayers that punctuate every 24-hour period.
There are nine in all, matins and lords, meaning the praises, which is around sunrise, a prime
around the first hour, tears, the third hour, sexed around noon, known around the ninth
hour, vespers at sunset, complying around bedtime, and vigils, which are sometimes
alighted with the matins, the night office.
When it's time for prayer, you'll hear a bell ringing, and that means you'll have to down
your tools or rise from your bed and head over to the church to pray.
Matins occur around two or three a.m.
Occasionally, you might nod off during the service, and if you do, the dean or deaconess,
the person in charge of discipline, will shine a lantern in your face or poke you with a
stave to wake you up.
A one difference between a convent and a monastery is that nuns aren't permitted to become priests
and conduct services, so the local monastery will have to supply the convent with a priest.
It's been rightly observed that once you entered a monastery or a convent, you'll never
have an uninterrupted night's sleep again.
Most of us wouldn't be able to tolerate it for a week, so what was its attraction?
First and foremost, the spiritual life had real value in the Middle Ages, and though
you might not be able to live up to the ideals of your order, that doesn't mean that you
wouldn't believe in those ideals.
Second, you became part of a supportive, extended family.
Though you withdrew from the world, you did not, except in extreme cases, withdraw from
human fellowship.
Indeed, monasteries and convents offered you a type of fellowship and support that ordinary
families often fail to provide.
This would have been especially in evidence when you were on your deathbed.
Death, of course, was merely a necessary stage of life before the blessedness of entering
the presence of your Creator.
Your fellow monks or fellow nuns would have attended you constantly.
And last, but by no means least, you escaped the fear of destitution.
You are now guaranteed a decent standard of living for the rest of your life.
A few words about your physical surroundings.
You live in what, in effect, is a miniature walled city.
There's only one gate, which is opened and closed, according to a regular schedule.
The heart of your monastery, or convent, is the church or chapel.
There's also a refectory, or dining hall, a dormitory, a hostelry to receive visitors,
a cloisters, a bakery, a wine cellar, a kitchen, and an infirmary.
The word refectory comes from the Latin Reficari, which means to remake or restore.
The same idea turns up again in the late 18th century French invention, the restaurant,
the restoring place.
Well those medieval monks and nuns knew a thing or two.
They knew the importance of communal eating, of commensality, a table fellowship.
You're not permitted to talk at meals, though you can communicate by sign language.
While you're eating, one of the monks will read out a biblical text.
The closest equivalent to a monastery today in its structure is an Oxford or Cambridge
College, which is also walled and which still functions rather like a miniature walled city,
being opened and closed at certain hours.
In fact the Oxford and Cambridge colleges took monasteries and nunneries as their model.
All this may sound rather cheerless and it certainly was to begin with, but human nature
being what it is, it couldn't last.
Initially monasteries and nunneries were intended to be entirely self-sufficient, but over time
towns grew up outside their walls to accommodate workers who provided them with necessary services.
Over time, too, some monks and nuns became quite worldly, like Chaucer's Prioress, whom
we met in the lecture on medieval women, and his monk, who enjoys the creature comforts
of life to the full.
This was due partly to the wealth that monasteries and convents acquired from bequests.
Some monasteries, too, were what we would call today going concerns, a fountain's abbey
in Yorkshire, for instance, produced the finest wool in Europe, while Rivo Abbey, also in
Yorkshire, branched out into mining.
Perhaps you'd be one of those monks or nuns who found it rather hard to live up to the
vow of chastity.
There are numerous references to sexual liaisons, often between monks and nuns.
After all, however, nuns lived more in accordance with the vows of poverty, chastity and obedience,
in part because there were few opportunities for them to enrich themselves and because
they were less involved with the outside world than monks.
In the 13th century, a new kind of clergy came into being known as friars.
As a friar, you'd also be subject to the rule of your particular order.
The two main mendicant orders were the Dominicans, or black friars, and the Franciscans, or grave
friars.
A mendicant means begging and is so used because they earned their living from charity.
We've met mendicant priests before in our lecture about being poor in Rome.
Friars were also permitted to live outside the confines of a monastery, though they couldn't
own property.
It was their purpose to do good works on behalf of the poor by teaching, preaching,
and hearing confession.
It's easy to criticise the monastic movement for its failure to live up to its high ideals
and for the fact that it ultimately became bloated with wealth.
But as a human experiment, it deserves our admiration.
Monks, nuns, and friars cared for the indigent, the bedridden, and the elderly.
They took care of widows and unmarried women.
So for all its shortcomings, the church did make a serious effort to attend to the other
side of history.
There was no other institution in medieval England that did this.
And when Henry VIII abolished the monasteries in 1538, there was nothing to take its place.
So far, I've been assuming that everybody in the Middle Ages was reading from the same
book, so to speak.
That's to say that everyone took Christianity very seriously and that everyone agreed what
Christ's teaching actually was.
Well, it's certainly true that the great majority of people took Christianity very seriously,
but it's not true that everyone agreed about what Christ had taught.
On the contrary, there were lots of people whom the church considered to be heretics.
You might have been one of them.
A heretic and heresy come from the Greek word hyracis, meaning choice.
The choice in question being a bad choice from the perspective of the medieval church.
You might have been a witch or a sorcerer or anyone who dabbled in black magic.
Or you might have been a cathar.
The cathars lived in the Pyrenees in southern France.
They styled themselves the true Christians.
As a cathar, you believed in a dualist universe, a universe that is, which is ruled jointly
by a good God who created the spirit and a bad God who created corporeal matter.
The Catholic Church abhorred cathars.
If you were identified as a cathar, you had to appear before an inquisitor who would grill
you on your faith.
If the inquisitor deemed you to be heretical and to whole views that were at variance with
official Catholic doctrine, you'd be forced to confess.
If you didn't confess freely, you would, for your own good of course, be tortured until
you did.
You'd also be required to implicate others, both alive and dead.
After hearing your confession, the inquisitor could impose either a penance or a punishment.
Others would include wearing a yellow cross, the medieval equivalent of the scarlet letter
in Nathaniel Hawthorne's novella of that name.
A punishment generally meant you'd be burned at the stake.
It's easy to condemn the medieval church for the severity of its response to those who
generally believed that they and not the church were practicing and believing what Christ
taught.
The response was based, however, on the sincere belief that they had been corrupted by the
devil and that the devil was working through you to undermine the entire body of believers.
You constituted, from the church's perspective, a disease that had to be eradicated.
There was one heretical movement for which I have a great deal of respect, not least,
because it represented a protest from and on behalf of the other side of history.
The movement is called Lollardie.
Lollardie is a derogatory nickname of uncertain etymology.
The most plausible explanation is that it's a Dutch word for a mutterer or mumbler, though
why it became attached to the movement is another matter altogether.
The movement flourished in the mid-14th century.
This leader was an Oxford theologian called John Wycliffe who believed that you, as an
ordinary person, could have a direct relationship with God, one that didn't require the mediation
of the church and clergy.
As a Lollard, you would have held a number of other beliefs that were deemed heretical
by the church.
You believed that the Bible should be translated into English so that everyone could understand
it.
You believed that the church had no authority to ordain priests and that women as well as
men could be religious teachers.
You objected to chantries, the chapels constructed by the wealthy so that prayers should be said
on their behalf.
And you believed that all people, irrespective of their station in life, should receive equal
prayers for the soul.
You may well have believed as well that the Pope was the Antichrist and that the Second
Coming was at hand.
Hardly surprisingly, given the religious passions of the age, many Lollards were burnt at the
stake.
A Wycliffe himself died peacefully in his bed in 1384.
But the church wasn't done with him.
44 years later, it had his remains dug up and burned at the stake.
To conclude, in this lecture, we've seen the ways in which the medieval church came
to exercise enormous influence over the thinking as well as the lives of ordinary men and women.
And how it did all in its power to maintain that influence.
In the next lecture, we're going to investigate how it used that influence to persuade the
faithful to take up arms on behalf of Christ.
