Picture a six-year-old boy having Sunday lunch in a restaurant with his parents and his 80-year-old
granny half a century ago. All around him other families are quietly enjoying the ritual
of Sunday lunch, roast beef, roast potatoes, and waterlogged vegetables along glares. Suddenly,
and with no warning, the six-year-old boy gets up from his chair, stands rigidly to
attention and belts out at the top of his voice, onward Christian soldiers marching
as to war, with the cross of Jesus going on before. I promise I won't sing to you again.
There is some embarrassed tittering around the room. His nervous parents eventually get him to
sit down. Well, that little boy was me, possessed by crusader-like zeal. Had I been living in the
Middle Ages, I might well have marched as to war in the words of the hymn. The word crusade
isn't very popular in our pluralist society, and for good reason. But the fact that the word has
stayed in currency so long, and the fact that it evoked such powerful reactions among Christians
and Muslims alike, demonstrates the continuing centrality of the concept to this day. All that
adds to the importance, indeed, the urgency of understanding why so many ordinary people went
on crusades. In today's lecture, we're going to unpack the terms crusade and crusader, and try to
situate them in their original cultural context. First, however, what was or rather what were
the crusades? They were military expeditions authorised by the Vicar of Christ, the Pope,
whose purpose was to seize or recover, as the Pope put it, the Holy Land, modern Israel,
and other territory that was controlled by Muslims. It was Pope Urban II who launched
the first crusade. While Urban was in France, chairing a church council at Clermont, he made
it known that he would issue an important announcement on Tuesday the 27th of November 1095.
It's not clear whether the substance of the announcement got leaked in advance, but you as
a Christian hear that something is afoot, and so you decide to travel to Clermont. The church
authorities soon discover that the cathedral won't be able to hold the multitude that's
descending on Clermont, so they set up a papal throne outside the city walls. Days beforehand,
you camp out in the neighbourhood along with hundreds, thousands of others, men, women,
and children. The excitement is palpable. Everyone is on tenterhooks. There's a rumour going around
that the Pope is going to announce that the second coming is at hand. Finally, the appointed day
rolls around and Pope Urban slowly ascends his throne. An immediate hush falls over the expectant
multitude. You quickly realise from the Holy Father's somber tone of voice that something truly
terrible has happened. You hear that the Muslims, or infidels, as he calls them, that's to say the
Ottoman Turks, are advancing against your Christian brothers living in the east in what is called
the Holy Land. You also learn to your horror that they're mistreating pilgrims and desecrating
the holy places, the cave in Bethlehem where Jesus was born, the mound of olives where he taught,
the garden of Gethsemane where he prayed the night before his crucifixion and so on.
A Jerusalem was, and is of course, the spiritual heart of the Christian world. It had fallen to the
Arabs in 638. It contains the most holy shrine in Christendom, the Church of the Holy Sepulchre,
built around 330, which according to tradition is on the site of the crucifixion, the entombment
and the resurrection. When he's finished enumerating all the terrible things the Muslims have been
doing, the Holy Father tells you that it's your duty, and the duty of all Christians living in the
west, irrespective of their station in life, to take up arms against the Muslims in the name of God.
You need to become the equivalent of a warrior monk. You must conquer, or as he puts it,
reclaim the land where Christ was born, the land where he performed his ministry, the land where
he was crucified and underwent resurrection, the land that is now occupied by people who have
nothing but contempt for our Lord. The Holy Father hasn't visited the land himself, but he knows it
from the Bible and his voice trembles as he describes these places to you. He tells you that
you're not going to be killing human beings. Instead, you're going to be eradicating evil. That's
something totally different. Infidels in all their forms, and that as we'll see includes Jews,
are carriers of evil. They're a kind of virus. It's a highly emotional appeal.
Urban is an extremely effective orator, and he knows exactly how to work a crowd. During his speech,
he's constantly interrupted with cries of Deus Levo. God wills it. When he finishes,
there's a brief moment of stunned silence. What is your immediate reaction to what you have just
heard? Are you unmoved? Of course not. What kind of Christian are you? You firmly believe it is your
sacred duty to rest the holy places from those who are insulting your Lord. You have no doubt
of the rightness of the cause. Was that all there was to it? Was it just a moment of what we might
call mass hysteria? The effects of mass hysteria soon wear off unless there's something to sustain
those effects. And there was. In return for your service in the crusade, you're going to be granted
full remission for your sins. In other words, you're granted a place in heaven. Not a bad deal,
all things considered, given what hell the alternative represented to the medieval mind,
as we saw previously. Since you've led a somewhat immoral life, you'll be able to wipe the slate
clean, while at the same time putting your violent tendencies to good use. Because by fighting and
killing the infidels, you're going to be performing what the Pope has called an act of love. An act
of love. So the deal is this. You can go on living just as you have always done, being the brute that
you've always been, but now with the guarantee that you'll escape eternal hellfire and in the
conviction that you'll be performing an invaluable service for Christ. There are other benefits.
The church will protect your property and your family while you're away. You can't be charged with
a lawsuit. The interest repayments on the debts you owe will be frozen for the duration of the
campaign. And last, but by no means least, you'll gain respect by fighting a holy war, fighting for
your God. No doubt some of the men who went off to fight had base motives, but the majority, I suspect,
truly believed in the cause for which they were fighting. The word crusader didn't enter the
English language until the 18th century. The term that came to be used in the late 12th century,
100 years after Clermont, was cruque signatus, a Latin for signed with the cross. That's a
reference to the fact that once you'd pledged to undertake the journey to Jerusalem, you received
a cross that was made out of cloth, which you sewed onto your clothing as a sign of your dedication.
By the way, if you have second thoughts and fail to set out after signing up, or if you're
checking out along the way, the church will excommunicate you and you'll go straight to hell
without stopping off at purgatory along the way. Following Pope Urban's initial appeal, the church
began holding rallies throughout Christendom, not unlike those that modern-day evangelical
Christians host. They were all carefully staged, managed and highly effective. They were designed
to make you experience a feeling of collective identity and collective outrage. You're there
in part because your Lord has summoned you to attend. The preacher holds up images depicting
Muslims desecrating the holy places. At key moments in his speech, he brandishes a crucifix or
perhaps a relic to work you up further. There's ritual chanting orchestrated by those who have
already taken the pledge. When he finishes, if you have even a split second of hesitation,
you're jostled forward by others your own age. Your Lord too is up there at the front, so you're
under a strong obligation to take the pledge. And so you do. You take the pledge to go on what will
later be known as the first crusade. Perhaps your father and your brothers do too, in which case,
what's to become of your poor mother? Well, that's not your concern. God will look after her,
as he will your sisters and your aunts and your girlfriend too.
One of the most effective of these preachers was an itinerant French monk called Peter the
Hermit. Peter the Hermit was a true charismatic. Within three months of Urban's announcement,
he had succeeded in mustering a large band of ordinary people. Some were even women and children,
or if not children, at least adolescents. The Latin word Puri, which appears in our sources,
means anyone who is not yet an adult. It's pretty amazing to think that any responsible
person, let alone a man of God, would target children and adolescents for any cause. But
that's exactly what Peter the Hermit did. The enterprise that he led is sometimes called
the peasant's crusade, the implication being that it comprised the poorest elements of society.
Well, it's true that Peter's army had fewer knights than later campaigns, that it was
badly organized and that it left with inadequate preparation. But it didn't just comprise country
bumpkins, nor did it lack the capacity to wreck havoc along the way. Passing through Germany on
their way to the Holy Land, Peter and his band slaughtered many hundreds of Jews. Jews were
persistently targeted by crusader armies. In fact, the crusades greatly exacerbated the latent
hostility towards the Jews in medieval society. Peter eventually reached Constantinople with
his army largely intact. However, when his soldiers started heading south towards the Holy
Land through western Turkey, most of them were either slaughtered or sold into slavery,
although by that time their leader had found an excuse to abandon them. It was some months later
that six great armies led by princes set out for the Holy Land, much better equipped, much better
funded, and much better organized than the so-called peasants' crusade. As we've seen,
Pope Urban called for a war of liberation involving what we would call today regime change
in the Holy Land. He told you that you'd be fighting a just war because you were reclaiming
land that long ago belonged to Christians and because crusading was an act of love.
A just war. When have we heard that before? Urban wasn't the first to come up with the notion of a
just war, or the first to promote an ideology of defensiveness. Nearly 2,000 years beforehand,
the Romans had devised the concept of a justum vellum, a just war. And probably they weren't
the first. It always boosts your morale if you believe you're marching off to a just war,
whether or not your cause is religious. The flower of the Crusader army was the knights.
It's they who will determine the outcome of the war. But the majority of crusaders belong to the
other side of history. They are perhaps as many as 100,000, and that's not including all the
non-combatants, the Cooks, Smiths, Servants, General Handeman, and not forgetting prostitutes.
They're simple, ignorant, God fearing people just like you. They're uneducated, inexperienced in war,
but in the grip of an ideal. Before you set off, you arm yourself with a bow and arrows,
or if you can't shoot with a stick or a club. With God on your side, you expect the campaign
to be over within a few weeks, a month or two at most. It doesn't take too long, however,
for the truth to begin to sink in. Along the way, you encounter some wounded crusaders heading in the
opposite direction. And as you get nearer to the Holy Land, the march begins to take its toll.
Your friends start to fall by the wayside. Some get sick or exhausted. Others are wounded or killed
when your column is attacked. Some even desert. You know that if you're captured, however,
you'll be sold into slavery. You're beginning too to learn the hard way that there's no
Christian way of fighting a war. Let's suppose you're one of the hardy ones
who survives the march. Truth to tell, you've begun to question the point of the expedition.
You occasionally whisper as much to your friends. The biggest challenge to your faith comes in 1098
when you're besieging the Muslim-occupied city Antioch. You and all the crusaders are facing
starvation. When you're just about to give up, reinforcements arrive and you somehow manage
to capture the city. And two days later, however, you yourself are under siege in turn from a Muslim
army. But then something happens to revitalize your faith. A French priest by the name of
Peter Bartholomew announces that he has had a vision from Saint Andrew revealing the whereabouts
of one of the holiest relics in Christendom, the holy spear that pierced Christ's side
at the crucifixion. With the company of his supporters, Peter begins digging under the floor
of one of the churches in Antioch. Eventually, he produces a rusty old piece of iron, which he
declares to be the holy spear. Not everyone is convinced. A lot of people think Peter is just
a self-seeking charlatan, the Pope's legate. The spiritual leader of the crusade isn't convinced
for a start. But the news spreads through the army like wildfire. You hear of it. You've risked
so much. You've lost friends, comrades, perhaps a brother to crossing the mountains.
You desperately want to believe their deaths have been worthwhile. You've been told that you're an
instrument of divine providence. Isn't this the proof you've been waiting for? So you and the
whole ragged army emerges from the city with the holy spear, born aloft, and you do battle against
the Muslims. And against all odds, you somehow win. Let's now take a moment to consider who the
enemy was that you were fighting so desperately. You were fighting the Saracens. That's the name
you gave to all Muslims and Arabs, the originally nomadic people who inhabited the deserts of
Syria and Arabia. They too were fighting for a cause. Jerusalem is the second holiest place for
Muslims after Mecca because it contains a site where the Prophet Muhammad ascended into heaven,
which just so happens to be the exact site where Abraham was about to sacrifice Isaac,
which of course is where the Temple Mount stands, the platform upon which once stood
the temple erected by Herod the Great. The Saracens, like the crusader knights,
fought on horseback. Some of them wore padded armor, others chain mail, and later plate armor,
just like the crusader knights. They fought with round shields, curved scimitars, and
composite bows, bows made out of more than one piece. In July 1099, about a year after capturing
Antioch and four years after Urban's Appeal, the crusaders captured Jerusalem.
They might be expected to display some mercy to their enemies. Instead, they commit acts of
terrible atrocity. They desecrate the Temple Mount Harameh Sharif, the second holiest place
for Muslims, where the Dome of the Rock and the Mosque of Al-Aqsa stand, slaughtering all the Muslims
who had taken refuge there, men, women, and children, and they do all that in the name of their God.
Once they've done with the infidels, they turn their venom on the Jews living in Jerusalem,
most of whom have fled to their synagogue. The crusaders charge them with having aided
and abetted the Muslims of being collaborators. Then they set fire to their synagogue
and burn them all alive. They also kill all the Christians living in Jerusalem, claiming that
they too have aided and abetted the Muslims. At the end of the bloodbath, when the crusaders have
purified, quote-unquote, Jerusalem, they hold a solemn service in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre
to give thanks to God for their victory. They feel deeply penitent, not for the killing of
infidels, of course, but for all their other misdeeds. Like Thomas of Marl, who claimed to be the
first crusader to scale the walls of Jerusalem and who did not think twice about massacring
women, they're overcome by tears when they enter the Church to attend the service in celebration
of their victory. Can we make sense of such apparent contradictoryness? Yes, we have to.
As Franco Cardini has importantly noted, we have to remember that people of that age thought in
quite different fashions from our own and did not share our concept of coherence.
That concept of coherence puts it very well.
And once the service is over, they no doubt go back to bragging about the bloodbath they have
caused. They'll no doubt continue bragging about it for the rest of their lives, as Stephen Runciman
observes. It was this bloodthirsty proof of Christian fanaticism that recreated the fanaticism
of Islam. In other words, each fed upon the other. So in today's world, jihadists are offered
unconditional admission to paradise for dying in the cause of Islam in much the same way that the
Pope promised the crusaders that they would be spared eternal damnation if they risked their
lives for Christianity. The concept of the jihad, though it has no equivalent in Christianity,
was fuelled by the crusades. After the capture of Jerusalem, most of the crusaders return home.
Some, however, remain out east. They build magnificent castles to solidify their power
and to protect pilgrims visiting the Holy Land, like Crac de Chevalier in Syria.
Eventually, for Christian or Frankish, as they came to be called, states were established
in the Eastern Mediterranean at Jerusalem, Antioch, which included parts of Turkey and Syria,
Odessa, a part of Turkey, and Tripoli in Lebanon. Jerusalem remained under crusader control for
less than a century. In 1187, it fell to Saladin, the Sultan of Egypt and Syria.
I can't refrain from saying a few words about Saladin, even though he belongs to the other,
in this case Muslim side of history. He was born in Tikrit in Iraq, the birthplace of Saddam
Hussein. He was occurred, the very people whom Saddam Hussein persecuted. Despite being a thorn
in the side of the crusaders, Saladin won the deep respect of his adversary, the English king,
Richard the Lionheart, and he's celebrated for his chivalrous conduct in Christian chronicles
of the time. On one occasion, learning that Richard was sick, he even sent him fresh fruit and snow.
Snow was a very rare and costly commodity in the Holy Land. A Christian influence in other parts
of the Eastern Mediterranean lasted barely a century after the loss of Jerusalem. The end
of Frankish rule was marked by the fall of the crusader city at Akra on the coast of Israel
to the Marmalooks of Egypt in 1291. Crusades weren't fought only between Christians and Muslims.
Christians fought Christians and claimed that in so doing, they were fighting crusades. In 1054,
a schism or religious rupture occurred between the Roman Catholic Church in the West and the
Orthodox churches in the East. It was due to differences of opinion regarding doctrine,
a religious observance, and the authority of the Pope. It was exacerbated in 1096 when armies of
crusaders began passing through the Byzantine Empire on their way to the Holy Land, leaving a
trail of havoc behind them. These tensions eventually erupted and resulted in what became called
the Fourth Crusade, when in 1204, a crusader army assisted by a Venetian fleet attacked and looted
Constantinople itself, the greatest city in the Christian world.
And then in 1209, a so-called Holy War was launched against the Cathars of Languedoc,
whom as we've seen, the Church regarded as heretics. The war resulted in the deaths of
hundreds of thousands of people. One last question. Who footed the bill for the crusades?
You did, of course. Ordinary people like you, as well as the wealthy. And the Church too had to
step up to the plate to coin a phrase. To finance the Third Crusade in 1189,
the English King Henry II imposed an income tax, the first such tax, to be levied anywhere in Europe.
So we have to thank the crusading spirit, not only for contributing to the divide between
Christian Europe and the Muslim East, but also for the origins of the IRS. Thanks, guys.
To sum up, the people who became crusade signati for the most part believed
sincerely in the cause they fought for, as did, of course, the people they were fighting against.
Each side believed that their God was the only God, and more disastrously yet, that it was
justifiable and necessary to kill in the name of that God. That Christians and Muslims worshiped
the same God was apparently not part of the equation in the minds of the combatants.
As a crusader, you fought for your beliefs and for your way of life against ways of believing
and living that seemed alien and threatening. You did your duty in the hope of saving Christianity
and your own soul. That was how your culture had shaped you. To justify this slaughter,
you were forced to demonize another living culture and its people. And in the process,
you dropped a stone into the well of history whose ripples continue to this very day.
People on both sides were infused with a virulent fear of the other. It's a fear that we've
encountered already in our course among Greeks of the classical era. It took the form of the
fear of the barbarian, the perennial divide between east and west that got implanted in the western
mindset. The barbarian in the eyes of the Greeks was the spitting image of the infidel in the eyes
of the Christians. A fear of the other is deeply ingrained in the human psyche. Will we ever escape
it? Who knows? Perhaps it has its roots in the encounter between Neanderthals and Homo sapiens.
There was, however, one good thing that came out of the Crusades. Contact with Arab culture. Arab
learning and Arab architecture. The writings of Aristotle, for instance, first became known in
the west by being translated from the Arabic into Latin, which meant they could be read and studied
in England, France, Italy and Germany. We owe a great deal to Arab culture.
In conclusion, the idea that Christian spirituality and military glory are not only consistent with
each other, but also codependent is strange indeed. The little boy who stood up in that restaurant
over half a century ago could, in a different age, so easily have been persuaded to march off to war
in the belief that by killing infidels, he was serving a merciful God. The Crusades were a highly
effective exercise in Christian propaganda, whose legacy, whatever our religious affiliation and
belief, has been nothing short of calamitous. In the next lecture, we're going to look at the men
and women who sought to save the world. In the next lecture, we're going to look at the men and women
spiritual exaltation, not in war, but in visiting holy sites.
