Understanding is Simulating: a Defence 

of Embodied Linguistic Comprehension 

Chris Letheby 

Discipline of Philosophy 

School of Humanities 

The University of Adelaide 

Submitted for the degree of Master of Philosophy 

April 2013 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 

1. Is Understanding Simulating? ..................................................................................................... 7 
Inquiring into Linguistic Comprehension ............................................................................. 7 
ELC in Context ..................................................................................................................................... 8 
Defending ELC: How to Proceed ............................................................................................. 10 
Conclusions to be Drawn ............................................................................................................ 12 
2. Embodied Linguistic Comprehension and Embodied Cognition ............................. 14 
4E Cognition and the Critique of Classical Cognitive Science ................................... 14 
EC: Grounding (Higher) Cognition in Perception and Action ................................... 26 
ELC as a Special Case of EC ........................................................................................................ 30 
Conclusion ......................................................................................................................................... 32 
3. The Case for ELC ............................................................................................................................. 34 
Perceptual Symbol Systems ...................................................................................................... 34 
The Indexical Hypothesis ........................................................................................................... 43 
The Immersed Experiencer Framework ............................................................................. 52 
Considering ELC in General ....................................................................................................... 56 
4. Alleged Amodal Advantages ...................................................................................................... 59 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 59 
The Problem of Abstraction ...................................................................................................... 60 
Comprehending the Unimaginable ........................................................................................ 79 
Productivity and Systematicity................................................................................................ 84 
5. Alleged ELC Advantages .............................................................................................................. 88 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 88 
Accounting for the Evidence ..................................................................................................... 89 
The Symbol Grounding Problem ............................................................................................. 96 
6. The Enactivist Challenge ...........................................................................................................103 
Introduction ....................................................................................................................................103 
Enactivism and Cognitivism ....................................................................................................104 
The Necessity Question .............................................................................................................109 
The Simulation Constraint .......................................................................................................117 
Conclusion .......................................................................................................................................119 
7. Conclusion and Future Directions ........................................................................................120 
The ELC vs. Amodal Debate .....................................................................................................120 
Theory Comparison Issues and Directions for Future Research ..........................124 
Conclusion .......................................................................................................................................129 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 

A  topic  of  debate  in  current  cognitive  science  is  the  nature  of  language 
understanding. One traditional view holds that we understand  expressions  of  a 
natural language by translating them into an inner, abstract, symbolic Language 
of  Thought.  Recently,  however,  an  increasingly  plausible  alternative  has  been 
proposed:  that  we  understand  natural  languages  by  means  of  sensorimotor 
simulations  of  real-world  objects  and  situations.  This  view  is  known  as 
Embodied Linguistic Comprehension (ELC). 

Much evidence has been found for ELC in such disciplines as psychology, 
linguistics,  and  neuroscience.  However,  the  position  faces  several  serious 
challenges. One is accounting for our comprehension of abstract terms, and other 
terms  which  refer  to  things  beyond  our  own  sensory  experience.  Other 
challenges include the productive and systematic nature of human thought, and 
difficult questions about how to interpret the relevant evidence. 

This thesis is an exposition and defence of ELC. I review a representative 
sample  of  empirical  data  and  major  theoretical  proposals,  and  then  respond  to 
objections. I argue that  ELC is well-equipped to meet  the challenges mentioned 
above. In particular, it has rich resources with which to account for abstraction, 
reference  beyond  a  comprehender’s  own  experience,  productivity,  and 
systematicity. 

Responding  to  a  recent  challenge  by  proponents  of  a  radical,  anti-
representational 
‘enactivist’  theory  of  comprehension,  I  argue  that  ELC 
outperforms  the  enactivist  view  in  accounting  for  the  flexible  and  context-
language  comprehension,  and  that  rejecting  mental 
sensitive  nature  of 
representation is a costly and unnecessary step. 

Perhaps  the  biggest  challenge  facing  ELC  at  this  point  comes  from 
powerful  arguments  purporting  to  show  that  the  existing  evidence  is,  at  best, 
neutral  between  ELC  and  its  rivals.  I  argue  that,  while  the  available  evidence 
cannot rule out the existence of an abstract Language of Thought, we nonetheless 
have  good  reason  to  believe  that  sensorimotor  simulation  is  a  genuine 
constituent  of  all  or  most  instances  of  comprehension,  preserving  the  central 
point of the ELC proposal. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Declaration 

For a thesis that does not contain work already in the public domain 

I certify that this work contains no  material which has been accepted for the award of any 
other degree or diploma in  any university or other tertiary institution and, to the best of my 
knowledge and belief,  contains no material  previously published or written by another 
person,  except where due reference has been made in the text. In addition,  I certify that no 
part of this work will,  in the future,  be  used in  a submission for any other degree or diploma 
in any university or other tertiary institution without the prior approval of the University of 
Adelaide and where applicable,  any partner institution responsible for the joint-award of this 
degree. 

I give consent to this copy of my thesis,  when deposited in  the  University Library,  being 
made available for loan and  photocopying,  subject to the provisions of the Copyright Act 
1968. 

I also give permission for the digital version  of my thesis to  be  made available on the web, 
via the  University's digital research  repository,  the Library catalogue and  also through web 
search engines,  unless permission  has been granted by the University to restrict access for 
a period of time. 

Signature 

Date ... .2Pr J"1. !~?f!:. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

Thanks to Jon Opie and Matt Nestor for helping me find my way around a ground 

for  thinking  about  the  mind;  to  Andrew  Gleeson  for  metaphilosophical 

challenges; and to John Mercier for early philosophical encouragement. 

Thanks  also  to  Denise  Gamble  for  help  and  support  throughout  my 

candidature, and to Benjamin Bergen, Tyler Marghetis and colleagues for a copy 

of—and permission to cite—their forthcoming paper. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the economy of understanding, words are merely money 
JOHN HAUGELAND 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Is Understanding Simulating? 

Inquiring into Linguistic Comprehension 

How  do we  understand  words and  sentences?  This  is  an  important  and  interesting  question 

about language. In the context of cognitive science and the philosophy thereof, it amounts to a 

request for an explanation or theoretical account of a ubiquitous cognitive phenomenon: what 

are the mechanisms underlying linguistic comprehension? 

To  get  a  clear  sense  of  what  is  at  issue,  consider  the  following.  If  you  are  a 

monolingual English speaker, something happens when you read the sentence „the cat sat on 

the  mat‟  which  does  not  happen when  you  read  the  sentence  „l'uccello  seduto  nel  nido‟1.  In 

each  case  you  visually  perceive  symbolic  forms.  In  the  former  case,  your  brain  also—

somehow—turns these symbols into meaningful thoughts2; in the latter case, it does not. My 

central  question  concerns  what  your  brain  does  in  the  former,  but  not  the  latter,  case—and 

how. 

One  possible  answer  is  that  your  brain  activates  representations  in  its  sensorimotor 

systems; among other things, representations of cats and of mats. Perhaps it even constructs a 

complex  representation,  or  inner  simulation,  of  a  cat  sitting  on  a  mat.  The  details  of  this 

proposal  clearly  want  development.  But  the  basic  claim  that  linguistic  comprehension  is 

fundamentally a process of accessing perceptual and sensorimotor representations to simulate 

denoted objects and described situations is one possible, and increasingly plausible, answer to 

the  question  about  the  mechanisms  of  comprehension.  The  idea  is  roughly  that,  when  you 

 Italian: „the bird sat in the nest‟. 
 There is a risk of begging certain questions by couching the issue in terms of the brain turning 

1 
2 
symbols into meaningful thoughts, as will become apparent in chapter 6 when I discuss the enactivist 
theory of language comprehension. The least prejudicial way of putting the question is, perhaps: what 
important change or event happens to you qua cognitive being in the former, but not the latter, case—
and how. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
understand  the  word  „cat‟,  you  do  so  by  undergoing  some  mental  process  (conscious  or 

otherwise)  which  is  similar  in  important  respects  to  what  happens  when  you  perceive  a  cat. 

Following  Daniel  Weiskopf  (2010) 

I  will  refer 

to 

this  claim  as  embodied 

linguistic 

comprehension (ELC.) 

My purpose in this thesis is to defend ELC. This thesis, therefore, offers an affirmative 

answer to the question: is understanding simulating? Unsurprisingly, however—given that this 

is  first  and  foremost  a  work  of  philosophy—determining  what  those  key  terms  understanding 

and simulating might amount to will prove to be no small matter. 

ELC in Context 

To understand ELC, it is important to understand the broad intellectual framework from which it 

has  emerged.  ELC  has  been  proposed  and  developed  by  theorists  working  in  a  research 

programme  in  cognitive  science  known  as  „embodied  cognition‟.  This  research  programme 

aims to establish the thoroughgoing dependence of higher cognitive functions generally—not 

just  linguistic  comprehension,  but  also  conceptual  reasoning  and  abstract  thought—on  the 

brain‟s sensorimotor systems. Confusingly enough, however, the embodied cognition research 

programme is itself but one facet of a far broader and more eclectic movement within cognitive 

science which is also often referred to simply as „embodied cognition‟. Clearly, this is a case of 

distinctions demanding to be drawn. 

In chapter 2, below, I will undertake the required clarification, delineation, and scene-

setting.  The  broader  movement  known  as  „embodied  cognition‟  also  goes  by  other  names, 

including „4E Cognition‟--because its proponents, variously, claim that cognition is Embodied, 

Embedded,  Extended,  or  Enactive  (Menary  2010.)  This  is  the  name  I  will  adopt  for  the 

movement, for two reasons: first, because it more accurately reflects the movement‟s diverse 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nature,  and,  second,  because  it  provides  terminological  clarity  by  distinguishing  the  broader 

movement from its narrower instance which is especially relevant to my project. 

Having described how 4E Cognition arose as a critique of classical cognitive science 

and artificial intelligence, and having canvassed a few of its many manifestations, I will focus in 

more detail on one of those manifestations—the embodied cognition (henceforth EC) research 

programme.  This  is  a  sustained  and  somewhat  concerted  multidisciplinary  endeavour  to 

establish the claim that higher cognitive functions systematically exploit evolutionarily old and 

basic  systems  of  perception  and  motor  control.  Compelling  evidence  is  adduced  from 

psychology,  linguistics,  neuroscience,  and  other  disciplines  to  argue  that  abilities  such  as 

categorical  inference,  conceptual  classification,  abstract  thought,  and  (of  course)  language 

comprehension are all subserved by sensorimotor resources. 

Understanding  the  EC  project  of  grounding  cognition  in  perception  and  action  is 

crucially important to the articulation and defence of ELC. Although it is helpful to be aware of 

the  broader  context  constituted  by  the  4E  Cognition  movement,  this  context  will  rarely  be 

directly relevant to the assessment of ELC itself. EC, however, is much closer to home. This is 

because ELC is basically just a special case of EC. That is to say, if we establish that higher 

cognitive  functions  in  general  are  parasitic  on  perceptual  and  sensorimotor  systems,  then  it 

seems likely that language comprehension will come along for the ride; it seems likely, in other 

words, that ELC will turn out to be true. So any evidence for the truth of EC, even if it does not 

directly concern language comprehension, constitutes at least indirect  prima facie support for  

ELC. Similarly, any in-principle or  a priori arguments concerning the truth or likelihood of EC 

will be relevant to ELC, too. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Defending ELC: How to Proceed 

Once ELC has been situated in the broad context of 4E Cognition and the narrow context of the 

EC  cognition-grounding  project,  in  chapter  3  I  will  examine  ELC  itself  in  more  detail.  I  will 

describe  the  two  main  theoretical  developments  of  the  claim:  Arthur  Glenberg's  Indexical 

Hypothesis and Rolf Zwaan's Immersed Experiencer Framework. While differing significantly in 

detail  and  emphasis,  both  these  views  agree  that  language  comprehension  consists  in  the 

activation of sensorimotor representations to create inner simulations. 

In chapter 3, I will also  describe Lawrence Barsalou's influential theory of Perceptual 

Symbol Systems (PSS), an EC account of concepts which provides valuable resources for the 

defender of ELC. Barsalou develops the crucial notion of simulation in detailed and important 

ways,  as  well  as  addressing  many  classic  objections  to  perception-based  theories  of 

conceptual knowledge. In the course of this tour through the two main versions of ELC and one 

of  their  chief  sources  of  theoretical  support,  I  will  also  describe  some  of  the  fascinating 

empirical evidence which has been gathered in support of EC and ELC. 

In chapter 4, I will compare and contrast ELC with its main rival in cognitive science: 

the traditional amodal account of linguistic comprehension. This view—closely related to Jerry 

Fodor's (1976) Language Of Thought (LOT) hypothesis—claims that linguistic comprehension 

does not essentially involve sensorimotor representations, though it may have incidental causal 

connections with them (Adams 2010.) On this view, comprehension is fundamentally a process 

of  manipulating  abstract  symbols  in  a  separate,  dedicated  language  faculty  or  conceptual 

system. These amodal symbols—'amodal' because they are separate and distinct in kind from 

representations in the sensorimotor modalities—are held to be the bearers of semantic content 

and the source of comprehension (Weiskopf 2010.) 

My  focus  in  chapter  4  will  be  the  central  motivations  which  have  traditionally  been 

given  for  adopting  the  amodal  view.  Many  of  these  concern  striking  cognitive  and  linguistic 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phenomena such as productivity, systematicity, propositional content, abstraction, and the like, 

which have commonly been held achievable only by amodal means. However, Barsalou and 

others argue that these phenomena can, in fact, be accounted for by a modal theory—that is, 

by an EC or ELC approach (Barsalou 1999; Prinz 2002.) A central guiding question of chapter 

4, therefore, will be: does the amodal view really have the advantages over ELC that are often 

claimed for it? 

In  chapter  5,  I  will  address  the converse  to  this  question:  Does  ELC  really  have  the 

advantages over the amodal view that are often claimed for it? This breaks down into two main 

parts.  One  of  the  key  motivations  for  adopting  ELC  is  the  wealth  of  empirical  data  showing 

intimate and systematic connections between linguistic and conceptual cognition on one hand, 

and  sensorimotor  processing  on  the  other.  However, defenders  of  the  amodal  view  respond 

that these data can all be accounted for within their framework, and that the data therefore do 

not  give  us  reason  to  reject  the  amodal view  in  favour  of  ELC.  I  will  examine  this  debate  to 

determine  what,  if  anything,  can  legitimately  be  inferred  from  the  empirical data.  One  line  of 

thought holds that the data establish merely causal connections between linguistic/conceptual 

cognition and sensorimotor processing (Adams 2010; Mahon & Caramazza 2008.) This issue 

goes deep, and I will revisit it in chapter 7. 

The  second  advantage  that  ELC  is  alleged  to  have  over  the  amodal  view  is  that  of 

solving the infamous Symbol Grounding Problem (SGP.) The SGP, at a very rough first pass, 

concerns how representations in a system can come to refer to things outside of the system. 

This has been seen as a problem for abstract symbol accounts like the amodal view because 

the  representations  they  posit  bear  no  intrinsic  connection  to  their  referents.  Advocates  of 

embodied  approaches  argue  that  they  fare  better  in  this  respect  because  they  are  able  to 

ground reference in sensorimotor representations, which are sometimes assumed to stand in 

non-arbitrary  relations  to  the  things  they  represent.  Be  that  as  it  may,  perhaps  the  biggest 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obstacle resolving the debate over the SGP is that of determining what exactly the problem is 

supposed to be—so I will devote a good deal of chapter 5 to such clarification. 

After  I  have  investigated  whether  or  not  the  amodal  view  really  has  its  alleged 

advantages  over  ELC,  and  vice  versa,  the  main  issue  remaining  concerns  a  quite  different 

theory  of  language  comprehension.  The  core  ELC  claim  that  comprehension  consists  in 

sensorimotor  simulation  has  recently  been  challenged  by  advocates  of  enactivism,  a  radical 

approach  to  cognition  which  rejects  the  existence—or  at  least  explanatory  importance—of 

mental  representations,  and 

identifies  cognitive  processes  with  capacities 

for  skilful 

environmental  exploration  and  action  (Van  Elk  et  al  2010.)  Chapter  6  consists  of  a  detailed 

comparison and contrast of the 'cognitivist' or simulation version of ELC and its enactivist rival. 

It includes an exploration of the two main arguments which have been given for preferring the 

enactivist  theory  of  comprehension,  as  well  as  a  discussion  of  what  seems  to  be  a  serious 

problem for the enactivist theory itself. 

Conclusions to be Drawn 

In chapter 7, I will take stock of the foregoing chapters, revisit the issue of empirical evidence 

for ELC, suggest some directions for future research, and  set out the minimally  qualified and 

specific version of ELC which seems defensible in light of my discussion.  

My  central  conclusions  will  be  as  follows.  First,  that  the  most  plausible  and  broadly 

applicable version of ELC is one which holds that episodes of simulation in Barsalou‟s technical 

sense are constituents of—even if not exhaustively constitutive of—all instances of language 

comprehension. Second, that comprehension is a  graded phenomenon (one which admits of 

degrees) and recognition of this fact makes ELC much more defensible. Third, that the amodal 

view  enjoys  no  advantage  over  ELC  with  respect  to  our  comprehension  of  language  about 

abstracta and things we have not experienced, because ELC has ample resources with which 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to account for this. Fourth, that the amodal view enjoys no advantage over ELC with respect to 

the productivity and systematicity of thought, because Barsalou‟s theory of PSS furnishes ELC 

with ample resources with which to account for these phenomena. Fifth, that ELC enjoys no 

advantage over the amodal view with respect to the SGP, properly understood, because any 

resources which are available to ELC for the solving of this problem are equally available to the 

amodal view. Sixth, that enactivist ELC enjoys no advantage over cognitivist ELC  with respect 

to  the  comprehension  of  language  about  abstracta  and  things  we  have  not  experienced, 

because  cognitivist  ELC  has  ample  resources  with  which  to  account  for  this.  Seventh,  that 

cognitivist ELC enjoys a significant advantage over enactivist ELC with respect to the flexible 

and context-sensitive nature of language comprehension, due to cognitivist ELC‟s emphasis on 

the  dynamic  and  variable  nature  of  sensorimotor  simulation  and  enactivist  ELC‟s  antipathy 

towards  mental 

representations  as  explanatory  posits.  Eighth, 

that—despite 

initial 

appearances—it is presently problematic to take the extant empirical evidence as support for 

ELC over the amodal view. Ninth, and finally, that friends of ELC need not be dismayed by my 

eighth conclusion, because there are several promising ways in which the case for ELC can be 

developed  and  strengthened.  These  include  a  parsimony  argument  and  an  alliance  with  the 

resemblance theory of mental representation. 

In summary, I will conclude that cognitivist ELC, in the attenuated form I will develop, is 

a viable theory of language comprehension, even if much work remains to be done. Indeed, 

understanding  is  simulating—even  if  neither  understanding  nor  simulating  turns  out  to  be 

precisely what we may have thought. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Embodied Linguistic Comprehension and Embodied 
Cognition 

4E Cognition and the Critique of Classical Cognitive Science 

Here is a story that has been told, more or less similarly, a number of times. Cognitive science 

and artificial intelligence got going in the mid-20th century as a consequence of the „cognitive 

revolution‟, a paradigm shift in the study of the mind. For the first half of the century, scientific 

inquiry  into  human  intelligence  had  been  dominated  by  behaviourism,  an  approach  which 

eschewed all mention of inner states or mechanisms. Motivated by the perceived unreliability of 

introspective  methods  and  a  desire  to  put  psychology  on  a  rigorous,  objective,  properly 

scientific  footing,  the  behaviourists  tried  to  account  for  all  human  intelligence  in  terms  of 

conditioning:  the  implanting  by  learning  of  tendencies  to  respond  in  certain  ways  to  certain 

kinds of stimuli. According to this vision, a complete psychology would make no reference to 

such seemingly intangible and unobservable mental events as beliefs, desires, experiences, or 

sensations, but only to patterns of stimulation and response (Gardner 1985.) 

At  least  three  events  were  crucial  to  the  demise  of  behaviourism  and  consequent 

embrace  of  a  new  approach  to  the  study  of  intelligence.  These  were:  Alan  Turing's  (1936) 

formal analysis of the notion of computation; the development of the electronic digital computer; 

and a growing awareness within psychology and related disciplines of the inherent limitations of 

the  behaviourist  programme  itself,  articulated  most  famously  in  Noam  Chomsky‟s  (1959) 

devastating criticism of the behaviourist approach to language. 

Turing‟s seminal work was originally motivated by investigations in logic which had little 

directly to do with either cognition or engineering. However, in the course of attempting to solve 

a  theoretical  problem  concerning  first-order  predicate  logic,  he  gave  a  thought  experiment 

incorporating the specifications for an abstract „machine‟ which turned out to form the basis of 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computer science (Clark 2001.) The Turing Machine, as it has become known, is a deceptively 

simple  system  consisting  of  three  elements:  a  tape  divided  into  squares;  a  read/write  head 

capable of scanning a symbol from the current square, writing and/or erasing a symbol on the 

current  square,  and  moving  left  or  right  along  the  tape;  and  a  central  processor  which 

determines  the  next  action  based  on  the  current  input  and  the  state  set  by  the  prior  input 

(Turing 1936.) 

Turing‟s purpose in describing the Machine was to give a precise, formal analysis of 

the  intuitive  notion  of  computability.  On  the  intuitive  notion,  a  mathematical  function  is 

computable just in case it can be worked out in a finite series of well-specified steps none of 

which  requires  any  insight  or  creativity.  Turing‟s  famous  thesis  is  that  the  class  of  functions 

computable in this sense is identical to the class of functions which can be solved by a Turing 

Machine, and hence that the definition of the Machine amounts to an exact specification of the 

conditions under which a function is computable (Copeland 1993.) 

The  relevance  of  this  development  to  the  study  of  the  mind  is  that,  prior  to  Turing‟s 

innovation, computing functions was an activity exclusively performed by human intellects. The 

description of a purely mechanical computing machine amounted to nothing less than a recipe 

for building a physical system apparently able to do something that could previously only be 

done  by  a  mind.  As  Turing  put  it:  “The  idea  behind  digital  computers  may  be  explained  by 

saying that these machines are intended to carry out any operations which could be done by a 

human computer” (1950, p.436.) 

In  particular,  Turing‟s  work  suggested  the  possibility  of  constructing  a  symbol 

processing  machine  whose  transformations  from  one  state  to  another  would  be  entirely 

determined by the syntactic properties—that is, the physical form or shape—of the symbols it 

trafficked  in,  but  would  nonetheless  respect  or  preserve  the  semantic  properties  of  those 

symbols. This insight into how to get meaning-respecting behaviour from a mere mechanism 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was pregnant with the thought that perhaps the meaning-respecting human mind just is such a 

mechanism—one built, of course, out of neurons, synapses, and the like (Clark 2001.) 

In the wake of the remarkable theoretical work done by Turing (and others; e.g. Church 

1936)  came  the  construction  of  the  first  digital  computers.  The  initial  insight  that  the 

computation  of  mathematical  functions  could  be  mechanized  and  automated  was  one  thing. 

However,  matters  were  taken  to  a  whole  new  level  by  the  further  insight  that  the  symbols 

manipulated by a Turing-style device need not stand only for mathematical objects, but could 

potentially  represent  anything  at  all.  This  led  to  the  construction  of  general-purpose, 

programmable  digital  computers:  artefacts capable  of solving  indefinitely  many well-specified 

problems  by  means  of  internal  formal  operations  performed  upon  symbolic  structures.  In 

retrospect,  it  seems  that  these  revolutionary  machines  were  conceived  of,  designed,  and 

created  in  perfect  time  for  the  position  of  scientifically-respectable-model-of-mind  to  be  left 

vacant  by  the  ignominious  dismissal  of  behaviourism.  By  the  middle  of  the  century,  Turing 

himself was defending the claim that there need be no contradiction or confusion involved in 

the idea of a machine that thinks (Turing 1950.) 

This third development was a gradual process, but is often thought to be encapsulated 

by Chomsky‟s (1959) review of B.F. Skinner‟s (1957) book Verbal Behavior, the latter being a 

comprehensive  application  of  the  behaviourist  framework  to  the  specific  phenomenon  of 

linguistic ability. In brief, Chomsky argued—among other things—that the sophisticated nature 

of  human  language  mastery  far  outstrips  what  can  be  accounted  for  solely  in  terms  of 

environmental  factors  and  simple  principles  of  conditioning.  To  adequately  explain  verbal 

behaviour, he contended, it is necessary to posit rich and complex inner resources of exactly 

the kind eschewed by a behaviourist treatment. 

The  implications  of  such  a  claim  for  the  study  of  intelligence  are  best  expressed  by 

Chomsky himself in his review of Skinner: 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  magnitude  of  the  failure  of  [Skinner‟s]  attempt  to  account  for  verbal 

behavior serves as a kind of measure of the importance of the factors omitted 

from  consideration,  and  an  indication  of  how  little  is  really  known  about  this 

remarkably complex phenomenon. (1959, p. 28.)  

The “factors omitted”, of course, were precisely the details of the cognitive resources whereby 

human  organisms  managed  to  achieve  such  sophisticated  performance  on  the  basis  of  the 

arguably meagre inputs available to a language learner. Chomsky‟s argument can be seen as 

a plea for the scientific study of intelligence to re-direct its attention to such factors, on pain of 

inability to yield any genuine insight into its subject matter. 

In effect, then, the backlash against behaviourism breathed new life into the question: 

what is the structure and nature of the human mind such that it can do the remarkable things it 

can do? And at the same time, an undeniably appealing answer was suggested by the general 

purpose digital computer, a mechanical device capable of solving problems in many different 

domains by means of purely syntactically driven but nonetheless semantically sensible symbol 

manipulations. The answer, in Allen Newell and Herbert Simon‟s famous formulation, was that 

“a  physical  symbol  system  has  the  necessary  and  sufficient  means  for  general  intelligent 

action” (Newell and Simon 1976.) This conjecture has become known as  the Symbol System 

Hypothesis (SSH; Copeland 1993.) 

So, the question about the structure and nature of the mind was legitimized, and the 

SSH proposed as an answer. The beginnings in the 1950s and 60s of a research programme 

based  directly  on  these  two  developments  constituted  the  twin  birth  of  (classical)  cognitive 

science and artificial intelligence. These were theoretical and practical sides of a single coin: 

the effort to understand the human mind on the model of a digital computer or physical symbol 

system. This multifarious but unified research programme has since become known as Good 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Old-Fashioned  Artificial  Intelligence,  or  GOFAI  (Haugeland  1985);  sometimes  simply  as 

„classicism‟ (Horst 2011.) For convenience, I will use these two terms interchangeably. 

For some time, this endeavour enjoyed considerable success and was accompanied 

by a sense of optimism. Computer programs were written which seemed to exhibit impressive 

signs  of  intelligent  performance  on  certain  tasks,  such  as  problem  solving  (Simon  &  Newell 

1958),  playing  games  such  as  checkers  (Samuel  1959),  medical  diagnosis  (Shortliffe  & 

Buchanan  1975),  and  natural  language  understanding  (Winograd  1972.)  But  ultimately,  a 

number  of  severe  criticisms  and  seemingly  intractable  problems  accumulated  for  the  GOFAI 

programme. 

One  of  these  difficulties  was  the  „Frame  Problem‟,  which  connects  with  deep  issues 

concerning relevance. The problem is that of how a cognitive system, updating its inner model 

or representation of the world in real-time, knows what to check or update. Suppose a system, 

which  harbours  a  complex  internal  model  of  its  environment,  performs  some  action  or 

perceives some event. Since actions and events have effects, the system will need to update 

various  parts  of  its  model.  For  a  GOFAI  system,  this  means  comparing  various  information-

encoding  symbol  strings  to  the  current  state  of  the  environment,  and  revising  those  symbol 

strings which no longer correspond to the environment. 

But  such  a  system  cannot,  for  practical  reasons,  update  every  symbol  string  in  its 

model every time some change occurs: that would be far too time-consuming and inefficient. 

Therefore, the system needs some method to determine, for any change that might occur in its 

environment, which parts of its model to update in response and which parts to leave alone, 

without considering every potential candidate. The problem of devising such a method is the 

Frame  Problem,  and  it  has  been—along  with  other  issues  concerning  relevance  and 

knowledge  organization—a  key  source  of  scepticism  about  GOFAI.  Consider:  the  modus 

operandi of GOFAI systems is rule-governed symbol manipulation, so, it seems, any solution to 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Frame Problem for these systems must be implemented as a set of rules codifying which 

kinds of symbol strings should be updated in the wake of which kinds of changes. But any such 

set  of  rules  will  certainly  be  subject  to  many  qualifications  and  exceptions,  necessitating  a 

further set of higher-order rules regarding when the first-order rules do and do not apply; and 

so forth (Copeland 1993.)  

Another  influential  criticism  of  GOFAI  centred  on  the  question  of  meaning,  or 

semantics,  and  was  brought  to  prominence  by  Searle‟s  (1980)  infamous  Chinese  Room 

Argument.  (This  is  related—though  in  exactly  what  way  is  highly  debatable—to  the  Symbol 

Grounding  Problem,  to  be  discussed  in  chapter  5.)  Without  delving  into  the  details  of  this 

controversy, the problem, in a nutshell, is this: How do the symbols manipulated by a GOFAI 

system refer to things in the world? The question arises in part because these symbols, like the 

symbols of a natural language, are arbitrarily related to their referents. For example, in English, 

the symbol „cat‟ could just as well have represented barking, canine animals, and the symbol 

string „dog‟ could just as well have represented meowing, feline animals. There is nothing about 

either symbol which makes it especially well suited to denoting what it in fact denotes. In just 

this sense are the symbols manipulated by GOFAI systems also arbitrary (Haugeland 1985.) 

In the case of public language, a plausible answer to the question is readily available: 

convention. The symbols of a language like English represent what they do because of tacit 

agreements, or intentions, or expectations, in the minds of those using them. But this answer 

cannot work for symbols in the mind, on pain of infinite regress. Of course, in the case of the 

actual  GOFAI  programs  that  were  written  and  executed,  it  was  clear  that  the  assignment  of 

symbol to referent stemmed from a decision on the part of the programmer (Winograd 1980.) 

But it was equally clear that this could not be the answer for the human mind, or any generally 

intelligent,  genuinely  cognitive  system.  Thus,  the  question  stood  open:  if  human  minds,  and 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
minds  more  generally,  are  physical  symbol  systems—if  the  SSH  is  true—then  how  do  their 

symbols mean anything? (Haugeland 1985; Shapiro 2007.) 

The problems of relevance and knowledge illustrated by the Frame Problem, and the 

question  of  meaning,  were  among  many  criticisms  of  the  SSH  and  the  GOFAI  programme. 

Others  concerned  the  apparently  significant  differences  between  the  workings  of  a  physical 

symbol system and those of the human brain; others, the tendency of GOFAI research to focus 

on  evolutionarily  recent  achievements  such  as  rational  thought  and  language  use,  while 

ignorant of how the older and more fundamental problems of perception and motor control had 

been  solved  by  nature  (Anderson  2003.)  Meanwhile,  writers  such  as  Hubert  Dreyfus  (1972) 

argued on philosophical grounds that the SSH relied on dubious assumptions about the very 

nature of thought. Andy Clark articulates the general sentiment well: 

One possibility is that we simply misconstrued the nature of intelligence itself. 

We imagined mind as a kind of logical reasoning device coupled with  a store 

of explicit data... In so doing, we ignored the fact that minds evolved to make 

things  happen.  We  ignored  the  fact  that  the  biological  mind  is,  first  and 

foremost,  an  organ  for  controlling  the  biological  body...  Minds  are  not 

disembodied logical reasoning devices. (1997, p.1) 

Suffice it to say that serious scepticism about GOFAI and the SSH was in the air by the 

1980s.  Many  researchers  began  to  suggest  that  the  classical  programme  was  somehow 

incomplete,  misguided,  or  fundamentally  flawed  and  that  a  new  paradigm—  or  at  least 

significant  change—  in  the  study  of  the  mind  was  required  (e.g.  Haugeland  1979;  Winograd 

1980;  Searle  1980;  Norman  1980;  Lakoff  and  Johnson  1980a.)  This  ultimately  led  to  the 

raising,  throughout  the  late  1980s  and  the 1990s,  of  many  different  revolutionary  banners  in 

cognitive  science  and  AI.  Several  proposals  were  made  seeking  to  supplant  GOFAI  as  the 

dominant approach to the scientific investigation of mental phenomena.  

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  first  prominent  aspect  of  this  methodological  explosion  was  the  advent  of 

connectionism, heralded as a neurally-inspired and (hence) more biologically plausible way of 

studying  cognition,  and  one  which  might  succeed  where  GOFAI  had  failed  (Tienson  1987.) 

Instead  of  rule-based  symbol  systems,  connectionists  used  (simulated)  artificial  neural 

networks  to  model  cognitive  tasks.  These  deceptively  simple  networks  consist  of  units  (or 

„nodes‟)  and  connections  between  those  units  along  which  activation  values  are  passed 

(Bechtel 1988.) 

A  typical  connectionist  network  might  have  three  „layers‟  of  units:  an  input  layer,  an 

output layer, and a „hidden‟ layer. Suppose the network‟s task is to convert text to speech. In 

this case, it will need to receive textual information as input, and yield phonetic information as 

output. The textual information will be encoded in the input layer by means of activation values: 

each  unit  in  the  input  layer will  take  some value,  either  binary  or  on  a continuum.  Next,  the 

input units will transmit activation values to units in the hidden layer via their connections. Each 

input layer unit is connected to various hidden layer units, and each connection has a certain 

„weight‟. The activation value that a given hidden layer unit takes will be determined by its own 

threshold function plus the total activation it receives—and the latter will be determined by the 

activation values of the input layer units, plus the strengths or weights of the connections. In 

short, this process will be repeated from the hidden layer to the output layer, and, ultimately, if 

the  network  is  successful,  the  resultant  pattern  of  activation  values  at  the  output  layer  will 

encode  the  phonetic  information  corresponding  to  the  textual  input  (Sejnowski  &  Rosenberg 

1987.) 

The foregoing is a very rough sketch, but it gives a sense of the first serious competitor 

to GOFAI in cognitive science. On the face of it, connectionism offers a very different vision of 

cognition to the SSH. Jerry Fodor once famously claimed that the symbolic model of the mind 

was “the only game in town” (1976, p.55) but by the late 1980s, it was apparent that this was 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
no  longer  true.  The  rise  of  connectionism,  however,  was  only  the  beginning.  In  its  wake 

followed  a  huge  variety  of  new  positive  proposals  about  how  to  gain  traction  on  the  vexing 

problems of intelligent thought and behaviour. 

The publication of The Embodied Mind by biologist Francisco Varela, philosopher Evan 

Thompson,  and  psychologist  Eleanor  Rosch  in  1991  may  be  said  to  mark  the  beginning  of 

embodied  cognition  in  the  broadest  sense—or,  as  I  am  calling  it,  4E  Cognition—as  a  self-

conscious,  revolutionary  movement.  This  landmark  work  articulated  a  number  of  the  key 

criticisms  of  the  classical  or  GOFAI  project,  and  drew  on  such  diverse  sources  as  Buddhist 

meditation,  biology,  and  the  phenomenological  tradition  in  philosophy  to  propose  a  new 

paradigm: “enactive” cognitive science, which would emphasize the continuity between life and 

mind, and study cognition as first and foremost a biological phenomenon (Varela et al 1991.) 

On the enactive view (a recent version of which I will discuss in chapter 6) cognition is 

identified with neither rule-governed symbol manipulation nor the parallel distributed processing 

of  connectionist  networks,  but  with  “a  history  of  structural  coupling”  between  organism  and 

environment (Varela et al 1991, p.206.)  The Embodied Mind amounted to nothing less than a 

manifesto,  urging  cognitive  science  to  rethink  its  foundations  in  light  of  a  perceived  gulf 

between computational theories of mind and the world of lived human experience (Varela et al 

1991.) 

The  enactive  proposal  was  but  one  of  many.  Robotics  researcher  Rodney  Brooks 

(1991a)  launched  an  influential  assault  on  the  traditional  conception  and  role  of  mental 

representation in cognitive science and AI. To understand Brooks‟ challenge, first consider that 

the modus operandi of GOFAI systems, in general, is to take as input a description of some 

task  or  problem,  convert  that  input  into  a  symbolic  representation  of  the  problem,  perform 

computational operations on the representation, and yield as output a solution to the problem. 

In  the  context  of  mobile  robotics,  this  translates  into  what  Brooks  (1991b)  calls  the  sense-

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model-plan-act  (SMPA)  framework:  the  robot  receives  information  about  its  environment  via 

sensors,  uses  this  information  to  construct  a  symbolic  model  or  representation  of  the 

environment, uses the representation in turn to generate a plan of action, and then executes 

the plan. 

Drawing attention to the typically poor performance of SMPA robots in navigating their 

environments in real time, Brooks proposed, and implemented, a new approach, which was—

put simply—to do away with the middle two steps of the SMPA cycle. He and his colleagues 

designed and built robots which did not generate detailed internal models of  their environment 

for use in planning, but which instead relied on direct couplings between sensing and acting. 

These minimal robots, it turned out, performed very well with such economical resources. One 

central  moral  Brooks  drew  from  this  was  that  explicit,  detailed  symbolic  representation  is  an 

unnecessary and even counterproductive design feature when trying to get simple creatures to 

exhibit basic intelligent behaviour. He further argued that, since „higher‟ cognitive activities like 

language  use  and  explicit  deliberation  are  the  tiny  tip  of  a  gigantic  evolutionary  iceberg,  the 

right way for AI and cognitive science to proceed is in a bottom-up fashion: First, we need to 

determine what is required for embodied beings to sense and act quickly and effectively in a 

changing environment, and then we can try to figure out how language and the other higher 

faculties might emerge from such fundamental capacities (Brooks 1991a.) 

In one of his seminal papers, Brooks tells a delightful fable which is worth quoting in 

full, because it vividly articulates one common diagnosis of the problem with GOFAI: 

Suppose  it  is  the  1890s.  Artificial  flight  is  the  glamor  subject  in  science, 

engineering,  and  venture  capital  circles.  A  bunch  of  AF  researchers  are 

miraculously transported by a time machine to the 1980s for a few hours. They 

spend  the  whole  time  in  the  passenger  cabin  of  a  commercial  passenger 

Boeing 747 on a medium duration flight. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Returned to the 1890s they feel vigorated, knowing that AF is possible 

on  a  grand  scale.  They  immediately  set  to  work  duplicating  what  they  have 

seen.  They  make  great  progress  in  designing  pitched  seats,  double  pane 

windows, and know that if only they can figure out those weird “plastics” they 

will  have  the  grail  within  their  grasp.  (A  few  connectionists  amongst  them 

caught a glimpse of an engine with its cover off and they are preoccupied with 

inspirations from that experience.) (1991a, p.141.) 

According to this way of thinking, GOFAI was led astray by its focus on symbol manipulation, a 

focus that amounted to seeking the essence of cognition in the inessential. Certainly, goes the 

thought, the design of digital computers was inspired by certain mental operations performed 

by  human  beings;  but  what  sorts  of  mental  operations?  Symbol  manipulation,  as  in  explicit 

mathematical  calculation  and  logical  reasoning—which  is  a  recent  innovation,  evolutionarily 

speaking, and perhaps marginal relative to the kinds of skilful environmental coping with which 

human and other brains were solely occupied for millions of years (Brooks 1991a.) 

So, connectionism, enactivism, and Brooks‟ bottom-up, representation-lite, embodied-

and-situated approach to intelligence each presented a serious alternative to GOFAI. Another 

such  was  the  Dynamical  Hypothesis—championed  by  Tim  Van  Gelder  (1995;  1998)—that 

cognitive systems, fundamentally, are not computational but dynamical, and ought therefore to 

be studied using the mathematical tools of Dynamical Systems Theory.  Meanwhile, articulating 

a growing appreciation of the ways in which cognitive creatures are “embedded” (Haugeland 

1998) in their environments, Andy Clark and David Chalmers (1998) famously argued for the 

metaphysical thesis that the mind itself was not confined to the head. Under certain conditions, 

they  claimed,  objects  external  to  a  biological  organism  could  literally  be  constituents  of  that 

organism's mental processes. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Much more could be said, but suffice it to note that, by the dawn of the 21st century, the 

eclectic and disorganised nature of the revolutionary movement led many to seek conceptual 

clarity.  Did 

this  vast  proliferation  of  diverse  methodological  proposals  and  research 

programmes really amount to a cohesive movement at all, they wondered? Was it united by 

any positive claims or theses, or merely by the negative critique and rejection of GOFAI? And 

even  if  some  of  its  positive  claims  were  true,  did  they  really  have  the  paradigm-shifting 

implications claimed for them? (Wilson 2002; Shapiro 2007; Kiverstein & Clark 2009.) 

Inspired  by  such  musings,  the  label  '4E  Cognition'  was  coined  to  recognise  the 

diversity of a 'movement' whose proponents claimed, variously, that the mind was Embodied, 

Extended,  Enactive,  and  environmentally  Embedded  (Menary  2010.)  Many  commentators—

including  Margaret  Wilson  (2002),  Michael  Anderson (2003),  and  Larry  Shapiro  (2007)--have 

also suggested that the best way to engage with 4E Cognition is to identify the distinct positive 

claims  being  made  by  its  proponents,  and  then  consider  each  of  these  (insofar  as  possible) 

independently, asking what grounds we have for thinking they are true, and what follows if they 

are. 

This seems like a sensible and fruitful way to proceed. In this spirit, then, I will for the 

most part ignore the Extended, Enactive, and Embedded strands of 4E Cognition research. My 

focus is on the claim that language comprehension is Embodied, in the sense of constitutively 

involving sensorimotor simulation. However, this claim has not arisen in isolation. It has been 

made  by  theorists  working  in  a  research  programme  which  aims  to  establish  that  higher 

cognitive functions in general are embodied in this sense. This research programme, which has 

its home primarily in cognitive psychology and linguistics, I will call 'embodied cognition' (EC) 

and distinguish from the broader 4E Cognition movement of which it is part. Time, then, for a 

closer look at EC itself. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EC: Grounding (Higher) Cognition in Perception and Action 

The diversity of the different proposals and research programmes which collectively comprise 

4E Cognition is mirrored by a diversity of motivations. Although it is common for theorists in this 

area to emphasize one aspect or another of the critique of classicism outlined above, they differ 

in which aspects they emphasize and how they propose to address these concerns. 

Insofar as the EC research programme is driven by negative or critical considerations, 

perhaps chief among them is the Symbol Grounding Problem. This, recall, is the question of 

how  the  symbols  of  a  formal,  rule-governed  cognitive  system  can  come  to  refer  to  things 

outside  of  the system;  or,  formulated  differently,  how a  purely  syntactic  system  can come  to 

have semantic content. A common thought fuelling research into EC has been that establishing 

the thoroughgoing dependence of higher cognitive functions on sensorimotor systems would go 

a  significant  way  toward  solving  this problem  (Anderson  2003.)  The  suggestion  seems  to  be 

that the structures used in abstract thought and reason, language use, and the like will be seen 

to have a non-arbitrary connection to their referents if it is established that they are essentially 

the  same  structures  we  use  to  represent  those  referents  when  experiencing  them  in  direct, 

physical, embodied perception and interaction (Barsalou 1999.)  

I  will  discuss  the  Symbol  Grounding  Problem  in  detail  in  chapter  5.  Meanwhile, 

however, we can examine EC without worrying overmuch about whether it offers a solution to 

this  problem  or  not.  The  key  claim  of  EC  is  that  (higher)  cognition  consists  in  embodied 

simulation,  which  essentially  means  the  partial  re-activation  of  sensorimotor  states.  As 

Margaret Wilson puts it: 

Many centralized, allegedly abstract cognitive activities may in fact make use 

of  sensorimotor  functions...  Mental  structures  that  originally  evolved  for 

perception or action appear to be co-opted and run “off-line”, decoupled from 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  physical  inputs  and  outputs  that  were  their  original  purpose,  to  assist  in 

thinking and knowing. (2002, p. 633.) 

Clearly, this is a significant and interesting claim in its own right. It is possible to consider the 

evidence  for  such  a  claim  without  the  Symbol  Grounding  Problem  or  other  critical 

considerations  for  motivation.  Among  others,  linguist  George  Lakoff  and  philosopher  Mark 

Johnson (1999) argue that this core EC claim—that abstract, conceptual, and off-line thought is 

subserved  by  mechanisms  of  on-line  perception  and  action—is  practically  forced  on  us  by 

convergent  evidence  from  different  areas  of  cognitive  science,  regardless  of  our  prior 

theoretical interests or convictions. 

At  this  point,  it  is  natural  to wonder what  the  evidence  is which  so  impresses Lakoff 

and Johnson. One datum is the phenomenon of conceptual metaphor in linguistics. Conceptual 

metaphor,  which  has  been  extensively  documented  by  Lakoff  and  Johnson  (1980a,  1980b, 

1999), refers to the existence of systematic structural mappings between abstract and concrete 

concepts. Studies in discourse analysis, etymology, and other subfields of linguistics reveal a 

pervasive tendency among human beings to instinctively deploy such metaphors as „Purposes 

Are  Destinations‟.  This  metaphor  maps  the  abstract  notion  of  a  purpose  onto  the  concrete 

notion of a (spatial) destination, leading to such expressions as “He‟ll ultimately be successful, 

but he isn‟t there yet” (Lakoff and Johnson 1999.) 

Lakoff  and  Johnson  give  detailed  analyses  of  dozens  of  such  metaphors,  some  of 

which are „primary‟ or fundamental, and others of which are complex (built out of combinations 

of  primary  metaphors.)  Examples  include  „More  Is  Up‟  (as  in  “My  income  rose  last  year”);  

„Understanding Is Seeing‟ (as in “I see what you‟re saying”); „Ideas Are Money‟ (as in “He has a 

wealth  of  ideas”);  and  many  more (Lakoff  and  Johnson  1980a.)  Some  of  these  metaphors—

particularly  primary  ones—are  found  cross-culturally,  while  others  are  culture-  or  language-

specific.  Throughout  their  discussion,  Lakoff  and  Johnson  are  at  pains  to  emphasize  their 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contention that conceptual metaphor is not merely about ways of speaking, but about ways of 

thinking. It is not mere terminology, but conceptual or inferential structure that is mapped from 

concrete  to  abstract  domains.  As  Lakoff  and  Johnson  put  it  when  discussing  the  complex 

metaphor „Love Is A Journey‟: 

[this] mapping does not just permit the use of travel words to speak of love. [It] 

allows forms of reasoning about travel to be used in reasoning about love. It 

functions  so  as  to  map  inferences  about  travel  into  inferences  about  love... 

(1999, p.65.) 

This  means  that,  insofar  as  the  abstract  concept  of  a  love  relationship  is  structured  on  the 

concrete concept of a spatial journey, inferences which are valid concerning journeys will be 

mirrored by correspondingly valid inferences concerning love relationships. The idea is that our 

concrete  concepts  of  objects,  spatial  properties,  and  the  like  are  represented  in  our 

sensorimotor systems, and these structures are exapted for the purpose of abstract conceptual 

tasks.  This,  if  true,  is  one  way  in  which  higher  cognition  might  constitutively  involve 

sensorimotor processing (Lakoff and Johnson 1999.) 

The  linguistic  evidence  for  conceptual  metaphor,  then,  is  one  reason  for  thinking 

cognition might be embodied in the EC sense. Some results from neuroscience have also been 

taken as supportive of the EC view. I will not discuss these  in detail here. However, Gallese 

and Lakoff (2005) use findings concerning „mirror neurons‟ and „canonical neurons‟, as well as 

other  neuroscientific  data,  to  argue  that  the  structure needed  to  process  abstract  conceptual 

inference is available in the brain‟s sensorimotor systems. 

Much of the evidence for EC which will be directly relevant to ELC (recall: Embodied 

Linguistic  Comprehension)  comes 

from  experimental  studies 

in  cognitive  psychology. 

Systematic and intimate interaction effects have been shown to exist between conceptual and 

linguistic tasks, on the one hand, and sensorimotor variables, on the other. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For  instance,  in  one  study,  subjects  were  presented  with  sentences  on  a  screen 

describing various actions involving motion toward or away from their body. They then had to 

either move toward or away from their body to press a button indicating that they had read and 

understood the sentence. It turned out the subjects were significantly quicker to respond when 

the direction of motion implied by the sentence was the same as the direction in which they had 

to  move  to  press  the  button.  One  possible  explanation  of  this  is  that  the  process  of 

comprehending  sentences  about  motion  actually  engages  motor  control  mechanisms  in 

producing an inner simulation, thus interfering with subsequent motion production (Glenberg & 

Kaschak 2002.) 

Many similar results have been found in other studies. To give just one more example, 

when subjects had first to read a sentence describing taking a particular orientation towards an 

object (e.g. you are driving a car) and then subsequently identify nouns presented to them as 

denoting  parts  of  that  object  or  not,  they  were  quicker  to  respond  correctly  for  object  parts 

which  would  have  been  readily  visible  from  the  described  perspective.  Again,  an  obvious 

explanation  is  that  their  comprehension  of  the  perspective-priming  sentence  involved 

constructing an inner perceptual simulation of taking the perspective in question (Borghi et al 

2004.) 

What I have just discussed is a brief but representative sample of the kinds of empirical 

evidence which the EC research programme has accrued. Meanwhile, work has progressed on 

theoretical  and  philosophical  fronts,  too.  Psychologist  Lawrence  Barsalou  (1999,  2003)  has 

developed  his  theory  of  Perceptual  Symbol  Systems  (which  I  will  discuss  in  chapter  3),  a 

detailed account of how concepts might be created, stored, and retrieved in the sensorimotor 

systems.  Relatedly,  philosopher  Jesse  Prinz  (2002)  defends  Concept  Empiricism,  a  position 

similar in spirit to the EC account, though differing in emphasis. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Armed with a basic understanding of the EC cognition-grounding project, and its place 

within the broader contexts of the 4E Cognition movement and cognitive science, it is time for a 

closer look at the particular instance of EC which is my concern: namely, the ELC project of 

grounding linguistic comprehension in sensorimotor simulation. 

ELC as a Special Case of EC 

As  far  as  I  am aware,  two  main  versions  of  ELC  have  been  articulated  and  defended  in  the 

cognitive  science  literature.  These  are  the  Indexical  Hypothesis  (IH)  developed  by  Arthur 

Glenberg  (Glenberg  1997;  Glenberg  &  Robertson  1999)  and  the  Immersed  Experiencer 

Framework (IEF) due to Rolf Zwaan (2004.) 

Although  both  these  views  claim  that  linguistic  comprehension  centrally  involves 

perceptual  simulation,  they  differ  in  detail.  IH  holds  that  linguistic  comprehension  is  a  three-

stage  process  involving  the  mapping  of  words  to  corresponding  (Barsalou-style)  perceptual 

symbols,  the  subsequent  derivation  of  affordances  (roughly,  perceived  opportunities  for 

organism-object  interaction)  from  these  perceptual  symbols,  and,  finally,  the  creation  of  a 

simulated  experience  by  combining  object  affordances  as  dictated  by  sentence  structure 

(Glenberg  &  Kaschak  2002.)  IEF,  on  the  other  hand,  although  relying  on  the  notion  of 

perceptual  symbols,  makes  no  explicit  mention  of  affordances.  IEF,  like  IH,  understands 

comprehension  as  a  three-stage  process3;  but  its  three  stages  are  called  „activation‟, 

„construal‟, and „integration‟, and they do not correspond to the three stages identified by IH. In 

the first stage, various sensorimotor representations corresponding to a word or morpheme are 

activated; in the second stage, the representational activity is „disambiguated‟ by context; and 

3 The term „stage‟ is slightly misleading, as activation, integration, and construal are supposed to 
operate in an overlapping and recurrent fashion (Zwaan 2004.) It might be more accurate to call these 
elements of the comprehension process. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
in the third stage, the disambiguated representations of objects and properties are combined to 

create a spatially and temporally coherent simulation (Zwaan 2004.)  

The differences of detail between these versions of ELC are worth bearing in mind. My 

project is to see what the prospects are for defending the bare thesis of ELC: that language 

comprehension constitutively involves the activation of sensorimotor representations. I want to 

identify  what—if  any—is  the  most  abstract,  minimally  qualified  version  of  this  claim  which 

appears  defensible  in  light  of  extant  objections  and  considerations  both  theoretical  and 

empirical. So if there is some specific claim made by IH or IEF which seems inessential to ELC 

itself, it will be possible to simply jettison that particular detail without needing to abandon the 

core position. 

Of  course,  this  does  not  mean  that  no  further  theoretical  work  will  be  required.  The 

project just described amounts to identifying constraints on a plausible version of ELC. So, for 

example,  if  it  turns  out  that  most  criticisms  of  ELC  can  be  answered,  but  that  its  use  of  the 

notion of affordances is indefensible, then one constraint will be that the position is plausible 

provided some more defensible alternative to affordances can be recruited to do the same work 

or play the same explanatory role. 

As  well  as  emphasizing  the  relationship  of  these  specific  ELC  theories  to  my  more 

abstract  investigation,  I  want  to  mention  again  the  relationship  of  ELC  to  the  broader  EC 

project. In outlining their theories of language comprehension, people like Glenberg and Zwaan 

readily  appeal  to  empirical  findings  and  theoretical  developments  in  the  EC  literature  which 

point to the sensorimotor grounding of conceptual knowledge and abstract thought generally, 

not just language-specific processes. This seems like a reasonable strategy, granted only the 

crucial (and quite plausible) assumption that the mechanisms of linguistic comprehension and 

those  of  conceptual  thought  are  intimately  linked  (Prinz  2002.)  If  understanding  language 

involves  having  thoughts  which  feature  the  concepts  corresponding  to  the  words  used,  then 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
certainly understanding language will involve (at least to some extent) whatever is involved in 

conceptual thought. I propose to accept this assumption, and, hence, its corollary: that direct 

evidence for EC constitutes indirect evidence for ELC. Every finding which lends support to the 

claim that sensorimotor processes are involved in conceptual cognition ipso facto lends support 

to  the  claim  that  such  processes  are  involved  in  linguistic  comprehension  (though  precisely 

how, and to what extent, remains to be seen.) 

Conclusion 

Now we know where we‟ve come from, and have some idea where we‟re going. The eclectic 

movement now known as 4E Cognition arose from dissatisfaction with GOFAI and the classical 

project in cognitive science. The perceived inability of classicism to solve key problems led to a 

number  of  different  research  programmes,  some  more  revolutionary  than  others.  Paradigm-

shifting implications aside, one of the most intriguing of these programmes is that which has 

come  simply  to  be  known  as  Embodied  Cognition  or  EC,  which  seeks  to  establish  that 

processes  of  higher,  abstract  and  conceptual  cognition  take  place  by  exploiting  the  brain‟s 

sensorimotor  resources.  The  core  of  this  approach  can  be  loosely  summarized  as  the  claim 

that “thoughts comprise mental simulations of bodily experiences” (Casasanto 2009.)  

Much  empirical  evidence  has  been  gathered  to  support  this  core  EC  claim  in  such 

disciplines  as  linguistics,  psychology,  and  neuroscience.  A  particular  strand  of  EC  research 

focuses  on  the  claim  that  linguistic  comprehension  constitutively  involves  sensorimotor 

simulation.  This  claim  is,  of  course,  what  I  am  calling  ELC.  The  two  main  ELC  theories  are 

Glenberg‟s „Indexical Hypothesis‟ (IH) and Zwaan‟s „Immersed Experiencer Framework‟ (IEF), 

both  of  which  appeal  to  the  empirical  and  theoretical  resources  of  the  broader  EC 

programme—particularly  Barsalou‟s  theory  of  conceptual  knowledge  known  as  Perceptual 

Symbol  Systems  (PSS.)  I  have  suggested  that  this  strategy  in  developing  ELC  is  legitimate, 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
given  the  plausible  assumption  that  linguistic  comprehension  and  conceptual  thought  are 

closely linked.  

In  the  next  chapter  I  will  give  a  thorough  exposition  of  the  case  for  ELC.  This  will 

involve  detailed  descriptions  of  IH,  IEF,  and  PSS,  focussing  in  particular  on  points  of 

comparison and contrast, as well as relationships of theoretical dependence. It will also involve 

a closer examination of the empirical evidence and other arguments cited in support of EC and 

ELC. It will emerge that there are many impressive and compelling reasons for concluding that 

understanding is simulating, before I move on to consider objections in subsequent chapters. 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. The Case for ELC 

Perceptual Symbol Systems 

As  I  have  already  remarked,  ELC  is  situated  firmly  within  the  EC  research  programme  in 

cognitive science. Probably the most thoroughly developed and oft-cited theoretical articulation 

of this programme is Lawrence Barsalou's (1999) theory of Perceptual Symbol Systems (PSS.) 

The  two  main  versions  of  ELC  which  I  will  discuss  below  make  liberal  use  of  theoretical 

constructs from PSS, so an understanding of PSS is a prerequisite to a true understanding of 

the case for ELC. Let us, therefore, look more closely at PSS. 

Barsalou's  project  is  to  give  a  schematic  but  comprehensive  account  of  how  such 

cognitive  abilities  as  conceptual  reasoning,  categorical  inference,  planning,  and  (of  course) 

language comprehension could be implemented in the brain's sensorimotor systems. He sets 

himself  squarely  in  opposition  to  the  classical  view  in  cognitive  science  that  such  processes 

take  place  outside  of  the sensorimotor  systems,  in  a separate,  dedicated  conceptual  system 

using  a  representational  code  distinct  from  those  deployed  by  the  sensorimotor  systems. 

Barsalou  refers  to  this  view  in  general  as  the  amodal  view  of  higher  cognition,  though  its 

canonical  articulation  is  Jerry  Fodor's  (1976)  Language  of  Thought  (LOT)  hypothesis.  To 

oversimplify slightly, then, PSS is offered as a rival hypothesis to LOT. 

The  widespread  acceptance  which  LOT  has  enjoyed  is  largely  due  to  influential 

theoretical arguments purporting to show that only such a view can account for certain  striking 

features  of  human  cognition,  particularly  those  exhibited  by  the  higher  cognitive  functions 

mentioned above. Those arguments will come to the fore in chapter 4, when I investigate the 

alleged  advantages  of  the  amodal  view  over  ELC.  For  now,  I  mention  them  only  to  set  the 

dialectical  context  for  Barsalou's  theory.  His  burden  is  to  show  that  it  is  not  necessary  to 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
postulate an amodal conceptual code, or LOT, by showing that sensorimotor resources alone 

can account for all the striking properties of higher cognition. 

Barsalou  begins  this  task  by  citing  a  well-established  finding  in  psychology:  during 

perception, attention can (and does) selectively fixate on distinct components of the perceptual 

scene—such as objects, shapes, properties, and relations—and those components on which it 

fixates are more likely to be stored in long-term memory from which they can later be retrieved. 

For instance, when visually perceiving a cat sitting on a mat, your attention might be drawn to 

the  cat,  and  this  will  increase  the  likelihood  that  your visual representation  of  the  cat  will  be 

stored and made available for subsequent use (Barsalou 1999.) 

Suppose, then, that this has happened, and the following day you see a different cat—

perhaps smaller, and of a different colour—sitting on a different mat. At this point, a match or 

similarity relation may be identified between your occurrent perception of today's cat and your 

stored  perceptual  representation  of  yesterday's  cat.  Despite  the  dissimilarities,  they  are 

classified as being instances of the same type. Now, due to the interaction of selective attention 

and  long-term  memory,  your  perception  of  today's  cat  is  also  stored  for  future  use—at  the 

same time probably modifying slightly your stored representation of yesterday's cat—and you 

now  have  a  greater  store  of  information  which  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  future  cat-like 

perceptions. Moreover, if you find yourself wandering aimlessly around on the third day, hoping 

in vain to encounter another cat, it is possible that your stored representations of the first two 

cats could be re-activated, amounting to a simulated cat perception of sorts. 

The  foregoing  is  a  simplistic  sketch  of  Barsalou's  account  of  concept  formation. 

According to PSS, a concept consists of a mechanism called a simulator, the precise nature of 

which  is  not  specified,  but  which  serves  to  integrate  information  from  various  sensory  and 

motor  modalities  derived  from  repeated  experience  of  members  of  a  certain  category  (of 

objects, properties, relations, etc.) Your concept of CAT, then, is a CAT simulator—and a CAT 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simulator is a mechanism which integrates stored visual, auditory, haptic, olfactory, gustatory, 

somatosensory and other kinds of information acquired through repeated encounters with cats 

(Barsalou 1999.) 

Speaking  generally,  there  are  two  main  functions  which  a  CAT  simulator  performs. 

One  is  on-line  categorization  and  inference:  if  you  have  a  sufficiently  well-developed  CAT 

simulator,  then  whenever  you  perceive  a  cat,  a  match  will  be  established  between  your 

perception and the simulator, which constitutes a categorical judgement or classification to the 

effect that 'this thing is a cat' (Barsalou 1999.) As a result of this classification, the wealth of 

information which your CAT simulator integrates will be made available to guide your actions in 

relation  to  the  present  cat;  for  instance,  your  simulator  might  recall  stored  memories  of  cats 

behaving  pleasantly  in  response  to  pats  or  food,  thus  suggesting  possible  goal-conducive 

forms of behaviour in relation to this cat here.  

The  second  function  which  a  CAT  simulator  performs,  and  which  is  crucial  to  the 

aspirations of PSS to be a fully-fledged account of higher cognition, is that of underwriting off-

line reasoning. If you are sitting in your armchair at home and wondering whether or not you 

should get a pet cat, your CAT simulator will be capable of recalling many sorts of cat-related 

experiences,  including  memories  of  what  cats  look,  feel,  and  smell  like,  how  they  behave  in 

relation to you, and how you typically feel in relation to them. This information will enable you to 

envisage or simulate (to a greater or lesser extent) what it would be like to have a cat, thus 

enabling your reasoning and decision-making processes in relation to the question (Barsalou 

1999.) 

According  to  PSS,  then,  concepts  are  simulators—mechanisms  which  integrate 

information  from  various  modalities  about  some  category  of  things,  enabling  on-line 

classification of and reasoning about members of that category, as well as off-line thought and 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
planning about members of that category. This is the core of the theory. It is now time to fill in a 

few details.  

One difference between PSS and the amodal view which Barsalou emphasizes is the 

fact that the representations posited by the former as the stuff of thought are both “modal and 

analogical” (Barsalou 1999 p. 578.) By “modal”, he means that they are processed in systems 

whose  function  is  representing  information  from  the  various  sensory-motor  modalities.  By 

“analogical”, he means that they stand (to some degree) in a relation of structural resemblance 

to the original modality-specific representations from which they were derived4. 

To get a sense of this difference, it helps to think about how the same thought might be 

represented in both systems. Returning to our earlier well-worn example, the thought that the 

cat is on the mat will be represented in the brain, according to the amodal view, by a symbol 

string in a linguiform representational code distinct from any codes used by the modalities. This 

string will probably contain symbols standing for CAT, ON, and MAT, combined in accordance 

with syntactic rules. (Recall the discussion in chapter 2 of GOFAI systems.) 

According to PSS, that same thought will be represented in the brain by a  schematic, 

simulated re-enactment of sensorimotor states typical of perceiving a cat on a mat. These will 

have been generated by mechanisms known as simulators, from stored traces of sensorimotor 

representations in long-term memory. Your thought that the cat is on the mat will be processed 

by the same systems that process your perceptions of cats on mats, and will stand in a relation 

of structural resemblance to those perceptions themselves. 

At this point an objection along the following lines arises naturally: it doesn't feel like 

we  think  by  simulating  sensorimotor  experience,  at  least  not  all  the  time.  We  are  often  not 

conscious of any such simulation; sometimes we seem to think in words, and sometimes we 

seem to think in wordless, imageless thought (Schwitzgebel 2008.)  

4 This seems to be the correct reading of Barsalou, at least. However, it is an interesting question 
exactly what various EC/ELC theorists mean when they talk about the „analogical‟ or „non-arbitrary‟ 
nature of sensorimotor simulations. This issue will come up again in chapters 5 and 7. 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
Barsalou's answer to this is twofold. First, there is his assumption that simulations or 

re-creations of sensorimotor states need not always be accompanied by conscious imagery in 

any of the modalities. The fact that we aren't conscious of imagining the smell of a rose, or its 

colour,  or  its  texture,  doesn't,  on  this  view,  show  that  schematic  representations  of  such 

sensory  experiences  are  not  in  fact  being  tokened  in  the  various  modality-specific  systems 

(Barsalou 1999.) 

Second,  Barsalou  makes  a  space  in  his  theory  for  a  kind  of  linguistic  thought. 

However,  he  thinks  that  this,  too,  operates  in  the  sensorimotor  systems,  using  re-created 

perceptual  information  about  words.  The  idea  would  be  that  your  MAT,  CAT,  and  ON 

simulators each possess, as well as traces of perceptions relating to their referents, traces of 

perceptions relating to the corresponding words. (Obviously this will not always be true, since 

we presumably have simulators for un-named categories.) So, for instance, your CAT simulator 

will  integrate  stored  visual  representations  of  the  written  word  'cat',  auditory  and  motor 

representations of the spoken word 'cat', and so forth (Barsalou 1999.) 

Speculatively,  then,  when  we  seem  to  be  thinking  in  words,  it  may  be  that 

representations are being activated in multiple modalities, but are richer and more detailed in 

linguistic 

than  non-linguistic 

information.  Either  way,  Barsalou  affords  sensorimotor 

representations  of  words  a  role  in  governing  the  construction  of  multi-modal  simulations.  He 

thinks  that  our  capacity  to  construct  such  complex  simulations  (i.e.  thoughts)  as  we  can 

piggybacks  on  the  immense  expressive  and  combinatorial  power  of  natural  language.  He 

allows that a pre-linguistic perceptual symbol system would be capable of some productivity, 

but also holds that language helps a great deal. (Sensorimotor simulations of natural language 

will become very important in chapter 4.) 

Another  difference  between  PSS  and  its  amodal rival which  Barsalou  emphasizes  is 

the dynamic nature of the representations posited by the former. According to the amodal view, 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  same  CAT  symbol  is  tokened  in  each  thought  you  have  about  cats  (Zwaan  et  al  2002.) 

According to PSS, on the other hand, your CAT simulator—the mechanism Barsalou identifies 

as your CAT concept—changes, however minutely, with every new cat-encounter you have. 

Another issue to mention in passing, which I will take up in more detail in chapter 4, is 

that of abstract concepts. Barsalou acknowledges that this is one of the main problems facing 

any sensorimotor or  perceptual  theory of  higher  cognition.  Depending  on  what  precisely  one 

takes abstract to mean, the idea of a perceptual representation of an abstract concept might 

sound self-contradictory. 

There are several possible understandings of the concept of abstraction. One intuitive 

sense is that involved in thinking about the idea of a cat in general, independently of the details 

of any particular cat, or thinking about a triangle in general, independently of the details of any 

particular  kind  of  triangle.  Barsalou,  perhaps  wisely,  chooses  to  tackle  the  triangle  first,  and 

reasons as  follows.  If  there  are  dedicated  neural  populations  in  the visual  system  coding  for 

lines,  vertices,  angle,  orientation,  and  the  like,  then  it  should  be  possible  to  token  a 

representational  state  in  the  visual  system  which  encodes  the  information  about  lines  and 

vertices  essential  to  triangularity  in  general,  while  remaining  silent  about  any  angles  or 

orientation which would specify a particular kind or orientation of triangle (Barsalou 1999.) 

This is one of the sensorimotor representations, of course, which Barsalou must think 

would  be  tokened  without  accompanying  conscious  imagery.  The  assumption  that  this  can 

work is crucial for Barsalou's story. One of his chief selling points for PSS is its invulnerability to 

a  key  objection  to  perceptual  theories  of  cognition:  that  they  are  committed  to  holding, 

implausibly,  that  every  time  we  think  about  a  category  we  must  represent  some  particular 

instance of it or other. Simulation, for Barsalou, is a technical term, meaning the (more or less) 

schematic  re-enactment  of  sensorimotor  states  under  endogenous  control,  with  or  without 

conscious imagery (Barsalou 1999.) 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Having  described  in  some  detail  the  theoretical  tenets  of  PSS,  it  is  now  time  to 

consider  some  of  the  empirical  evidence  cited  in  its  favour.  Of  course,  there  are  difficult 

questions  about  whether,  and  to  what  extent,  various  data  actually  support  PSS  against  its 

amodal rival. However, I will defer such questions to chapter 5; for now, I will just recount the 

evidence and why it is supposed to favour PSS. 

One piece of evidence which Barsalou cites is a finding from neuroscience: viz., that 

damage  to  modality-specific  areas  of  the  brain  results  in  impaired  conceptual  processing  of 

concepts whose exemplars are typically represented in that modality. For example, damage to 

the visual system results in problems performing conceptual tasks related to categories such as 

BIRD (Pulvermüller 1999.) Arguably, this should not be the case if conceptual cognition occurs 

in a system separate from the modalities, but it is exactly what we would expect if PSS is true 

(Barsalou 1999.) 

A  related  neuroscientific  result  which  Barsalou  describes  comes  from  neuroimaging 

studies of normal-brained subjects which show high levels of activity in modality-specific areas 

during conceptual tasks. For instance, visual areas are very active during tasks relating to such 

categories  as  animals,  while  motor  and  somatosensory  areas  are  very  active  during  tasks 

relating to such categories as tools (Pulvermüller 1999.) This is perhaps less decisive than the 

previous finding, but it seems prima facie to be an empirical prediction of PSS, and not of the 

amodal view, which is borne out (Barsalou 1999.) 

Many findings from cognitive psychology have also been claimed to support PSS. The 

empirical literature demonstrating systematic interrelationships between conceptual tasks and 

sensory-motor variables has grown enormously in the last 15 years, and I cannot hope to cover 

all of it here. I will therefore settle for describing a representative sample of these fascinating 

findings. 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One  is  that  subjects  who  are  asked  specifically  to  perform  conceptual  tasks  using 

mental imagery exhibit the same performance as those who are permitted to perform the same 

conceptual tasks using whatever method they select spontaneously. For instance, suppose two 

groups are asked, for a number of different concepts, to list features or properties which are 

true of that concept. One group is instructed to perform the task using mental imagery, while 

the other group is not instructed to use any particular method. When such experiments have 

been performed, it has been found that both groups give similar lists of features and perform 

similarly in other important respects (Barsalou et al 2003.) This result is predicted by PSS: if 

conceptual  cognition  operates  in  the  normal  case  on sensorimotor simulation,  then  it  is  very 

similar to using mental imagery and should produce similar performance. On the other hand, if 

conceptual cognition is amodal in nature, then the two groups should show some interesting 

differences in performance. 

Another finding is that subjects performing a conceptual property-verification task are 

slowed down by switching from one modality to another. For instance, suppose a subject has 

just verified that the auditory property rustling is (typically) true of the concept leaves. They will 

be quicker to respond on the next verification if it, too, is of an auditory property, such as loud 

being (typically) true of blender. On the other hand, they will be slower to respond if the next 

verification  is  of  a  non-auditory  property,  such  as  the gustatory property  tart  being  (typically) 

true of the concept  cranberries. An obvious explanation of this difference in reaction times is 

that  the  subjects‟  performance  of  this  conceptual  task  is  underwritten  by  simulations  in  their 

perceptual systems, and they are slowed down when they have to switch from one modality-

specific system to another (Pecher et al 2003.) 

I  will  describe  more  relevant  empirical  results  in  due  course.  In  particular,  studies 

pertaining to language comprehension will feature later in this chapter. However, it is clear that 

findings  of  the  sort  I  have  discussed,  in  conjunction  with  Barsalou‟s  theoretical  arguments, 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount to a compelling case. PSS is a powerful and well worked-out theory of higher cognition 

and conceptual knowledge which cannot be ignored. Now that it is in place as a background 

framework, we can turn to the embodied theories of language comprehension which stand to it 

in  a  relationship  of  mutual  support:  Glenberg‟s  Indexical  Hypothesis  (IH),  and  Zwaan‟s 

Immersed Experiencer Framework (IEF). 

Before that, however, there is one more thing that needs to be mentioned in relation to 

PSS: namely, the term 'perceptual symbol' itself. Given that it constitutes most of the name of 

the theory, and is used liberally by theorists such as Glenberg and Zwaan, it is important to be 

clear what it means. This question is particularly confusing because some writers in the fields 

of  cognitive  science  and  artificial  intelligence  define  the  term  'symbol'  in  such  a  way  that 

'perceptual symbol' becomes almost oxymoronic. In this sense, a symbol is something which, 

by  definition,  stands  in  an  arbitrary  relationship  to  the  thing  it  represents:  no  symbol  is 

intrinsically  better  suited  than  any  other  to  represent  its  particular  referent.  Symbols,  on  this 

construal,  are  primitive  tokens  in  some  computational  system,  the  manipulation  of  which 

constitutes  that  system's  computations,  and  which  stand  for  their  referents  by  virtue  of 

convention, causation, or some other non-resemblance relationship. Such symbols are the stuff 

of thought, according to the amodal view (Harnad 1990.) 

Since  Barsalou  is  at  pains  to  stress  the  analogical  and  non-arbitrary  nature  of  the 

representations he posits as the stuff of thought, it is clear that he is not using the term 'symbol' 

in this strict sense. Rather, he is using it simply to mean a representation: any state of a system 

which stands in for something in the system's computations. Why, then, does he use the term 

'symbol'? Largely for strategic reasons: he wants to emphasize that the restriction of the term to 

arbitrary,  amodal,  non-analogical  tokens  is  unwarranted,  because  non-arbitrary,  modal, 

analogical representations can play all the same roles, and do all the same work, which makes 

the term 'symbol' appropriate for their counterparts. 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Very  well,  but  what  then  are  perceptual  symbols?  Well,  they  are  not  simulators, 

because although simulators are identified with concepts, they are not themselves the stuff of 

thought:  rather,  they  are  mechanisms  with  the  capacity  to  generate  various  representations 

which  are  the  stuff  of  thought5.  Perceptual  symbols  are  simulations:  each  of  the  indefinitely 

many more-or-less detailed cat simulations which your cat simulator is capable of generating is 

itself  a  perceptual  symbol,  a  representation  of  a  cat  which  stands  in  for  that  object  in  your 

mind's reasoning and cogitation. Perceptual symbols are the modality-specific representations 

of  external  stimuli  which  are  stored  by  selective  attention  and  re-activated  in  cognitive 

processes (Barsalou 1999.) 

Time,  now,  to  look  at  what  role  these  symbols  are  claimed  to  play  in  understanding 

language, and how. 

The Indexical Hypothesis 

As well as Barsalou's theory of PSS, and a wealth of fascinating empirical evidence, Glenberg's 

IH  is  based  in  his  broader  views  about  the  nature  and  purpose  of  cognition.  These  views 

intersect  with  what  has  become  known  as  the  study  of  situated  cognition:  that  is,  cognitive 

processes in the service of immediate, real-time action with the present environment (Wilson 

2002.) Glenberg (1997) believes that the central purpose of higher cognitive processes such as 

memory, reason and language is, in short, action preparation. The function of cognition is to 

guide effective action. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  this  wider  claim  concerning  the  function  of  cognition  is 

separable  from  ELC.  The  specific  claim  that  ELC  makes,  that  comprehension  consists  in 

sensorimotor  simulation,  might  be  true  even  if  the  wider  teleological  claim  is  false.  If  claims 

5 This is reminiscent of Cummins‟ (1996) insistence on the distinction between concepts, understood as 
knowledge structures, and the representations which comprise them. 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
about  the  action-guiding  nature  of  cognition  end  up  looking  contentious,  then  that  is  not 

necessarily fatal to ELC: rather, it will amount to identifying constraints on a plausible version of 

the latter. 

That aside, here is the IH story about comprehension. Comprehending a sentence, it 

says,  is  a  three  stage  process:  First,  perceived  words  are  indexed  to  perceptual  symbols; 

second, affordances (to be defined below) are derived from those symbols; third, and finally, 

the derived affordances are combined or “meshed” to create a simulation of the state of affairs 

described by the sentence (Glenberg & Robertson 2000.) 

Let  us  unpack  these  steps  one  at  a  time.  The  first  step  is  the  indexing of  perceived 

words to perceptual symbols. This means that when you hear or read the sentence  the cat sat 

on the mat, the first part of the comprehension process consists in the accessing or activation 

of sensorimotor simulations of, at least, CAT, MAT, SIT, and ON. The precise mechanism by 

which this occurs is not specified—a problem which besets much theoretical work in EC and 

ELC  at  the  present  time  (Flusberg  et  al  2010;  Pezzulo  et  al  2011.)  However,  presumably 

associative  mechanisms  combined with  the perceptual  encoding of  words  themselves  play  a 

substantial role. When you perceive the word 'cat', according to PSS, your recognition of it as 

that  word  and  not  another  consists  in  a  matching  of  your  perception  of  the  word  to  stored 

sensorimotor representations  of  the  word.  Assuming your stored  representations of  the  word 

cat  are  integrated  by  a  simulator  mechanism  with  your  stored  representations  of  cats 

themselves,  then  your  recognition  and  classification  of  the  word  will  automatically  tend  to 

activate representations of its referents. 

The  second  stage  of  the  comprehension  process  consists  of  the  derivation  of 

affordances  from  the  activated  perceptual  symbols.  At  a  first  gloss,  the  concept  of  an 

affordance—due  originally  to  Gibson  (1979)--is  simply  that  of  an  opportunity  for  organism-

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
object  interaction.  So  chairs  afford  sitting  to  able-bodied  humans,  but  not  to  elephants;  tree 

tops afford eating to able-bodied giraffes, but not to humans; and so forth. 

The  existence  and  nature  of  affordances  and  our  perceptions  thereof  has  been  a 

matter of some controversy. Gibson infamously claimed that we directly perceive affordances, 

with no inference or reasoning process required. Investigating this claim would take us too far 

afield.  Happily,  we  can  stay  fairly  neutral  on  this  point.  All  that  is  required  for  Glenberg's 

analysis is that there genuinely are properties of objects which make them amenable to certain 

kinds of actions by certain kinds of animals, and not to others, and that we can perceive those 

properties and represent them in our sensorimotor systems. Whether our perception of these 

properties is conceived of as direct or indirect is neither here nor there.  

That having been said, there are still two important points about affordances. One is 

that the term itself is ambiguous between properties of objects and our representations of those 

properties.  Obviously,  if  we  are  talking  about  the cognitive  system  deriving  affordances  from 

perceptual  symbols  as  part  of  the  comprehension  process,  the  latter  sense  is  at  play.  The 

cognitive system is deriving representations of properties from representations of objects; it is 

certainly not deriving properties of objects from representations of objects (whatever that might 

mean.) 

The final thing to be said is that if Glenberg‟s analysis is to be plausible and general, 

there is a problem with relying on an egocentric notion of affordances. In order to comprehend 

the sentence 'the cat sat on the mat', what matters is representing that mats afford sitting  to 

cats. Whether or not they afford sitting to me, the human language comprehender, is obviously 

beside  the  point.  So,  the  affordances  which  we  derive  from  perceptual  symbols  in 

comprehension  must  at  least  be  understood  to  include  any  affordance  of  any  action  by  any 

object to any creature. However, I think that even a non-egocentric notion of affordances is too 

narrow to do the required work. It is not affordances—that is, opportunities for organism-object 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interaction—which need to be derived from perceptual symbols. Rather, it is any opportunities 

for interaction between two objects, animate or otherwise. Justifying this claim  takes us into a 

discussion  of  the  third  and  final  stage  of  the  comprehension  process  posited  by  the  IH:  the 

combining,  or  meshing,  of  derived  affordances  to  create  a  sensorimotor  simulation  of  the 

described situation. 

Glenberg and his colleagues would most likely not accept  the modification I propose. 

The emphasis of the IH as they develop it is on comprehension as action preparation. Glenberg 

holds  that  “the  world  is  perceived  in  terms  of  its  potential  for  interaction  with  an  individual‟s 

body” (1997, p.4) and that “the meaning of [a] situation consists of the set of actions available 

to the animal in the situation” (Glenberg & Kaschak 2002, p.558.) It is clear, therefore, that he is 

talking about affordances in the traditional sense of opportunities for action by an organism. 

Consider,  though,  how  the  IH  is  applied  to  analysing  results  from  empirical  studies. 

Several experiments (e.g. Glenberg & Robertson 2000; Glenberg & Kaschak 2002; Glenberg et 

al  2008)  have  used  a  “sensibility  judgement”  paradigm  (Shapiro  2011,  p.106),  in  which  a 

central task for subjects is to decide whether or not a given sentence is sensible, and make 

some  prescribed  response.  Most  of  the  sentences  used  in  these  studies  describe  actions, 

concrete or otherwise; e.g. the following pair: 

(1a) After wading barefoot in the lake, Erik used his shirt to dry his feet. 

(1b) After wading barefoot in the lake, Erik used his glasses to dry his feet. 

(Glenberg & Robertson 2000, p. 384.) 

The  IH  explanation  of  people‟s  tendency  to  judge  1a,  but  not  1b,  sensible  goes  as 

follows: The affordances of the objects in 1a, but not of the objects in 1b, can be combined or 

meshed into a coherent simulation. Shirts afford drying to wet humans; glasses do not. So what 

has  occurred  with  the non-sensible sentence  1b  is  a  failure  in  the  third  and  final  step  of  the 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comprehension process: meshing derived affordances into a coherent simulation (Glenberg & 

Robertson 2000.) 

As soon as we go beyond explicitly action-describing language, however, this kind of 

analysis in terms of affordances will no longer work. Consider the following pair of sentences: 

(2a) The coffee dripped into the cup. 

(2b) The book dripped into the cup. 

It is easy to believe that most people would judge 2a sensible and 2b not sensible, and this fact 

can  be  given  a  ready  explanation  which  conforms  to  the  structure  of  the  comprehension 

process posited by the IH—but only if the notion of affordances is replaced, as I am suggesting, 

by the notion of opportunities for interaction between two objects, animate or otherwise. This is 

because  the  difference  between  coffee  and  books  which  makes  one,  but  not  the  other,  a 

plausible candidate for dripping into a cup has nothing to do with how people or other animals 

can interact with coffee and books, and everything to do with how cups can interact with coffee 

and books. The same point applies to our old friend  the cat sat on the mat, and innumerable 

other simple sentences describing concrete situations which do not involve human action. 

At this point, Glenberg and colleagues could still insist, on independent grounds, that 

affordances are important to the use of embodied simulations to guide action planning. Maybe 

after  a  coherent  simulation  of  the  coffee  dripping  into  the  cup  is  created,  affordances  are 

derived  to  generate  an  awareness  of  possible  actions  in  relation  to  this  situation.  However, 

what  is  clear  is  that  affordances  cannot  account  for  the  important  differences  between  our 

processing of sensible and non-sensible sentences where action is not explicitly involved. If the 

described situation does not consist of an  action, then the situation itself must be coherently 

simulated before any action can be planned in relation to it. 

The  revision  I  am  proposing  is  consistent  with  some  of  the  central  and  distinctive 

emphases of  the  IH.  Perhaps  more  than  most  EC  theorists,  Glenberg  is  explicitly concerned 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the idea of simulations as analogical mental models, and the idea that what is meaningful, 

or comprehensible, or able to be simulated is determined by fairly literal relations between the 

shapes  or  structures  of  objects  and  actions  as  analogically  represented  in  the  sensorimotor 

systems (Glenberg 1997.) The idea of mental models, or situation models, will come up again 

in chapter 4, and the idea of analogical representation in chapter 7. For now, however, suffice it 

to  note 

that 

the 

IH 

in  outline 

looks 

like  a  potentially  widely  applicable  model  of 

comprehension—so long as step 3 involves the creation of a simulated model by meshing a 

broader class of structural relations between analogical representations than just affordances. 

This  leaves  us  with  the  following  story  of  the  comprehension  process:  words  are 

indexed to perceptual symbols; structural relations are derived from those perceptual symbols; 

and the structural relations are combined to create a simulation.  

One thing to note is that syntax is quite important to the final stage of the process, as is 

made  obvious  by  a  moment's  reflection  on  the  different  simulations  which  would  underwrite 

comprehension of the following two sentences: 

[A] 

[B] 

Andy delivered the pizza to you. 

You delivered the pizza to Andy. 

(Glenberg & Kaschak 2002, p.560.)  

The first two stages of comprehension—accessing perceptual symbols and deriving  structural 

relations from them—would be exactly the same in the two cases, so clearly the difference is in 

the final stage, when these elements are combined, and clearly syntax must be doing a lot of 

work. 

An  objection  may  arise  at  this  point  that  syntactic  analysis  cannot  consist  of 

sensorimotor  simulation,  and  so  the  IH—or  ELC  more  generally—cannot  be  the  whole  story 

about comprehension. There are two things to say in response to this. The first is that, despite 

the  misleading  oversimplification  of  the  slogan  „understanding  is  simulating‟,  ELC  is  not 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
committed to holding that the comprehension process is exhausted by sensorimotor simulation. 

Rather,  at  least  in  the  form  I  am  defending,  ELC  claims  that  comprehension  constitutively 

involves  such  simulation.  This  is  consistent  with  it  involving  many  other  non-simulation 

processes  too.  So  even  if  there  are  completely  non-sensorimotor  syntactic  processing  

mechanisms, this is not a problem for ELC. 

The second thing to say is that there are attempts in progress to account for syntactic 

processing in terms of sensorimotor simulation. In particular, the linguistic formalism known as 

Embodied  Construction  Grammar  (Bergen  &  Chang  2003)  attempts  to  ground  grammatical 

constructions in sensorimotor schemas. I will not review this work here. For the purposes of this 

thesis—especially  in  light  of  the  previous  paragraph—I  am  content  to  treat  the  nature  of 

syntactic processing mechanisms as a black box, although the effects of their outputs will be 

discussed somewhat below in the context of the IEF. 

Now  we  have  a  basic  understanding  of  IH  as  an  account  of  the  comprehension 

process.  It claims,  fundamentally,  that  understanding  language  consists  of  indexing  words  to 

perceptual  symbols,  deriving  affordances  (or  structural  relations)  from  those  symbols,  and 

meshing  those  affordances  (or  structural  relations)  to  create  a  simulation  of  the  described 

situation.  It  is  also  associated  with  the  claim  that  the  primary  function  of  higher  cognition  is 

action preparation. For this reason, Glenberg and his collaborators have done extensive work 

focusing on the role of the motor system in comprehension. 

One result they have found, much discussed in the literature on EC and ELC, is known 

as the Action-sentence Compatibility Effect (ACE). In brief, this is that merely understanding a 

sentence which implies motion of an object in one direction facilitates performing actual motion 

in the same direction, and interferes with performing action in the opposite direction. That is, 

actions are more quickly performed if they are  compatible with (the same as) the direction of 

the motion described or implied by the sentence (Glenberg & Kaschak 2002.) 

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subjects in the relevant study were asked to read a series of sentences, one at a time, 

on a computer screen, and decide whether or not the sentences made sense. They then had to 

press a 'yes' or 'no' button to indicate their answer. Some of the sentences presented implied 

motion towards the subjects' bodies, such as sentence [A] above, or  open the drawer. Other 

sentences implied motion away from the subjects' bodies, such as sentence [B] above, or close 

the  drawer.  Some  neutral  sentences  did  not  imply  motion  at  all,  while  some  nonsense 

sentences did not describe any coherent or imaginable state of affairs. 

The action-related variable comes from the position of the 'yes' and 'no' buttons which 

the  subjects  had  to  press.  Each  subject  would  begin  each  trial  with  their  hand  resting  in  a 

position  in  between  their  'yes'  and  'no'  buttons.  Some  subjects  were  in  the  'yes-is-near' 

condition,  in  which  their  'yes'  button  was  nearer  to  their  body  than  their  hand,  and  their  'no' 

button further. This meant, of course, that they had to move towards their body to press 'yes' 

and away from their body to press 'no'. 

Here  is  the  striking  result  of  the  study:  subjects  in  the  'yes-is-near'  condition  were 

consistently  significantly  quicker  to  press  'yes'  for  sensible  sentences  describing  motion 

towards their bodies than for sensible sentences describing motion away from their bodies. The 

opposite result was found for subjects in the 'yes-is-far' condition (the nature of which I trust is 

obvious.) The theoretical inference which Glenberg and Kaschak draw is that comprehending 

the  sensible  sentences  engaged  the  subjects'  motor  systems  in  simulating  movement  in  the 

described direction, facilitating motion production in that direction—because the relevant motor 

programs  were  already  active—and  interfering  with  motion  production  in  the  opposite 

direction—because switching motor programs was required (Glenberg & Kaschak 2002.) 

Several other studies conducted by Glenberg and his collaborators have found results 

congenial to the IH. For example, one study aimed to test competing predictions of the IH and 

two amodal accounts of meaning and comprehension, with respect to the role of affordances 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Glenberg  &  Robertson  2000.)  Each  of  the  amodal  accounts  in  question—Latent  Semantic 

Analysis  (LSA;  Landauer  and  Dumais  1997)  and  Hyperspace  Analogue  to  Language  (HAL; 

Burgess and Lund 1997)--endorses some version of the claim that the meanings of words and 

sentences are  mathematically  calculable  functions  of  the  co-occurrences  of words with  other 

words.  There  is  no  role  given  to  sensorimotor  representations  of  words'  referents,  nor  to 

affordances derived from such representations. 

Glenberg and Robertson's strategy was to find pairs of sentences so similar that they 

were assigned very close meaning values by LSA and HAL, but which differed significantly in 

the affordances they involved. One example of such a pair is the following: 

[1] 

[2] 

As a substitute for her pillow, she filled up an old sweater with leaves 

As a substitute for her pillow, she filled up an old sweater with water 

(Glenberg & Robertson 2000, p.385.) 

These sentences are given very similar numerical values by LSA, which amounts to the claim 

that  they  have  very  similar  meanings  and  should  be  similarly  understood  by  language 

comprehenders.  On  the  other  hand,  the  IH  predicts  significant  differences  in  comprehension 

(and  thus  meaning)  between  the  two  sentences  because  of  the  difference  in  affordances. 

Because of the affordances of pillows, sweaters, leaves, and water, the situation described by 

[1] can readily be simulated, while the situation described by [2] cannot (Glenberg & Robertson 

2000.) 

Subjects in this study were presented with various sentences and asked to rate how 

sensible they were, on a scale from 1 to 7. As predicted by the IH, subjects assigned vastly 

different  sensibility  ratings  to  pairs  of  otherwise  similar  sentences  which  differed  in  their 

affordances. This has become known as the Affordance Compatibility Effect (Weiskopf 2010a.) 

This result seems strongly to favour the IH over its amodal rivals, since it is difficult to see why 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subjects should rate the sensibility of sentences like [1] and [2] so differently if their meanings 

are as similar as theories like LSA and HAL calculate. 

Many other empirical predictions of the IH have been borne out (see, e.g., Glenberg & 

Robertson 1999; Kaschak & Glenberg 2000; Glenberg et al 2005.) The literature which it alone 

has generated is enough to establish that inquiry into ELC is a flourishing research programme. 

It  is  now  time,  however,  to  meet  the  IH's  theoretical  counterpart,  the  other  main  version  of 

ELC—Zwaan's (2004) Immersed Experiencer Framework (IEF). 

The Immersed Experiencer Framework 

The  IEF,  like  the  IH,  holds  that  linguistic  comprehension  is  a  three-stage  process,  the 

successful output of which is an inner simulation of a described situation. This much, the two 

accounts have in common. However, the three stages identified by the IEF—which are held to 

operate  in  an  overlapping,  rather  than  a  strictly  sequential,  manner,  and  which  do  not 

correspond neatly to those posited by the IH—are called activation, construal, and integration 

(Zwaan 2004). 

Each  of  the  IEF‟s  three  stages  operates  on  a  particular  kind  of  linguistic  unit, 

corresponding  to  a  particular  class  of  referents.  Activation  operates  on  single  words  or 

morphemes, corresponding to individual objects, properties, or actions; Construal operates on 

clauses  or  „intonation  units‟,  corresponding  to  individual  events;  and  Integration  operates  on 

entire  discourses,  corresponding  to  whole  sequences  of  events.  Already,  it  is  clear  that  a 

central concern of Zwaan's is the dynamic and temporally unfolding nature of comprehension. 

Considering  an  example  in  a  coarse-grained  fashion  may  be  the  clearest  way  to 

explicate the IEF's three stages. Take the following sentence, inspired by related examples in 

Zwaan  (2004):  „The  eagle  flew  across  the  sky  and  then  landed  in  its  nest‟.  The  first  stage, 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activation—which  corresponds  loosely  to  the  Indexing  stage  of  the  IH—consists  of  the 

unconstrained activation of perceptual symbols corresponding to words or morphemes. Thus, 

upon reading the word „eagle‟, traces of all kinds of previous sensorimotor representations of 

eagles  are  activated  in  a  diffuse  and  non-specific  fashion.  Various  different  eagle-related 

representations will be activated, all to an equally low level. 

Upon  reading  the  word  „flew‟,  the  perceptual  symbol  for  flight  will  be  activated  in  a 

similar  fashion  (modulated,  presumably,  by  the  past  tense  form—a  complication  I  will  ignore 

here.) However, already, the second stage, Construal, will begin its work. This stage consists of 

the narrowing down or selection from the many possible representations of objects or actions to 

yield a relatively determinate, albeit schematic, representation of an event. So the activation of 

representations of flight constrains the activation of representations of eagles, narrowing them 

down  to  flying  ones.  The  'pull'  exerted  by  the  activation  of  flight-related  representations  will 

mean  that  of  all  the  previously  activated  eagle  representations,  the  flying  ones  will  become 

activated to a higher level, thus being selected from among the available alternatives. A similar 

thing will happen with the next word, „across‟, which will further constrain the representation by 

ruling out swooping or diving eagles; and so forth (Zwaan 2004.) 

The  third  stage,  Integration,  is  just  the  ordering  of  event  simulations  generated  by 

Activation  and  Construal  into  temporally structured,  coherent sequences.  This  is  the  process 

whereby the representation of the eagle not only flying, but flying  across—and across the sky, 

to be precise—is joined with the subsequent representation of the eagle not only landing, but 

landing in its nest, to create a seamless and unified inner simulation of the sequence of events 

described by the sentence. 

The  IEF,  then,  views  comprehension  as  a  continuous,  overlapping  process  in  which 

perceptual  and  sensorimotor 

representations  are  accessed,  constrained  by 

further 

representations  and  other  new  information,  and  combined  into  simulations  of  denoted 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
situations  and  (sequences  of)  events.  As  Zwaan  (2004)  puts  it,  “the  comprehender  is  an 

immersed  experiencer  of  the  described  situation,  and  comprehension  is  the  vicarious 

experience of the described situation” (p. 36.) 

A couple of qualifications should be made to this formulation. The first is that the word 

„vicarious‟  is  potentially  misleading;  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  a  language 

comprehender simulating our example sentence would simulate it from the perspective of the 

eagle,  or  of  any  other  object  or entity  in  the  situation.  It  is  more  natural  to  suppose  that  the 

comprehender would simulate perceiving the eagle‟s actions from an observer standpoint. 

The second qualification is equally minor: Zwaan‟s use of the word „experience‟ should 

not be taken too literally, in light of Barsalou‟s insistence—on good theoretical grounds—that  

sensorimotor  simulation  be  understood  as  simply  neural  re-activation,  with  or  without 

accompanying phenomenology. 

As with the IH, some impressive empirical data have been adduced in support of the 

IEF. One study in cognitive psychology showed that language comprehenders are sensitive to 

differences between described situations in ways which allegedly can only be accounted for by 

appealing to sensorimotor simulation (Zwaan et al 2002.) 

Subjects in this study, after reading sentences such as „the ranger saw the eagle in the 

sky‟ and „the ranger saw the eagle in its nest‟, were presented with a series of pictures, one at 

a  time.  For  each  picture,  they  had  to  indicate,  as  quickly  as  possible,  whether  the  object  it 

depicted was mentioned in the sentence or not. 

The  result  was  that  subjects  were  quicker  to  respond  correctly  if  the  shape  of  the 

object  in  the  picture  matched  the  shape  implied—but  not  explicitly  stated—in  the  sentence. 

That is, after reading „the ranger saw the eagle in the sky‟, subjects were quicker to respond 

correctly to a picture of an eagle with outstretched wings—as it would appear in the sky—than 

to a picture of an eagle with folded wings (Zwaan et al 2002.) 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zwaan  et  al.  take  this  priming  effect  as  evidence  that  the  subjects  generated  a 

perceptual simulation of the eagle in the course of comprehending the sentence, because the 

information  about  its  shape  is  not  given  by a  purely semantic  interpretation  of  the  sentence. 

The fact that the eagle in the sky has spread wings only becomes obvious, they suggest, when 

one simulates or imagines (consciously or otherwise) what such an eagle would look like. Put 

differently,  it  is  not  obvious  why  we  should  expect  this  difference  in  response  times  if 

comprehending  the  sentence  consists  of  activating  amodal  conceptual  representations 

completely  distinct  from  the  sensorimotor  modalities;  whence  the  priming  and  interference 

effects, on such a picture? 

Another psychological finding cited in support of IEF is closely analogous to the one 

just discussed, but concerns object orientation, rather than shape. This time, subjects had to 

read sentences such as „John put the pencil in the cup‟ and „John put the pencil in the drawer‟. 

After each sentence, a picture of an object (e.g. a pencil) was presented, and the subject had 

to  respond  as  quickly  as  possible  to  the  question  whether  the  depicted  object  had  been 

mentioned in the sentence (Stanfield & Zwaan 2001). 

Perhaps unsurprisingly by now, the result was precisely analogous to the one previous 

described: subjects were quicker to give correct responses when the depicted orientation of an 

object matched the object‟s orientation as implied by, but not explicitly stated in, the sentence. 

The  explanatory  inference,  too,  is  the  same:  Stanfield  and  Zwaan  attribute  the  different 

response times to subjects‟ having created, during the comprehension process, a perceptual 

simulation  of  the  described situation.  The  effect  found  in  relation  to orientation  and  shape  in 

these  two  studies  has  become  known  as  the  Appearance-sentence  Compatibility  Effect 

(Weiskopf 2010a.) 

The IEF, then, is—like the IH—a version of ELC which describes comprehension as a 

three-stage  process.  In  this  case,  the  three  stages  operate  in  an  overlapping  and  mutually 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
modifying fashion. First, perceptual symbols representing objects and actions are activated by 

perceived  words  and  morphemes.  Second,  mutual  constraining  of  the  perceptual  symbols 

selects  from  among  the  many  active  possibilities  to  yield  simulations  of  fairly  determinate 

objects,  properties,  relations,  and  events,  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of  clauses  and 

intonation units. Third, the distinct events represented are integrated into coherent, temporally 

ordered  sequences  of  events  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of  the  broader  ongoing 

discourse. Once again, the result of successful comprehension is an inner simulation of what is 

being described by the comprehended sentence(s). 

Zwaan (2004) cites many other empirical results in support of the IEF, including more 

from  psychology,  and  others  from disciplines such  as neuroscience.  However,  we now  have 

enough to step back from the details of the two theoretical versions of ELC and look at the big 

picture. 

Considering ELC in General 

Having looked at the IH and the IEF, as well as the evidence for them, in some detail, it is time 

for a little logical geography. Each of these theories is an explication of the central ELC claim 

that language comprehension constitutively involves sensorimotor simulation. Further, each of 

them  holds  that  it  is  a  process  involving  three  distinct  components  or  stages,  although  the 

components  and  stages  they  identify  are  different.  With  respect  to  their  differences,  one 

important question is precisely what 'simulation' amounts to. 

For the purposes of the theory of PSS, recall, simulation is a technical term. It means 

the  re-activation  of  more-or-less  schematic  sensorimotor  representations,  with  or  without 

accompanying  phenomenology  or  conscious  experience.  In  this  sense,  simply  tokening,  in 

isolation,  a  representation  in  the  sensorimotor  systems  of  the  lines  and  vertices  essential  to 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being  a  triangle,  without  any  representation  of  angles  or  orientation—and  hence  without 

phenomenology—counts as simulation. This is a minimal sense of the term. 

Simulation, however, takes on more full-blooded meanings in the hands of Glenberg 

and Zwaan. Such claims as “language is a set of cues to the comprehender to construct an 

experiential (perception plus action) simulation of the described situation” (Zwaan 2004) make 

plain that they understand a simulation as something akin to a mental model of a state of affairs 

or  sequence  of  events.  Further,  in  light  of  the  IH's  emphasis  on  affordances,  consider  the 

following from Glenberg and Kaschak, part of which I quoted earlier: 

[T]he meaning of [a] situation consists of the set of actions available to the 

animal  in  the  situation...  language  is  made  meaningful  by  cognitively 

simulating the actions implied by sentences... 

(2002 pp. 558-9.) 

What is meant here is obviously something even more substantial—something along the lines 

of  a  mental  model  of  an  entire  situation,  including  of  the  performance  of  various  courses  of 

action available in that situation. 

We have, then, three possible senses that the term 'simulation' could take, in the core 

ELC  claim.  The  weakest 

is 

the  activation  of  more-or-less  schematic  sensorimotor 

representations.  The  next  is  the  construction  of  a  somewhat  comprehensive  model  of  a 

situation  or  sequence  of  events out  of  more-or-less  schematic  sensorimotor representations. 

Finally,  the  strongest  sense  is  the  construction  of  a  somewhat  comprehensive  model  of  a 

situation  or  sequence  of  events,  including  affordances  and  actions,  out  of  more-or-less 

schematic sensorimotor representations. 

One of the reasons that this is important is that the plausibility and generality of ELC is 

likely to vary depending on what understanding of 'simulation' we adopt. This came out clearly 

in my earlier discussion of the limits of the classical notion of affordances in relation to the IH. 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Also, for example, there may be some sorts of language—perhaps very abstract or technical 

language—the comprehension of which is difficult to account for if even a full-blown situation 

model  must  be  involved, but  which can be  accounted for  purely  in  terms of  the  activation  of 

sensorimotor  representations.  In  considering  arguments  for  and  against  ELC,  then,  we  can 

keep in mind these three possibilities about the meaning of the term 'simulation'. 

Another dimension along which the strength of ELC could vary is helpfully identified by 

Weiskopf (2010a.) He notes that proponents of ELC could claim that sensorimotor simulation is 

constitutive  of,  or  necessary  for,  all  acts  of  language comprehension;  more  weakly,  that  it  is 

constitutive of, or necessary for, only some acts of comprehension; or, more weakly still, that it 

is  neither  constitutive  of  nor  necessary  for  any  acts  of  comprehension,  but  that  it  plays  a 

facilitating role in some such acts.  

To my mind, it is questionable whether the last possibility is even a version of ELC at 

all.  To  claim  that  sensorimotor  simulation  aids  some  acts  of  comprehension,  but  is  never 

constitutive  of  comprehension  itself—that  all  genuine  comprehension  could  potentially  take 

place without any simulation—seems quite contrary to the spirit of the theory. Small wonder, 

then, that Weiskopf finds no conflict between this „weak‟ sense of ELC and the amodal view of 

comprehension. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  range  of  possibilities  at  our  disposal  now  amounts  to  the 

following: understanding language always, or sometimes, constitutively involves, or is facilitated 

by,  the  activation  of  sensorimotor  representations—perhaps  to  construct  an  entire  situation 

model, perhaps also involving affordances and actions. In relation to the various arguments for 

and against ELC which we will encounter, we can always ask, firstly, what sense of 'simulation' 

is at play and to what extent comprehension is being identified with simulation in that sense. 

Time, now, to look at the first set of arguments—those which aim to convince us that 

the amodal view is a better theory than ELC in some respect or other. 

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Alleged Amodal Advantages 

Introduction 

This  chapter,  as  its  name  suggests,  examines  alleged  advantages  of  the  amodal  view  over 

ELC.  Chief  among  these  is  the  problem  of  accounting  for  our  comprehension  of  abstract 

language.  This  is  acknowledged  as  a  problem  for  ELC  by  its  proponents,  as  well  as  being 

pressed  as  an  objection—both  implicitly  and  explicitly—by  its  detractors.  I  will  begin  by 

presenting  this  problem  in  its  various  forms,  and  then  discuss  several  attempts  which  have 

been made to account for the comprehension of abstractions in embodied terms. I will argue 

that these attempts, whatever problems they face in isolation, combine to create a compelling 

case  for  the  claim  that  ELC  is  not  at  a  disadvantage  here.  This  argument  will  include  a 

digression  into  issues  relating  to  concept  possession  conditions,  in  which  I  will  consider  the 

possibility  that  friends  of  ELC  might  benefit  from  endorsing  the  Concept  Pragmatism 

championed by Prinz and Clark (2004.) 

The second alleged amodal advantage I will discuss is that of accounting for our ability 

to  comprehend  language  whose  meaning  we  seemingly  cannot  simulate  with  sensorimotor 

resources.  This  overlaps  significantly  with 

the  problem  of  abstraction,  but  deserves 

independent discussion because it raises issues concerning the nature of our explanandum. It 

thus presents an opportunity to consider the question: what are we trying to explain when we 

try  to  explain  linguistic  comprehension?  There  is  an  influential  view  in  the  philosophy  of 

language which holds that comprehension is knowledge of truth conditions. Weiskopf (2010a) 

uses this as a basis for criticizing ELC. My response to his arguments will be twofold. First, I 

will  present  some  independent  reasons  for  doubting  that  this  analysis  of  comprehension  is 

correct.  Second,  I  will  propose  a  dilemma  about  how  truth  conditions  themselves  are 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understood: on one horn, the truth conditions view will face infinite regress, while on the other, 

it will turn out to be compatible with ELC or something very like it. 

The  third  alleged  advantage  of  the  amodal  view  concerns  two  distinct,  but  closely 

related,  issues.  As  I  have  mentioned earlier,  one  of  the  strongest  arguments  for  the  amodal 

view or LOT in relation to conceptual thought generally has been its apparently unique ability to 

account  for  certain  cognitive  phenomena.  Chief  among  these  are  the  productivity  and 

systematicity of  thought.  These  issues do  not  pertain specifically  to  comprehension,  so  I  will 

give  them  less  attention  than  the  others.  However,  since  these  theoretical  arguments  have 

been so influential, it is worth spending a little time to dispel lingering doubts that an embodied 

view of cognition in general is capable of accounting for such phenomena. In this section, I will 

rely chiefly on Barsalou's defence of PSS against amodal arguments.  

The ultimate thesis of this chapter, then, is that the apparent advantages of the amodal 

view  are  merely  that:  apparent.  ELC  is,  at  least,  not  inferior  to  its  rival  when  it  comes  to 

accounting for abstraction, comprehension of the unimaginable, productivity, and systematicity. 

The Problem of Abstraction 

The  first  thing  to  mention  about  the  problem  of  abstraction  is  that  the  most  prominent 

advocates  of  EC  and  ELC  acknowledge  it  as  a  problem.  Barsalou  (1999)  and  Prinz  (2002), 

champions of EC in psychology and philosophy respectively, both state in no uncertain terms 

that  it  is  a  real  challenge  for  the  embodied  view  to  explain  how  we  represent—using  only 

sensorimotor  resources—such  concepts  as  TRUTH,  IMPLICATION,  NEGATION,  LOVE, 

DEMOCRACY, ELECTRON, and so forth.  

The problem is also raised sharply, whether explicitly or not, by critics of EC and ELC. 

For  example,  in  discussing  the  IH,  Fred  Adams  (2010)  raises  the  possibility  that  it  may  be 

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
committed to a criterion of meaningfulness, such that only sentences which can be perceptually 

simulated are meaningful. In this case, suggests Adams, IH itself might be in deep self-refuting 

trouble.  He  asks:  “can  one  perceptually  simulate  IH,  itself?  No!  What  are  its  affordances?” 

(p.624.) Now, I have argued elsewhere (Letheby 2012) that IH is not committed to a criterion of 

meaningfulness in the way Adams suggests. But this takes none of the bite out of his question. 

“[C]an  one  perceptually simulate  IH”,  indeed?  If  not,  then,  even  if  IH  is  meaningful,  it  seems 

that—by its own lights—we cannot understand it. The reason, of course, why it is questionable 

whether we could simulate IH is that the following sentence is abstract if anything is: 

[IH] 

Language comprehension is a three-stage process of indexing words to 

perceptual symbols, deriving affordances from those symbols, and meshing 

those affordances to create a simulation. 

Never  mind  criteria  of  meaningfulness;  explaining  how  we  could  simulate  the  state  of  affairs 

described by [IH] in our sensorimotor systems is a challenge indeed. 

The problem of abstraction also underlies an objection raised by Weiskopf (2010a.) He 

argues that there are pairs of sentences which do seem susceptible to sensorimotor simulation, 

but which have differences in meaning that could not be accounted for in sensorimotor terms. 

Consider, for instance, the sentences the man stood on the corner and the man waited on the 

corner.  Obviously  they  both  describe  situations  which  we  can  imagine  perceiving,  and 

obviously they describe different situations: the second one contains information that the first 

does  not.  But  it  is  not  clear  that  this  difference  could  be  captured  in  sensorimotor  terms.  It 

seems  that  the  simulations  of  both  situations  will  be  the  same,  and  thus,  that  ELC  cannot 

account for our undeniable ability to understand the difference. Why, though, does it seem that 

the difference cannot be captured in sensorimotor terms? I submit that it is simply because the 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difference  between  standing  and  waiting  is  an  abstract  one,  in  the  sense  of  (arguably6)  not 

being directly perceivable through any of the traditional sensory modalities. 

Clearly,  then,  abstraction  is  a  problem.  But,  inspired  by  the  last  sentence  of  the 

preceding  paragraph,  we  might  want  to  ask:  what  problem,  exactly?  What  is  meant  by 

'abstraction'? 

There  are  at  least  two  possible  senses  of  the  term7.  The  first  is  the  sense  of 

abstracting  away  from particular  details,  as  in  Barsalou's  (1999)  discussion  of  how  we could 

represent  a  triangle  in  general.  We  achieve  a  certain  measure  of  abstraction  by  only 

representing  certain  details—in  this  case,  lines  and  vertices—and  leaving  others,  such  as 

angles  and  orientation,  unspecified8.  In  this  sense,  most  concepts—at  least  of  kinds,  rather 

than individuals—are abstract, in that they represent entire classes of things (or properties, or 

events, or relations) independently of the details of their instances.  

The second sense of 'abstraction' is that to which I alluded in discussing the difference 

between  standing  and  waiting.  In  this  sense,  abstract  simply  means  something  like  not 

perceivable by  the senses.  Many  concepts  are abstract  in  this  sense,  some  more clearly  so 

than others. Possible examples include GOD, ELECTRON, TRUTH, JUSTICE, DEMOCRACY, 

LOVE,  etc.  This  sense  of  abstraction  is  more  obviously  problematic  for  ELC.  Even  if  the 

subtracting details strategy which Barsalou applies to the concept of triangle can gain a lot of 

mileage, it is hard to believe it can work to characterize such concepts as  those I just listed. 

Clearly at least one more solution is needed. 

Fortunately,  many  are  in  the  offing.  In  their  review  of  the  literature  on  ELC  and 

abstraction,  Glenberg  et  al  (2008)  identify  three  distinct  proposals.  We  can  call  these  the 

Metaphorical Account, the Introspective Account, and the Action Schema Account. There are 

6 Arguably, because this may depend what view one takes about the phenomenon of „mindreading‟ in 
social cognition; cf. Gallagher (2008.) 
7 Barsalou (2003) identifies six senses, but the fine grained distinctions involved will not be directly 
relevant here. 
8 I am grateful to Dr. Jon Opie for bringing this conception of abstraction to my attention. 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
two  other  proposals  which  I  think  are  interestingly  distinct  from  these  three.  I  will  call  these 

other two the Situational Account and the Partial Dis-embodiment Account. Without further ado, 

then, let us take a look at each of these five proposals. 

The  Metaphorical  Account  has  been  given  its  fullest  and  most  compelling  exposition 

and  defense  by  Lakoff  and  Johnson  (1980a,  1999)  and  has  also  been  pursued  theoretically 

and  experimentally  by  many  others  (e.g.  Gibbs  [1996],  Boroditsky  &  Ramscar  [2002], 

Casasanto [2009].) The basic idea is that abstract concepts are in some sense metaphorical 

extrapolations  of  concrete  ones.  There  is  much  evidence  from  linguistics  that  people 

pervasively talk about abstract concepts in concrete terms. For instance, the metaphor MORE 

IS  UP  can  be  seen  at  work  in  such  turns  of  phrase  as  prices rose,  stocks  fell,  and  the  like. 

When  we  speak  like  this,  we  talk  about  the  abstract  concept  of  quantity  in  terms  of  the 

concrete, spatial concept of verticality. 

Of course, talking is one thing, and thinking another. The Metaphorical Account claims 

that in discourse like this, how we talk genuinely reflects how we think. We do not merely talk 

about abstract concepts using concrete terms, but we actually think and reason about abstracta 

by tokening and manipulating representations of concreta in our sensorimotor systems (Lakoff 

and Johnson 1999.)  

What is the evidence that warrants this inference from linguistic behaviour to cognitive 

process?  For  one  thing,  there  is  the  fact  that  the  inferential  structure  of  abstract  concepts 

seems  to  reflect  that  of  the  concrete  concepts  to  which  they  are  metaphorically  mapped. 

Consider, for instance, the metaphor PURPOSES ARE DESTINATIONS, in which the abstract 

concept of a purpose is put in terms of the concrete concept of a (spatial) destination. Here, we 

find  that  inferences  which  are  valid  in  the  domain  of  destinations  are  mirrored  by 

correspondingly valid inferences in the domain of purposes. For example, if X is travelling to 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
destination  D,  then  it  follows  that  X  has  not  yet  reached  D.  Correspondingly,  if  X  is  working 

towards purpose P, then it follows that X has not yet achieved P. 

Lakoff and Johnson (1980a, 1980b, 1999) in particular present an impressive array of 

evidence  from  different  languages,  cultures,  times,  and  places,  aimed  at  showing  that  such 

metaphors  are  real,  ubiquitous,  and  genuinely  cognitive  rather  than  merely  (superficially) 

linguistic. They describe in detail how complex metaphors such as A PURPOSEFUL LIFE IS A 

JOURNEY  are  constructed  out  of  basic  or  primary  metaphors  such  as  PURPOSES  ARE 

DESTINATIONS  and  ACTIONS  ARE  MOTIONS,  many  of  which  may  be  human  universals 

(Lakoff and Johnson 1999.) 

One  prima  facie  difficulty  for  the  Metaphorical  Account  is  that  there  is  obviously  a 

difference  between  abstract  concepts  and  concrete  ones.  It  is  all  very  well  to  say  that  the 

abstract concept of a purpose is metaphorically modeled on the concrete concept of a (spatial) 

destination, and represented—like the latter—in the sensorimotor systems; but what then is the 

cognitive difference between thinking she has not yet reached her destination and thinking she 

has  not  yet  achieved  her  purpose?  As  Prinz  (2002)  puts  the  point:  “metaphors  leave 

remainders”  (p.  171.)  Call  this,  then,  the  Problem  of  the  Remainder,  because,  given  any 

abstract  concept  and  any  proposed  concrete  metaphorical  basis  for  it,  there  will  still  be 

something of the abstract concept which remains unaccounted for. 

So much for the Metaphorical Account. The second embodied story about abstraction 

is the Introspective Account, due to Barsalou (1999) in his original presentation of PSS. Being 

aware of the work of Lakoff and Johnson on conceptual metaphor, but believing—like Prinz—

that it could not be the full story, Barsalou set out to give another account of abstract concepts 

in terms of perceptual symbols derived from repeated introspective experience. To explain this, 

it  is  probably  best  to  look  at  a  couple  of  examples.  Therefore,  I  will  now  present  Barsalou's 

treatment in these terms of the concepts TRUTH and NEGATION. 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According  to  PSS,  we  can  represent  the  proposition  THE  CAT  IS  ON  THE  MAT  by 

combining our simulators for CAT, ON, and MAT to create a simulative model of the state of 

affairs of the cat's being on the mat. So far, so good. Having done so, we might then go into the 

room containing the mat and look at the mat to see if the cat is indeed on it. Suppose we see 

that it is. In that case, we now have two sensorimotor representations of situations: a simulation 

of the cat's being on the mat, and an occurrent perception of the cat's being on the mat. 

What  we  also  have  now  is  a  match,  or  mapping,  between  our  perception  and  the 

simulation (which latter is our representation of a proposition.) We have a situation in which our 

off-line  representation  of  the  world  matches  our  on-line  perception  of  the  world;  we see  that 

things are as we thought them to be. Suppose, now, that this cognitive event of a successful 

mapping can itself be stored in long-term memory, through the operation of selective attention, 

for later re-activation and use. Given repeated experiences of such successful mappings, we 

might develop a robust simulator mechanism capable of categorizing new  cognitive events as 

belonging  to  the  class  or  type  of  successful  representation-to-world  mappings.  Under  the 

influence of our linguistic community, this simulator mechanism might also come to integrate 

linguistic information from auditory, visual, or tactile modalities, such as representations of the 

words 'true' and 'truth'. Thus, we acquire a concept of TRUTH (Barsalou 1999.) 

There is a certain intuitive plausibility to this account. Further, a corresponding account 

of NEGATION falls straightforwardly out of it. This is, of course, simply a simulator built up from 

repeated experiences of failed representation-to-world mappings, or of representation-to-world 

mismatches. 

Barsalou applies this strategy to several other abstract concepts—notably, other logical 

ones  such  as  IMPLICATION  and  DISJUNCTION.  The  extent  to  which  his  analyses  of  these 

various  cases  are  convincing  is  open  to  debate.  In  any  case,  despite  its  merits,  the  main 

65 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential  stumbling  block  for  his  Introspective  Account  seems  to  be  its  reliance  on  a 

questionable Inner Sense model of introspection. 

In order to sustain the claim that we can develop simulators of such cognitive events 

as  successful  or  failed  simulation-to-perception  mappings,  one  must  also  claim  that 

introspection  is  a  modality  similar  in  the  relevant  respects  to  the  various  sensorimotor 

modalities. It must be a faculty which receives a channel of information from its domain (i.e. our 

own  cognitive  processes)  and  generates,  on 

the  basis  of 

this 

information,  on-line 

representations  of  the  current  state  of  affairs  in  that  domain.  Further,  these  on-line 

representations must be subject to the operations of selective attention, long-term storage, and 

recall, just as the five senses, proprioception, and the like are. 

However, the view that introspection is a faculty similar in such important respects to 

the  sensorimotor  modalities  is  known  as  an  Inner  Sense  theory  of  introspection  or  self-

knowledge,  and  it  is  increasingly  controversial  in  cognitive  science  and  philosophy.  Several 

thinkers—notably,  Peter  Carruthers  (2011)—have  been  developing  a  case  for  the  claim  that 

our access to our own mental states is nowhere near as direct, reliable, or perception-like as 

such a model would suggest. Without venturing into the self-knowledge debate here, I will just 

note  that  the  biggest  potential  stumbling  block  for  the  Introspective  Account  of  embodied 

abstraction  is  that  it  seems  committed  to—and  thus  hostage  to  the  increasingly  doubtful 

plausibility of—an Inner Sense model of introspection.  

Moving on, the third proposal concerning ELC and abstraction is what I have called the 

Action  Schema  Account,  due  to  Glenberg  and  his  colleagues (Glenberg  and  Kaschak  2002; 

Glenberg et al 2008.) This shares a large part of the spirit of the Metaphorical Account, in that it 

suggests  that  our  understanding  of  (certain  kinds  of)  abstract  language  operates  via  a 

metaphorical extension of our understanding of concrete language. In this case, however, what 

66 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are allegedly re-used for abstract comprehension purposes are general schemas which enable 

our fluid performance of various kinds of physical actions. 

Proponents  of  the  Action  Schema  Account  propose  that  we  have  „action  schemas‟ 

grounded in very basic patterns of bodily experience. For instance, we might have a schema 

for transfer of objects, consisting of the following parameters: kind of grip, determined by the 

object;  level  of  force  required,  also  determined  by  the  object;  and  direction  of  motion, 

determined by the starting location of the object (oneself or another, in the case of giving and 

receiving  respectively)  and  the  destination  of  the  object  (another  or  oneself,  in  the  case  of 

giving and receiving respectively.) Research suggests that the development of such schemas 

underlies development of an understanding of transfer verbs such as  to give (Glenberg et al 

2008.) 

Now, supposing that we have action schemas for object transfer, it seems reasonable 

to suppose, on ELC, that they might be involved in our comprehension of such sentences as 

Andy  delivered  the  pizza  to  you  and  you  delivered  the  pizza  to  Andy.  This  would  provide  a 

detailed  and  interesting  explanation  of  the  differential  reaction  times  found  by  Glenberg  and 

Kaschak  (2002)  in  their  study  of  sentence  comprehension  relating  to  object  transfer  (see 

discussion in section 2 of chapter 3 above.) 

What is even more interesting, however, is that Glenberg and Kaschak found the same 

result  in  testing  comprehension  of  sentences  describing  transfer  of  abstract  objects.  That  is, 

reading and understanding the sentence you radioed the message to the policeman affected 

motor  response  times  in  the  same  way  as  did  reading  and  understanding  the  sentence  you 

delivered the pizza to Andy. And reading and understanding the sentence Liz told you the story 

affected motor response times in the same way as did reading and understanding the sentence 

Andy delivered the pizza to you (Glenberg & Kaschak 2002.) 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  Action  Schema  Account  of  abstraction  provides  an  attractive  explanation  of  this 

result:  viz.,  that  the  same  action  schemas  which  underwrite  our  comprehension  of  concrete 

transfer  sentences  are  also  implicated  in  our  comprehension  of  abstract  transfer  sentences. 

Thus, when we understand Liz told you the story, we activate the same object transfer schema 

as we do in understanding Andy delivered the pizza to you, with the parameters being set as 

direction of motion towards the body. 

One  obvious  shortcoming  of  this  approach,  at  least  in  isolation,  is  its  limited  scope: 

clearly not all abstract language is comprehended using action schemas. What action schema 

would we recruit, for instance, to understand physicists have demonstrated the existence of the 

Higgs  Boson,  or  the  concept  of  God  is  that  of  a  being  greater  than  which  none  can  be 

conceived? Perhaps these questions can be answered, but clearly they can also be multiplied, 

and it is doubtful that the Action Schema Account can generalize to all kinds and degrees of 

abstract  conceptualization.  The  focus  on  action  schemas  specifically  may  reflect  Glenberg‟s 

focus  on  the  action-guiding  aspects  of  language;  Lakoff  and  Johnson  (1999)  discuss  other 

kinds  of  sensorimotor  schemas,  particularly  spatial  ones,  which  may  be  recruited  in  the 

comprehension of abstraction. 

Another shortcoming, which the Action Schema Account shares with the Metaphorical 

Account  by  virtue  of  their  similarity,  is  the  Problem  of  the  Remainder.  The  proposal  that  we 

understand sentences about storytelling through the same processes whereby we understand 

sentences  about  pizza  delivering  strikes  us  as  novel  and  provocative  precisely  because  we 

know there is a big difference; we all understand that in one case a physical object is literally 

being transferred, and in the other case it is not. There must, therefore, be something going on 

other than the activation of an action schema when we comprehend Liz told you the story. This 

is  not  to  say  that  we  cannot  specify  what  that  something  is.  It  is  just  to  emphasize  that  the 

Action  Schema  Account  cannot  carry  all  the  weight  alone.  Glenberg  et  al  acknowledge  this, 

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commenting  that  the  “various  approaches  to  the  embodiment  of  abstract  language  are  not 

mutually  exclusive;  in  fact,  they  may  all  be  emphasizing  different  aspects  of  the  same 

phenomenon” (2008, p.908.) 

The  fourth  proposal  to  consider  is  the  Situational  Account.  Like  the  Action  Schema 

Account,  this  is  not  intended  as  a  complete  or  comprehensive  story  about  the  embodied 

representation  of  abstract  concepts.  Rather,  it  is  a  proposal  about  one  aspect  of  how  such 

concepts  might  be  represented  and  processed  on  an  embodied  view.  The  proposal,  due  to 

Barsalou  and  Wiemer-Hastings  (2005),  is  that  an  important  part  of  the  content  of  abstract 

concepts consists of knowledge of the kinds of situations to which they apply. 

Barsalou  and  Wiemer-Hastings  review  empirical  evidence  supporting  the  idea  that 

situational content is central to both concrete and abstract concepts. For example, to have a full 

or adequate grasp of the concept HAMMER, it is not enough simply to possess visual, tactile, 

and  proprioceptive  representations  of  hammers  themselves.  One  must  also  have  some 

knowledge  of  the  sorts  of  things  people  do  with  hammers,  how  they  do  them,  in  what 

circumstances, and the like (Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings 2005.) 

However  important  such  situational  content  is  to  concrete  concepts,  Barsalou  and 

Wiemer-Hastings  argue  that  it  is  even  more  important  to  abstract  ones.  The  previous 

paragraph  notwithstanding,  it  is  possible  to  represent  the  concept  HAMMER—albeit  in  a 

severely  limited  fashion—simply  by  tokening  straightforward  perceptual  representations  of 

hammers.  But  it  does  not  seem  possible  at  all  to  represent  the  concept  TRUTH  simply  by 

tokening  straightforward  perceptual  representations  of  truths.  Rather,  one  must  represent  a 

situation in which some claim is made and the world is arranged accordingly. It is only in the 

situation  partly  comprised  by  the  relationship  of  claim  to  world  that  the  concept  of  TRUTH 

becomes manifest. Thus, knowing the kinds of situations to which they correctly apply seems 

even more important to abstract concepts than to concrete ones. 

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  proposal,  then,  can  perhaps  be  summarized  by  saying  that  the  difficulty  of 

representing abstract concepts in terms of simple perceivable features or performable actions 

can be mitigated by representing them, at least to a large extent, in terms of complex situations 

and situation types. As I have already mentioned, it is certainly not an adequate total theory of 

the embodied representation of abstraction. It also needs to be handled with care, lest it give 

rise to a Euthyphro-type dilemma: does abstract concept A apply to these situations because 

the situations independently have the property of being A-instances? Or do the situations have 

the property of being A-instances only because abstract concept A applies to them? The latter 

unpalatable  horn  only  threatens  if  we  suppose  the  Situational  Account  is  being  offered  as  a 

complete theory of abstract conceptual content, which is just another reason for emphasizing 

its lack of any such ambition. 

The fifth and final proposal to consider is the Partially Dis-embodied Account, due to 

Dove (2011), with antecedents in the work of Barsalou (1999) and Louwerse (2011.) The core 

claim of this account is that the content of abstract concepts consists at least partially of their 

associative  and  inferential  relationships  with  other  concepts,  encoded  in  sensorimotor 

representations  of  words.  So,  for  example,  part  of  the  content  of  the  concept  TRUTH  is  its 

relationship  of  antonymy  with  the  concept  FALSITY,  and  this  relationship  is  represented  in 

terms of sensorimotor representations of words such as „true‟, „truth‟, „false, and „falsity‟, as well 

as their relationships with one another. 

It  is  hard not  to  see  this as a  dramatic  concession.  After  all,  the  claim  that  linguistic 

context  is  constitutive  of  conceptual  content  is  at  the  heart  of  amodal  theories  of  linguistic 

meaning like LSA and HAL—commonly viewed as antithetical to ELC (Glenberg & Robertson 

2000.) The Partially Dis-embodied Account seems thus to amount to an admission that ELC is 

only true about certain kinds of language. 

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There  is  a  sense  in  which  this  is  true.  To  the  extent  that  the  Partially  Dis-embodied 

Account  is  correct,  we  do  not  comprehend  abstract  sentences  by  constructing  simulative 

situation models of the states of affairs they  describe. But here we should recall the different 

possible ELC claims distinguished in the final section of chapter 3. It is not essential to ELC 

that the sort of simulation implicated in comprehension always amounts to the construction of a 

situation model. Rather, it can just be simulation in Barsalou‟s minimal sense: the tokening of 

more-or-less  schematic  sensorimotor  representations  under  endogenous  control.  This  is 

certainly still  doing  the  work  in  comprehension,  on  the  Partially  Dis-embodied  Account.  And, 

importantly, what is not doing the work is any kind of amodal representational code: there is still 

no  need  to  posit  a  LOT  or  anything  like  it.  Sensorimotor  representations can  take  us  all  the 

way, even if situation models cannot. 

Dove  (2011)  coins  the  (hyphenated)  term  „dis-embodied‟  to  refer  to  representations 

which  are  modality-specific  but  whose  semantic  content  is  not  a  function  of  their  modality-

specific  content.  The  hyphen  in  „dis-embodied‟  is  supposed  to  distinguish  it  from  the  term 

„disembodied‟, which Dove reserves for amodal representations proper: symbols in a LOT. An 

example  of  a  dis-embodied  representation  is  an  auditory  representation  of  the  word 

„democracy‟. This representation is couched in a modality-specific code, but—supposing it can 

represent,  or  stand  in  for,  democracies  in  various  cognitive  processes—it  has  semantic  or 

referential content which is arbitrary relative to its modality-specific content. 

The  Partially  Dis-embodied  Account,  then,  preserves  the  minimal  core  claims  of  EC 

and  ELC:  that  all  representations  manipulated  in  higher  cognition  are  couched  in  modality-

specific  codes,  and  that  there  is  no  LOT.  However,  it  claims  that  modality-specific 

representations of natural language phonemes, graphemes and the like perform roles similar to 

those  for  which  an  amodal  code  has  typically  been  postulated,  representing  categories 

arbitrarily related to their form—including, importantly, abstract ones. 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There  is  much  more  which  could  be  said  about  each  of  these  five  proposals 

concerning abstraction. Now, however, it is time to step back and consider what can be said in 

general terms about the ability to handle abstraction as an alleged advantage of the amodal 

view.  

One  question  which  merits  attention,  and  to  which  I  have  alluded  several  times 

already,  is  whether  a  single,  unitary,  monolithic  account  of  the  representation  of  abstract 

concepts is necessary or desirable. Prinz (2005) mentions this question at the beginning of his 

articulation  and  defence  of  an  embodied  theory  of  moral  concepts—a  theory  which, 

interestingly, does not fit neatly into any of  the five embodied accounts of abstraction I have 

discussed. He contends that because abstract concepts themselves differ greatly and do not 

form a homogeneous class, there is no reason to suppose that a single story will be true about 

how they are all represented. Even if all representation and cognition operates on sensorimotor 

resources, different sorts of sensorimotor representations and combinations thereof might be 

used in different ways, by different processes, to represent different sorts of concepts. 

This  seems  to  me  correct.  Viewed  in  this  light,  the  partial  and  incomplete  nature  of 

each of the embodied accounts of abstraction can be seen as a virtue. We should expect that 

various  individually  insufficient  stories  about  the  embodiment  of  abstraction  can  be  told, 

amounting  to  a  pool  of  resources  which  can  be  drawn  on  as  the  problem  of  abstraction  is 

“dismantled piecemeal” (Prinz 2005, p.93.) 

A second general question to consider concerns the nature of the explanandum: What 

are we trying to explain when we try to explain the representation of abstract concepts? Two 

possible  opposing  answers  to  this  question  can  be  found  in  the  debate  over  Concept 

Rationalism  and  Concept  Pragmatism  (Fodor  2004;  Prinz  and  Clark  2004.)  These  are  two 

different doctrines about the conditions under which cognitive beings possess concepts. 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to Concept Rationalism (or „Cartesianism‟), defended by Fodor, a necessary 

and  sufficient  condition  for  possessing  some  concept  C  is  the  ability  to  “think  about  Cs  „as 

such‟” (2004, p. 29.) Defined negatively, this means that concept possession is not identified 

with  any kind  of  ability,  such  as  the  ability  to  distinguish  Cs  from  non-Cs,  or  to  draw certain 

inferences  about  Cs.  These  are,  of  course,  precisely  the  sorts  of  things  with  which  Concept 

Pragmatism identifies concept possession: abilities of one sort or another, be they abilities of 

classification, of knowledge-deployment, or whatever. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  adjudicate  the  debate  between  Rationalists  and  Pragmatists 

about concept possession. A few things, however, are worth noting. The first is that, insofar as 

the question is open, Concept Pragmatism seems like a natural ally of any embodied view of 

cognition,  given  the  emphasis  typically  placed  by  the  latter  on  the  evolved,  biological,  and 

action-oriented  nature  of  thought  (Prinz  and  Clark  2004.)  The  second  thing  to  note  is  that 

Concept Pragmatism looks like a far more suitable basis for an empirical science of concepts 

than Concept Rationalism, because such abilities as classification and knowledge-deployment 

are much easier to operationalize than the ability to think about Cs „as such‟. 

It is tempting,  in light of  this, to argue as follows: Proponents of ELC should also be 

Concept Pragmatists, and Concept Pragmatism eases the pressure on an account of abstract 

concept possession by more clearly specifying the explanandum in a way that takes much of 

the mystery out of the topic. If we adopt Concept Pragmatism, then it seems like we no longer 

have to tell a story about how people can manage, using only sensorimotor resources, to think 

about truth, negation, disjunction, democracy, electrons, and the like „as such‟ (if that was in 

fact what we thought we had to do.) Rather, we now have to tell a story about how people can 

manage, using only sensorimotor resources, to distinguish truth from untruth, democracy from 

non-democracy, etc., or to deploy knowledge about the typical features of truths etc., or to draw 

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensible  inferences  about  truths,  etc.  This  leaves  the  cognitive  operations  underwriting  such 

abilities rather under-specified, thus making the problem look refreshingly tractable. 

However, there are two problems with this line of argument. One stems  from the fact 

that,  as  Prinz  and  Clark  point  out,  the  line  between  Concept  Pragmatism  and  Concept 

Rationalism is actually quite blurry. One can be something of a Pragmatist, holding that all and 

only those creatures able accurately to distinguish Cs from non-Cs (or whatever) possess the 

concept  C,  and  yet  maintain  that  as  a  matter  of  fact,  such  classificatory  abilities  are 

underwritten by the ability to think about Cs „as such‟ (Prinz & Clark 2004.) In fact, I think this is 

the way we have to go if we want to endorse the cognitivist, representationalist form of EC and 

ELC which I am defending. To identify concept possession with various epistemic abilities and 

hold that those abilities are not underwritten by the ability to genuinely think about the referents 

of  concepts  is  to  flirt  with  a  more  radical  enactivist  or  anti-representationalist  strain  of 

embodiment,  which  I  will  argue  in  chapter  6  is  costly  and  under-motivated.  So  opting  for 

Concept Pragmatism over Concept Rationalism does not obviously ease the  burden on ELC 

proponents to explain, in sensorimotor terms, people‟s ability to think about abstracta as such. 

The  second  problem  with  my  strategy  above  is  that  this  thesis  is  not  about  concept 

possession;  it  is  about  linguistic  comprehension.  It  is  true  that  I  have  been  at  pains  to 

emphasize  the  intimate  connection  between  conceptual  cognition,  on  the  one  hand,  and 

comprehension on the other, and the extent to which evidence for EC and ELC can be treated 

as interchangeable. However, it is clear that the two issues are nonetheless separate. Suppose 

I were to give, right now, a bulletproof, ironclad argument for the truth of some form of Concept 

Pragmatism. We would then know that any organism O possesses arbitrary abstract concept A 

just in case O is able to draw the right inferences (or whatever) about As. But we could still 

sensibly ask what goes on when O understands language about As. 

74 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We should be careful here, however. Perhaps a suitably adapted Pragmatist answer 

can  be  given  to  this  question.  Perhaps,  when  presented  with  a  sentence  S  about  As,  O 

understands S just in case O is able to draw the right inferences from S, or something along 

those lines9. This would amount to a kind of Comprehension Pragmatism which would ease the 

explanatory burden on the ELC-proponent in the way originally intended, reducing the project 

of  explaining  abstract  comprehension  in  sensorimotor  terms  to  the  project  of  explaining 

abstract inference-drawing (etc.) in sensorimotor terms. 

Having  reached  this  point,  my  commitment  to  a  cognitivist  or  representationalist 

construal  of  ELC  is  again  something  of  a  stumbling  block.  Even  if  compelling  philosophical 

analysis  were  to  yield  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions  of  a  pragmatist  kind  for  either 

concept possession or language comprehension, there would still remain the question of how, 

or  by  what  cognitive  mechanisms,  actual  organisms  satisfy  those  conditions.  And  I  am 

committed to the view that these mechanisms are representational—they are mechanisms of 

simulation; in other words, of thinking. So concluding that O understands S just in case O can 

draw  certain  inferences  raises  the  question  of  how  O  can  draw  those  inferences,  to  which  I 

must answer: because O has thoughts which accord with the (abstract) content of S. This, in 

turn, raises the question of how O manages to have thoughts which accord with the (abstract) 

content  of  S,  which  leaves  me  back  where  I  started:  attempting  to  account  for  our  ability  to 

represent abstract concepts—to think about abstracta—using purely sensorimotor terms. 

There is one caveat to this, however. This is the idea that our ability to think about any 

given concept—and  consequently  to  understand  language  involving  terms  for  that concept—

admits of degrees. 

9 This is very close to the enactivist proposal, to be discussed at length in chapter 6, that “language 
comprehension can be accurately described as the procedural knowledge how to respond in certain 
situations to specific utterances” (Van Elk et al 2010, p.4.) 

75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
Let  me  begin  to  unpack  this  by returning  to  the  five  embodied  strategies  for  dealing 

with  abstraction.  These,  recall,  are:  the  Metaphorical Account;  the  Introspective  Account;  the 

Action Schema Account; the Situational Account; and the Partially Dis-embodied Account.  

Now,  suppose,  that—as  I  have  followed  Prinz  in  arguing—there  is  no  reason  to 

suppose that any one of these stories will or should apply to all abstract concepts. Suppose, 

further, that—as I have followed Glenberg in arguing—the full story about any given abstract 

concept may well consist of some combination of two or more of these accounts. 

In  this  case,  when  considering  any  abstract  concept,  such  as  TRUTH,  we  can  start 

from  the  premise  that  its  representation  in  a  given  human  mind  will  consist  of  some 

combination  of  the  following:  a  metaphorical  mapping  to  one  or  more  concrete  concepts, 

encoded  in  sensorimotor  representations;  a  stored  stock  of  introspective  representations  of 

cognitive events, such as simulation-to-perception mappings; links to schemas for performing 

certain kinds of physical actions; a stored stock of schematic representations of different (kinds 

of) situations to which TRUTH is applicable or appropriate; and a stored stock of sensorimotor 

representations  of  the word  TRUTH  and  its cognates, from  various  modalities,  along  with  its 

contextual, inferential, and other relationships to many other words. 

In light of this picture, two things seem abundantly clear. One is that this is a very rich 

stock of resources with which to account for the ability to perform various cognitive operations 

involving  abstract  concepts.  Another  is  that  possession  of  all  these  resources  admits  of 

degrees. 

For example, an individual‟s concept TRUTH could be metaphorically mapped to only 

one concrete concept, or many. The concrete concept(s) to which it is mapped could contain 

more or less detail. It could contain many stored introspective representations, or few, or none. 

It could be linked to only one action schema, or many… and so forth. 

76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To take an example: as a philosopher, my concept of VALIDITY is probably quite rich, 

containing much situational and linguistic information, in particular. I have a comparatively large 

body  of  knowledge  about  the  sorts  of  situations  to  which  VALIDITY  is  applicable,  and  its 

relationships  (including  definitional  ones)  to  other  words.  In  contrast,  my  concept  of  HIGGS 

BOSON is undoubtedly quite meager. It, too, contains situational and linguistic information, but 

relatively little; and due to my (introspectively apparent) ineptitude in conceptualizing of physics 

and  similar  topics  in  spatial  or  other  similar  terms,  I  would  suspect  that  it  is  fairly  bereft  of 

metaphorical mappings. 

To  say  that  the  ability  to  comprehend  language  about  some  concept  C  (and  the 

corresponding  ability  to  think  about  Cs)  admits  of  degrees  is  not  to  deny  clear-cut  cases  of 

comprehension and non-comprehension. For example, I definitely do not, at the time of writing, 

understand  the  word  calidad10,  and  I  definitely  do  understand  the  word  tree.  The  idea  is, 

however, that of those words which I do understand, I understand some better, or more fully (or 

richly) than others. 

This  idea  is  helpful  in  tackling  the  problem  of  abstraction  because  it  immediately 

suggests the plausible idea that we typically do not understand abstract ideas as well, or as 

fully, or as richly as concrete ones. Examples such as my minimal understanding of sentences 

about the Higgs Boson are probably pretty close to a limiting case of this putative phenomenon. 

I can understand language about the Higgs Boson, to a certain extent; and I can think about 

the Higgs Boson, to a certain extent. But explaining these abilities of mine is not too formidable 

a task, because, in each case, the extent is so limited that there is relatively little to explain! 

This is the grain of truth to be gleaned from the initially promising Concept Pragmatist 

strategy:  we  should  be  wary  of shouldering  more  of  a  burden  than  is  necessary  by  trying  to 

explain more than there actually is to be explained. ELC need only account for our ability to 

10 Spanish: „quality‟, as I have since learned. 

77 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
understand abstract language to the extent that we can understand it—and once it is admitted 

that understanding may admit of degrees of richness or fullness, it is not hard to see abstract 

language  as a  prime  candidate  for  language  which  is typically  less  richly  or  fully  understood 

than other kinds. 

What can we now say about the claim that the amodal view has an advantage over 

ELC  with  respect  to  accounting  for  our  ability  to  comprehend  abstract  language?  Well,  this 

conclusion is usually derived from the premise that ELC cannot account for this ability because 

it is limited to invoking only sensorimotor resources. I think we are now in a position to see that 

this  is  false.  ELC has a  wealth  of  promising  strategies  invoking  only  sensorimotor  resources 

with  which  to  account  for  the  comprehension  of  abstraction,  especially  with  the  clearer 

conception of a gradable explanandum which I have just developed. 

Of  course,  this  does  not  show  that  the  amodal  view  does  not  have  some  kind  of 

advantage  here.  It  just  shows  that  such  an  advantage  cannot  consist  in  a  mere  ability  to 

account  for  the  comprehension  of  abstraction.  It  must  consist  in  a  superior  ability  to  do  so; 

there must be something about the amodal view which makes it better equipped to account for 

this than the ELC view, despite all the resources of the latter. 

This seems implausible, however, in light of the Partial Dis-embodiment Account. Any 

special  advantages  which  an  amodal  symbol  system  would  confer  with  respect  to  the 

comprehension  of  abstraction  could  surely  be  mimicked  by  a  system  of  sensorimotor 

representations  of  natural  language,  functioning  effectively  as  an  arbitrary  semantic  code 

despite  its  modality-specific  nature.  Further,  as  discussed  earlier,  this  is  not  the  substantial 

concession which it appears to be, because there is still no need to postulate an actual amodal 

code or  LOT,  and  because embodied  (as  opposed  to dis-embodied)  representations  are still 

doing the lion‟s share of the work in most instances of comprehension. 

78 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My final verdict, then, is that the amodal view does not enjoy any advantage whatever 

over ELC with respect to accounting for our ability to comprehend abstract language. With that 

conclusion established, it is now time to examine the second, closely related, alleged amodal 

advantage:  that  of  accounting  for  our  ability  to  comprehend  language  whose  meaning  we 

cannot simulate. 

Comprehending the Unimaginable 

This  objection  is  often  tangled  up  with  the  Problem  of  Abstraction,  because  there  is 

considerable  overlap  between  the  two.  It  is  pressed most  clearly  and  distinctly,  however,  by 

Weiskopf  (2010a)  and  can  be  summarized  as  follows:  there  is  language  which  we  can 

understand,  but  the  meaning  of  which  we  cannot  simulate;  therefore,  understanding  is  not 

identical to simulation; therefore, ELC is false. 

There  are  at  least  three  different  putative  varieties  of  language  which  we  can 

understand but the meaning of which we cannot simulate. One is abstract language. Another is 

language  describing  things  we  have  never  experienced—e.g.  sentences  about  dodos  or 

dinosaurs,  or,  for  physically  disabled  people,  sentences  about  performing  various  kinds  of 

physical  actions.  A  third  kind  is  nonsense  sentences,  such  as  Chomsky‟s  famous  “colorless 

green ideas sleep furiously” (1957, p.15.) 

The claim that we can understand such sentences as Chomsky‟s may seem dubious. 

Weiskopf‟s grounds for this claim consist of an influential view in the philosophy of language 

that sentence understanding is identical to knowledge of truth conditions (Davidson 1967.) On 

this view, which Weiskopf calls a “minimal view of linguistic understanding” (2010a, p. 298), it is 

sufficient  to  demonstrate  understanding of  some sentence  S  to  be  able  to  infer  from  S what 

would have to be the case for S to be true. So, for example, we can infer that if Chomsky‟s 

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sentence  is  true,  then  ideas  “slept,  and  they were  both  colorless  and green”  (ibid.),  and  this 

demonstrates  that  we  can  understand  Chomsky‟s  sentence.  However,  it  seems  clear,  says 

Weiskopf, that we cannot create a sensorimotor simulation of the situation of colourless green 

ideas sleeping furiously; thus, here is a case of understanding without being able to simulate, 

which is all that is required to refute ELC‟s identification of the former with the latter. 

It is not difficult or distorting to reconstruct this argument as a claim that the amodal 

view enjoys an advantage over ELC. Given its identification of understanding with simulation, 

runs  the  objection,  ELC  cannot  account  for  our  (alleged)  ability  to  comprehend  such 

unimaginable  sentences  as  Chomsky‟s  „green  ideas‟.  Lurking  not  far  from  the  surface,  of 

course,  is  the  thought  that  the  amodal  view  can  account  for  our  ability  to  comprehend  such 

sentences. If understanding language consists of tokening symbolic representations in a LOT, 

or something like it—representations which may or may not be incidentally associated with any 

sensorimotor content—then it seems clear that such representations could readily be tokened 

for the „green ideas‟ sentence. It further seems clear that such truth-conditional inferences of 

the  sort  which  interest  Weiskopf  could  be  drawn  from  them  in  a  purely  syntactic  fashion, 

unhampered by any inability to construct a sensorimotor simulation. 

There  are  a  number  of  ways  to  respond  on  behalf  of  ELC.  The  first  is  just  to 

recapitulate one of the strategies I used in dealing with the Problem of Abstraction: namely, to 

recruit  the  Partially  Dis-embodied  Account  and  its  ability  to  simulate  the  properties  of  an 

amodal  symbol  system  using  sensorimotor  representations  of  natural  language.  Even  if  it  is 

conceded that the ability to compute truth-conditional inferences is sufficient for understanding, 

it  does  not  follow  that  ELC—with  its  restriction  to  only  sensorimotor  resources—is  unable  to 

account  for  our  understanding  of  the  „green  ideas‟  sentence.  We  just  need  to  claim  that  the 

computation of truth-conditional inferences is performed by the manipulation of dis-embodied 

(sensorimotor) representations of natural language. 

80 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Of  course,  this  does  concede  something  to  Weiskopf:  that  the  ability  to  construct 

simulations  in  the sense  of  full-blown situation  models  cannot  be  a  necessary component  of 

understanding.  But  I  have  already  admitted  this;  one  of  the  qualifications  which  ELC  has 

accrued in the course of my discussion so far is  that, in order to be generally applicable, the 

simulation  with  which  it  identifies  comprehension  must  be  understood  in  Barsalou‟s  minimal, 

technical  sense,  meaning  the  re-activation  of  stored  sensorimotor  representations  under 

endogenous control.  So  far,  we  have seen  no reason  to  suppose  that  any  kind  of  language 

comprehension—of  abstract  language,  or  of  unimaginable-because-nonsensical  green  ideas 

type sentences—occurs in the absence of simulation, so construed.11 

The second response to Weiskopf‟s argument involves questioning his claim that we 

do  understand  the  green  ideas sentence  and  its  ilk.  It  is  undeniable  that we  can  draw  truth-

conditional  inferences  from  it;  and  it  follows  from  this,  given  the  minimal  view  of  linguistic 

understanding, that we understand it. But what reason do we have to accept the minimal view 

of linguistic understanding? 

This  rhetorical  question  could  obviously  be  answered.  There  are  deep  and  complex 

debates in the philosophy of language surrounding these issues. However, I think it is worth 

emphasizing  that,  if  the  minimal  view  and  ELC  are  genuinely  inconsistent  with  one  another, 

then all the evidence we have for ELC is equally evidence against the minimal view. This point 

speaks 

to  deep  methodological 

issues  concerning 

the  relationship  between  a  priori 

philosophical analysis, on the one hand, and empirical inquiry, on the other. As Prinz (2004) 

argues in the context of the philosophy of emotions, when we conduct scientific investigation 

into  the  nature  of  some  putative  phenomenon,  we  need  to  allow  for  the  possibility  that  the 

11 One possible counter to this response is to claim that, even if sensorimotor representations of words 
are being tokened in the course of understanding the green ideas sentence, they are not doing the real 
work. Syntactic mechanisms—which, as I have admitted, may or may not be sensorimotor—are 
responsible for the computation of truth conditions. 

Thus, the success of this first response to the green ideas objection may depend on the 

viability of an embodied theory of syntax. Apart from Embodied Construction Grammar, which I 
mentioned earlier, Alistair Knott has recently (2012) published a book-length treatment of an embodied 
interpretation of Chomskyan syntax—but I do not have space to address these issues here. 

81 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
 
results of that investigation will unseat some of our pre-theoretic or, indeed, pre-scientific views 

about  the  nature  of  the  phenomenon.  If  our  best  evidence  indicates  that  paradigm  cases  of 

linguistic comprehension involve something richer than mere computation of truth conditions, 

then  we  must  at  least  be  prepared  for  the  possibility  of  abandoning  the  view  that 

comprehension consists of such computation. 

The  strategy  of  questioning  Weiskopf‟s  claim  that  we  understand  the  „green  ideas‟ 

sentence can be taken in a slightly different direction, too. Recall the idea, discussed at length 

in  the  previous  section,  that  comprehension  admits  of  degrees.  If  I  may  indulge  in  a  little 

intuition-pumping, I submit that it is eminently plausible to say we do not understand the „green 

ideas‟ sentence to the same extent, or even in the same sense, as we understand the sentence 

„the  cat  sat  on  the  mat‟.  Suppose  that,  as  Weiskopf  believes,  there  is  a  wholly  amodal 

(disembodied,  not  merely  dis-embodied)  conceptual  system  syntactically  computing  the 

inferential  consequences  of  all  sentences  we  process,  and  sensorimotor representations  are 

only contingently activated as a causal consequence of some such computations. In this case, 

there  would  still  clearly  be  a  big  difference  between  merely  computing  inferences  from  the 

„green ideas‟ sentence, on the one hand, and on the other, computing inferences from „the cat 

sat on the mat‟ while also simulating perceptions of a cat sitting on a mat. The best way I can 

think of to express this difference is that we would understand far more clearly  what the world 

would have to be like for the cat sentence to be true than for the „green ideas‟ sentence. 

This  last  remark  brings  me  to  my  final  response  to  Weiskopf,  which  consists  of  a 

dilemma  for  the  truth-conditional  view  of  understanding  which  he  advocates.  Suppose  we 

accept that understanding a sentence consists of knowing its truth conditions12. We may then 

ask  in  what  manner  those  truth  conditions  themselves  are  known.  On  the  first  horn  of  the 

dilemma, they are themselves further linguiform entities. This seems to be what Weiskopf has 

12 Or satisfaction conditions, to include comprehensible non-declarative sentences. 

82 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
in mind when he conceives of knowing truth conditions as the ability to draw inferences. But if 

our  knowledge  of  the  truth  conditions  of  some  sentence—which  knowledge  allegedly 

constitutes our comprehension of that sentence—consists in the tokening of further linguiform 

representations,  then  we  can  legitimately  ask  how  those  truth  conditions  themselves  are 

understood. On this first horn of the dilemma, an infinite regress threatens. 

The  second  horn,  of course,  involves denying  that  our  knowledge  of  truth conditions 

consists in the tokening of further linguiform representations. In this case, we can legitimately 

ask  in  what  it  does  consist.  I  submit  that  sensorimotor  simulation  is  an  eminently  plausible 

answer  to  this  question.  If  knowing  the  truth  conditions  of  a  sentence  intuitively  amounts  to 

knowing what the world would have to be like for a sentence to be true, then  it is difficult  to 

imagine a more effective way of doing this than undergoing a simulated perception of the world 

being as the sentence describes.  

I conclude that the ability to account for our comprehension of the unimaginable is not 

an advantage of the amodal view. Even if the minimal view of comprehension is correct and 

computation of truth conditions suffices for understanding, the qualified version of ELC which I 

am  defending  can  explain  such  computation  in  terms  of  dis-embodied  (sensorimotor) 

resources; no amodal code is necessary. Further, the empirical and theoretical case for ELC 

may give us good reason to reject the minimal view of comprehension. If not, and we accept 

that  knowing  truth  conditions  suffices  for  some  degree  or  kind  of  understanding,  there  are 

clearly higher degrees and richer kinds of understanding which outstrip such mere inferential 

competence. Finally, the question of how truth conditions themselves are understood seems to 

lead either to infinite regress13 or to compatibility of the minimal view with ELC. 

13 As Dr. Jon Opie has pointed out to me, a proponent of the minimal view could here respond by 
identifying knowledge of truth conditions specifically with an inferential capacity, as opposed to the 
tokening of a linguiform representing vehicle. I think this move is problematic because of conceptual 
considerations relating to the notion of understanding, which I will discuss briefly in my suggestions 
for future directions in chapter 7. 

83 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
I  turn,  now,  to  the  final  alleged  amodal  advantage:  the  much-discussed  productivity 

and systematicity of thought. 

Productivity and Systematicity 

As I have already mentioned, the issues to be discussed in this section tend not to arise in the 

context of ELC per se, but rather in the context of EC more generally. As a consequence, I will 

treat them rather briefly. However, given how influential they have been in debates about the 

necessity  of  postulating  a  LOT  (Fodor  &  Pylyshyn  1988;  Chalmers  1989)  it  is  worth  at  least 

saying something, since I am defending a view according to which there is no need to postulate 

a LOT. 

I will describe the problems one at a time. Firstly, productivity is the apparent ability of 

the human cognitive system to construct an indefinite number of complex representations using 

a finite stock of representational primitives and mechanisms for combining them (Prinz 2002.) It 

is probably best to illustrate this with an example, of a classic sort: Unless you have read this 

thesis  before,  then  there  is  a good chance  that  you  have  never  entertained  the  thought  that 

rhinoceroses never ride shopping trolleys to the pub wearing purple jackets and polka dot ties. 

However, there is an equally good chance that you are perfectly capable of entertaining, and 

indeed endorsing, this thought. 

The  important  point  is  that  it  does  not  stop  there.  You  can  just  as well  entertain  the 

thought that rhinoceroses never ride shopping trolleys to the pub wearing purple jackets, polka 

dot ties, and tutus. Or you can entertain the thought that giraffes never ride shopping trolleys to 

the  pub  wearing  purple  jackets  and  polka  dot  ties.  You  can  entertain,  in  fact,  a  seemingly 

indefinite  number  of  novel,  complex  thoughts  simply  by  combining  members  of  the  finite 

repertoire of concepts you already possess in indefinitely many novel, complex ways which are 

84 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nonetheless  governed  by  a  finite  repertoire  of  basic  combinatorial  principles  or  rules. 

(Propositions of mathematics provide another clear example.) 

This is a first gloss of what is meant by the productivity of thought. Specifying exactly 

what it amounts to in a precise, formal fashion is no small matter. However, an intuitive grasp of 

the phenomenon is all we need to assess the question whether EC and ELC are capable of 

accounting for it. Before I argue that they are, however, I will briefly describe the systematicity 

of thought, because the same fundamental aspects of PSS allow it to account for both of these 

(not unrelated) phenomena. 

Systematicity, like productivity, is difficult to characterize precisely. Imprecisely, it refers 

to the apparent fact that the ability to think certain thoughts is inescapably connected with the 

ability to think certain other, related, thoughts. To use a well-worn example, anyone who is able 

to think that John loves Mary is ipso facto able to think that Mary loves John (Fodor 2004.) You 

simply  do  not  find  people  who  have  the  ability  to  entertain  one  thought  but  not  the  other. 

Whether  it  is  included  in  one's  characterization  of  systematicity  per  se,  or  as  part  of  an 

explanation  of  it,  it  seems  natural  to  suppose  that  this  is  related  to  the  way  in  which  such 

complex  thoughts  as  John  loves  Mary  are  constructed  from  their  constituent  parts.  If  we 

assume  that  the  actual  cognitive  structure  of  such  thoughts  mirrors,  to  some  extent,  the 

structure of the language with which we express them, then it looks as though their meaning is 

a lawful function of the meanings of their constituents plus the ways in which those constituents 

are combined.  

Languages  both  formal  and  natural  are  fairly  clear  examples  of  representational  or 

communicative  systems  which  exhibit  productivity  and  systematicity  in  the  senses  I  have 

described.  Examples  include  spoken  and  written  languages  such  as  English,  Hindi,  and 

French; various sign languages; formal systems such as propositional logic and mathematics; 

and the symbolic encoding formats used by digital computers. 

85 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It  has  often  been supposed  that  the  productivity  and  systematicity  of  languages  is a 

unique consequence of certain features which are essential to being a language—in particular, 

having a compositional syntax and semantics (Fodor 2008.) This simply means having a finite 

stock of primitive or atomic symbols plus a finite set of rules specifying the ways in which the 

primitives  can  be  combined  to  create  meaningful  complexes,  whose  meanings  are  a  joint 

function  of  their  structure  and  the  meanings  of  their  constituents.  The  claim  that  productivity 

and  systematicity can  only  be gotten  from  these  quintessential  properties of  languages,  plus 

the claim that thought is productive and systematic, together make a strong case for the claim 

that thought must take place in something very like a language in these key respects—hence, 

of course, the LOT (Fodor & Pylyshyn 1988.) 

It is possible to question the extent to which, or the senses in which, thought is, in fact, 

productive and systematic (Cummins 1996.) However, we need not pursue that line of inquiry 

here.  Productivity  and  systematicity  are,  of  course,  only  issues  for  EC  and  ELC  to  address 

insofar as they are in fact features of human thought. So I will just give a brief overview of the 

reasons Barsalou gives for thinking that PSS can account for these phenomena. 

First of all, productivity follows naturally from Barsalou's claims about how simulators 

interact to create simulations. Recall the schematic story about how we token the thought that 

the  cat  is  on  the  mat.  We  have  simulators  for  CAT,  MAT,  and  ON, each  of which  integrates 

stored traces of perceptions of these categories from various modalities. These mechanisms, in 

combination with one another, can create a schematic multi-modal representation of a cat, and 

a  mat,  arranged  in  a  way  that  exemplifies  the  spatial  relationship  of  on-ness.  This  complex 

simulation constitutes our thought that the cat is on the mat. 

Similarly, we could re-apply our simulators for MAT and ON to simulate another mat on 

top  of  the  (unfortunate)  cat.  The  same  basic  mechanisms  which  allowed  us  to  entertain  the 

thought that the cat is on the mat also allow us to entertain the thought that the mat is on the 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cat which is on the (other) mat. It is clear that this recursive capacity could be extended to allow 

us to generate an extremely large range of potential complex simulations from a finite stock of 

simulators. This, of course, is productivity. 

Systematicity  follows  equally  straightforwardly  from  the  core  properties  of  PSS.  In 

order to simulate the cat's being on the mat, we must possess simulators for CAT, for ON, and 

for MAT. But if we have such simulators, then we are automatically equally able to simulate the 

mat's  being  on  the  cat.  Likewise,  to  entertain  the  thought  that  John  loves  Mary,  we  must 

possess simulators for JOHN, LOVE, and MARY. But, of course, possessing such simulators 

automatically  enables  us  to  entertain  the  thought  that  Mary  loves  John.  Thus,  we  have 

systematicity. 

Much  more  could  be  said  on  this  topic,  but  this  is  not  the  place.  I  take  this  brief 

discussion to have demonstrated that ELC and EC have, in the form of Barsalou's development 

of PSS, rich resources with which to account for the productivity and systematicity of human 

thought. Thus, the amodal view does not enjoy an advantage in ELC over this respect either. 

To  conclude  this  chapter,  then,  the  alleged  advantages  of  the  amodal  view  do  not 

survive scrutiny. A sufficiently rich and carefully qualified version of ELC is, at least, the equal 

of  its  rival  in  accounting  for  our  comprehension  of  language  about  the  abstract  and  the 

unimaginable, and in accounting for productivity and systematicity. In the next chapter, I turn to 

the converse question: does ELC really have the advantages which it is often held to have over 

the amodal view? 

87 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Alleged ELC Advantages 

Introduction 

In this chapter I subject to closer scrutiny the main advantages which ELC is claimed to have 

over  the  amodal  view.  There  are  two  such  advantages—one  empirical,  and  one  theoretical. 

The alleged empirical advantage of ELC simply consists  in the wealth of evidence from such 

disciplines  such  as  psychology,  linguistics,  and  neuroscience  which  are  held  to  support  the 

embodied  view  against  its  rival.  Meanwhile,  the  alleged  theoretical  advantage  of  ELC  is  its 

claimed  ability  to  solve  the  much-discussed  Symbol  Grounding  Problem  (SGP),  which  many 

theorists  think  is  deeply  problematic  for  the  amodal  view  (e.g.  Barsalou  1999;  Glenberg  & 

Robertson 2000.) 

I will discuss these two alleged advantages in turn. Several issues arise in connection 

with  the  inference  from  empirical  data  to  embodied  theory.  One  of  these  is  the  question  of 

whether the data are genuinely inconsistent with the amodal view, as some claim. Another is 

the  question  of  whether  the  studies  relating  to  language  comprehension  specifically  are 

sufficiently  well-designed  to  identify  facts  about  comprehension,  rather  than  some  other 

cognitive  process.  Yet  another  concerns  the  charge  that  the  empirical  data  only  support  a 

conclusion  about  the  contents  of  cognitive  processes,  while  ELC  is  a  thesis  about 

representational  vehicles.  I  will  discuss  each  of  these  issues  in  turn,  and  argue  that  the 

inference  from  data  to  theory  withstands  such  objections.  None  of  these  issues  seriously 

damages the empirical case for ELC. 

There  is,  however,  one  objection  which  is  harder  to  answer.  This  is  the  contention 

made  by  Mahon  and  Caramazza  (2008)  that  there  is  no  sense  in  talking  about  „the  amodal 

view‟,  because  there  are  many  different  amodal  theories  of  language  comprehension—and, 

88 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
moreover, that some of these theories actually predict the same sensorimotor effects that ELC 

does. For the purposes of the present chapter, I will ignore this complication and assume (as 

do most parties to this debate) that we can legitimately contrast ELC with „the amodal view‟ of 

comprehension.  However,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  conclusions  I  reach  by  this 

method are tentative, and may need revision in light of Mahon and Caramazza‟s arguments, 

which I will discuss in chapter 7. 

The SGP is a somewhat different story. It takes some effort merely to specify precisely 

what the problem is supposed to be. At a first pass, it is the problem of how the representations 

tokened  in  higher  cognitive  processes  such  as  language  comprehension  manage  to  convey 

meaning about things in the world. But this first pass leaves open many important questions, 

such  as  whether  the  SGP  is  a  problem  about  meaning  or  about  understanding,  and  how  it 

relates to philosophical debates about mental representation and content determination. After a 

close  examination  of  these  issues,  I  will  conclude  that  the  SGP  does  not  pose  any  special 

difficulty  for  the  amodal  view,  because—as  Shapiro  (2011)  argues  convincingly—amodal 

symbols can be grounded. The resources which the ELC theorist must posit to solve the SGP 

are equally available to the amodal theorist. At this dialectical point, a parsimony argument may 

hold  some  hope  for  the  ELC  proponent—but  even  this  is  by  no  means decisive,  and  in  any 

case is, strictly speaking, a distinct argument from the SGP. 

The ultimate conclusion of this chapter, then, is that the extant empirical evidence does 

favour ELC over the amodal view, but that the SGP does not. A parsimony argument is a more 

promising line of theoretical inquiry. 

Accounting for the Evidence 

89 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recall  the  various  empirical  findings  we  have  seen  adduced  in  support  of  ELC.  Merely 

understanding  a  sentence  which  implies  motion  relative  to  the  body  affects  subsequent 

production  of  actual  motion  (Glenberg  &  Kaschak  2002.)  Understanding  a  sentence  which 

implies—but  does  not  explicitly  state—that  an  object  has  a  certain  position  or  orientation 

facilitates  identifying  the  object  when  depicted  with  that  position  or  orientation  (Stanfield  & 

Zwaan  2001.)  Information  about  affordances  which  is  not  derivable  from  linguistic  context 

predicts how sensible subjects will rate given sentences to be (Glenberg & Robertson 2000.) 

Reading  category  nouns  activates  areas  of  the  brain  implicated  in  perceptual  and  motor 

encounters  with  members  of  the  relevant  categories  (Pulvermüller  1999.)  This  small  and 

selective  sampling  of  the  wealth  of  data  on  offer  leaves  no  doubt  that  inquiry  into  ELC 

constitutes  a  fruitful  research  program  which  has  contributed  enormously  to  our  knowledge 

about the mind. 

However, several theorists have recently sounded a note of caution. While not denying 

how impressive and exciting these empirical findings are, they are sceptical about the inference 

from such findings to the truth of ELC. 

One such critic is Adams (2010) who notes that the systematic correlations discovered 

between language comprehension and sensorimotor processes are consistent with the claim 

that the latter are a mere causal consequence of the former, rather than a genuine constituent 

thereof.  The  fact  that  understanding  language  goes  hand-in-hand  with  the  activation  of 

sensorimotor representations does not show that understanding language  is the activation of 

such representations. So, he argues, the data do not pose a genuine threat to the amodal view, 

because they can be accounted for readily within that framework. 

To a certain extent, Adams' point is well taken. Sometimes researchers sympathetic to 

ELC  do  claim  that  their  results  are  inconsistent  with  amodal  accounts  of  comprehension  or 

higher  cognition  (e.g.  Glenberg  &  Kaschak  2002.)  This  seems  implausible  and  hyperbolic. 

90 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  the  suggestion  that  language comprehension consists  in  the 

activation  of  amodal  conceptual  representations,  which  typically  causes  the  activation  of 

distinct but closely associated modality-specific representations. Of course, one would want the 

details  of  this  story  spelled  out,  but  the  same  can  be  said  about  many  extant  ELC  and  EC 

proposals. So Adams is correct in this much: the empirical evidence adduced in support of ELC 

does not deductively, conclusively, or unequivocally demonstrate the truth of ELC or the falsity 

of the amodal view. 

Once  we  set  aside  pretensions  to  conclusive  falsification,  however,  the  situation  is 

somewhat different. The best kind of argument to make for ELC is an abductive one—that is, 

an  inference  to  the  best  explanation.  The  way  to  do  this  is  to  enumerate  all  the  available 

observations concerning language comprehension and then to attempt to show that ELC out-

scores  alternative  explanations  of  these  observations  in  terms  of  parsimony,  consilience, 

fruitfulness,  and  other  qualities  of  a  good  explanation.  Once  this  sort  of  strategy  is  explicitly 

adopted,  the  prospects  for  arguing  from  empirical  evidence  to  the  truth  of  ELC  look  much 

better. I do not, in this thesis, provide a thorough and systematic abductive argument for the 

superiority of ELC to rival theories. And, as will be discussed in chapter 7, there are problems 

with inferring the truth of ELC from the evidence as things currently stand. However, while there 

may be problems with an abductive inference to the truth of ELC, the formal consistency of the 

evidence with alternative theories is not one of them. 

As far as the prospects for an abductive argument are concerned, when it comes to the 

sorts of data we have been discussing, there  seems to be  a crucial difference between ELC 

and the amodal view. Granted, the latter can explain the various results post-hoc, but it is less 

clear that it can predict them in a principled fashion. This is, of course, exactly what ELC has 

done.  Many  of  its  predictions  concerning  the  relationships  between  comprehension  and 

sensorimotor processing have been confirmed empirically. As Barsalou (1999) argues, results 

91 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which were predicted by one explanatory theory but can also be accommodated after the fact 

by  a  rival  theory  should  not  be  considered  to  favour  both  theories  equally,  but  should  be 

considered to favour the theory which predicted them. 

The  second  issue  relating  to  arguing  from  data  to  theory  is  connected  with  Adams' 

suggestion  that  sensorimotor  processing  might  merely  be  a  causal  consequence  of  higher 

cognitive  processes  such  as  language  comprehension.  Expanding  upon  Adams'  arguments, 

Shapiro (2011) argues that the experimental designs used in some of the relevant studies are 

not  sufficiently  fine-grained  to  warrant  the  claim  that  the  observed sensorimotor  priming  and 

interference effects occur as part of the comprehension process. 

In  particular,  recall  the  experimental  paradigm  used  in  the  study  which  showed  the 

interaction  between  understanding  motion-implying  sentences  and  producing  actual  motion 

(Glenberg  &  Kaschak  2002.)  Subjects  had  to  read  a  sentence,  then  judge  whether  it  was 

sensible or not, and subsequently move their hand toward or away from their body in order to 

make a 'yes' or 'no' response. Shapiro's suggestion is simple, and equally applicable to other 

studies which use this 'sensibility judgment' paradigm: we are not justified in concluding that the 

motor effects occur or are caused during the comprehension process, because they could just 

as  well  be  a  constituent  or  result  of  the  process  of  making  a  sensibility  judgment  instead. 

Maybe subjects  first  understand  the  sentence,  and  then  imagine  or simulate  what  they have 

understood in order to decide whether it is sensible (Shapiro 2011.) 

I think this is correct. Fortunately, Glenberg and his collaborators have since performed 

another study aimed at testing precisely this possibility, using more fine-grained methods from 

neuroscience. In this later study, subjects once again had to read sentences describing transfer 

of  concrete  objects,  others  describing  transfer  of  abstract  objects,  and  others  not  describing 

transfer at all. This much was the same as in the earlier study (Glenberg et al 2008.) 

92 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This time, however, Glenberg et al used a technique known as Transcranial Magnetic 

Stimulation (TMS) which can be used to evoke a response in the motor system, the modulation 

of which response can in turn be measured. This allows researchers to identify differences in 

modulation of the evoked motor response between stimuli. 

In  order  to  test  the  possibility  that  the  motor  system  is  only  engaged  after  sentence 

comprehension,  Glenberg  et  al  designed  the  experiment  so  that  the  TMS  pulse  would  be 

applied shortly after the presentation of the verb, while the subjects had  not even completed 

reading the sentence. Obviously at this point they could not have finished comprehending it, so 

any  motor  response  modulation  measured  must  take  place  during,  and  not  after,  the 

comprehension process. 

The  results  of  the  experiment  confirmed  the  prediction  made  by  ELC.  Significantly 

greater  modulation  of  the  evoked  motor  response  occurred  during  reading  of  the  sentences 

describing transfer, both abstract and concrete, than during reading of the 'no-transfer' control 

sentences. This seems to settle the question pressed by Shapiro: the motor system is engaged 

during the comprehension process, and not merely during the post-comprehension process of 

making a sensibility judgment. 

The  third  and  final  issue  concerning  data-to-theory  arguments  for  ELC  is  raised  by 

Weiskopf  (2010a),  who  contends  that  some  such  arguments  rely  on  a  conflation  of 

representational  content  with  representational  vehicles.  This  distinction—a  mainstay  of  the 

philosophy  of  mind  and  cognitive  science—is,  intuitively,  that  between  what  is  being 

represented  and  what  is  doing  the  representing.  To  give  an  example  similar  to  Weiskopf's: 

consider a photograph of a cat sitting on a mat, the string of English words 'the cat is on the 

mat', and a line drawing of a cat sitting on a mat. Each of these is a different representational 

vehicle—a different thing which is representing something. But they all have the same content; 

they all represent the same thing (namely, the state of affairs of the cat‟s being on the mat.) 

93 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Without  delving  into  technicalities,  it  seems  plain  that—as  Weiskopf  is  at  pains  to 

stress—the content-vehicle distinction is a well-motivated and useful one. Why, then, does he 

think the arguments for ELC blur it? 

His  worries  stem  from  Glenberg  et  al's  use  of  the  Affordance  Compatibility  Effect 

discussed in chapter 3. Recall, the Affordance Compatibility Effect is the finding that subjects 

reliably assign higher sensibility ratings to sentences describing scenarios which are afforded 

by  the  properties  of  the  objects  they  describe  than  to  sentences  describing  non-afforded 

scenarios. This holds true even when the two sentences are given very similar semantic values 

by amodal computational models such as LSA and HAL. Glenberg and Robertson (2000) argue 

that  this  is  problematic  for  the  amodal  view  because  it  gives  us  no  understanding  of  why 

subjects'  sensibility  ratings  would  differ  in  accordance  with  affordance  compatibility,  while 

ELC—in particular the IH, with its emphasis on the derivation of affordances—explains (indeed, 

predicts) this result straightforwardly. 

What,  then,  is  Weiskopf's concern?  Simply  this:  the  empirical  results  only  show  that 

information  about  affordances  is  being  mentally  represented,  but  they  do  not  show  in  what 

format or by what kinds of vehicles. This being the case, there is no reason to assume that they 

are  being  represented  in  modality-specific  codes,  as  ELC  claims.  Information  about  what 

various  objects  afford  could  equally  well  be  represented  in  an  amodal  LOT-style  code  and 

brought to bear on the tasks involved in these studies, with identical results. The studies, then, 

only establish the claim that content about affordances is represented by subjects, which falls 

far short of establishing the ELC claim that the representing vehicles involved are sensorimotor 

or modal in nature. 

There  are  a  few  things  to  be  said  about  this  argument.  The  first,  which  may  seem 

slightly  pedantic  but  is  nonetheless  important,  concerns  Weiskopf's  reference  to  it  as  his 

“second major argument against ELC” (2010, p.299.) This is misleading, since the point about 

94 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  content-vehicle  distinction  is  not,  in  any  way,  an  argument  against  ELC.  Rather,  it  is  a 

criticism  of  one  kind  of  argument  for  ELC.  Even  if  totally  successful,  all  it  shows  is  that  the 

Affordance  Compatibility  Effect  cannot  be  used  to  support  ELC.  It  leaves  all  the  other 

arguments  for  ELC,  as  well  as  the  internal  coherence  and  plausibility  of  the  position  itself, 

untouched.  

A second point to be made echoes one I made earlier about the relative degrees of 

support gained by, on the one hand, theoretical frameworks which predict empirical findings, 

and  on  the  other,  frameworks  which  merely  accommodate  them  in  an  ad  hoc  manner. 

Glenberg and Robertson's (2000) study was specifically designed to test competing predictions 

of ELC and certain of its amodal rivals, LSA and HAL—which predicted that subjects should 

understand the paired afforded and non-afforded sentences very similarly. Setting aside those 

specific models, it is unclear on what basis the amodal view of comprehension generally would 

make  a  prediction  that  information  about  affordances  would  be  accessed  in  comprehension. 

Granted, 

the  empirical 

finding 

that 

information  about  affordances 

is  represented 

in 

comprehension does not conclusively rule out the claim that such information is represented in 

an  amodal  format.  However,  given  two  alternative  frameworks  capable  of  explaining  this 

finding,  one  of  which  predicted  it  and  the  other  of  which  did  not,  then,  as  Barsalou  (1999) 

urges, we should ceteris paribus prefer the predictively successful framework. 

The  final  point  I  want  to  make  about  Weiskopf's  criticism  is  that  the  possibility  of 

affordances being represented in an amodal format does not generalise to the other kinds of 

sensorimotor information represented in comprehension. When the process of understanding 

language influences motor responses and performance in perceptual tasks, it is clear that the 

sensorimotor  information  being  represented  is  being  represented  in  the  relevant  modality-

specific systems. In light of this, and insofar as we have good reason to think that affordances 

95 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are represented in comprehension, it seems more parsimonious to suppose that they, too, are 

represented in modality-specific codes.14 

Weiskopf's  objection  about  the  content-vehicle  distinction,  then,  at  most  shows  the 

untenability of one kind of argument for ELC—that which relies on the Affordance Compatibility 

Effect.  It  leaves  ELC  itself,  and  all  the  other  arguments  for  it,  untouched.  Further,  given  the 

point about prediction vs. post-hoc explanation, it is not clear that it even deals a fatal blow to 

this one kind of argument. 

I conclude that the objections I have discussed do not substantially harm the empirical 

case for ELC. Despite the formal consistency of the various empirical results with the amodal 

view  of  comprehension,  when  viewed  from  the  point  of  view  of  an  inference  to  the  best 

explanation, they seem to favour ELC. I turn, now, to the major theoretical argument in favour 

of ELC: the infamous SGP. 

The Symbol Grounding Problem 

The SGP is presented by many theorists as a central motivation for research into ELC and EC, 

and as a strong reason for preferring these embodied frameworks to amodal views of higher 

cognition  (e.g.  Barsalou  1999;  Glenberg  &  Robertson  2000;  Anderson  2003.)  Its  canonical 

articulation is due to Harnad (1990) who introduces it via a re-worked version of Searle's (1980) 

famous Chinese Room thought experiment. The story goes roughly like this: Imagine landing in 

a foreign country, the language of  which you do not speak. Disembarking at the airport, you 

14 Of course, we should note that the study in question utilises the same sensibility judgement paradigm which we 
have already seen is somewhat coarse-grained. This leaves open the possibility that affordances are not 
represented in comprehension, but only in the post-comprehension process of making a sensibility judgement. 
Unless and until some ingenious experimental design can discriminate between these two possibilities, the 
question remains open. But it is not really relevant here, since it amounts to a different criticism than Weiskopf's 
about the content-vehicle distinction. 

96 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
look  around  and  find  yourself  confronted  with  many  signs  bearing  unfamiliar  strings  of 

unfamiliar symbols. Seeing your plight, a sympathetic local provides you with a dictionary in the 

local  language.  Opening  this  up,  you  look  up  some  of  the  symbol  strings  and  find,  to  your 

dismay, that they are defined only in terms of further unfamiliar symbol strings. Looking  those 

up, in turn, you of course find the same thing again... and so on, ad infinitum. Never will this 

monolingual dictionary give you any understanding of the unfamiliar language. The moral of the 

story  is  that  abstract  symbols  such  as  words  cannot  gain  meaning  merely  through  their 

relations with other abstract symbols: something more is needed to ground them, to establish 

their connection to extra-linguistic things. 

Advocates  of  EC often  take  the  SGP  to  demonstrate, or  at  least  strongly  suggest,  a 

fatal 

flaw  of 

the  amodal  view  of  higher  cognition: 

that 

the  abstract, 

language-like 

representations  it  posits  as  the  stuff  of  thought  cannot  be  meaningful  because  they  are  not 

grounded  in  our  perceptual  and  bodily  encounters  with  the  things  to  which  they  refer.  The 

embodied view is supposed to enjoy an advantage in this respect because the representations 

it posits as the stuff of thought are none other than stored traces of such encounters; the SGP 

does  not  arise  because  modal  representations  such  as  perceptual  symbols  are  already 

grounded. 

The first thing to ask about the SGP is how it relates to the philosophical problem of 

mental content. The way the SGP is often articulated in the literature on EC, it sounds like the 

exact same question: how do the representations manipulated in cognition get to refer to their 

specific referents? Of course, as Shapiro (2011) points out, there are many extant answers to 

this question in the philosophical literature. For instance, causal theories of representation hold 

that mental particulars refer to their referents by virtue of entering into the right kinds of causal 

relations  with  them  (Dretske  1981)  while  resemblance  theories  of  representation  hold  that 

97 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some form of resemblance between mental particular and referent is what fixes the content of 

the former (O‟Brien & Opie 2004.) 

Given  that  the  question  of  mental  content  has  been  so  extensively  explored  by 

philosophers, the SGP presumably cannot simply be the same question re-stated as though it 

were  a  complete  mystery.  But  sometimes  this  seems  like  what  is  going  on.  In  particular, 

proponents of EC and ELC sometimes sound as though they are (i) assuming the truth of some 

kind  of  resemblance  theory  of  mental  content,  and  (ii)  arguing  that  the  embodied  view  is 

superior because it endorses such a theory while its amodal rival does not. Thus, Stanfield and 

Zwaan write: 

Perceptual  symbol  systems  assume  an  analogue  relationship  between  a 

symbol and its referent, whereas amodal symbol systems assume an arbitrary 

relationship between a symbol and its referent. 

(2001, p.153.) 

In a similar vein, Glenberg et al write: 

The  [amodal]  symbols  are  arbitrary  in  the  sense  that  there  is  no  natural 

connection between the symbol and what it represents. For example, the word 

“chair” does not look, taste, feel, or act like a chair, and the word “eight” is not 

larger in any sense than the word “seven.” 

(2005, p.116.) 

These  may  simply  be  careless  uses  of  language,  but  the  distinctions  involved  are 

worth making, especially given the use of 'arbitrary' as a pejorative adjective in the literature on 

EC and ELC. The implication cannot be that mental particulars are incapable of representing 

categories or objects to which they stand in arbitrary (i.e. non-resemblance) relations. In order 

for this to be available as a premise in an argument for the embodied view, one would first have 

to  establish  the superiority of  a  resemblance  theory  of  content.  No  such  argument  has  been 

98 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
offered  by  any  EC  or  ELC  proponent,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  and  certainly  Harnad's  popular 

thought experiment alone will not do the job.  

Let us be clear, then: the issue is not one of content determination. A more plausible 

construal of the SGP, as Shapiro (2011) suggests, is that it is a problem about  understanding, 

rather  than  about  meaning.  The  question  it  is  intended  to  raise  is  not  about  how  the 

representations manipulated in thought acquire their specific contents. Rather, the question is 

about how the cognitive system manipulating the representations  knows or understands what 

they  refer  to.  This certainly  seems  to be  what  Glenberg  and Robertson (2000)  have  in  mind 

when  they  ask:  “how  does  the  system  know  what  the  symbols  are  about;  that  is,  what  it  is 

thinking about?” (p.382.) We can now state the question more precisely. Assume the existence 

of  a  cognitive  system  manipulating  symbols  which  represent  things  in  the  world,  but  which 

stand in arbitrary relations to those things. By what means can that system determine, for each 

symbol type it manipulates, what category of real-world things that symbol represents? 

If  this  is  the  question,  however,  then  it  seems  like  a  resemblance  theory  of 

representation  has,  in  fact,  been smuggled  in  through the  back  door.  Consider:  EC  theorists 

argue that the amodal view falls foul of the SGP, while the embodied view does not, because 

the  latter  sees  all  cognition  as  consisting  of  the  manipulation  of  representations  which  are 

modal in nature. But why does the SGP not arise for modal representations themselves? The 

implied  answer  seems  to  be:  because  they,  unlike  abstract  symbols,  are  not  arbitrary  in  the 

allegedly  problematic  sense.  This  suggests  the  following  argument:  a  modal  view  of  higher 

cognition  solves  the  problem  of  mapping  representations  onto  real-world  referents  because 

modal representations represent by some form of resemblance.  

There is a different construal of the SGP as mapping problem, however, which does 

not rely on a resemblance theory of representation, even for modal representations. This is one 

which takes for granted the cognitive system's ability to map modal representations onto their 

99 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
referents, but then questions how a system of amodal representations could be mapped onto 

modal representations. This leaves open the question whether the representational codes used 

by  the  various  modalities  use  any  form  of  resemblance  relation  or  not.  On  this  reading,  the 

embodied  view's  touted  advantage  of  non-arbitrariness  does  not  refer  to  relations  between 

representations  and 

things,  but 

rather 

to 

relations  between 

representations  and 

representations—in particular, between the representations used in higher cognition and those 

used in perception and action. This seems like the most plausible resolution of the ambiguity 

surrounding the SGP. 

So understood, however, it is doubtful that the embodied view enjoys any advantage 

with respect to the SGP. This is made clear by Shapiro (2011), who asks: why couldn't amodal 

symbols be grounded in the same way that perceptual symbols could be? The obvious reply—

that  perceptual  symbols  get  grounding  'for  free'  because  of  their  analogical  relationships  to 

perceptual  states—will  not  work,  for  the  reason  that  the  simulators  posited  by  Barsalou  are 

multi-modal  integration  mechanisms.  When  you  think  about  cats,  or  understand  language 

about  cats,  according  to  PSS  your  CAT  simulator  recreates  schematic  representations—

namely,  simulations—of  typical  cat  encounters  in  the  various  modalities.  Of  course,  the 

auditory  simulations  it  generates  will  bear  an  analogical  relationship  to  your  auditory 

perceptions  of  cats,  because  they  are  just  re-enactments  (albeit  schematic)  of  those  very 

perceptions.  Similarly,  the  visual simulations  it  generates  will  bear  analogical  relationships  to 

your  visual  perceptions  of  cats,  etc.  But  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  your  auditory 

representations of cats are analogically related to your stored visual, tactile, proprioceptive or 

other representations of cats. Assuming, plausibly, that the various modalities encode different 

information, in different formats, the very idea of a multi-modal simulator requires the existence 

of  some  mechanism  distinct  from  the  various  stored  modality-specific  representations  which 

can integrate them all and ensure that representations of the  same category are re-created in 

100 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all  the  various  modalities.  But  what  is  this  mechanism,  if  not  an  amodal  symbol  grounding 

device? When activated by a mere visual perception of a cat—say, in a photograph—your CAT 

simulator is, on this story, capable of mapping this to auditory, tactile, and other representations 

of cats, and it does not do this by exploiting any kind of analogical relationship between its input 

and the representations onto which this gets mapped. Simulators, then, are capable of symbol 

grounding in a way that may work equally well for abstract, arbitrary, amodal symbols. 

In response to the suggestion that their need for multi-modal integration mechanisms 

commits  them  to  the  existence  of  amodal  representations,  embodiment  theorists  sometimes 

respond that these integration mechanisms are not amodal representations because they are 

not  themselves  the  stuff  of  thought.  Modal  encodings  are  still  what  are  doing  the 

representational  work;  as  Prinz  says,  “…occurrent  cognitive  activity  and  conceptual 

performance rely on activity within the modalities… If an amodal code exists, it works on credit 

rather than serving as the primary currency of thought.” (2002, p.137.) Now, this is a perfectly 

acceptable response to the charge that EC theorists are forced to posit amodal symbols, and 

one which I will return to in chapter 7. But it will not work to deflect the present point, which is 

this:  The  amodal  view  is  not  disadvantaged  with  respect  to  symbol grounding  because  EC's 

symbol grounding (or multi-modal integration) resources could ground amodal symbols equally 

well. The representational status of the extra-modal integration mechanisms is irrelevant. If EC 

theorists  must  posit  mechanisms  for  mapping  information  about  categories  across  different 

forms of encoding, then a similar mechanism could map amodal information about categories 

onto modal information about them, thus grounding amodal symbols.  

Another possible move for the EC theorist, at this point, is  to appeal to a parsimony 

argument, along the following lines: It is true that amodal symbols could be grounded, given the 

machinery  that  EC/PSS  already  needs  to  posit.  But  since  that  machinery  plus  modal 

101 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representations alone can do the work, why bother to posit extra (grounded) amodal symbols 

as well? 

However, this response is inadequate in the present context, for two reasons. The first 

is  that  it  misses  the  point:  even  if  a  parsimony  argument  could support  EC  over  the  amodal 

view, it is a change of subject. The parsimony argument does not establish any EC advantage 

with respect to the SGP. 

The  second  reason  that  the  parsimony  argument  may  fail  is  that  it  is  unclear  that 

positing  multi-modal  integration  mechanisms  is  more  parsimonious  than  positing  amodal 

symbols.  Perhaps  one  could  bolster  this  argument  by  showing  that  amodal  symbols  would 

require integration mechanisms as well. However, I will not investigate this strategy here15. 

For now, I conclude that ELC does not enjoy an advantage over its amodal rival where 

the SGP is concerned. The resources which ELC needs to posit in order to solve the problem 

could equally be posited to solve it by the amodal view. 

However,  as  we  saw  earlier,  the  situation  seems  different  when  it  comes  to  the 

empirical case for ELC. This appears16 to constitute a genuine advantage. While the data can 

undoubtedly be accommodated by the amodal view, they provide much stronger support to the 

theory  which  predicted  them  before  the  fact  and  which  continues  to  generate  new,  fruitful 

empirical predictions. 

In the next chapter, I will turn from the dispute between ELC and its amodal rival to a 

different front. This is the clash between the relatively conservative, representationalist version 

of ELC which I endorse, and a more radical, 'enactivist' interpretation of the position, which has 

recently been advanced as a better explanation of the available evidence. 

15 I will mention it again briefly in chapter 7. 
16 Though, again, the arguments of Mahon and Caramazza (2008)—which I will revisit in chapter 7—
should be borne in mind as a potential problem for this empirical verdict. 

102 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
6. The Enactivist Challenge 

Introduction 

So far, this thesis has been considering the contrast between ELC and the amodal view—two 

very different accounts of linguistic comprehension. Despite their differences, however, there is 

a  lot  about  which  these  two  views  agree.  They  are  both  committed  to  the  claim  that 

comprehension  is  constituted,  at  least  partly,  by  the  activation  of  mental  representations  of 

some  kind,  and  they  both hold  that  comprehension—like  other  cognitive  functions—is wholly 

“intracranial”, in Adams and Aizawa‟s (2001, p.56) term. That is, cognition takes place entirely 

within the bounds of “skin and skull” (Clark & Chalmers 1998, p.7.) 

There is a more radical approach to cognition which denies both of these claims. This 

is the thesis of enactivism (mentioned briefly in chapter 2) which denies that cognition is best 

conceived of as operations on mental representations, and holds instead that it inheres in the 

dynamic relationships between an organism and its environment as the former acts skilfully in 

the latter (Varela et al 1991.) On this view, cognition is fundamentally  knowledge-how, rather 

than  knowledge-that;  it  consists  of  the  exercise  of  practical  abilities,  rather  than  the 

representation of states of affairs (Van Elk et al 2010.) The contrast between enactivism and 

the  version  of  ELC  I  have  been  defending  is  a  stark  reflection  of  the  diverse  nature  of  the 

broader 4E Cognition research programme, as outlined in chapter 2. Despite the fact that my 

version of ELC and the enactive approach both situate themselves under this banner, it may 

well be that ELC has more in common with the amodal view of higher cognition, when it comes 

to such fundamental issues. 

Recently, a challenge has been mounted to ELC from proponents of enactivism. Van 

Elk  et  al  (2010)  argue  that  there  are  insurmountable  problems  facing  a  „cognitivist‟ 

103 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpretation of the data concerning embodiment and language comprehension, and that these 

problems can and should be avoided by adopting an enactivist version of ELC instead. 

In this chapter I respond to these arguments in detail. I will proceed as follows. In the 

second section, I will outline the enactivist view of cognition in general, including its intervention 

in the debate concerning the function of mirror neurons. Van Elk et al use this intervention as a 

model for their dialectical strategy concerning language comprehension. In the third and fourth 

sections, respectively, I will discuss the two arguments given for thinking that we should reject 

the cognitivist version of ELC in favour of the enactivist alternative. These relate to what Van 

Elk et al call the „Simulation Constraint‟—the question how we can understand language about 

things we have not experienced with our senses—and the „Necessity Question‟—the question 

whether activation in sensorimotor areas of the brain is necessary for understanding language. 

I  will  argue  that  neither  of  these  issues  poses  an  insurmountable  problem  for  the 

cognitivist version of ELC, and that it is not clear that the enactivist version of ELC enjoys any 

significant  advantage  with  respect  to  these  issues.  Fundamentally,  the  claim  that  enactivist 

ELC  has  an  advantage  seems  to  rely  on  saddling  cognitivist  ELC  with  unnecessary 

assumptions  about  language—in  particular,  that  there  is  a  core  meaning  of  words  which  is 

activated  automatically  regardless  of  context.  I  will  argue  that  cognitivist  ELC  is  just  as  well-

placed as enactivist ELC to account for the context-sensitive nature of language, and, further, 

that enactivist ELC faces problems of its own. In the fifth and final section of the chapter, I will 

summarize and conclude the preceding discussion. 

Enactivism and Cognitivism 

The 4E Cognition movement, and the various claims known as „embodied cognition‟, are often 

presented  as  a  radical  challenge  to  the  orthodox  practice  and  theoretical  assumptions  of 

104 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cognitive science  (Shapiro  2011.)  Nowhere  is  this  more  accurate  than  when  it  comes  to  the 

enactivist  view.  Van  Elk  et  al  define  enactivism  as  “the  view  that  cognition  emerges  in  the 

interaction between an organism and the environment, such that perception and action are co-

constitutive  of  it”  (2010,  p.1.)  Consider  the  narrow  EC  claim  that  activity  in  the  brain‟s 

sensorimotor systems is constitutively involved in higher cognitive functions. This is considered 

by  some  theorists  to  be  quite  radical  (e.g.  Adams  2010.)  But  it  is  positively  conservative 

compared to the enactivist proposal that not just perceptual and motor activity in the brain but 

perception  and  action  themselves  are  constitutively  involved  in  cognition.  On  this  view,  the 

ability of organisms to orient themselves appropriately in relation to their environments and act 

skillfully cannot be said to be a causal consequence of those organisms‟ cognitive capacities; 

rather, this ability is (at least partly) what those cognitive capacities are. 

One  of  the  most  influential  and  detailed  applications  of  the  enactivist  view  is  the 

sensorimotor theory of (visual) perception. On this view, perception is constituted by the active 

exploration  of  the  environment,  and  the  mastery  of  “sensorimotor  contingencies”—reliable 

couplings in both directions between sensory input and action (O‟Regan &  Noë 2001, p.940.) 

One  famous  putative  example  of  this  is  “presence-in-absence”  (Noë  2009,  p.472)—the 

phenomenon  of  looking  at,  e.g.,  a  building  from  the  front,  only  able  to  see  the  façade,  and 

nonetheless  having  a  sense  of  the  presence  or  reality  of  the  rest  of  the  three-dimensional 

structure. This sense, according to the sensorimotor theory, is a function of the fact that the rest 

of  the  object  is  available  to  our  sensory  systems  if  we  take  certain  actions.  This  is  what  is 

meant by a sensorimotor contingency. 

Gaining a clear understanding of enactivism may be helped by considering what it is 

supposed  to  be  an  alternative  to.  Van  Elk  et  al  define  cognitivism,  the  orthodoxy  to  which 

enactivism  is  meant  to  be  a  radical  reaction,  as  “the  theoretical  approach  that  attempts  to 

explain cognition in terms of the manipulation of discrete internal representations” (2010, p.1.) 

105 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This characterization, however, immediately raises questions. Whence the requirement 

that  cognitivism  be  committed  to  the  discreteness  of  representations?  Certainly  the  classical 

cognitivist  theory,  the  amodal  view  in  the  form  of  Fodor‟s  LOT  theory,  holds  that  the  mental 

representations  manipulated 

in  higher  cognition  are  discrete.  But 

there  are  other 

representational  approaches  to  cognition  which  are  consistent  with  cognition  being  entirely 

intracranial  and  ontologically  distinct 

from  skilful  action,  while  not  positing  discrete 

representations.  Connectionist  frameworks,  for  instance,  posit  as  representational  vehicles 

either  occurrent  patterns  of  activation  over  a  whole  network  of  neuron-like  units,  or  more 

durable  patterns  of  connection  strengths  between  those  units  (O‟Brien  &  Opie  2002.) 

Computational  models  of  phenomena  relating  to  EC  and  ELC  have  been  developed  which 

utilize connectionist techniques; e.g. Flusberg et al‟s (2010) model of conceptual metaphor, and 

Joyce et al‟s (2003) model of visual cognition in Perceptual Symbol Systems. 

These are thoroughly representational models of cognitive processing, consistent with 

a  brain-bound  ontology  of  cognition.  But  their  representational  vehicles  are  patterns  of 

activation and patterns of connection strengths, neither of which are discrete phenomena. Not 

only are connectionist representations distributed across the whole network in this fashion, but 

they  also  exhibit  superpositional  storage—meaning  that  the  very  same  vehicles  are  used  to 

encode  multiple  items  of  information  (Clark  1993.)  This  is  about  as  far  from  a  discrete 

representation as one could get. 

So, if the cognitivism vs. enactivism dichotomy is meant to be mutually exclusive and 

exhaustive, and the former posits representations while the latter does not, then it cannot be 

true  that  cognitivism  is  committed  to  the  discreteness  of  representations.  Perhaps  the  most 

illuminating contrast is to be found in the answers given by the two positions to the following 

two  questions.  First,  is  action  a  constituent  of  cognition?  Second,  does  cognition  involve 

internal representations of the external world? Enactivism answers yes to the first question, no 

106 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to  the  second;  cognitivism  answers  no  to  the  first  question,  and  yes  to  the  second.  So, 

enactivism  is  the  claim  that  cognition  consists  in  appropriate  sensorimotor  couplings  of  an 

organism to its environment, while cognitivism is the claim that cognition consists in some kind 

of  operations  performed  over  some  kind  of  internal  mental  representations  of  an  organism‟s 

environment. 

In proposing their enactivist version of ELC, van Elk et al (2010) draw inspiration from 

the enactivist interpretation of neurological evidence concerning mirror neurons. Briefly, mirror 

neurons are a class of neurons which fire during both performance of certain actions by us and 

our  observation  of  performance  of  those  same  actions  by  others  (Gallagher  2005.)  So,  for 

example, a given neuron might fire in my brain whenever I activate a precision grip  or observe 

someone else activating a precision grip (Gallese & Goldman 1998.) 

One interpretation of the available information concerning mirror neurons is that they 

enable social perception by subserving a simulation process (ibid.) The idea is that when we 

see someone performing some action, we are able to understand their behavior and intentions 

thanks,  at  least  in  part,  to  a  mirror  neuron-based  simulation  of  performing  that  same  action 

ourselves17. 

However, the simulation interpretation of the mirror neuron evidence is controversial. 

One  objection which  has  been  raised stems  from  the observation  that  higher-level  intentions 

are under-determined by „motor intentions‟. That is, simulating the activation of a precision grip 

can only help us to understand that someone is attempting to grasp an object of a certain size; 

it  cannot  help  us  understand  why  they  might  be  doing  that,  what  pragmatic  or  other  signals 

their action might be intended to convey, and so forth (Van Elk et al 2010.) 

In light of this and other worries about the simulation interpretation, an enactivist theory 

of  the  social-perceptual  function  of  mirror  neurons  has  been  proposed.  This  involves  re-

17 Another line of thought holds that mirror neurons play an important role in learning, specifically by 
imitation (Gallese & Goldman 1998.) 

107 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
conceiving what the phenomenon of social perception is. In line with the core enactivist claim 

that  cognition  is  constituted  by  skillful  action,  this  theory  claims  that  social  perception  is 

constituted, at least in part, by social interaction (De Jaegher 2009); it is not a mere matter of 

interpreting  sensory  input  and  generating  simulations or  other  representations  on  that  basis, 

but  rather  it  consists  of  couplings  between  sensory  stimulation  and  the  right  kinds  of  motor 

outputs. It is worth quoting van Elk et al on this point: 

Mirror neurons…should be interpreted as contributing to the processing of the 

perceived  behavior  of  others  for  the  direct  purpose  of social  interaction.  The 

idea  here  is  to  think  of  social  perception  as  an  enactive  process  involving 

sensorimotor  skills  and  not  as  mere  sensory  input  processing.  This  idea  is 

borrowed from enactive theories of perception according to which perception 

involves active engagement with the world rather than mere passive reception 

of information from the environment… 

(2010, p.3) 

If we consider the dialectical structure of the mirror neuron debate, it is not hard to see why it is 

an inspiring model for van Elk et al. It begins with empirical evidence showing the activation  of 

sensorimotor areas during a particular cognitive process. A theoretical account of this evidence 

is  proposed  according  to  which  the  cognitive  process  in  question  is  underwritten  by 

sensorimotor  simulation.  However,  serious  difficulties  are  raised  for  the  simulation  account, 

opening  the  door  for  an  alternative,  enactivist  theory,  which  promises  to  account  for  the 

sensorimotor activation data in a way that avoids the difficulties of the simulation account—viz., 

by identifying the cognitive process in question with (among other things) actions of the entire 

organism. 

In this spirit, van Elk et al propose an enactivist account of language comprehension. 

On this view, comprehension consists in skills instantiated in sensorimotor couplings. It is not 

108 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge that certain words or sentences mean such-and-such, but rather knowledge how to 

generate appropriate behavior in response to linguistic input. To use their example, when you 

are  sitting  in  a  restaurant  after  having  finished  your  meal  and  a  waiter  asks  you  if  you  are 

alright, your understanding of this utterance consists in your ability to respond along such lines 

as:  yes,  thank  you,  I’m  fine;  can  I  get  the  bill?  Once  again,  a  relatively  lengthy  quote  is 

warranted: 

Learning  how  to  understand  language  is  learning  how  to  couple  specific 

linguistic inputs to specific actions. These actions may be immediate but they 

may also be in the more distant future (e.g., as in understanding the sentence 

“the  election  will  be  on  May  the  5th”).  They  may  also be  only  “virtual”  in  the 

sense that understanding an utterance only involves being disposed to act in 

certain ways given certain circumstances… In short, on an enactivist account, 

language  comprehension  can  be  described  as  procedural  knowledge—

knowledge how, not knowledge that—that enables us to interact with others in 

a shared physical world. 

(2010, pp.4-5.) 

This  is  enough,  for  now,  to  have  a  fairly  clear  sense  of  the  alternative  conception  of 

comprehension which van Elk et al think is demanded by the data. Time, now,  to look at the 

problems which they think face a cognitivist version of ELC.  

The Necessity Question 

The first difficulty which van Elk et al raise for cognitivist ELC is the question whether activation 

in modality-specific brain regions is necessary for language comprehension. This is primarily an 

empirical  problem;  a  potential  falsifier  of  cognitivist  predictions.  Van  Elk  et  al  argue  that 

109 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cognitivist  ELC  predicts  two  things:  firstly,  that  damage  or  disruption  to  sensorimotor 

processing  should  cause  corresponding  deficits  in  comprehension,  and,  secondly,  that 

comprehension  should  always  be  associated  with  rapid  and  automatic  activation  in  motor 

areas.  However,  they  say,  the  empirical  verdict  on  these  questions  is  still  inconclusive.  The 

data  on  conceptual  and  comprehension-related  deficits  stemming 

from  damage 

to 

sensorimotor areas is equivocal, and awaits further research; and the same is true of the data 

concerning rapid motor activation during comprehension (particularly, during comprehension of 

action verbs—a case much discussed by van Elk et al.) According to them, this constitutes, at 

present,  a  lacuna  in  the  empirical  case  for  cognitivist  ELC,  which  could,  depending  on  the 

outcome of future inquiry, amount to a fatal flaw (Van Elk et al 2010.) 

The first thing which can be said in response to this argument is that we need to be 

careful about what exactly cognitivist ELC predicts. Remember that words and sentences are 

comprehended  via  the  construction  of  multi-modal  simulations,  which  may  be  more  or  less 

schematic,  and  incorporate  different  amounts  of  information  from  different  modalities. 

Particularly,  in  accordance  with  Dove‟s  (2011)  Partial  Dis-embodiment  Account  of  the 

comprehension of abstraction, the representation of linguistic context in the form of simulations 

of written and spoken words can also play a role in comprehension. Thus, what kind of deficits 

cognitivist  ELC  predicts  should  result  from  damage  to  sensorimotor  areas  is  a  delicate 

question. Suppose, since birds are primarily encountered visually, that the bulk of the work in 

comprehending language about birds is done by the generation of visual simulations. This does 

not mean that auditory simulations, motor simulations, and dis-embodied linguistic simulations 

are not also playing a role. Therefore, if a subject‟s visual cortex is damaged, we should expect 

that their ability to comprehend language about birds will be somewhat impaired. However, it is 

not  clear  that  we  should  predict  it  will  completely  fail.  Consistently  with  my  arguments  in 

chapter 4 about abstraction and degrees of comprehension, it is possible that such a subject 

110 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will understand language about birds less richly or fully, but still to a certain extent, and perhaps 

that  dis-embodied  linguistic simulations  will pick  up  some  of  the slack  left  by  the  absence  of 

visual simulations. 

The second way of responding to this argument—strictly speaking, an elaboration and 

extension of my first response—concerns the issue of rapid and automatic activation of motor 

areas, in particular during the reading of action verbs. The issues involved here will be treated 

in more depth when I discuss the context-sensitive nature of language below. For now, suffice 

it to say that the multi-modal nature of the simulation posited by ELC proves, once again, to be 

an  explanatory  advantage.  To  be  sure,  we  should  expect  that  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases, 

comprehension  of  verbs  such  as  „kick‟  and  „take‟  would  be  primarily  underwritten  by  motor 

simulations. But, of course, we do not have only motor experiences of kicking and taking. Most 

of  us  also  have  stored  visual  perceptions  of  these  kinds  of  actions,  as  well  as  linguistic 

information,  and  possibly,  to  a  lesser  extent,  information  from  auditory  and  other  modalities. 

Also,  according  to  Barsalou‟s  theory  of  PSS,  context  is  an  important  factor  in  determining 

exactly what kind of simulation is generated of a given category on a given occasion. So we 

may reasonably expect that the kinds of sensorimotor information activated, and the strength of 

activation,  will  vary  across  occasions  as  well as  individuals  in  the  comprehension  of  a  given 

word or sentence. 

My third and final response to the argument from the Necessity Question is to ask how, 

exactly,  adopting  enactivist  ELC  is  supposed  to  help.  The  suggestion  seems  to  be  that 

enactivist ELC would withstand the potential finding that motor information is only sometimes 

activated  during  comprehension,  or  by  the  potential  finding  that  sensorimotor  lesion  patients 

can still understand language, because it is well-equipped to account for these findings by its 

commitment to language as a flexible and context-sensitive phenomenon. Consider: 

111 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An  advantage  of  an  enactive  approach  is  that  it  allows  for  the  fact  that 

language comprehension  is  a  context-bound  phenomenon  that  is  dependent 

on the relation between the organism and the context in which the organism is 

acting.  Cognitivist  embodied  approaches  often  make  the  implicit  assumption 

that  there  is  a  core  meaning  of  words  that  can  be  specified  in  terms  of  a 

specific  representational  vehicle.  More  specifically,  cognitivist  embodied 

approaches  to  language  processing  seem  to  imply  that  the  sensorimotor 

representations that are activated in association with the processing of words 

occur relatively fast, automatic [sic], and in a bottom-up fashion. 

(van Elk et al 2010, p.5.) 

The two assumptions mentioned should be carefully distinguished, however. It is true 

that  cognitivist  ELC  endorses 

the  claim 

that 

the 

initial  activation  of  sensorimotor 

representations  in  comprehension  occurs  “relatively  fast,  automatic[ally],  and  in  a  bottom-up 

fashion”. But this does not, by any means, imply the existence of a “core meaning of words that 

can be specified in terms of a specific representational vehicle”. 

Attention to the details of both Zwaan‟s theory of IEF and Barsalou‟s theory of PSS can 

help us understand how the one claim does not entail the other. Recall, from chapter 3, that 

IEF  claims  comprehension  consists  of  three  overlapping  and  mutually  modifying  stages: 

Activation,  Construal,  and  Integration.  Activation  involves  the  diffuse  and  under-specified 

tokening  of  various  representations  associated  with  a  given  word  or  morpheme,  while  in 

Construal,  greater  specificity  is  achieved  through  the  imposition  of  constraints  by  the  wider 

linguistic context—i.e. the word, clause or sentence in which the initial word or morpheme is 

embedded. So, for instance, when understanding the sentence the ranger saw the eagle in the 

sky,  on  first  reading  the  word  eagle,  all  sorts  of  eagle-related  representations  from  different 

situations and modalities will be accessed in a preliminary fashion. Subsequently, the activation 

112 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of representations of in the sky will serve as an attractor which will preference representations 

of eagles with outstretched wings, resulting in those being more strongly activated, and other 

representations of eagles with folded wings losing activation strength. 

This  shows  that  the  assumption  of  “relatively  fast,  automatic,  and…  bottom-up” 

activation  of  sensorimotor  representations  in  comprehension  does  not  commit  one  to  the 

existence of a core meaning of words. The stored representations associated with any given 

word are many and varied, and which are activated on a given occasion will depend on many 

factors,  including  linguistic  and  extra-linguistic  context.  The  latter  is  especially  important, 

because it is so rich and varied. It includes many factors emphasized by enactivism, such as 

social  context,  goals,  and  the  like.  Consider  just  one  simple  example:  a  smoker,  trying 

desperately to quit, who reads or hears the word „smoke‟. I conjecture that such a person would 

activate  many  more  cigarette-related  representations  (as  opposed  to,  say,  bonfire-related 

representations)  than  another  person  reading  the  same  word—because  of  the  fixation 

(conscious  or  otherwise)  on  an  object  of  addiction  which  often  happens  during  quitting 

attempts. 

All this amounts to pointing out that if a common network of perceptual symbols is used 

in all the higher cognitive functions, including planning, deliberation, and so forth, then the total 

context biasing the activation which occurs during a given instance of comprehension can be 

extremely  complex  and  multifaceted.  The  IEF‟s  „first  stage‟,  Activation,  never  occurs  in  a 

vacuum;  there  is  always  some  prior  cognitive  context  which  will  bias  the  interpretation  of  a 

given word in a certain direction—a direction which may be subsequently altered. 

Barsalou, in his development of the theory of PSS, also strongly endorses the idea that 

the construction of multi-modal simulations—and, hence, the comprehension of language—is 

highly flexible and context-dependent: 

113 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Because  a  perceptual  symbol  is  an  associative  pattern  of  neurons,  its 

subsequent activation has dynamical properties. Rather than being reinstated 

exactly on later occasions, its activations may vary widely… Different contexts 

may distort activations of the original pattern, as connections from contextual 

features bias activation toward some features in the pattern more than others. 

(1999, p.584.) 

In  light  of  these  explicit  commitments  of  theories  such  as  Zwaan‟s  and  Barsalou‟s,  it  is 

somewhat puzzling why van Elk et al should think that cognitivist ELC is unable to account for 

the  context-sensitive  nature  of  language  comprehension.  Its  ability  to  do  so  is  touted  by  its 

proponents as one of its major advantages over the amodal view, in the analysis of results from 

experiments  which  demonstrate  the  contextually-determined  nature  of  the  sensorimotor 

representations  activated  in  comprehension.  For  instance,  remember  the  study  in  which 

subjects were quicker to verify a horizontal pencil than a vertical one, after reading „John put 

the pencil in the drawer‟, and vice versa after reading „John put the pencil in the cup‟ (Stanfield 

& Zwaan 2001.) Obviously the pencil is being represented differently in comprehending these 

two  different  sentences,  and  the difference  in  representations  of  the  meaning  of  this word  is 

determined  by  context.  The  fact  that  cognitivist  ELC  predicts  this  contextually-determined 

difference in simulation in a principled fashion is the entire point of the study. Cognitivist ELC is 

extremely  well  equipped 

to  account 

for 

the  context-sensitive  nature  of 

language 

comprehension. 

Moreover, while it does not, strictly speaking, relate directly to the Necessity Question, 

there  is  another  issue  about  the  flexibility  of  language  comprehension  which  is  worth 

mentioning. This issue seems far more difficult for the enactivist proposal. It is simply that there 

are many occasions in which we seem to comprehend language without exercising any abilities 

to  respond,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  physical  or verbal  action.  It  is  possible  to  attenuate  the 

114 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notion of skilful action to account for such cases, and to characterize the relevant abilities as 

dispositions, but if one takes this  path, then it starts to look inevitable that comprehension is 

underwritten  by  the  tokening  of  mental  representations  of  the  world,  even  if  one  wishes  to 

define it in other terms. 

To see this, recall this passage from van Elk et al, quoted earlier in this chapter: 

Learning  how  to  understand  language  is  learning  how  to  couple  specific 

linguistic inputs to specific actions. These actions may be immediate but they 

may also be in the more distant future (e.g., as in understanding the sentence 

“the  election  will  be  on  May  the  5th”).  They  may  also be  only  “virtual”  in  the 

sense that understanding an utterance only involves being disposed to act in 

certain ways given certain circumstances… 

(2010, pp.4-5.) 

Consider  briefly  the specific  sorts of  actions  to  which one  might  couple  the  linguistic 

input the election will be on May the 5th. They are innumerable and extremely varied; they are 

verbal, physical, and cognitive. One might respond May the 5th if asked when the election will 

be; one might respond  the first week of May if asked in what week the election will be. One 

might go to a polling booth on May the 5th, if one is a conscientious citizen, or go to the pub on 

May the 5th, if one is not. One might make a note in one‟s diary to update one‟s address on the 

electoral  roll  before  it  is  too  late,  or  make  a  mental  note  to  remind  one‟s  18-year-old son  to 

enroll to vote, or—depending on what sort of parent one is—make a mental note to take one‟s 

18-year-old son to the pub on May the 5th.  

Obviously I could enumerate such actions indefinitely, but I take it that is not required 

to make the point. The diverse and open-ended nature of the arbitrarily temporally and spatially 

distant actions which could constitute a comprehender‟s total set of appropriate responses to 

the  sentence  about  the  election  is  surely  not  determined  by  any  simple  or  straightforward 

115 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensorimotor coupling. It is undeniable that when someone hears and understands the election 

sentence,  some  durable  change  occurs  in  their cognitive  profile:  some  item  of  information  is 

stored  which  is  capable  of  interacting  with  other  items  of  information  to  produce  sensible 

responses. Until a viable alternative (which is difficult to even imagine) is presented, the most 

parsimonious conclusion is that the item of information which is stored upon comprehension of 

this sentence is some kind of structure (discrete or distributed) which, in some format or other, 

represents the world as being such that the election will be on May the 5th.  

Instances of comprehension which do not demand an immediate response cry out for a 

representational analysis. This is made clear by the claim above that the appropriate responses 

“may  also  be  only  “virtual”  in  the  sense  that  understanding  an  utterance  only  involves  being 

disposed to act in certain ways given certain circumstances” (van Elk et al 2010, p.4.) What are 

“virtual” actions, if not representations of actions? It is logically coherent, of course, to identify 

comprehension with the disposition to act in certain (appropriate) ways, etc., and to treat the 

internal neural or cognitive mechanisms underwriting this disposition as a black box. But it is 

difficult to see how this amounts to anything more than an ill-motivated return to behaviourism. 

This is the same issue which posed problems for the Concept Pragmatist-inspired analysis of 

comprehension: once one has philosophically identified some phenomenon with a disposition, 

or ability, or whatever, one can still sensibly ask how that disposition or ability is realized, and 

this seems to lead rapidly and inexorably to the manipulation of mental representations in the 

brain. 

I conclude, then, that the Necessity Question does not pose any special problem for 

cognitivist  ELC,  or  furnish  us  with  any  reason  to  reject  this  view  in  favour  of  the  enactivist 

alternative. The cognitivist view is very well-equipped to account for the flexible and context-

sensitive  nature  of  comprehension,  while  the  enactivist  view  faces  its  own  problems  about 

accounting for comprehension which causes complex dispositions to act in various ways best 

116 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explained in representational terms. I turn, now, to the second argument for the superiority of 

enactivist ELC to cognitivist ELC: the Simulation Constraint. 

The Simulation Constraint 

According to van Elk et al, while the Necessity Question is a contingent, empirical matter, the 

Simulation Constraint is a “more principled problem” for cognitivist forms of ELC (2010, p.2.) It 

amounts to the question how we can understand language describing things which we have not 

experienced. This includes abstract language, as well as concrete language referring to things 

which we simply happen not to have encountered personally. 

It  is  easy  to  see  why  the  Simulation  Constraint  might  be  thought  to  constitute  an 

advantage  for  enactivist  ELC;  it  is  a  problem  which,  on  that  view,  simply  does  not  arise. 

Because  enactivism  does  not  conceive  of  cognition  in  terms  of  representation,  but  rather  in 

terms of the ability skillfully to respond to stimuli, the enactivist account has no need to explain 

how  we  can  represent  or  simulate  the  meaning  of  language  which  goes  beyond  our  own 

experience. All it needs to explain is how we can learn to respond appropriately to receiving 

such language as inputs. 

However—and  this  will  come  as  no  surprise  to  the  attentive  reader—the  Simulation 

Constraint is no reason to reject cognitivist ELC, because cognitivist ELC has ample resources 

with which to answer the question it poses. I examined these resources in detail in chapter 4, 

when  I  discussed  the  alleged  advantages  of  the  amodal  view  relating  to  abstract  and  other 

language  describing  things  beyond  our  own  sensorimotor  experience.  The  Simulation 

Constraint  is  just  that  same  problem,  being  offered  now  as  an  alleged  advantage  of  the 

enactivist view over cognitivist ELC. My response now is the same as it was then. Cognitivist 

ELC can account for our ability to comprehend language about things we have not experienced 

117 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by deploying the combined resources of the Metaphorical Account, the Introspective Account, 

the Action Schema Account, the Situational Account, and the Partially Dis-embodied Account. 

At  this  point,  one  might  wonder  whether  the  Simulation  Constraint  does  not  still 

constitute some kind of advantage of the enactivist proposal. Even though cognitivist ELC has 

resources to account for it, the thought runs, perhaps we should nonetheless prefer a theory 

which does not need to appeal to five different accounts in order to explain comprehension, let 

alone 

introducing 

the 

idea 

that  comprehension  admits  of  degrees,  and  other  such 

complications. 

My response to this line of thought is twofold. Firstly, until enactivist ELC is developed 

in more detail, we have no reason for thinking that its story will be any less complex or multi-

faceted.  According  to  enactivist  ELC,  comprehension  is  a  skill.  Therefore,  given  only  the 

plausible assumption that skillfulness admits of degrees, it will also entail that comprehension 

admits  of  degrees.  Further,  suppose  I  am  right  about  direct,  straightforward  sensorimotor 

couplings  being  insufficient  to  account  for  the  diverse and  open-ended  nature  of  the  sets  of 

skilful responses required even by a simple sentence such as  the election will be on May the 

5th. In this case, a fully worked-out enactivist account of comprehension will have to specify the 

nature of the mechanisms involved in generating such sets of responses; and there is certainly 

no  a  priori  reason  to  think  that  such  mechanisms  will be  more  simple  than  the  five  different 

accounts of comprehension recruited by the cognitivist version of ELC which I am defending. 

Secondly, even if enactivist ELC enjoys some advantage with respect to the Simulation 

Constraint, it is hard to imagine that this will outweigh the disadvantage which accrues to it by 

virtue of its rejection of mental representations. Of course, one can reasonably quarrel about 

the nature of such representations, and that is what I have been doing for most of this thesis. 

But  when  we  consider  the  undeniable  human  ability  to  generate  indefinitely  many  kinds  of 

behavior  which  relate  sensibly  to  the  content  of  sentences  they  have  heard  and  understood 

118 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decades earlier and continents distant, we should be dismayed by the prospect of attempting to 

explain  this  ability  by  abandoning  the  idea  that  our  brains—somehow  or  other—genuinely 

represent the world as being the way sentences describe it to be. 

Conclusion 

Neither the Simulation Constraint nor the Necessity Question  shows that we should abandon 

cognitivist ELC in favour of enactivist ELC. The argument from the Simulation Constraint can 

readily  be  answered  by  pointing  to  the  resources  developed  in  chapter  4  to  account  for  the 

comprehension of abstract and other language describing things we have not experienced. And 

the  Necessity  Question  is  only  a  problem  for  cognitivist  ELC  if  one  saddles  the  latter  with 

assumptions about language which are directly contradictory to its stated principles. Cognitivist 

ELC is very well-equipped to account for the flexible and context-sensitive nature of language; 

perhaps better equipped than the enactivist view, when we consider the difficulties engendered 

by rejecting mental representations as explanatory posits. Therefore, we should retain the idea 

that language comprehension consists of the construction of sensorimotor simulations. 

119 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Conclusion and Future Directions 

The ELC vs. Amodal Debate 

It is now time to return to our original question: how do we understand words and sentences? 

We have seen many good reasons to believe the answer that our brains perform the task of 

converting  perceived  symbolic  forms  into  meaningful  thoughts  by  generating  sensorimotor 

simulations. 

In chapter 2, we saw that, without ignoring its historical antecedents, this claim can and 

should be distinguished from various others made by theorists in the 4E Cognition movement. 

We  can  hold  that  understanding  is  simulating  without  abandoning  mental  representations; 

without explaining cognition purely in dynamical systems terms; without holding that the mind 

extends beyond the brain; and so forth. The task of assessing the arguments and evidence for 

and against ELC was made much more tractable by considering the position on its own merits. 

Chapter 3 gave us a good sense of the strength and richness of the theoretical and 

empirical  case  for  ELC.  Barsalou‟s  theory  of  PSS,  in  particular,  provides  an  indispensable 

theoretical background, including its technical definition of simulation as the activation of more-

or-less 

schematic 

sensorimotor 

representations—with 

or  without 

accompanying 

phenomenology—and  its  characterization  of  simulators  as  mechanisms  integrating  our 

knowledge  about  categories  from  various  modalities.  Meanwhile,  empirical  findings  from 

neuroscience show close relationships in both directions between performance in conceptual 

tasks  and  activity  in  modality-specific  brain  regions,  while  psychological  experiments  reveal 

systematic  interrelationships  between  performance  on  conceptual  tasks  and  sensorimotor 

variables. 

120 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With the framework of PSS established, we examined the details of two different ELC 

theories.  The  first  of  these  was  Glenberg‟s  IH,  with  its  emphasis  on  affordances  and  action 

(which  I  argued  needs  refinement)  and  its  three  stages  of  indexing  words  to  perceptual 

symbols,  deriving  affordances  from  those  symbols,  and  meshing  the  affordances  into  a 

simulation. The second was Zwaan‟s IEF, with its three overlapping, mutually modifying stages 

of Activation, Construal, and Integration, reflecting the dynamic and temporally unfolding nature 

of  comprehension.  Consistently  encouraging results  have  been  found  by  behavioural  studies 

aimed  at  testing  these  theories—among  them  the  Action,  Appearance,  and  Affordance 

Compatibility Effects. 

In the final section of chapter 3, I distinguished two different dimensions along which 

interpretations  of  ELC  could  vary.  When  we  disambiguate  the  claim  that  „understanding  is 

simulating‟,  we  can  construe  the  term  „simulating‟  in  three  different  possible  ways.  It  could 

minimally mean the activation of sensorimotor representations, as in Barsalou; or it could mean 

the construction of a full-blown situation model, as in Zwaan; or it could mean the construction 

of a full-blown situation model incorporating information about affordances and actions, as in 

Glenberg.  Further,  however  we  construe  „simulating‟, we  can  ask—as  Weiskopf  points  out—

whether    simulating  in  the  relevant  sense  is  constitutive  of  all  or  some  instances  of 

comprehension, or a mere unnecessary aid to all or some instances. 

With this logical geography in mind, chapter 4 took us on a tour of alleged advantages 

of the amodal view. I argued that ELC has ample resources to account for the comprehension 

of abstract language, in the form of the Metaphorical Account, the Introspective Account, the 

Action  Schema  Account,  the  Situational  Account,  and  the  Partially  Dis-embodied  Account. 

Although  adopting  Concept  Pragmatism  does  not  ease  the  explanatory  burden  on  the  ELC 

proponent in the way one might think, the related strategy of incorporating the assumption that 

121 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comprehension admits of degrees does help. It makes the problem of abstraction even more 

tractable, yielding the conclusion that the amodal view enjoys no advantage in this respect. 

As  regards  the  comprehension  of  the  unimaginable  (or  un-simulable),  many  of  the 

same  resources  can  be  recruited  to  account  for  this  as  for  the  comprehension  of  abstract 

language.  Further,  the  minimal  or  truth-conditional  view  of  comprehension  involved  in  this 

objection  does  not  constitute  an  advantage  of  the  amodal  view,  because  there  are  good 

reasons to think that comprehension is a richer phenomenon  than this, a priori considerations 

notwithstanding. Another reason why the minimal view cannot help the amodal theorist here is 

that it faces a dilemma. On one horn, an infinite regress threatens, with language understood in 

terms of linguiform truth conditions which must themselves be understood, and so on. On the 

other horn, comprehension of truth conditions  grounds out in something non-linguiform, such 

as sensorimotor simulation. Finally, any purely syntactic computation of truth conditions can be 

accounted  for  by  Dove‟s  Partial  Dis-embodiment  proposal,  according  to  which  sensorimotor 

representations of natural language mimic many of the properties of an arbitrary symbol system 

without needing to actually postulate an amodal code or LOT. 

The final argument of chapter 4 was essentially a recapitulation of part of Barsalou‟s 

defence of PSS. The amodal view does not enjoy an advantage with respect to the productivity 

and systematicity of thought, because these fall naturally out of the properties of simulators as 

defined  by  Barsalou.  Indefinitely  complex  simulations  can  be  constructed  by  recursively 

applying simulators to one another, and possession of the simulators required to entertain any 

complex  thought  such  as  Mary  loves  John  automatically  provides  the  ability  to  entertain 

systematically related complex thoughts. In short, I argued that the amodal view simply does 

not  have  the  advantages  which  are  claimed  for  it  over  ELC  and  EC,  because  the  latter  two 

views  are  very  well-equipped  to  account  for  our  comprehension  of  the  abstract  and  the 

unimaginable, as well as productivity and systematicity. 

122 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In chapter 5, we looked at the two main alleged advantages of ELC over the amodal 

view: the empirical data concerning embodiment, and the Symbol Grounding Problem (SGP). I 

here endorsed Barsalou‟s argument that, while the amodal view may well be able to account 

for the empirical results, they should be taken as favouring ELC because it  predicts them in a 

principled  fashion.  However,  I  then  argued  that  the  SGP,  properly  understood,  does  not 

constitute an advantage of ELC  as is often claimed. This is because all the resources which 

proponents of EC and ELC deploy to solve the SGP could, as Shapiro argues, equally well be 

used for the grounding of amodal symbols. An open  possibility is that a parsimony argument 

could favour ELC over the amodal view, but this remains to be developed, and depends upon 

the  claim  that  postulating  multi-modal  integration  mechanisms  is  more  parsimonious  than 

positing grounded amodal symbols.  

At this point, the scales look tilted in favour of ELC purely by the weight of the empirical 

evidence. The two rival accounts of language comprehension look pretty evenly matched from 

a  theoretical  perspective—both  can  equally  well  account  for  comprehension  of  abstraction, 

productivity,  systematicity,  symbol  grounding,  and  the  like.  But  predictions  of  the  embodied 

view have been borne out again and again, in a convergent way, in psychology, neuroscience, 

and  linguistics.  Given  the  equality  of  the  two  views  in  other  respects,  the  strength  of  the 

empirical case seems to be a very good reason for believing that ELC is the correct account of 

comprehension. 

Before  concluding,  I  will  briefly  revisit  the  arguments  purporting  to  show  that  the 

empirical evidence does not favour ELC over the amodal view. Deeper consideration of these 

arguments  shows  that  inferring  the  truth  of  ELC  from  the  extant  data  may  not  be  as 

straightforward as Barsalou‟s response suggests. This has implications for the next steps that 

should be taken in the debate over ELC. 

123 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Theory Comparison Issues and Directions for Future Research 

Recall the argument Adams (2010) gave in relation to the data: The data cannot be taken as a 

straightforward confirmation of ELC or as a falsification of the amodal view because they are 

consistent  with  the  amodal  view.  It  is  coherent,  he  argued,  to  claim  that  comprehension 

consists  of  the  tokening  of  amodal  symbols,  and  that  any  accompanying  sensorimotor 

processing  is  a  mere  contingent  causal  consequence,  subsequent  to  and  distinct  from  the 

comprehension process itself. 

In response to this argument, I conceded that such a claim is indeed coherent and that 

the  data  therefore  do  not  conclusively  falsify  the  amodal  view  or  prove  the  truth  of  ELC. 

However,  I  suggested  that  the  best  way  to  argue  for  ELC  is  by  an  inference  to  the  best 

explanation, and echoed Barsalou‟s contention that ELC gains a significant advantage over the 

amodal  view  by  predicting  the  empirical  results  in  a  principled  way,  while  the  amodal  view 

merely accommodates them post-hoc. 

However,  in  the  course  of  making  a  similar  argument  to  Adams‟,  Mahon  and 

Caramazza  (2008)  explicitly  and  forcefully  argue  that  the  amodal  view  does  not  merely 

accommodate the results post-hoc. They point out that there are many extant amodal theories 

of  language  comprehension,  and  so  there  is  never  any  such  thing  as  „the‟  unique  amodal 

prediction.  Rather,  different  amodal  theories  will  yield  different  empirical  predictions,  so  it 

always  needs  to  be  specified  which  theories  are  being  compared.  Having  made  this  point, 

Mahon  and  Caramazza  sketch  the  outline  of  an  amodal  theory  of  conception  and 

comprehension which they say does predict the empirical findings in a principled way. In brief, 

their theory—which they call the hypothesis of “grounding by interaction” (2008, p.67)—claims 

that  abstract,  symbolic,  amodal  representations  do  exist,  and  constitute  the  representational 

vehicles  accessed  in  comprehension  and  conception.  However,  it  also  claims  that  these 

124 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amodal  representations  serve,  like  Barsalou‟s  simulators,  to  integrate  information  about 

categories from different sensorimotor modalities, and to activate this sensorimotor information 

on  specific  occasions  for  functional  purposes.  This  theory  holds  that  the  sensorimotor 

processing  which  occurs  during  comprehension  is  the  result  of  activation  spreading  from 

amodal conceptual representations to sensorimotor regions. 

The  existence  of  a  coherent  theory  which  holds  that  comprehension  consists  in  the 

tokening of amodal symbols, but which also predicts systematic two-way interactions between 

comprehension  and  sensorimotor  processing,  is  troubling  for  my  argument.  It  raises  the 

possibility that the kind of empirical evidence I have discussed—on which my entire case now 

rests—does not support an inference to the truth of ELC at all. 

There  are  four  things  I  want  to  say  about  this  development.  First,  even  if  the  extant 

evidence does not discriminate between ELC and amodal theories, I have still shown at least 

that ELC is at no theoretical disadvantage with respect to its rivals. Systematically detailing the 

rich resources with which it can account for the comprehension of abstraction and other such 

phenomena, as I did in chapter 4, is a major step forward in the development of the embodied 

approach to language. It may be that further such steps will ultimately tip the scales in favour of 

ELC  on  theoretical  grounds,  even  if  the  issue  cannot  be  settled  on  the  basis  of  the  current 

evidence. 

Second,  one  theoretical  move  which  might  tip  the  scales  is  the  development  of  a 

parsimony argument for ELC, as I briefly suggested in chapter 5. Barsalou (1999) and Prinz 

(2002)  deploy  parsimony  arguments  for  EC/ELC,  and  their  efforts  could  be  extended.  In 

particular, as I mentioned in chapter 5, this would require exploring the issue of the multimodal 

integration  mechanisms  which  ELC  is  forced  to  posit.  If  amodal  theories  are  forced  to  posit 

distinct  integration  mechanisms  in  addition  to  their  amodal  symbols,  then  ELC—which  must 

125 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
posit integration mechanisms, but not symbols—may be a more parsimonious theory. This is 

one line of inquiry which could be pursued. 

Third, some of the ELC studies explicitly aim to compare and contrast it with specific 

amodal theories, and the results of these would seem immune from  Mahon and Caramazza‟s 

arguments.  For  example,  Glenberg  and  Robertson  (2000)  set  out  to  test  the  IH  against  the 

statistical amodal models LSA and HAL. They derived certain predictions about meaning and 

sensibility judgements from LSA/HAL, and distinct predictions from the IH. They then  ran the 

experiment and found that the results were as predicted by the IH. Of course, it is possible to 

dispute the details of Glenberg & Robertson‟s derivation of predictions, or interpretation of their 

results (Burgess 2000.) My point is simply that the Mahon and Caramazza arguments do not 

preclude  the  possibility  that  existing  empirical  evidence  shows  specific  ELC  theories  to  be 

superior to specific amodal theories. 

If  this  much  has  been  shown,  then  at  least  one  thing  which  has  been  achieved  by 

research  into  ELC  is  the  identification  of  constraints  on  a  plausible  amodal  theory  of 

comprehension. The amodal approach may not have been shown to be untenable in general, 

but certain forms of it may have. This thought leads directly into my fourth and final point, which 

is this: one fruitful direction for the debate over ELC may be away from the question „can we do 

without postulating an amodal code?‟ and toward the question „what positive contribution might 

sensorimotor simulation make to comprehension?‟ 

A similar suggestion has recently been made by Marghetis and colleagues (Marghetis 

et al, under review.) Starting from the possibility that the current evidence does not discriminate 

between modal and amodal theories of comprehension, they argue that no evidence ever could 

so discriminate, because the modal/amodal dichotomy is ill-conceived and unsustainable. They 

argue that there is no viable characterization of what it is for a representation or system to be 

modal, and that we should therefore abandon questions of representational code or format  in 

126 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
favour  of  questions  about  the  functional  roles  of  neural  circuits:  “Which  neural  circuitry, 

performing  which  functions  for  perception  and  action,  also  serves  what  functional  role(s)  in 

what higher cognitive processes (if any)?” (ibid, p.4.) 

I agree with the spirit of this proposal. The way to move forward is definitely to start 

asking  more  positive  and  functional  questions  about  the  mechanisms  of comprehension.  But 

problems with the „modal vs. amodal‟ question should not lead us to eschew all questions of 

representational  format.  In  particular,  while  Marghetis  et  al  may  be  correct  that  the 

modal/amodal distinction “dissolves at the level of neurons and their functional properties” (ibid, 

p.20)  there  is  a  distinction  of  representational  format  which  does  not:  the  symbolic/analogue 

distinction. 

Very  roughly,  symbolic  representing  vehicles  are  those  which  stand  in  arbitrary 

relations to what they represent, and analogue representing vehicles are those which do not. 

Analogue representations  stand in relations such  as structural resemblance to  their referents 

(Copeland 1993; O‟Brien & Opie 2004.) The debate about the vehicles of comprehension might 

well  be  re-cast  in  analogue  vs.  symbolic  terms,  with  advocates  of  ELC  being,  as  much  as 

anything, concerned with the potential importance of analogue representation to understanding. 

Some  ELC 

theorists  explicitly  hold 

that 

the  perceptual  symbols  underwriting 

comprehension  are  analogically  related  to  their  real-world  referents  (e.g.  Glenberg  1997, 

Stanfield  &  Zwaan  2001.)  Others  are  more  cautious,  claiming  that  perceptual  symbols  are 

analogically  related  to  the  sensorimotor  states  from  which  they  arise,  but  refraining  from 

claiming that the latter stand in any analogical relations to their referents (Barsalou 1999.) 

Long  out  of  favour,  the  idea  that  analogicity  or  resemblance  might  be  the  basis  of 

mental  representation  has  recently  been  making  a  comeback  in  philosophy  (e.g.  O‟Brien  & 

Opie  2004;  Bartels  2006;  Isaac  2012.)  When  discussing  the  Symbol  Grounding  Problem  in 

chapter  5,  I  commented  that  advocates  of  ELC  cannot  assume  the  truth  of  a  resemblance 

127 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theory of mental representation in arguing for their position. That much is true; but perhaps they 

can argue for the truth of such a theory, as others have. ELC and the resemblance theory may 

well be natural allies. Perhaps, with a little more theoretical work, advocates of ELC can make 

a case along roughly these lines: resemblance is the (sole) basis of original meaning or non-

derived  mental  content;  sensorimotor  states  represent  by  resemblance,  while  any  dis-

embodied or disembodied symbols which exist do not; so, any symbols which exist cannot be 

meaningful  except  derivatively,  by  virtue  of  their  connections  with  analogue  (sensorimotor) 

representing vehicles. 

This line of thought suggests that the truth in ELC is not the  rejection of symbols but 

the  insistence  that  symbols  without  sensorimotor  content  are  blind.  As  my  epigraph  from 

Haugeland says, words [symbols] are “merely money” and must be cashed out in goods which 

our  cognitive  systems  can  trade  directly  with  the  environment:  sensorimotor  states  encoding 

the structure or shape of the environment itself and our actions in it. This would apply equally to 

disembodied  or  dis-embodied  representations.  Of  course,  this  is  reminiscent  of  Prinz‟s 

insistence that “if an amodal code exists, it works on credit” (2002, p.137.) If this line of thought 

can be made to work, it will have the consequence that understanding is still simulating, even if 

there is a LOT18. 

There  are  other  positive  ideas  about  the  contribution  of  simulation  to  understanding 

which might be developed, too. Haugeland (1979) and Winograd (1980) developed prescient 

critiques  of  symbolic  accounts  of  natural  language  comprehension,  and  these  critiques  are 

pregnant with suggestions about what sort of features a plausible model of natural language 

comprehension  must  have.  They  emphasize  such  aspects  as  the  holistic  nature  of 

18 This echoes the point I made in discussing Weiskopf‟s „minimal view‟ of comprehension in chapter 
5: even if there is a wholly disembodied conceptual system computing truth-conditional inferences 
from sentences, there is still surely a big difference between merely computing the truth conditions of 
Chomsky‟s „green ideas‟ sentence and computing the truth conditions of „the cat sat on the mat‟ while 
also simulating the kind of perceptual state we would enjoy if things were thus. 

128 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
understanding, the role of common sense, the social and pragmatic aspects of language, and 

the phenomenology of comprehension: 

Much  of  what  we  recognize  as  "making  sense"  is  ...  about  some  (possibly 

unique)  circumstance  or  episode,  which  a  longer  fragment  leads  us  to 

"visualize." Introspectively, it seems that we imagine ourselves into the case, 

and then decide from within it what's plausible. Of course, how this is done is 

just the problem. 

(Haugeland 1979, p.624.) 

I  cannot  develop  these  ideas  here.  But  I  think  they  show  that  Mahon  and  Caramazza‟s 

arguments should be viewed more as a challenge than an objection. The empirical evidence 

may not clearly support ELC in the latter‟s current state of theoretical development. However, 

we  can  be  justifiably  optimistic  that  deeper  examinations  of  the  parsimony  argument,  the 

resemblance theory of mental representation, and other theoretical issues will serve to clarify 

and strengthen the case for simulation as a central constituent of comprehension. 

Conclusion 

It may seem that we have a tie between cognitivist ELC and the amodal view, theoretically and 

empirically. However, I have proposed several promising ways in which the tie might be broken 

in favour of ELC, and suggested that this leaves us still in a position to tentatively endorse the 

theory (while acknowledging the work that remains to be done.) In that case, it is reasonable as 

things  stand  to  believe  that  language  comprehension  is  not  mere  activation  of  disembodied 

LOT  symbols—or,  for  that  matter,  skilful  action  (capacities)  and sensorimotor couplings—but 

the activation of sensorimotor representations to amount to a form of internal simulation.  

129 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before reflecting a little more broadly on this conclusion, we should return to the logical 

geography  I  presented  at  the end  of chapter  3.  Cognitivist  ELC claims  that  understanding  is 

simulating; but simulating in what sense? And „is‟ in what sense? 

Firstly,  the  relevant  sense  of  simulation  must  be  Barsalou‟s  minimal,  technical 

understanding—at least, if „is‟ denotes a universal relationship of necessity or constitution This 

follows  directly  from  my  heavy  reliance  on  the  Partially  Dis-embodied  Account  in  defending 

ELC‟s  ability  to handle  abstraction  and  other  objections.  Probably,  when  we  comprehend  (to 

whatever  extent  we  do)  extremely  abstract  language,  we  are  not  constructing  a  full-blown 

situation  model—not  even  one  sans affordances.  But  I  think  we  are  warranted  in concluding 

that whenever we comprehend any language, to however great or small an extent, a necessary 

constituent  of  that  comprehension  process  is  the  activation  of  more-or-less  schematic 

sensorimotor representations. 

It is also reasonable to think that when we comprehend language more fully or richly, 

especially  language  describing  concrete  objects  and  situations,  the  construction  of  situation 

models often occurs—sometimes incorporating information about affordances. Given that the 

richness  of  the  comprehension  is  partly  a  function  of  the  level  of  detail  being  simulated,  it 

seems  as  though  the  construction  of  such  situation  models,  in  these  kinds  of  cases,  is  a 

genuine  constituent  of  understanding.  So,  all  instances  of  understanding  are  instances  of 

simulating,  at  least  in  the  minimal  sense.  And  many  instances  of  understanding  are  partially 

constituted by—not merely causally related to—instances of simulating in one or another of the 

richer senses.  

Now,  let  us  briefly  return  to  my  central  conclusion:  that  cognitivist  ELC  is  a  better 

explanation of the data than either the amodal view or enactivist ELC. The broader significance 

of  this  is  worth  considering.  This  conclusion  is  in  the  spirit  of  Prinz  and  Barsalou‟s  (2000) 

chapter,  „Steering  a  Course  for  Embodied  Representations‟.  The  course  to  be  steered  runs 

130 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between  two  untenable  extremes.  One  of  these—the  amodal  view—amounts  to  explaining 

away  the  intimate  relationships  between conceptual  and  linguistic  thought,  on  the  one hand, 

and sensorimotor processing, on the other, as a mere causal, contingent epiphenomenon, and 

claiming  that  the  stuff  of  thought  is  a  representational  code  completely  distinct  and  divorced 

from all of our perceptual and bodily encounters with the world and with natural languages. The 

other untenable extreme—the radical thesis of enactivism—amounts to denying that our skilful, 

flexible,  and  open-ended  engagement  with  the  world  is  best  explained  by  our  ability  to 

represent  the  world  as  being  certain  ways  rather  than  others,  and  by  our  ability  to  simulate 

objects, properties, and events in their absence. 

ELC,  along  with  the  simulation-based  „cognitivist‟  form  of  EC  more  generally—as 

embodied in Barsalou‟s theory of PSS and Prinz‟s Concept Empiricism—allows us the best of 

both  worlds.  It  does  justice  to  the  rich  and  deep  connections  between  thinking  and  doing, 

without  rejecting  the  immeasurable  explanatory  purchase  to  be  gained  by  positing  the 

existence of mental representations. Understanding is not doing; it is thinking. But thinking is 

simulating, and is inextricably tied to our nature as situated, acting beings. 

131 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bibliography 

Adams, F. (2010). Embodied cognition. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 

9(4), 619-628. 

Adams, F. & K. Aizawa (2001). The bounds of cognition. Philosophical Psychology 

14(1), 43-64. 

Anderson, M.L. (2003). Embodied cognition: a field guide. Artificial Intelligence 149, 

91-130. 

Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 

22(4), 577-660. 

Barsalou, L.W. (2003). Abstraction in perceptual symbol systems. Philosophical 

Transactions: Biological Sciences 358(1435), 1177-1187. 

Barsalou, L.W., W.K. Simmons, A.K. Barbey & C.D. Wilson (2003). Grounding 
conceptual knowledge in modality-specific systems. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 7(2), 84-91. 

Barsalou, L.W. & K. Wiemer-Hastings (2005). Situating abstract concepts. In D. 

Pecher & R.A. Zwaan (eds.) Grounding Cognition: The Role of Perception and 
Action in Memory, Language and Thinking. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Bartels, A. (2006). Defending the structural concept of representation. Theoria 55, 7-

19. 

Bergen, B.K. & N. Chang (2005). Embodied construction grammar in simulation-

based language understanding. In J. Östman & M. Fried (eds.) Construction 
Grammars: Cognitive grounding and theoretical extensions. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 

Borghi, A.M., A.M. Glenberg & M.P. Kaschak (2004). Putting words in perspective. 

Memory & Cognition 32(6), 863-873. 

Boroditsky, L. & M. Ramscar (2002). The role of body and mind in abstract thought. 

Psychological Science 13(2), 185-189. 

Brooks, R. (1991a). Intelligence without representation. Artificial Intelligence 47(1-3), 

139-159. 

Brooks, R. (1991b). New approaches to robotics. Science 253(5025), 1227-1232. 

Burgess, C. (2000). Theory and operational definitions in computational memory 

models: a response to Glenberg and Robertson. Journal of Memory and 
Language 43(3), 402-408. 

132 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Burgess, C. & K. Lund (1997). Modelling parsing constraints with high-dimensional 

context space. Language and Cognitive Processes 12, 177-210. 

Carruthers, P. (2011). The Opacity of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts: good and bad in right- and 
left-handers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 138(3), 351, 367. 

Chalmers, D.J. (1989). Why Fodor and Pylyshyn were wrong: the simplest refutation. 
Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science 
Society, 340-347. 

Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton. 

Chomsky, N. (1959). Verbal behaviour by B.F. Skinner. Language 35(1), 26-58. 

Church, A. (1936). A note on the Entscheidungsproblem. Journal of Symbolic Logic 

1(1), 40-41. 

Clark, A. (1993). Associative Engines: Connectionism, Concepts, and 
Representational Change. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 

Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body and World Together Again. 

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 

Clark, A. (2001). Mindware: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Cognitive Science. 

New York: Oxford University Press. 

Clark, A. & D. Chalmers (1998). The extended mind. Analysis 58(1), 7-19. 

Copeland, J. (1993). Artificial Intelligence: A Philosophical Introduction. Oxford: 

Blackwell. 

Cummins, R. (1996). Systematicity. The Journal of Philosophy 93(12), 591-614. 

Cummins, R. (1996). Representations, Targets, and Attitudes. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 

Press. 

Davidson, D. (1967). Truth and meaning. Synthese 17, 304-323. 

De Jaegher, H. (2009). Social understanding through direct perception? Yes, by 

interacting. Consciousness and Cognition 18(2), 535-542.  

Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 

Press. 

Dreyfus, H.L. (1972). What Computers Can‟t Do. New York: Harper & Row. 

Dove, G. (2011). On the need for embodied and dis-embodied cognition. Frontiers in 

Psychology 1(242), 1-13. 

133 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flusberg, S.J., P.H. Thibodeau, D.A. Sternberg & J.J. Glick (2010). A connectionist 

approach to embodied conceptual metaphor. Frontiers in Psychology 1(197), 1-
11. 

Fodor, J. (1976). The Language of Thought. Sussex: Harvester. 

Fodor, J. (2004). Having concepts: a brief refutation of the twentieth century. Mind 

and Language 19(1), 29-47. 

Fodor, J.A. (2008). LOT 2: The Language of Thought Revisited. Oxford: Clarendon. 

Fodor, J.A. & Z.W. Pylyshyn (1988). Connectionism and cognitive architecture: a 

critical analysis. Cognition 28(1), 3-71. 

Gallagher, S. (2005). How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford: Clarendon. 

Gallagher, S. (2008). Direct perception in the intersubjective context. Consciousness 

and Cognition 17(2), 535-543. 

Gallese, V. & A. Goldman (1998). Mirror neurons and simulation theory of mind-

reading. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2(12), 493-501. 

Gallese, V. & G. Lakoff (2005). The brain‟s concepts: the role of the sensory-motor 

system in conceptual knowledge. Cognitive Neuropsychology 25, 1-25. 

Gardner, H. (1985). The Mind‟s New Science: A History of the Cognitive Revolution. 

New York: Basic Books. 

Gibbs, R.W. Jr. (1996). Why many concepts are metaphorical. Cognition 61, 309-319. 

Gibson, J.J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton 

Mifflin. 

Glenberg, A.M. (1997). What memory is for. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 

20(1), 1-55. 

Glenberg, A.M. (2007). Language and action: creating sensible combinations of ideas. 
In G. Gaskell (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Psycholinguistics, 361-370. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

Glenberg, A.M., D. Havas, R. Becker & M. Rinck (2005). Grounding language in 

bodily states: the case for emotion. In D. Pecher & R.A. Zwaan (eds.) 
Grounding Cognition: The Role of Perception and Action in Memory, 
Language and Thinking 115-128. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Glenberg, A.M. & M.P. Kaschak (2002). Grounding language in action. Psychonomic 

Bulletin & Review 9(3), 558-565. 

134 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glenberg, A.M. & D.A. Robertson (1999). Indexical understanding of instructions. 

Discourse Processes 28(1), 1-26. 

Glenberg, A.M. & D.A. Robertson (2000). Symbol grounding and meaning: a 

comparison of high-dimensional and embodied theories of meaning. Journal of 
Memory and Language 43(3), 379-401. 

Glenberg, A.M., M. Sato, L. Cattaneo, L. Riggio, D. Palumbo & G. Buccino (2008). 

Processing abstract language modulates motor system activity. Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology 61(6), 905-919. 

Haugeland, J. (1979). Understanding natural language. The Journal of Philosophy 

76(11), 619-632. 

Haugeland, J. (1985). Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 

Press. 

Haugeland, J. (1998). Mind embodied and embedded. In J. Haugeland, Having 

Thought: Essays in the Metaphysics of Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press. 

Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem. Physica D 42(1-3), 335-346.  

Horst, S. (2011). The computational theory of mind. In E. Zalta (ed.) The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2011 Edition), accessed 18 Jan 2013. 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2011/entries/computational-mind/>. 

Isaac, A.M.C. (2012). Objective similarity and mental representation. Australasian 

Journal of Philosophy, forthcoming. 

Joyce, D.W., L.V. Richards, A. Cangelosi & K.R. Coverntry (2003). On the 

foundations of Perceptual Symbol Systems: specifying embodied 
representations via connectionism. In F. Detje, D. Dörner, & H. Schaub 
(eds.),The Logic of Cognitive Systems: Proceedings of the Fifth Annual 
Conference on Cognitive Modeling, 147-152. Bamberg: Universitätsverlag 
Bamberg. 

Kaschak, M.P. & A.M. Glenberg (2000). Constructing meaning: the role of 

affordances and grammatical constructions in sentence comprehension. Journal 
of Memory and Language 43(3), 508-529. 

Kiverstein, J. & A. Clark (2009). Introduction: mind embodied, embedded, enacted: 

one church or many? Topoi 28, 1-7. 

Knott, A. (2012). Sensorimotor Cognition and Natural Language Syntax. Cambridge, 

Mass.: MIT Press. 

Lakoff, G. & M. Johnson (1980a). The metaphorical structure of the human 

conceptual system. Cognitive Science 4(2), 195-208. 

135 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lakoff, G. & M. Johnson (1980b.) Conceptual metaphor in everyday language. The 

Journal of Philosophy 77(8), 453-486. 

Lakoff, G. & M. Johnson (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh. New York: Basic Books. 

Landauer, T.K. & S.T. Dumais (1997). A solution to Plato‟s problem: the Latent 
Semantic Analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of 
knowledge. Psychological Review 104(2), 211-240. 

Letheby, C. (2012). In defence of embodied cognition: a reply to Fred Adams. 

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 11(3), 403-414. 

Louwerse, M. (2011). Symbol interdependency in symbolic and embodied cognition. 

Topics in Cognitive Science 3(2), 273-302. 

Mahon, B.Z. & A. Caramazza (2008). A critical look at the embodied cognition 

hypothesis and a new proposal for grounding conceptual content. Journal of 
Physiology-Paris 102(1), 59-70. 

Marghetis, T., T. Davenport, R. Metusalem & B. Bergen (under review). From format 

to function: embodiment and the functional roles of neural circuits. 

McCarthy, J. & P.J. Hayes (1969). Some philosophical problems from the standpoint 

of artificial intelligence. Machine Intelligence 4, 463-502. 

Menary, R. (2010). Introduction to the special issue on 4E cognition. Phenomenology 

and the Cognitive Sciences 9(4), 459-463. 

Newell, A. & H.A. Simon (1976). Computer science as empirical inquiry: symbols 

and search. Communications of the ACM 19(3), 113-126. 

Norman, D.A. (1980). Twelve issues for cognitive science. Cognitive Science 4(1), 1-

32. 

Noë, A. (2009). Conscious reference. The Philosophical Quarterly 59(236), 470-482. 

O‟Brien, G. & J. Opie (2002). Radical connectionism: thinking with (not in) language. 

Language and Communication 22(3), 313-329. 

O‟Brien, G. & J. Opie (2004). Notes towards a structuralist theory of mental 

representation. In H. Clapin, P. Staines & P. Slezak (eds.) Representation in 
Mind: New Approaches to Mental Representation, 1-20. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 

O‟Regan, J.K. & A. Noë (2001). A sensorimotor account of vision and visual 
consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24, 939-1031. 

Pecher, D., R. Zeelenberg & L.W. Barsalou (2003). Verifying different-modality 

properties for concepts produces switching costs. Psychological Science 14(2), 
119-124. 

136 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pezzulo, G., L.W. Barsalou, A. Cangelosi, M.H. Fischer, K. McRae & M.J. Spivey 
(2011). The mechanics of embodiment: a dialog on embodiment and 
computational modelling. Frontiers in Psychology 2(5), 1-21. 

Prinz, J.J. (2002). Furnishing the Mind: Concepts and their Perceptual Basis. 

Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. 

Prinz, J.J. (2004). Gut Reactions: A Perceptual Theory of Emotion. New York: Oxford 

University Press. 

Prinz, J.J. (2005). Passionate thoughts: the emotional embodiment of moral concepts. 
In D. Pecher & R.A. Zwaan (eds.) Grounding Cognition: The Role of 
Perception and Action in Memory, Language and Thinking, 93-114. New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 

Prinz, J.J. & L.W. Barsalou (2000). Steering a course for embodied representation. In 
E. Dietrich & A. Markman (eds.) Cognitive Dynamics: Conceptual Change in 
Humans and Machines, 51-77. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 

Prinz, J. & A. Clark (2004). Putting concepts to work: some thoughts for the 

twentyfirst century. Mind and Language 19(1), 57-69. 

Pulvermüller, F. (1999). Words in the brain‟s language. The Behavioral and Brain 

Sciences 22, 253-336. 

Samuel, A.L. (1959). Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. 

IBM Journal of Research and Development 3, 210-229. 

Schwitzgebel, E. (2008). The unreliability of naive introspection. Philosophical 

Review 117(2), 245-273. 

Searle, J. (1980). Minds, brains, and programs. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 

3(3), 417-457. 

Sejnowski, T.J. & C.R. Rosenberg (1987). Parallel networks that learn to pronounce 

English text. Complex Systems 1(1), 145-168. 

Shapiro, L. (2007). Symbolism, embodied cognition, and the broader debate. In M. de 
Vega, A.M. Glenberg & A.C. Graesser (eds.) Symbols and Embodiment: 
Debates on Meaning and Cognition, 57-74. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Shapiro, L. (2007). The embodied cognition research programme. Philosophy 

Compass 2(2), 338-346. 

Shapiro, L. (2011). Embodied Cognition. Oxford: Routledge. 

Shortliffe, E.H. & B.G. Buchanan (1975). A model of inexact reasoning in medicine. 

Mathematical Biosciences 23(3-4), 351-379. 

137 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simon, H.A. & A. Newell (1958). Heuristic problem solving: the next advance in 

operations research. Operations Research 6(1), 1-10. 

Skinner, B.F. (1957). Verbal Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 

Stanfield, R.A. & R.A. Zwaan (2001). The effect of implied orientation derived from 
verbal context on picture recognition. Psychological Science 12(2), 153-156. 

Tienson, J.L. (1988). An introduction to connectionism. Southern Journal of 

Philosophy 26(supplement), 1-16. 

Turing, A.M. (1936). On computable numbers, with an application to the 

Entscheidungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 
2(42), 230-265. 

Turing, A.M. (1950). Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind 59(236), 433-460. 

Van Elk, M., M. Slors & H. Bekkering (2010). Embodied language comprehension 

requires an enactivist paradigm of cognition. Frontiers in Psychology 1(234), 
1-9. 

Van Gelder, T. (1995). What might cognition be, if not computation? The Journal of 

Philosophy 92(7), 345-381. 

Van Gelder, T. (1998). The dynamical hypothesis in cognitive science. The Behavioral 

and Brain Sciences 21, 615-665. 

Varela, F., E. Thompson & E. Rosch (1991). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science 

and Human Experience. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 

Weiskopf, D.A. (2010). Embodied cognition and linguistic comprehension. Studies in 

History and Philosophy of Science 41(3), 294-304. 

Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & 

Review 9(4), 625-636. 

Winograd, T. (1972). Understanding Natural Language. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 

University Press. 

Winograd, T. (1980). What does it mean to understand language? Cognitive Science 

4(3), 209-241. 

Zwaan, R.A. (2004). The immersed experience: toward an embodied theory of 

language comprehension. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation 44, 35-
62. 

Zwaan, R.A., R.A. Stanfield & R.H. Yaxley (2002). Language comprehenders 

mentally represent the shapes of objects. Psychological Science 13(2), 168-
171. 

138 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
