Słowik, Oskar; Sawicki, Adam
Calculable lower bounds on the eﬃciency of universal sets of quantum gates.
(cid:3)
Zbl 07660813
(cid:2)
J. Phys. A, Math. Theor. 56, No. 11, Article ID 115304, 20 p. (2023)

(cid:0)
(cid:1)

(English)

Summary: Currently available quantum computers, so called Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum devices,
are characterized by relatively low number of qubits and moderate gate ﬁdelities. In such scenario, the
implementation of quantum error correction is impossible and the performance of those devices is quite
modest. In particular, the depth of circuits implementable with reasonably high ﬁdelity is limited, and
the minimization of circuit depth is required. Such depths depend on the eﬃciency of the universal set of
gates S used in computation, and can be bounded using the Solovay-Kitaev theorem. However, it is known
that much better, asymptotically tight bounds of the form O(log(ϵ−1)), can be obtained for speciﬁc S.
Those bounds are controlled by so called spectral gap, denoted gap(S). Yet, the computation of gap(S)
is not possible for general S and in practice one considers spectral gap at a certain scale r(ϵ), denoted
gapr(S). This turns out to be suﬃcient to bound the eﬃciency of S provided that one is interested in a
physically feasible case, in which an error ε is bounded from below. In this paper we derive lower bounds
on gapr(S) and, as a consequence, on the eﬃciency of universal sets of d-dimensional quantum gates
S satisfying an additional condition. The condition is naturally met for generic quantum gates, such as
e.g. Haar random gates. Our bounds are explicit in the sense that all parameters can be determined by
numerical calculations on existing computers, at least for small d. This is in contrast with known lower
bounds on gapr(S) which involve parameters with ambiguous values.
MSC:

81-XX Quantum theory
68-XX Computer science

Keywords:

spectral gap; averaging operators; t-designs; quantum gates eﬃciency; quantum gates; quantum circuits;
quantum computing

Full Text: DOI arXiv

Edited by FIZ Karlsruhe, the European Mathematical Society and the Heidelberg Academy of Sciences and Humanities
Page 1
© 2023 FIZ Karlsruhe GmbH

