The straw man of quantum physics 
Peter Morgan 
Physics Department, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. 

One-sentence  summary:  The  violation  of  Bell  inequalities  rules  out  the  straw  man  class  of  classical  particle 
property models but leaves untouched the more significant class of classical random field models. 

Abstract: The violation of Bell inequalities by experiment has convinced physicists that we cannot maintain a classical view of the 
world.  When  we  argue  against  the  possibility  of  local  realist  hidden-variable  models,  however,  the  ubiquitous  requirement  of 
realism,  that  “measurement  results  depend  on  pre-existing  properties  of  objects  that  are  independent  of  the  measurement”××××, 
reduces classical theory to a straw man. When our most successful physical theories have been field theories for well over a century, 
and probabilistic for almost as long, the proper comparison is between quantum fields and random fields, for which there are no 
sharply  defined  objects  and  no  properties,  so  that  realism  is  inapplicable.  If  we  model  quantum  fluctuations  explicitly,  we  can 
construct random field models as alternatives to quantum field models. 

Bell's  first  construction  of  an  inequality  that 
must  be  satisfied  by  a  local  realistic  theory1 
was refined to apply to classical field theories 
by  considering  probability  densities  for 
events  which  occur  in  spatially  separated 
regions  of  space-time2,  with  a  few  tricky 
issues  tidied  up  later3.  Bell  emphasizes  his 
belief  that  this  argument  applies  to  classical 
fields, not just to particle property models, in 
Ref.  4.  Essentially5, 
the 
observations of a classical field that we make 
now to be rather unusual — in the sense that 
local realistic hidden-variable  models cannot 
account for them — the classical field would 
also have to be rather unusual in the past. It is 
usually said, pejoratively, that a “conspiracy” 
is  required,  however  classical  local  field 
models are possible, it is just that the past has 
to be unusual for the present to be unusual. 

in  order 

for 

is 

for 

field, 

adequate 

it  does  not 

A  straightforward  classical  field  theory  is 
not  mathematically  adequate  for  modern 
include 
physics  because 
probabilities,  which are  needed  to  model  the 
statistics  of  experimental 
results.  Bell 
introduces,  in  Ref.  2,  what  he  calls  a  theory 
of  “beables”,  which  he  supposes  to  be  a 
classical  statistical  theory;  however,  a  well-
defined  elementary  mathematical  object,  a 
random 
his 
mathematical  needs  and  does  not  have  any 
awkward 
connotations.  A 
random  field  is  an  indexed  set  of  random 
variables,  the  elementary  building  blocks  of 
mathematical  probability  theory.  The  index 
set  can  be  as  simple  as  {1,2},  representing 
two  dice,  say,  but  the  physically  interesting 
case  is  an  index  set  of  functions  on  space-
time,  which  gives  us  a  continuous  random 
field.  A  quantum  field  can  be  presented as  a 
set  of  measurement  operators  indexed  by  a 
set of functions on space-time; following that 
lead,  a  continuous  random  field  can  be 
presented as a commutative quantum field. 

ontological 

There  is  a  substantial  logical  difference 
between  a  local  random  field  model  and  a 
local  realistic  hidden-variable  model.  For  a 
local random field model, each measurement 
event  is  determined  by  the  physical  state  of 
the  whole  experimental  apparatus,  whereas 
for  a  local  realistic  hidden-variable  model 
measurement  results  are  determined  by  a 
point  source  from  which  two  objects  are 
transmitted.  There  are  no  sharply  defined 

pre-existing  objects  and  properties  in  a 
random  field  model  to  cause  measurement 
events and correlations between them, which 
are  instead  caused  by  correlations  of  the 
random  field  and  the  detailed  statistical 
mechanics of the experimental apparatus and 
the  actions  and  reactions  between  them.  A 
continuous random field model  is contextual 
experimental 
the  whole 
just  because 
apparatus must be modeled. 

observe,  but  also  what  statistics  of  other 
measurement results we would observe if we 
were  to  make  different  measurements,  at 
earlier  times,  which  would  always  prefigure 
the  actual  measurement  statistics  we  obtain. 
Hence,  unusual  statistics  of  measurement 
results now no less entail unusual statistics of 
measurement  results  in  the  past  and  in  the 
future for a quantum field model than they do 
for a classical random field model. 

of 

part 

untenable7, 

in  a  detailed  model, 

If  the  unusual  past  that  is  required  is 
thought  unreasonable,  then  quantum  field 
theory  has  the  same  problem.  Suppose  we 
construct  a  quantum  field  state  that  models 
the  whole  of  an  experimental  apparatus  that 
violates  Bell  inequalities  and  operators  that 
model  statistics  of  the  experimental  results. 
For a sophisticated experiment such as that of 
Weihs et al.6, which satisfies most physicists 
that local realistic hidden-variable models are 
essentially 
the 
experimental  results  are  the  settings  of  the 
polarizers that determine what measurements 
are  made; 
the 
measurement 
settings  are  measurement 
results, manifestly so in the case of Weihs et 
al.'s  experiment,  and  should  be  modeled  as 
that  are  more 
well  as  measurements 
obviously  called  “results”.  It  may  seem 
excessive to require of a quantum model that 
the measurement apparatus must be modeled 
as well as the system that is measured, when 
the 
a  simple  appeal 
experiment  and  some  standard  quantum 
mechanical  calculations  yield  quite  good 
agreement  with  experiment,  but  a  detailed 
model of the thermodynamics of detectors is 
a necessary aim of quantum field theory if it 
is  to  be  taken  seriously  as  a  more-or-less 
universal  theory.  Such  a  requirement  is 
expressed,  for  example,  by  Feynman  and 
Hibbs, 

to  symmetries  of 

“The  usual  separation  of  observer  and 
observed  which  is  now  needed  in 
analyzing  measurements  in  quantum 
mechanics 
really  be 
should  not 
necessary,  or  at  least  should  be  even 
more thoroughly analyzed. What seems 
to be needed is the statistical mechanics 
of amplifying apparatus” 8. 

Once we construct a quantum field state for a 
complete  experiment,  it  models  not  only 
statistics  of  the  measurement  results  we 

is 

that 

One concern that Bell and some subsequent 
authors  have  emphasized 
the 
experimenter  should  be  able  to  make  free 
choices  of  what  measurements  will  be  made 
(although  many  physicists  react  strongly 
against  the  idea  that  an  effective  physical 
model  should  be  required  to  include  the 
experimenter). Classical deterministic models 
for biological systems might prevent the free 
will  of  the  experimenter,  but  a  model  of 
statistical  measures  of 
the  choices  an 
experimenter  makes  does  not  impinge  on 
their  free  will  for  each  individual  choice.  In 
any  case,  a  comprehensive  quantum  field 
inequality-violating 
model 
for 
statistics 
experiment  models 
of 
the 
measurement  settings  — 
the  polarizer 
settings  in  Weihs  et  al.'s  experiment  —  no 
more  or  less  than  a  random  field  model 
(which,  recall,  can  be  presented  as  a 
commutative  quantum field), so again this is 
a problem for a quantum field model as much 
as for a random field model. 

a  Bell 

is 

from 

significant 

invariance, 

An  important  feature  of  random  field 
models  for  experiments  in  which  quantum 
effects  are 
the  natural 
appearance  of  quantum  fluctuations.  In  the 
random  field  context  quantum  fluctuations 
are  differentiated  in  a  fundamental  way,  by 
Lorentz 
thermal 
fluctuations9.  The  amplitude  of  quantum 
is  determined  by  Planck's 
fluctuations 
constant,  just  as  the  amplitude  of  thermal 
fluctuations is determined by temperature. A 
fundamental  consequence  of  the  explicit 
presence  of  quantum  fluctuations 
in  a 
random  field  formalism  is  the  concept  of  a 
thermodynamic  dual  of  the  amplitude  of 
quantum  fluctuations,  analogously  to  the 
concept  of entropy as a thermodynamic dual 
of  the  amplitude  of  thermal  fluctuations;  the 
interplay of quantum and thermal entropy is 
accounted for implicitly in existing physical 

 
The straw man of quantum physics 

Random  fields.  We  cannot  in  general 
measure  a  quantum  field  or  a  continuous 
random field at a point unless we are willing 
to  talk  in  mathematically  undefined  terms 
—  when  we  could  say  that  the  field  at  a 
point  is  almost  always  ±∞  —  but  we  can 
measure  the  field  averaged  over  a  small 
region of space-time, with a weight function 
f,  to  give  a  set  of  operators  Φf  indexed  by 
weight  functions  (which  are  called  test 
functions).  These  weighted  averages  of 
field  values  that  can  loosely  be  thought  of 
as ±∞ at a point are finite [more properly, Φ 
is  a  linear  functional  of  test  functions  f  to 
operators  Φf  ;  there  is  no  infinite  field  at  a 
point  in  the  theory,  there  are  only  finite 
observations  of  Φf ]. 
  The  essential 
difference  between  a  quantum  field  and  a 
continuous  random  field,  from  which  all 
other  differences  follow,  is  that  Φf  and  Φg, 
for  different  test  functions  f  and  g,  may  be 
incompatible  observables  for  a  quantum 
field  but  are  always  compatible  for  a 
continuous random field. This difference of 
incompatibility  or  compatibility  of  measure-
ments  is  significant  and  is  the  basis  of  a 
long-running  critique  of  the  idea  that  the 
violation  of  Bell 
is  about 
locality10,11,12. 

inequalities 

arguments  in  the  quantum  field  context, 
whereas  the  interplay  must  be  explicit  in  a 
random field formalism. Random fields have 
a general requirement to model the effects of 
quantum fluctuations explicitly, which can be 
alternately useful or a hindrance. No-one will 
stop  using  quantum  fields  and  quantum 
mechanics whenever that is  easier to do, but 
we  can  understand  quantum 
theory  by 
relationship  between 
understanding 
quantum  fields  and  classical  random  fields, 
which 
the 
relationship between quantum mechanics and 
classical particle property models. 

than  understanding 

is  easier 

the 

as 

apparatus” 

We  should  think  of  Feynman  and  Hibbs’ 
sensitive 
“amplifying 
apparatus,  not  as  detection  or  measurement 
devices  or  apparatus:  it  is  by  now  well-
established  that  we  are  best  not  to  think  in 
terms  of  systems,  objects,  or  particles  that 
exist independently and can be “detected” or 
“measured”.  A  “sensitive  apparatus”  is  a 
thermodynamic  system  that  is  delicately 
engineered  in  a  rest,  metastable  state,  ready 
to  a  different, 
to  make  a 
precipitated  state 
that  can  be  observed 
macroscopically.  Even  when  the  sensitive 
apparatus is completely isolated, there will be 
a  “dark-rate”  of  thermodynamic  transitions; 
when  the  sensitive  apparatus  is  placed  near 
other  experimental  apparatus,  the  average 
rate and other statistics of the transitions will 
change,  differently  for  different  kinds  and 
geometries of the whole apparatus. 

transition 

feedback 

There are many different kinds of sensitive 
apparatus. A photographic plate, for example, 
has  no 
the 
precipitated  state  to  the  ready  state,  which 
would  make  statistics  awkward  if  we  could 
not construct a large-scale structure  of many 
small,  effectively  isolated  thermodynamic 

return 

loop 

to 

are 

systems  that  are  all  in  the  ready  state. 
Semiconductor 
carefully 
detectors 
engineered to  be  very small, numerous, with 
“dead-times” (when the sensitive apparatus is 
not  in  the  ready  state)  that  are  as  small  as 
possible,  and  with  sensitivities  tuned,  as  far 
as  possible,  to  electromagnetic,  electronic, 
muonic, or other fields. We say that the field 
causes  the  events,  but  the  field  and  the 
sensitive apparatus are both required. 

the 

Despite 

constant 

fine-grained 
transitions  of  the  sensitive  apparatus,  many 
classic experiments are engineered to be in a 
coarse-grained equilibrium state, in the sense 
that statistics  of observed events do not vary 
over time. For an experimental apparatus that 
is in a coarse-grained equilibrium of the field, 
the  field  and  the  statistics  of  the  observed 
events are  globally determined  by the  whole 
experimental apparatus. Changing any part of 
the apparatus — and waiting for equilibrium 
to  be  re-established  —  will  change  the 
observed  statistics  of  events.  This  classical 
understanding  agrees  naturally  and  firmly 
with 
the  Copenhagen 
interpretation of quantum mechanics that the 
whole  apparatus  affects  the  results  that  will 
be  obtained,  an  idea  that  is  not  natural  to 
This 
particle-oriented 
understanding  also  agrees  with  Bell’s 
polemic,  “Against  ‘measurement’ ”13,  which 
emphasizes the role of the whole experiment 
and the difficulties  of talking  about  systems, 
objects, or particles and measurement of their 
properties. 

insistence  of 

approaches. 

the 

field 

typically  been 

The  stumbling  blocks  for  classical  particle 
property models for Bell inequality-violating 
their 
experiments  have 
mathematically  ad-hoc  nature,  nonlocality, 
contextuality,  or  the  lack  of  a  Lorentz 
invariant  formalism,  which  certainly  make 
them  poor  in  comparison  with  quantum 
theory. 
mechanics  and  quantum 
Quantum  field  theory,  however,  is  notorious 
for  its  need  for  renormalization,  which  is  a 
mathematically  dubious  enough  procedure 
that  no  rigorous  interacting  quantum  field 
models  are  known  in  Minkowski  space.  It 
has  been  shown  recently,  however,  that  a 
large class of rigorous interacting continuous 
random fields can be constructed in a Lorentz 
invariant 
a 
less 
commutative  algebraic  structure 
confining 
than  algebraic  constraints  on 
quantum  fields  —  making  the  mathematics 
of  quantum  fields,  in  this  respect,  poor  in 
comparison  to  the  mathematics  of  random 
fields. 

formalism14  — 

because 

is 

to 

Renormalization  is  a  first  reason  to  justify 
the use of random fields. Secondly, although 
accommodations 
the  measurement 
problem are by now natural enough that they 
are  of  little  concern  in  our  daily  use  of 
quantum  mechanics, 
the  construction  of 
random  field  models  would  also  lessen 
interpretational 
issues.  Thirdly,  quantum 
gravity  has  to  some  extent  stumbled  on  the 
conceptual mismatch  between quantum  field 
theory  and  classical  general  relativity15,  a 

2 

mismatch that is reduced if we adopt the use 
of  random  fields,  although  the  probabilistic 
aspect  that  is  introduced  to  classical  models 
by  random  fields  may  well  cause  as  many 
technical  difficulties  as  we  find  in  quantum 
gravity. 

There are several existing classes of models 
that to varying degrees may be understood to 
be random fields, including those of Adler16, 
’t Hooft17,  Khrennikov18,  Morgan14,  and 
Wolfram19, all of which have been relatively 
little  pursued  partly  because  they  have  been 
taken  to  be  obviously  in  conflict  with  the 
inequalities.  The 
violation 
mathematics  of  random  fields  is  certainly 
very 
is 
little  developed  as  yet,  but 
nonetheless  time  to  put  away  the  straw  man 
of classical particle property models. 

of  Bell 

it 

email: peter.w.morgan@yale.edu 
homepage: http://pantheon.yale.edu/~PWM22 

×××× S. Gröblacher et al., An experimental test of non-
local realism. Nature 446, 871-875 (2007). 
1 J. S. Bell, On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox, 
in Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum 
Mechanics (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987), pp14-21. 
2 J. S. Bell, The theory of local beables, in Speakable 
and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics 
(Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987), pp52-62. 
3 J. S. Bell, Free variables and local causality, in 
Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics 
(Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987), pp100-104. 
4 J. S. Bell, Bertlmann's socks and the nature of 
reality, in Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum 
Mechanics (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987), pp139-
158. 
5 P. Morgan, Bell inequalities for random fields. J. 
Phys. A 39, 7441-7445 (2006). 
6 G. Weihs et al., Violation of Bell’s inequality under 
strict Einstein locality conditions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 
5039-5043 (1998). 
7 A. Aspect, Bell’s inequality test: more ideal than 
ever. Nature 398, 189-190 (1999). 
8 R. P. Feynman, A. R. Hibbs, Quantum Mechanics 
and Path Integrals (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965), 
pp22-23. 
9 P. Morgan, A succinct presentation of the quantized 
Klein-Gordon field, and a similar quantum 
presentation of the classical Klein-Gordon random 
field. Phys. Lett. A 338, 8-12 (2005). 
10 W. M. de Muynck, The Bell inequalities and their 
irrelevance to the problem of locality in quantum 
mechanics. Phys. Lett. A 114, 65-67 (1986). 
11 L. J. Landau, On the violation of Bell's inequality in 
quantum theory. Phys. Lett. A 120, 54-56 (1987). 
12 R. F. Streater, Classical and quantum probability. J. 
Math. Phys. 41, 3556-3603 (2000). 
13 J. S. Bell, Against ‘measurement’, Physics World , 
33-40 (August 1990). 
14 P. Morgan, Lie fields revisited. J. Math. Phys. 48, 
122302 (2007). 
15 S. Carlip, Is quantum gravity necessary? Class. 
Quantum Grav. 25, 154010 (2008). 
16 S. Adler, Quantum theory as an emergent 
phenomenon (Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 2004). 
17 G. ’t Hooft, Quantum gravity as a dissipative 
deterministic system. Class. Quant. Grav. 16, 3263-
3279 (1999). 
18 A. Khrennikov, Quantum mechanics as an 
approximation of statistical mechanics for classical 
fields. Rep. Math. Phys. 60, 453-484 (2007). 
19 S. Wolfram, A New Kind of Science (Wolfram 
Media, Champaign, IL, 2002). 

                                                 
