Precis of The Significance of 
Consciousness  

Charles Siewert 

Philosophy Department 
University of Miami 
PO Box 248054 
Coral Gables, FL 33124 
U.S.A. 

csiewert@miami.edu 

Copyright (c) Charles Siewert 2000 

PSYCHE, 6(12), October 2000 
http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/v6/psyche-6-12-siewert.html  

KEYWORDS:  Consciousness,  First-Person  Knowledge,  Phenomenal  Character, 
Blindsight, Intentionality, Conscious Thought, Higher Order Representation. 

PRECIS  OF:  Siewert,  C.  P.  (1999).  The  Significance  of  Consciousness.  Princeton 
University Press. ISBN: 0691027242. 392 pp. $42.50 hbk.  

ABSTRACT:  The  aims  of  this  book  are:  to  explain  the  notion  of  phenomenal 
consciousness  in  a  non-metaphorical  way  that  minimizes  controversial  assumptions;  to 
characterize  the  relationship  between  the  phenomenal  character  and  intentionality  of 
visual  experience,  visual  imagery  and  non-imagistic  thought;  and  to  clarify  the  way  in 
which conscious experience is intrinsically valuable to us. It argues for the legitimacy of 
a  first-person  approach  to  these  issues--one  which  relies  on  a  distinctively  first-person 
warrant for judgments about one's own experience. Thought experiments are employed in 
which  one  is  asked  to  conceive  of  having  various  forms  of  blindsight,  so  as  to  make 
consciousness intellectually conspicuous by its absence in such hypothetical scenarios. It 
is argued that theories of mind that would commit us to denying either the conceptual or 
the metaphysical possibility of these scenarios neglect the occurrence of consciousness in 
this phenomenal sense. 

1. Introduction 

 
 
My book is about the significance of consciousness in three senses. First: I try to clarify a 
significance (or sense) of the word 'consciousness'--one we can give to it, if not find in it: 
what  is  sometimes  expressed  by  speaking  of  "phenomenal  consciousness".  Second,  my 
book  concerns  the  relationship  between  consciousness  and  the  fact  that  experience 
"signifies" something, that it is "of" or "about" things, or "directed at" them -- that it has, 
in the philosopher's sense, "intentionality." Third, I discuss the importance consciousness 
has for us--what value it has for us, and why it merits serious theoretical attention. 

In  confining  myself  to  these  topics,  I  do  not  pretend  to  determine  the  proper  way  to 
characterize the relation between experience and its neurophysiological basis, and I say 
little  about  whether  the  character  of  the  experience  we  have  affects  what  else  happens. 
And  these  issues--roughly,  the  struggles  over  physicalism  and  mental  causation--have 
often  set  the  agenda  for  the  philosophy  of  mind.  But  I  am  reluctant  to  make  these  the 
central questions, not because I doubt that they are worth pursuing, rather: I believe that 
responsible  views  about  these  issues  and  about  the  focus  and  goals  of  "consciousness 
studies" generally require we to attend to these questions first: Just what do we mean by 
'phenomenal  consciousness'? How is this  related to the capacity mind to  be of or  about 
the  world?  Why  does  consciousness  matter  to  us?  In  any  case,  I  do  not  think  that  the 
interest  of  my  discussion  rests  entirely  on  its  helping  to  answer  (or  showing 
unanswerable) the mind-body problem and its recalcitrant near relations in our textbook 
list of philosophical problems. For we just may find that the prospect of attaining some 
clarity regarding the trio of topics on which I do focus exerts its own fascination. 

When I say that we first need to clarify what we mean by 'conscious' I can imagine the 
impatient groans this may provoke, and the weary complaint that philosophers' obsession 
with defining terms has for millennia only led down blind alleys and stymied the genuine 
intellectual progress that can be won only by a more direct "empirical" approach. But I 
would  say  that  careful  attention  to  the  way  we  draw  distinctions  can  have  important 
consequences for how we conduct and assess empirical research, and that where doctrinal 
conflicts seem particularly entrenched (as they do here), we could do worse than to step 
back  and  try  to  articulate  carefully  what  we  mean  by  some  of  our  key  terms,  so  as  to 
identify better the source of our disagreements. 

I certainly do not mean to suggest that the study of consciousness must be prefaced by an 
account of conditions necessary and sufficient for a state to be phenomenally conscious, 
phrased entirely in general and undisputed terms, and without illustrative lists. My own 
clarification makes essential appeal to lists of examples, and to a contrast between cases 
in which certain types of conscious experience occur and those in which they do not. I 
concede  that,  as  Ned  Block  (1995)  suggests,  where  we  explain  what  we  mean  by 
'consciousness'  we  find  ourselves  (perhaps  inevitably)  reduced  to  an  elaborate  sort  of 
"pointing" at the phenomenon. And of course it is important to point "in the right way." 
Whether or not I do this will have to be judged by looking at the specifics of what I have 
to say. 

 
2. Defending a First-Person Approach 

I  propose  to  take  a  "first-person  approach"  to  explaining  what  I  mean  by  'conscious 
experience.' That is: first, when I illustrate what I mean by 'conscious' with examples of 
episodes of consciousness, I ask you to consider such types of examples that you know 
occur  in  a  distinctively  first-person  way.  And  second,  when  I  contrast  these  examples 
with hypothetical cases in which certain kinds of conscious experience are missing, while 
other features remain in place, I ask you to conceive of being a subject so described--in 
that sense, I ask you to conceive of these cases from the first-person point of view. 

When I say that you know you have certain kinds of experiences in a distinctively first-
person  way,  I  mean  that  the  type  of  warrant  you  have  for  beliefs  that  you  have  them--
beliefs expressible with the first-person singular pronoun (e.g., 'I feel an itch,' 'It looks to 
me  as  if  this  line  is  longer  than  that  one')--is  a  type  of  warrant  had  (at  least  ordinarily) 
only for first-person beliefs attributing these kinds of experiences, and not for beliefs that 
other  people  have  them.  It  is  possible  to  recognize  one's  commitment  to  this  without 
endorsing  or  appealing  to  any  views  about  the  respect  in  which  these  two  types  of 
warrant  differ.  For  instance,  one  need  not  adopt  an  inner  perception  theory  about  the 
source of first-person knowledge of mind, and one need not suppose that judgments about 
one's own mind involve some peculiar invulnerability to doubt, error, or challenge. It is 
enough if  you find yourself disposed to assert that you  know that you have  this or that 
type of experience, in circumstances where you either have not exhibited for observation, 
or  simply  have  not  yourself  observed,  the  sort  of  thing  that  another  person  would 
ordinarily  need  to  observe  to  know  that  same  thing  about  you.  Assuming  that  if  one 
believes  and  knows  that  p,  then  one  has  warrant  for  believing  that  p,  it  follows  that  in 
these  circumstances  you  are  committed  to  recognizing  you  have  a  type  of  warrant  for 
your belief about your own experience different in kind from that ordinarily had for the 
corresponding third-person belief (Sections 1.4-5, 1.7). 

One  might  try  objecting  that  in  such  cases  one  enjoys  a  sort  of  knowledge  and  belief 
without  warrant.  But  consider  the  consequences.  First,  it  would  follow  that  the  only 
warrant one has for beliefs about one's own experience came from access to the sort of 
evidence  available  to  others.  And  then,  if  one  knowingly  deceived  others  about  one's 
current experience, it seems one would have more warrant for believing the lie one told 
others than for believing what one knew to be true. Also, one would not have warrant for 
believing  that  one  was  deceiving  others.  These  results  are  unacceptable.  Similar 
considerations  should  make  us  resist  Wittgensteinian  notions  that  it  is  out  of  place  to 
speak of self-knowledge here at all (Section 1.6). 

But  why  bother  with  a  first-person  approach,  and  take  on  the  preliminary  burden  of 
clarifying and defending it, instead of getting right down to business? And, if I do bother, 
why not give a positive account of it instead of coyly leaving so much open? In answer to 
the  first  question:  I  insist  on  a  first-person  approach  because  of  a  suspicion  that  one 
source of the consciousness neglect I decry in later chapters lies in a tendency to theorize 
about  these  matters  from  a  third-person  perspective.  In  answer  to  the  second:  I  do  not 
offer a positive account of this warrant because that is a very complex undertaking in its 

own right, and part of what makes it complex is that, in my view, a satisfactory account 
of  first-person  knowledge  rests  on  achieving  a  satisfactory  prior  understanding  of 
phenomenal consciousness. 

However, if I cannot say what first-person warrant consists in until I have relied on it to 
develop my view about consciousness, prior to this I can and should do more than draw 
attention  (as  I  do  in  Chapter  One)  to  our  ordinary  pre-theoretical  commitment  to  the 
reality  of  a  distinctive  kind  of  warrant  and  knowledge  for  beliefs  about  one's  own 
experience. I should also defend this commitment against sceptical attacks. This I do in 
Chapter Two, by considering empirical research of the sort referred to in the much-cited 
work of Nisbett and Wilson (1977) that is supposed to count against "introspective access 
to  mental  processes,"  as  well  as  that  presented  by  Alison  Gopnik  (1993),  purporting  to 
show  that  developmental  evidence  refutes  commonsense  belief  in  a  special  first-person 
knowledge of intentionality. I argue (Section 2.2) that neither of these in fact present any 
threat  to  the  assumption  that  we  enjoy  a  distinctive  sort  of  warrant  for  our  first-person 
beliefs  about  what  we  experience.  Further,  I  argue  (Section  2.4)  that  a  reliance  on  this 
sort of self-knowledge is not discredited by eliminativist attacks on the mental generally 
(as  in  Churchland,  P.M.  1981),  since  these  implicitly  rely  on  epistemological 
presuppositions we have no reason to endorse. 

3. What is Meant by 'Phenomenal Consciousness'? 

With  these  epistemological  preliminaries  out  of  the  way,  I  begin  in  Chapter  Three  to 
implement my first-person approach to explaining what I mean by consciousness. I first 
offer several categories of examples of its occurrence, where its recognition is likely to 
raise  the  least  trouble.  I  start  with  the  phenomenon  of  silent  speech,  but  include  other 
forms of imagery, both aural and visual, together with these and other modalities of sense 
experience--all  of  which  we  can  know  with  first-person  warrant  to  share  the  feature  of 
being  episodes  of  phenomenally  conscious  experience.  Now,  while  the  first-person 
knowable  aural  imagery  of  silent  speech  is  a  remarkable  and  illustrative  species  of 
phenomenal  consciousness,  still,  it  is  only  one  species,  alongside  other  imagery  and 
sense-experience.  And  by  recognizing  this,  we  keep  ourselves  from  being  misled  by 
accounts that begin by taking consciousness to consist in some kind of stream of narrative 
or  commentary,  and  the  associated  inclination  to  think  of  consciousness  as  concerned 
with (at least "virtual") "serial processing." 

Now  I  rely  not  only  on  positive  examples  of  the  occurrence  of  consciousness,  but 
negative examples of its absence. Recognition of states of belief that may obtain at such 
time as one has no experiences conscious in the sense illustrated can help us to be clear 
that  the  common  feature--phenomenal  consciousness--exemplified,  is  not  just  that  of 
having  representational  or  intentional  content.  But  still  one  can  construe  the  relevant 
commonality  in  ways  that  amount,  I  maintain,  to  a  neglect  of  genuine  phenomenal 
consciousness. 

 
To  see  this,  we  need  to  consider  four  (at  least  conceivable)  forms  of  "blindsight." 
Blindsight  I  take  to  be  some  form  of  discriminative  response  (as  for  example  in  verbal 
judgment)  to  visual  stimuli,  of  which  the  subject  nonetheless  has  no  visual  experience 
conscious in the sense earlier illustrated--the stimuli do not look any way to him or her. 
The  reader's  task  is  to  try  to  conceive  of  being  a  subject  with  each  of  these  forms  of 
blindsight--to  conceive  of  having  certain  deficits  in  visual  consciousness,  while  the 
exercise  of  certain  other  capacities  remains  intact.  If  one  can  employ  the  sense  of 
'conscious'  first  explained  by  means  of  positive  examples  to  make  sense  of  these 
hypothetical cases, one can understand what I mean by phenomenal consciousness. The 
first type of case is one (I believe) that has been found actual in the celebrated case study 
of Lawrence Weiskrantz (1986), for which he coined the catchy oxymoron, 'blindsight.' 
This I label (Section 3.5) prompted blindsight, as the subject's discriminatory judgments 
appear only when prompted by forced choice methods (the subject is asked, "Was an X 
or an O just flashed?"). 

The second (as far as I know, non-actual) type of blindsight would involve discriminating 
the  same  types  of  figures  as  prompted  blindsight--relatively  simple  colors  and  shapes, 
spatial  orientations--but spontaneously,  unprompted.  Here  thoughts  about  what  types  of 
stimuli are present just occur, without forced choices, generated by the stimuli, but still 
without conscious vision of them (Section 3.6). 

In the third stage (Section 3.7), I ask the reader to conceive of spontaneous blindsight that 
matches,  in  the  discriminatory  prowess  it  affords,  the  conscious  visual  experience  of 
someone  with  extremely  poor,  low  acuity  "legally  blind"  vision.  (At  its  extreme,  this 
would amount to nothing more than a visual experience of a blurry expanse of achromatic 
light--greyish  blobs  and  the  like.)  Would  a  blindsight  equivalent  of  this--what  I  call 
"amblyopic blindsight"--properly be described as seeing? We can, I think,  understand a 
sense of 'visual' in which it is enough for a blindsighter's judgment to count as visual that 
it be caused by internal states that are typically the effect of light stimuli, of the sort that 
would  make  the  judgment  true.  Whether  we  call  this  "seeing"  or  not  seems  merely  a 
terminological matter. 

But, using this sense of 'visual,' it seems we are free to conceive of a blindsighter who is 
herself inclined to classify her judgment as visual--even spontaneously--though still the 
stimuli  that  triggered  her  judgment  do  not  look  any  way  to  her.  This  "reflective 
blindsight" (Section 3.9) marks the fourth stage of the thought experiment. 

If  you  can  perform  the  little  conceptual  exercise  thus  described,  then  you  are  ready  for 
my explanation of the notion of phenomenal character (Section 3.10). This I  take to be 
that  first-person  knowable  respect  in  which  experiences  that  share  the  feature  of  being 
phenomenally conscious yet differ in ways that only phenomenally conscious experiences 
can.  Familiar  examples  would  include:  the  difference  between  the  way  it  feels  to  be 
nauseous  and  the  way  it  feels  to  be  in  pain,  and  the  manner  in  which  these  both  differ 
from the way it feels to have an itch. Generally we might speak of these differences in 
phenomenal character as differences in the way it seems to one to have various types of 
experience.  And  we  may  speak  of  its  seeming  as  it  does  to  someone  to  have  an 

experience--e.g., its seeming to you as it does for it to look as if there's a green circle on 
your left--as a phenomenal feature. 

4. Consciousness Neglect 

Now part of the point of this way of explaining the sense of 'phenomenal consciousness' 
is  that  it  provides  us  with  a  way  of  determining  that  a  given  theory  of  mind  or 
consciousness  does  not  recognize  the  reality  of  consciousness  in  this  sense.  This  is  of 
interest,  I  believe,  because  it  is  one  mark  of  the  depth  of  disagreement  among 
philosophers  and  psychologists  who  profess  to  concern  themselves  with  consciousness 
that the theories proposed by some leave others suspecting that real consciousness--a.k.a., 
the  subjective  character  of  experience,  what  it  is  like  to  have  it--has  been  left  out  or 
excluded, and that something else, to which the term 'consciousness' is affixed, has been 
substituted. I confess that I myself have harboured such suspicions, and so have tried to 
find  some  way  of  articulating  what  I  understand  by  'consciousness'  that  would  help 
clarify these concerns, while minimizing controversial metaphysical and epistemological 
assumptions, and avoiding overly vague, misleading or metaphorical formulations. 

I do this by summing up my explanation of what I mean by 'phenomenal consciousness' 
as  follows.  By  'phenomenal  consciousness'  I  mean  "that  feature  we  know  with  first-
person  warrant  to  be  shared  by  episodes  of  silent  speech,  other  imagery,  and  sense-
experience--a feature whose occurrence one would deny, if one held any of the forms of 
blindsight  earlier  described  to  be  strictly  impossible."  (p.  100)  Thus  if  your  theory  of 
consciousness apparently leaves no reasonable alternative to holding that the hypothetical 
forms of blindsight in my thought experiment are really inconceivable, or in some distinct 
(but  more-than-nomological  sense)  metaphysically  impossible,  then  your  theory  fosters 
what  I  term  "consciousness  neglect."  So,  if  your  theory  is:  (1)  fairly  construed  as 
committed  to  views  about  what  we  do  or  should  mean  by  speaking  of  conscious 
experience, or about what constitutes the feature or property of being a conscious state; 
and (2) these views do not permit us  to conceive of, or rule out the  mere possibility of 
blindsighters such as I have described--then your theory does not recognize, but neglects, 
phenomenal consciousness. 

Of course, having stated this standard, it remains to be seen whether anyone may be fairly 
convicted of consciousness neglect by its means. That question is not so quickly resolved. 
I devote Chapter Four to a long and fairly complex discussion of it. My conclusion is that 
consciousness-neglectful  theoreticians  of  mind  include  such  eminent  figures  as  Daniel 
Dennett, David Rosenthal, and Michael Tye, and various purveyors of functionalism. 

For  ease  of  discussion  I  frame  the  issue  of  consciousness  neglect  in  terms  of  a 
hypothetical  blindsight  subject,  Belinda,  defined  by  contrast  with  another  subject, 
Connie, who in her left field has only rather poor and limited conscious visual experience 
of  some  stimuli  (the  visual  experience  of  an  extremely  legally  blind  achromatope,  we 
may  suppose).  Belinda  then,  we  conceive  of  as  enjoying  a  spontaneous,  amblyopic, 

 
reflective form of blindsight that matches in discriminatory fineness (or crudity) Connie's 
desperately  poor  left  field  vision.  If  phenomenal  consciousness  is  real,  I  maintain,  then 
we  know  with  first-person  warrant  that  we  have  experience  conscious  in  a  sense  that 
allows us to preserve in thought the contrast between Belinda and Connie. If a philosophy 
of mind obliterates this contrast, so as to render Belinda's blindsight either inconceivable 
or metaphysically impossible, it leaves no room for consciousness. 

In  this  summary  I  cannot  reproduce  all  the  dialectical  turns  that  lead  me  to  find 
consciousness neglect; I can only give the gist of the argument. Dennett's denial that there 
is a phenomenon of visual seeming "over and above that of judging in one way or another 
that  something  is  the  case"  (1991,  p.  364)  seems  on  the  face  of  it  to  rule  out  the 
possibility of spontaneous blindsight. If a spot of gray light on Belinda's left triggers, by 
visual pathways, a spontaneous judgment that there's one there, then on his view it seems, 
there  cannot  be  anything  else--the  look  of  the  light  to  her--that  she  could  be  missing. 
However, it appears that Dennett would allow for some forms of spontaneous blindsight, 
by  maintaining  that  what  constitutes  the  difference  between  such  blindsight  and 
conscious  sight  is  just  that  the  latter  involves  information  about  the  stimulus  that  is 
relatively  richer,  less  sparse.  But  this  seems  to  rule  out  the  possibility  of  Belinda's 
(amblyopic)  blindsight.  For  since  she  would  have  as  good  (or  weak)  a  spontaneous 
discriminatory  capacity  with  regard  to  left  field  stimuli  as  her  cousin  Connie,  the 
information  content  they  have  about  their  visual  stimuli  would  be  equally  rich  (or 
impoverished).  So  a  difference  in  Belinda  and  Connie's  visual  experience  becomes 
impossible, perhaps inconceivable (Section 4.2). 

Similar  difficulties  attend  Michael  Tye's  (1995)  theory  of  consciousness.  On  his  view, 
roughly, conscious visual experience consists in the  possession of  nonconceptual visual 
information  content  "poised"  to  affect  one's  beliefs,  without  an  exercise  of  will.  But  it 
would  seem  that  someone  of  Belinda's  talents  would  be  just  as  rightly  regarded  as  a 
possessor of such information about her left field as Connie would be; so on Tye's view 
of  visual  consciousness  Belinda  could  not  possibly  lack  any  phenomenal  visual 
experience  that  Connie  had.  That  is  to  say,  Belinda's  blindsight  is  metaphysically 
impossible (Section 4.6). 

Now it may seem unfair for me to criticize David Rosenthal's (1986, 1993) "higher order 
thought" theory of what makes conscious states conscious on the grounds that it neglects 
phenomenal consciousness. For it may seem my "phenomenal consciousness" is not to be 
accounted for by "higher order thought" at all, but is treated under the rubric of "sensory 
quality"--about which Rosenthal has other things to say (1991). The problem is that what 
he has to say about this (for instance, that a sensory quality of pain is such as can be had 
even while one has no feeling of pain) leads one to think that Rosenthal's sensory quality 
is  not  my  phenomenal  character,  and  that  nothing  would  prevent  his  visual  sensory 
qualities from being had by a blindsighter. 

So,  unless  Rosenthal  takes  care  of  phenomenal  consciousness  in  the  "higher  order 
thought" part of his theory, he does not take account of it at all. And he does not seem to 
me  to  do  so.  For  what,  on  that  view,  gives  Connie  a  conscious  visual  experience  of  a 

patch of light on her left where Belinda has none? Should we say: Connie has a higher 
order thought about her visual representation to the effect that she has it, while Belinda 
lacks  this?  But  Belinda,  being  a  "reflective"  blindsighter,  would  have  the  higher  order 
thought  that  she  visually  judges  that  there's  a  patch  of  light  on  her  left.  So  what  is  the 
crucial consciousness-making thought that she would lack? 

It seems we should not want to say that what makes Connie consciously sighted on her 
left, while Belinda is not, is just that Connie has the higher order judgment "I consciously 
see on my left." For one ca not constitute a difference (e.g., between conscious vision and 
blindsight) purely out of the thought that there is one (Section 4.5). So, will we say that 
what  gives  Connie  the  visual  experience  Belinda  lacks  is  the  former's  having  a  higher 
order  thought  that  she  possesses  a  (Rosenthalian)  visual  quality  (i.e.,  a  sort  of  visual 
quality  that  even  a  blindsighter  might  enjoy)?  A  problem  here  is  that  ordinary 
consciously sighted people (like myself) typically do not, consciously or unconsciously, 
think that they have such visual qualities, when things look some way to them. So it ca 
not  be  reasonable  to  suppose  this  is  what  leaves  open  the  possibility  of  Connie  and 
Belinda (Section 4.4). 

I  conclude  that  neither  Rosenthal,  nor  Tye,  nor  Dennett  have  the  resources  in  their 
theories of "consciousness" to leave open this possibility. If one allows no consciousness 
but what one finds in their theories, one renders the contrast between Belinda and Connie 
inconceivable  or  otherwise 
leaves  out  phenomenal 
consciousness. 

impossible,  and 

thereby 

Functionalists have been accused of failing to take into account the "feel" of experience, 
or of "leaving out qualia," and my own discussion backs this reproach, at least regarding 
certain  forms  of  this  doctrine.  Though  my  reason  for  thinking  functionalists  have  been 
guilty  of  consciousness  neglect  bears  some  resemblance  to  the  familiar  "absent  qualia" 
argument, the point is not quite the same. I do not claim that Belinda's blindsight involves 
an internal state that duplicates the functional role of Connie's blurry left field conscious 
vision.  It  may  well  be  that  there  are  things  that  necessarily  only  conscious  visual 
experience, and no ersatz blindsight stand-in, could do. For instance, it seems plausible to 
me (Section 4.3) that learning to judge spontaneously, by visual stimulation, how to apply 
certain terms (such as color or shape terms) contributes to one's learning the meaning of 
those  terms  (acquiring  the  relevant  concepts)  only  if  that  judgment  is  mediated  by 
conscious  visual  experience.  Only  if  there  is  some  way  red  looks  to  you,  does  your 
learning to say 'red' in response to red stimuli contribute to your understanding what 'red' 
means. (I do not insist on the truth of this--I say only that it seems plausible to me.) 

But  even  if  this  is  an  inevitable  functional  difference  between  conscious  vision  and 
blindsight,  we  cannot  rightly  say  that  all  there  is  to  the  difference  between  Connie's 
blursight  and  Belinda's  blindsight  is  that  the  former  affords  the  capacity  to  acquire 
concepts through learning visual discriminations, while the latter does not (Section 4.8). 
For  consider  a  Belinda-like  subject,  Linda,  who  grows  up  learning  blindsighted  verbal 
discriminatory responses to visual stimuli. Shall we say that all we mean by saying she 
differs  from  Glenda,  who  grows  up  learning  her  discriminatory  responses  through 

extremely  weak  Connie-like  conscious  vision,  is  that  Linda  lacks,  while  Glenda 
exercises,  the  capacity  to  acquire  concepts  visually?  Or  shall  we  say  that  this  alone 
constitutes the difference between Glenda's conscious vision and Linda's blindsight? 

Either way, it seems we would be attributing a difference in capacities for understanding 
that cannot in any way be displayed--either to the subjects themselves or to others who 
observe  them.  For  I  assume  that,  if  two  subjects  differ  in  their  ability  to  understand  a 
given  term,  evidence  of  this  difference,  or  any  distinguishing  mark  from  which  this 
difference between them followed, would have to be a manifest, not a hidden one. That 
is, it would need to be a difference such as either the subjects themselves or others could 
have warrant for attributing to them without the literal observation of anything transpiring 
hidden beneath  the skin.  (Hidden differences--e.g., brain  lesions--bear on differences in 
understanding only insofar as they are relevantly related to manifest differences.) Now on 
the  views  under  consideration  the  only  relevant  difference  between  Glenda's  visual 
experience and Linda's lack of it would be nothing but that between the possession and 
the lack of an ability to acquire concepts visually. But, if that is all there is to conscious 
visual  experience,  then:  there  will  be  nothing  manifest  whereby  they  can  display  this 
difference  in  understanding.  However,  I  assume  we  do  not  want  to  say  there  could  be 
differences  in  two  speakers'  capacity  to  understand  that  can  be  manifest  to  no  one, 
including  themselves.  So  even  if  it  is  inevitable  that  the  consciously  sighted  and  the 
blindsighted  differ  in  their  concept  acquiring capacities,  it  would  not  do  to  say  that  the 
experiential difference between them is nothing but a difference in how they can come to 
understand their terms. 

Thus  for  me  the  crucial  question  to  pose  a  functionalist  theory  of  mind,  regarding 
consciousness,  is  not  the  "absent  qualia"  question,  viz.:  Could  something  other  than  a 
conscious  experience  conceivably  play  precisely  the  same  functional  role?  My--slightly 
more complicated-- question is this. Once we hold constant all the functional likenesses 
that  we  cannot  reasonably  deny  could  obtain  between  Belinda  and  Connie  (or  subjects 
very  like  them),  would  there  be  any  essential  functional  differences  remaining  between 
Connie's conscious vision and Belinda's blindsight, such that we can justifiably say: that 
is all we mean by saying, or: that is all there is to this difference between Connie's having 
visual  experience  and  Belinda's  lacking  it?  My  claim  is  that,  upon  consideration  of 
plausible candidates, there is no manifest difference in functional role that will return a 
positive  answer  to  this  question.  And  so  any  theory  according  to  which  differences  in 
mental concepts or mental properties are exhausted by differences in manifest functional 
roles  of  subjects'  internal  states,  leaves  us  no  reasonable  alternative  to  denying  the 
conceptual or metaphysical possibility of an experiential difference between Connie and 
Belinda--which is to say, that theory leads to a neglect of phenomenal consciousness. 

The question then naturally arises: can one reasonably identify the difference between the 
occurrence  and  absence  of  conscious  experience  with  that  between  the  occurrence  and 
absence of some hidden feature--whether this be thought of as a functional role property, 
or  otherwise  (as  perhaps  a  physical  or  physiological  feature  whose  identity  is  not 
exhausted  by  the  role  it  plays  vis-a-vis  other  things)?  Some  possible  "hidden"  feature 
functionalisms  I  think  can  be  seen  as  no  better  off  than  the  manifest  kind:  those  that 

would locate the crucial hidden functional difference near the periphery (at say the level 
of  receptor  or  afferent  neurons).  However,  if  we  locate  the  hidden  difference  more 
internally  still,  we  are  no  longer--by  my  "Belinda"  test--doomed  to  theorize  ourselves 
into  a  neglect  of  phenomenal  consciousness.  But  we  do  face  several  other  problems  to 
which I see no satisfactory solution. One is: by identifying consciousness as  something 
buried  internally,  whose  presence  is  knowable  only  through  probing  deep  beneath  the 
surface,  it  would  seem  we  will  lose  any  rationale  for  maintaining  a  specifically 
functionalist kind of physicalism about consciousness. For such deeply hidden "physical-
functional"  properties  would  seem  to  be  hardly  more  amenable  to  realization  in  a 
physically  diverse  range  of  entities--scarcely  more  "multiply  realizable"--than  physical 
features that are not "functionalistically" construed. Second, without any analysis of our 
concept  of  phenomenal  consciousness  in  manifest  functional  terms,  it  becomes  very 
unclear  just  what  is  to  guide  our  decision  about  the  physical  sine  qua  non  of 
consciousness, in a way that applies not just to normal actual human subjects, but ranges 
over all "metaphysically" possible worlds. Third, and relatedly, it becomes difficult to see 
on what grounds we are to maintain a physicalism that rules out the possibility of David 
Chalmers'  (1996)  "zombie  world"--a  world  with  the  same  type  distribution  of 
fundamental  physical  particles  in  fields  of  force  as  our  own,  but  in  which,  unlike  our 
own,  phenomenal  consciousness  does  not  occur.  It  will  be  harder  to  dismiss  or  argue 
away the logical possibility of such a world, once we have allowed the conceivability of 
Belinda-like blindsight. 

However,  my  main  concern  here  is  not  with  these  issues,  but  with  the  prevention  of 
consciousness  neglect.  And  even  if  no  clear  and  robust  form  of  physicalism  is  true  or 
warrantable, or some version of property dualism is true, still: someone who would claim 
that  consciousness  is  some  hidden  physical  feature  of  the  brain,  or  that  consciousness 
logically supervenes on such features, does not count as a neglector of consciousness in 
my book. Let all who will maintain that consciousness just is the very feature specified 
by  some  as-yet-undetermined  predicate  of  neuroscience,  to  be  discovered  through 
stabbing  and  scanning  the  intricate  recesses  of  our  brains;  let  them  claim  that 
consciousness must occur in any possible world in which that hidden feature does (or that 
it  must  not  occur  in  any  world  in  which  that  feature  does  not).  I  want  to  say  only:  I 
understand these claims only if consciousness is also taken to be that manifest feature to 
which  we  can  attend  by  recourse  first,  to  a  distinctive  first-person  knowledge  of 
experience,  and  second,  to  our  capacity  to  conceive  of  certain  merely  hypothetical 
situations--as in my Chapter Three thought experiments. 

5. Can "Consciousness Neglect" be Defended? 

In  Chapter  Five  I  try  to  anticipate  and  answer  several  lines  of  defense  that  might  be 
offered against the criticisms in Chapter Four--arguments to the effect that the "neglect" I 
deplore is really no offence at all, since we have reason to think that there is nothing in 
reality  answering  to  my  phrase  'phenomenal  consciousness,'  to  which  we  might  pay 
attention.  The  arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  eliminative  materialism  supply  one 

 
possible source. Already in Chapter Two I argue that general eliminativist attacks on the 
use  of  ordinary  ("folk")  mentalistic  notions  depend  on  a  conception  of  our  warrant  for 
applying such notions that is baseless. On this conception, their use is warranted only if it 
can be justified as part of a general theory of bodily movement from whose description 
they have been thoroughly expunged. However, once that epistemology is renounced, we 
no  longer  have  reason  to  demand  talk  of  experience  and  attitudes  be  "vindicated"  via 
some intertheoretic reduction to neuroscience. 

But  it  might  seem  that  an  eliminativist  argument  which  is  not  subject  to  this  criticism 
could be directed specifically against phenomenal consciousness, as I understand this, an 
argument  made  by  Patricia  Churchland  (1988).  Roughly:  just  as  scientific  advance 
showed that the range of things (the sun, fireflies, logs) which once upon a time would 
have  been  said  to  be  "on  fire"  were  in  fact  not  properly  classified  in  this  way,  so 
neuroscience will probably one day show that the paradigms by which I explain my use 
of  'conscious'  (various  forms  of  imagery  and  sense  perception)  possess  no  common 
feature  that  we  know  with  first-person  warrant  that  they  have,  which  leaves  open  the 
possibility of Belinda-like blindsight. 

On  examination,  the  argument  seems  to  rest  on  this  idea:  The  lack  of  a  unified 
explanation  of  apparently  similar  effects  (light,  heat)  of  the  sun,  fireflies  and  burning 
wood required us to give up applying the word 'fire' univocally to all; similarly we also 
will need to refuse to apply the term 'conscious experience' to the heterogeneous class of 
phenomena to which I apply it, once we see that no unified neuroscientific explanation is 
to be had of what these so-called "conscious experiences" typically do. But I reply: to the 
extent  we  can  identify  common  effects  conscious  experiences  typically  have,  we 
evidently  lack  reason  to  think  that  they  will  probably  find  no  unified  explanation  in  an 
ideally completed neuroscience. Furthermore, we have no reason to demand that they do 
so, once we stop saying that ordinary modes of mentalistic explanation must be reducible 
to neuroscientific ones (Section 5.2). 

A  second  challenge  to  my  notion  of  phenomenal  consciousness  is  likely  to  come  from 
another quarter. Here one focuses, not on the heterogeneity of conscious experience, but 
on the (metaphysical) possibility of such a one as my Belinda. Again, the argument rests 
on an analogy to some case of successful theorizing in natural science. It will be argued 
that,  much  as  science  shows  us  that  it  may  seem,--but  is  not  really--possible  that  there 
could  be  water  that  was  not  H2O,  so  too  science  will  show  (or  has  shown)  that  it  may 
seem but is not really possible that there could be a subject of Belinda's discriminatory 
talents, but who lacked Connie's blurry left-field conscious visual experience. This at any 
rate  is  what  would  seem  to  be  behind  appeals  to  "a  posteriori  necessities"  likely  to  be 
invoked in this context (Section 5.3). 

Merely  stating  such  an  analogy  surely  does  not  by  itself  give  us  reason  to  believe  that 
Belinda  is  metaphysically  impossible.  Nor  would  it  even  be  right  to  say  that  this  shifts 
some  burden  of  proof  onto  me  to  demonstrate  that  she  is  possible.  For  affirming  the 
reality of phenomenal  consciousness does not commit me to asserting the metaphysical 
possibility of Belinda. It only commits me to asserting the occurrence of a feature whose 

instantiation one would deny who maintained the metaphysical impossibility of Belinda. 
And I can assert this while officially abstaining on questions of metaphysical possibility. 

The situation then seems to be this. Apparently we can interpret the term 'conscious' so as 
to conceive of someone in Belinda's shoes. Now we could stipulate that the term not be 
interpreted this way, but rather in such a way (on some analogy with 'water') that welded 
the exercise of Belinda's discriminatory prowess to conscious visual experience with the 
same iron bonds of necessity with which H2O is water. But this is not to say 'conscious' 
cannot  also  be  interpreted  in  a  way  that  leaves  open  the  possibility  of  Belinda-style 
blindsight. For that matter, we could easily interpret the word 'water' so that it applied to 
the same this-world stuff as we take it to apply to, even while leaving open the possibility 
that,  in  some  possible  world,  stuff  that  was  not  H2O  still  could  count  as  water,  merely 
because  it  behaved  on  a  macro-level,  to  ordinary  appearance  and  for  ordinary  uses  as 
water in our world does. 

Admittedly,  we  cannot  correctly  say  that,  just  as  we  might  interpret  'water'  to  apply  to 
whatever  sufficiently  appears  like  water,  so  we  might  interpret  'conscious'  to  apply  to 
whatever  sufficiently  appears  like  conscious  experience.  For  there  is  no  way  in  which 
experience appears to us--as distinct from the way in which we judge, think, or believe it 
to be. But this only makes it harder to uphold the analogy with metaphysical necessities 
obtaining  in  connection  with  natural  kinds  like  water  or  gold.  For  it  is  admitted,  I 
presume, on this picture, that Belinda is in some sense conceivable. Once this is allowed, 
one who maintains that she is, nonetheless, strictly impossible needs to explain how we 
can nonetheless be oblivious to this when we perform the thought experiment. How is it 
that we do not see the impossibility of Belinda, and perhaps even are inclined to assert 
she  is  in  a  broad  sense  possible  (though  probably  not  within  the  constraints  of  human 
neurophysiology)? 

We cannot explain this by saying that in conceiving of Belinda we mistake the contingent 
superficial  appearance  of  consciousness  for  the  thing  itself--consciousness  has  no 
appearance  in  the  relevant  sense.  One  could  try  proposing  that  the  problem  is  that  in 
conceiving of Belinda, we mistakenly suppose her lack of a higher order thought about 
her vision entails her lack of something essential to phenomenal  visual  experience. But 
this  would  not  work.  For  if  that  thought  attributes  a  visual  state  of  the  sort  that  a 
blindsighter  could  have,  I  for  one  certainly  do  not  suppose  that  thought  is  essential  to 
conscious  vision,  since  I  do  not  think  it's  one  that  even  I--consciously  sighted  though  I 
am--typically  have.  And  though  I  imagine  Belinda  not  to  think  she  consciously  sees 
things on her left, I do not for a moment suppose (in fact I explicitly deny (Section 6.5)) 
that  the  capacity  to  engage  in  this  kind  of  higher  order  reflection  is  essential  to 
phenomenal  visual  experience.  So  it  will  not  explain  our  obliviousness  to  the  alleged 
impossibility  of  Belinda's  blindsight  to  assert  that  we  confuse  a  lack  of  higher  order 
judgment  about  her  visual  consciousness  with  a  lack  of  conscious  vision  itself.  Thus  it 
seems to me that the prospects are very dim for arguing for the impossibility of Belinda 
by appeal to some water/H2O-like metaphysical necessities. 

A third strategy to defend against my charges of neglect might try to attack the possible 
absences of experience by which I explain consciousness by questioning the knowability 
of  such  absences.  The  thought  is:  the  lack  of  conscious  visual  experience  in  Belinda's 
blindsight  would  be  in  principle  unknowable  by  anyone--including  herself.  And 
undetectable  absences  of  experience  should  be  deemed  impossible.  Such  a  pattern  of 
thought appears to be at work in Dennett's attack on qualia (1988, 1991). 

Applying this style of argument to the case at hand, one might say: "Someone with the 
talents ascribed to Belinda would not be in a position to know that she was blindsighted 
on  her  left--and  neither  would  anyone  else.  And  if  no  one  could  know  that  she  lacked 
conscious visual experience on her left, we should deny this is a scenario we can really 
make sense of." But this argument faces two problems. First, evidently nothing warrants 
the assumption that the impossibility of some scenario  involving consciousness follows 
from its unknowability. Second, I argue (Section 5.4) that Belinda would indeed be in a 
position to know that her denials of left field conscious visual experience were correct. 

A more general skepticism about the knowability of others' conscious experience also can 
help foment a neglect of consciousness (even if it is not used explicitly to justify this). I 
offer  two  points  in  response  (Section  5.5).  First,  a  denial  that  one  can  know  other 
conscious  minds  may  be  used  to  undermine  claims  to  know  one's  own,  only  if  it  is 
assumed  that  first-person  knowledge  is  dependent  on  knowledge  of  others.  But, 
depending  on  how  this  sort  of  dependence  is  understood,  it  may  furnish  us  with  an 
argument, not for a universal skepticism about consciousness that would extend even to 
the first-person case, but against skepticism even about other's experience. Second, even 
if knowledge of one's own experience is independent of knowledge of others', plausible 
considerations appear to stall a move from this to a sound sceptical argument about other 
minds. Briefly: the ways in which I form beliefs about others' experience would provide 
very accurate results if used by others to form beliefs about me. Now do I have reason to 
think  others  actually  differ  from  me  in  some  manner  that  would  make  the  ways  others 
could form reliable beliefs about my experience by contrast thoroughly faulty, if directed 
by me on others? No. Do I then have some reason to think they do not differ from me in 
such manner? Yes. For: first, the picture formed of their experience is no less coherent, 
explanatorily rich, and conducive to successful anticipation of behavior than is the picture 
that would be similarly formed of my own. Also, I have reason to think that others have 
(literally) in their heads what in mine suffices to make conscious experience occur. Taken 
together  this  does  not  prove  that  it  is  impossible  I  am  a  lonely  little  island  of 
consciousness in a vast zombie sea. But it appears to give me more warrant for asserting 
than  for  denying  what  I  cannot  in  any  case  stop  believing  without  going  insane--that 
others also feel, see, and think consciously. 

6.  Phenomenal  Consciousness  Distinguished  from  the 
Mind's Self-Representation 

 
Having done my part, by the end of Chapter Five, to defend phenomenal character from 
neglect, I  devote most  of  Chapters Six through Eight to certain  fundamentals regarding 
the relationship of the phenomenal character of experience to its intentionality. For this I 
need  to  furnish  a  conception  of  intentionality  adequate  to  my  purpose.  I  choose  not  to 
base my discussions on some notion of mental or intentional or informational "content" 
because I find the general notion of content is too unclear to furnish a good starting point. 

So instead of relying on talk of "content" to elucidate intentionality I proceed on the basis 
of this idea: it is sufficient for a feature to be intentional (in the philosopher's sense) that 
it  be  a  feature  in  virtue  of  which  its  possessor  is  assessable  for  truth  or  accuracy.  (For 
instance:  x  is  assessed  for  truth  in  virtue  of  an  intentional  feature  if  it  is  said  that  x 
believes  falsely  that  tomatoes  are  poisonous,  or  that  the  way  it  looks  to  x  is  accurate, 
when  it  looks  to  x  as  if  a  is  taller  than  b.)  I  distinguish  between  a  feature  merely  in 
respect  of  which  one  is  assessable  for  accuracy,  and  a  feature in  virtue  of  which  one  is 
assessable  for  truth  or  accuracy.  I  may  be  assessed  for  truth  in  respect  of  the  feature: 
uttering  the  sentence,  'Oswald  shot  Kennedy'--someone  may  say  that  what  I  uttered  is 
true, or is false. But I am so assessable for truth in respect of my utterance, only if it is 
supplied with an interpretation: from the fact (if it is one) that Oswald shot Kennedy, and 
the fact that I uttered 'Oswald shot Kennedy,' it follows that what I uttered is true, only if 
some interpreting condition is added, such as: by uttering this, I asserted that Oswald shot 
Kennedy.  Intentional  features  are  never  only  features  in  respect  of  which  one  is 
assessable for truth or accuracy (though some of them are that). They are (some of them) 
features the possession of which entails corresponding assessments for truth or accuracy, 
when conditions are added, none of which need include interpreting conditions (as in the 
utterance example)--but only conditions of truth or accuracy. 

In Chapter Six I use this conception of what's sufficient to make a feature intentional to 
frame the issue of how  phenomenal  consciousness relates to what I call "mentally self-
directed" or "self-reflexive" intentionality--the capacity of some minds (ours for instance) 
to  represent  themselves.  This  is  one  (important)  dimension  of  the  issue  of  how 
consciousness relates to self-consciousness. Here I continue the discussion begun when I 
distinguished  phenomenal  consciousness  from  higher  order  thought  (in  Chapters  Three 
and Four). In Chapter Six, I argue not just for this distinction, but more broadly that no 
intentional feature whose conditions of truth or accuracy require that its possessor be in 
this or that state of mind, is either necessary or (more than trivially) sufficient for having 
a phenomenally conscious experience. So I aim to distinguish phenomenal consciousness 
clearly  not  just  from  thought  about  one's  own  states  of  mind,  but  from  mental  self-
representation  generally--including  what  has  been  called  "inner  scanning,"  "inner 
perception," and "inner sense." Phenomenal consciousness is not "the perception of what 
passes in one's mind." 

I contend that we have been sometimes led to think otherwise by shifting too uncritically 
between talk of one's "conscious experience," and talk of experience one is "conscious of 
having."  We  are  sometimes  willing  to  characterize  conscious  mental  states  as  mental 
states one is conscious (or aware) of being in. And this can appear to support the notion 
that a state's being conscious involves one's forming a representation of it, because one 

assumes  that  to  be  conscious  of  one's  experience  one  must  somehow  represent  it  to 
oneself,  perhaps  by  having  a  "higher  order  thought"  about  it,  perhaps  by  having,  via 
"inner sense," a "higher order perception" of it. But I think we should be wary here. We 
should cautiously recognize some inclination to say that, generally, we are conscious of 
having our conscious experience. But then we should ask: under just what interpretation 
of that claim are we entitled to regard as true? 

By saying we are conscious of our conscious experience we may mean no more than that 
typically we know that we have (phenomenally) conscious experience when we do. But 
notice that in this sense someone may be conscious of being in a mental state without its 
being phenomenally conscious. (For one may know that one is in mental states that are 
not  phenomenally  conscious.)  Moreover,  this  interpretation  leaves  open  the  possibility 
that creatures other than us incapable of higher order representation can have conscious 
experiences that they are not conscious of having. 

Alternatively,  it  seems  one  might  interpret  one's  saying  one  is  conscious  of  feeling  a 
certain way, or thinking something, in a manner that entails nothing about higher order 
representation at all. One may interpret 'He is conscious of feeling pain' on analogy with 
'This paint is the color of blood,' or 'It has the shape of a mushroom'--that is, as saying 
what  determinate  of  the  determinable  'consciousness'  someone  possesses.  On  this 
interpretation, the 'of' here is not the 'of' of intentionality. 

The  assumption  that  one's  state  of  mind  is  conscious  just  in  case  one  is  conscious  of 
having it feeds a tendency to identify an experience's being conscious with its being the 
object  of  some  sort  of  higher  order  representation.  But  it's  just  not  clear  that  this 
assumption  has  any  truth  or  plausibility  that  stands  in  need  of  explanation,  once  it  is 
interpreted  as  implying  that  some  species  of  metacognition  accompanies  all  conscious 
experience (Section 6.3). 

Do we then have any warrant for believing that all conscious experiences are targeted by 
some kind of ongoing higher order representation? It will be admitted for instance, that 
we  are  often  (maybe  usually)  in  conscious  states  that  we  do  not  then  consciously  think 
that we are in. But it is proposed (by Rosenthal) that nonetheless these conscious states 
are  always  shadowed  by  unconscious  thoughts  about  them.  However,  why  should  we 
believe this? We (most adult humans) do usually have the ability to give some report of 
our conscious experiences, and this implies the ability to think that we have them. But to 
explain our ability to report our experiences not concurrently consciously thought about, 
we  do  not  need  to  suppose  that  we  are  actually  (unconsciously)  thinking  about  them 
continuously. 

Further, a problem arises even for saying that a disposition to think one is in a given state 
is necessary to its being conscious. Greater conceptual resources are needed for forming 
thoughts or beliefs about one's seeing or hearing, than are required merely for seeing or 
hearing things. But then what about unreflective perceivers--such as sighted children so 
mentally  disabled  that  they  cannot  form  or  wield  mentalistic  concepts?  We  would  be 
committed  to  saying  that  they  would  have  only  a  sophisticated  form  of  blindsight--no 

color or shape would ever look any way to them. The point is not that such children (and 
mute  sighted  animals  of  many  species),  who  possess  no  capacity  for  metacognitive 
thoughts,  clearly  do  have  phenomenal  vision.  (Though  that  is  certainly  plausible).  The 
point  is  this.  If  we  understand  blindsight  in  such  a  way  as  to  allow  us  to  conduct  the 
thought  experiments  of  Chapter  Three,  we  can  see  their  incapacity  for  higher  order 
thoughts simply does not entail that they are blindsighters (Section 6.5). 

A  natural  defense  to  make  to  this  and  similar  criticisms  is  to  "dumb  down"  the 
prerequisites  for  having  thoughts  about  one's  experience  so  much  that  we  will  be  hard 
pressed  to  suppose  that  sighted  children  and  animals  might  fail  to  meet  them.  But  the 
problem then is to specify what this cognitively or conceptually less demanding sort of 
higher order representation does involve in a way that does not make us say that animals 
unable  to  reflect  on  their  own  minds  must  be  blindsighters,  while  also  requiring  more 
than  mere  responsiveness  to  one's  own  experience  (for  surely  that  need  not  involve 
thinking anything true or false of it). 

Something  like  this  last  problem  also  troubles  theories  that  make  some  sort  of  inner 
perception--as  distinct  from  (conceptual)  thought--essential  to  or  constitutive  of 
consciousness.  Just  what  is  this  less  demanding,  quasi-sensory,  non-conceptual  form  of 
mentally self-reflexive intentionality? And why should we suppose that it is trained on all 
our  conscious  experience?  To  meet  this  challenge,  it  is  not  enough  to  claim--however 
plausibly--that even without deploying full blown mental concepts, a creature may attend 
to  its  own  experience.  For  such  attention  still  is  more  occasional  than  conscious 
experience, and in any case does not evidently require that one represent (in thought or 
quasi-sensorily) one's own experience--truly or falsely, accurately or inaccurately. 

Now  we  can  form  a  distinction  between  ("outer")  sensory  appearance  or  experience--
looking, smelling, tasting, etc.--and the sensory judgments sometimes based upon them. 
But, I argue (Section 6.6), we find no similar sort of warrant for the notion of an inner 
sense  as  distinct  from  higher  order  judgment.  Consider:  I  can  make  sense  of  visible 
shapes or figures looking as if they are other than I judge them to be. However, I cannot 
analogously  make  sense  of  my  visual  experience  of  them  appearing  to  me  to  be  other 
than I judge it to be. (Though I can make sense of my visual experience being other than I 
judge  it  to  be).  And,  though  the  blindsight  thought  experiment  gives  us  a  way  of 
conceiving of the absence of visual appearance, while a form of visual judgment remains, 
no  analogous  thought  experiment  helps  us  to  make  inner  sense  conspicuous  by  its 
absence. On the contrary, this effort only feeds my doubts. For when I try to make this 
conceptual  manoeuvre,  I  find  the  absence  of  inner  sense  indistinguishable  from  its 
alleged  presence!  Also:  we  can  indeed  contrast  changes  in  the  sensory  appearance  of 
"outer" objects (through changes in perspective, for instance) while we judge the shape, 
size,  location,  etc.  of  things  seen,  heard,  etc.  to  remain  constant.  And  we  can  also 
conceive of changes in how we judge them to be while their appearance is constant. But I 
cannot  find  any  analogous  contrast  between  changes  in  the  "appearance"  of  my 
experience, while I judge its phenomenal character to hold constant. Nor can I see how to 
judge  the  phenomenal  character  to  change,  while  the  experience  presents  to  me  an 

unvarying appearance. I conclude I have no warrant for attributing inner sense to myself. 
And I have not found a satisfying understanding of what it is supposed to be. 

7. Visual Consciousness and Intentionality 

So  I  argue  that  we  need  to  distinguish  phenomenal  consciousness  clearly  from  higher 
order intentionality, partly because consciousness should not be considered the exclusive 
province of those with the intellectual wherewithal to reflect on their own minds. But I 
argue  that  it  would  also  be  a  mistake  to  see  phenomenal  character  as  irrelevant  to 
differences  in  level  and  style  of  cognitive  sophistication  or  intelligence.  More 
specifically,  I  argue,  in  Chapter  Seven,  that  the  phenomenal  character  of  visual 
experience  is  not  a  matter  of  mere  sensation  or  "raw  feel,"  requiring  (like  pictures  or 
symbols) something on the order of an interpretation for it to be "of" or "about" anything, 
for it to have intentionality: intentionality (thus intelligence) is already built into it. 

I  make  this  case  not  by  arguing  that  differences  in  phenomenal  character  determine 
differences  in  intentional  content.  There  may  be  ways  of  distinguishing  content 
"externally"  such  that  experiences  with  different  content  have  the  same  phenomenal 
character.  Should  we  say  that  differences  in  phenomenal  character  at  least  determine 
differences in "internal" or "narrow" content? I think that, to argue for the inseparability 
of  intentionality  from  phenomenal  character,  it  is  not  necessary  or  desirable  to  try  to 
justify  this  sort  of  distinction  between  different  types  of  content  (internal/external, 
broad/narrow)--a problematic effort that is anyway vexed by the unclarity of the general 
notion  of  content.  So  I  prefer  to  focus  the  discussion  on  the  issue  of  whether,  once  the 
phenomenal character of one's visual experience is fixed, anything other than conditions 
of  accuracy  need  obtain,  if  assessments  of  one  for  accuracy  with  respect  to  those 
phenomenal features are to follow. Does the phenomenal character of visual experience 
need to have added to it something it might lack, before that experience can be assessable 
as  accurate  or  inaccurate  of  anything--does  it  need  interpreting  conditions  to  have 
intentionality? 

I  argue  (Sections  7.2-6)  that  we  have  more  reason  to  say  phenomenal  experience  does 
not, than that it does, in this way, "stand in need of interpretation." If visual phenomenal 
consciousness  needs  to  have  intentionality  bestowed  on  it  somehow,  then  there  are 
conditions that: (a) might fail to obtain though one's experience had that character, which 
also (b) must obtain if assessments of one for accuracy with respect to one's having such 
experience are to follow, but which (c) are distinct from the mere conditions of accuracy 
of that experience. I find no good reasons for thinking that something about the nature of 
phenomenal consciousness or intentionality generally shows that some conditions need to 
be  added  to  visual  consciousness  to  make  visual  experience  intentional.  (For  sense 
perception does not involve the appearance of sense-data that need interpreting, and the 
phenomenal character of sense-experience is not too atomistic to accommodate whatever 
holism  is  essential  to  intentionality.)  Further,  a  broad  search  for  plausible  candidate 
conditions turns up none which we have more warrant for believing do satisfy all of (a) 

 
(b) and (c) than not. (For we lack warrant for thinking that special links of experience to 
judgment, or intention, or to behavior or the environment are both necessary to sensory 
intentionality  and  essentially  separable  from  the  phenomenal  character  of  sensory 
experience.) If this is what we find on examination, we are more warranted in believing 
such  "interpreting"  conditions  are  not  needed  than  that  they  are.  So  phenomenal 
consciousness  should  not  be  pushed  to  the  margins  of  one's  picture  of  the  mind,  by 
dissociating it from intentionality and hence from intelligence. 

We  should  also  resist  another  way  of  belittling  consciousness:  the  claim  that  it  extends 
much  less  widely  than  one  might  have  thought--that  consciousness  is  a  sparse,  spotty, 
gappy,  or  occasional  affair.  Some  remarks  from  Julian  Jaynes  (1976)  seem  to  me  to 
illustrate  an  extreme  form  of  this.  Jaynes  says,  for  instance,  that  in  reading  we  are 
typically  conscious,  not  of  the  words  on  the  page,  but  only  of  their  meaning.  We  can 
recognize how far off track he has gone, when we realize that he would apparently have 
us believe that typically we read only by blindsight. I conjecture that Jaynes is drawn to 
such absurd extremes by a failure to recognize that objects of visual consciousness--what 
one  sees  that  one  can  rightly  be  said  to  be  conscious  of--are  very  often  only  vaguely 
identifiable; there is no saying with much precision exactly what part of an array of visual 
stimuli one was conscious of when. This is true not only in normal skillful reading, but in 
a broad range of activities, which one can, in a sense, say are often done "unconsciously"-
-i.e., without conscious deliberation about how  to  do  them--such  as  driving  and  typing, 
and the use of tools or instruments generally. 

I  believe  it  is  true  that,  as  we  are  engaged  in  much  ordinary  competent  goal-directed 
activity, there are not many items we can rightly say we were visually conscious of, and 
we can identify but vaguely the spatio-temporal boundaries of those we can list. But we 
ought  not  confuse  this  admission  with  the  claim  that  often  during  such  times  we  are 
visually conscious of nothing at all, or of scarcely anything, or very little. For we still see 
consciously, even if we cannot identify with precision which objects we see. And, there is 
a way in which we can consciously see a lot--a way in which visual experience can be 
relatively  rich--that  is  not  proportional  to  the number  of  items  that  can  be  named  in  an 
inventory  of  which  things  one  was  conscious  of.  We  often  consciously  see  and  can 
visually  differentiate  many  levels  of  complexity  in  spatial  patterns  and  configurations 
(think of the figure in a carpet, the branches in a leafless  tree)  even if we cannot name 
commensurately  great  numbers  of  distinct  entities  we  were  then  conscious  of,  from 
among the stimulus array. We should not make ourselves oblivious to this kind of wealth 
in  our  visual  experience  of  space,  on  account  of  our  inability  to  describe  verbally  the 
differences in how we see things to be spatially configured and situated, or on account of 
our  acknowledgment  of  all  the  countless  aspects  and  differences  in  visual  stimuli  that 
escape our experience of them during a given time (Section 7.8). 

Finally,  visual  recognition  (of  individuals  and  types)  presents  us  with  a  rich  realm  of 
differences  in  phenomenal  experience,  which  go  beyond  those  characterizing  our 
consciously  seeing  merely  where  things  are--their  particular  shape,  position,  movement 
and  contour--and  differences  in  lighting  and  color  (Section  7.9).  Recognition  of 
something as a sunflower or a glove, rather than merely as something filling a particular 

space,  involves  differences  in  the  phenomenal  look  of  things--though  this  kind  of 
difference is most evident perhaps when one can voluntarily alter the type of pattern one 
sees--as  when  one  goes  from  seeing  a  figure  as  of  one  type  (an  M)  to  seeing  it  as  of 
another  type  (a  sigma)--or  when  one  suddenly  recognizes  a  person  or  place  that  first 
seemed  unfamiliar.  This  is  not  a  phenomenally  invariant  accompanying  "feeling  of 
familiarity"--but  something  integral  to  the  many  differences  in  phenomenal  character 
involved when something looks recognizable to one as of this or that type, as this or that 
individual.  Though  this  kind  of  experience  is  common  and  diverse,  its  very  ubiquity 
makes it intellectually elusive; the kind of contrasts that bring phenomenal experiences of 
recognition  to  the  attention  of  first-person  thought  often  occur  only  when  subnormal 
conditions  of  viewing  (odd  orientations,  occlusions)  obtain,  or  lapses  of  memory  make 
recognition more gradual or more effortful than usual. Still I maintain that the differences 
in the way it seems to recognize things visually are found in the exercise of many kinds 
of  intelligence--both  those  that  distinguish  our  cognitive  capacities  from  those  of  other 
species,  and  those  that  distinguish  people  who  have  special  talents  (technical,  artistic) 
from others who lack these. Visual phenomenal (or "qualitative") character emphatically 
does  not  have  only  to  do  with  "brute,"  "dumb,"  or  "raw"  sensation--on  the  contrary,  it 
seems  that,  if  there  are  ways  of  seeming  so  devoid  of  intelligence  as  to  deserve  such 
appellations, they are rather rare, atypical, or abnormal. 

8. Conscious Thought 

In  Chapter  8  I  explore  one  more  area  where  the  role  of  consciousness  has  been  often 
underestimated. It has often been observed that there is no qualitative aspect to belief, and 
that  consciousness  is  involved  in  linguistic  understanding,  if  at  all,  only  as  some 
dispensable "feeling of understanding," or in some extraneous imagery accompanying the 
use  of  words.  But  I  argue  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  confine  phenomenal  consciousness  to 
sensory  experience  and  imagery.  And  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume  that  differences  in 
belief  content  have  distinctive  "qualitative  feels"  to  show  that  there  are  differences  in 
phenomenal  character  inseparable  from  our  capacity  to  engage  in  non-imagistic, 
conceptual thought or judgment. 

But  prior  to  making  this  point,  it  is  important  to  get  some  clarity  about  just  how 
phenomenally conscious thought that is imagistic--visualization of shapes and figures, for 
instance--relates to intentionality (Section 8.2). I argue that it does make sense to speak of 
one's  visualizing  some  shape  accurately  or  inaccurately,  to  some  extent  or  other, 
independently of assuming that one intends to visualize that shape. And we also do not 
have  to  assume  that  one  has  the  concept  of  that  type  of  shape,  or  of  shape  in  general 
(where possession of such concepts involves inferential capacities that may be absent in 
subjects  who  nonetheless  can  perceptually  recognize  and  discriminate  shapes  of  those 
types).  Nor  is  it  necessary  that  one's  imagery  be  secured,  via  historical  causal  links,  to 
particular objects, for it to be assessable as a more or less accurate visualization of objects 
with their type of shape. Once that is clear, we can see that the phenomenal character of 
visualization experience--how it seems to us to visualize--can determine that we visualize 

 
something as recognizably of this or that shape. Much as it may look to me as if a certain 
figure is recognizable as either M or sigma shaped, because of the phenomenal character 
of my visual experience of it, so too I may visualize a figure as recognizably either sigma 
or  M  shaped  on  account  of  the  way  it  seems  to  me  to  visualize  a  figure.  Gestalt 
phenomena occur in visual imagery as well as in vision. Thus, whatever similarities may 
exist between visual imagery and pictorial representation, differences in the phenomenal 
character  of  visual  imagery  cannot  rightly  be  likened  to  differences  in  the  non-
representational features of pictures, and so they do not, like lines on paper or blobs of 
color, need interpretation in order to be accurate or inaccurate of something. And to the 
extent  that  the  phenomenal  character  of  visual  imagery  is  detachable  from  conceptual, 
inferential  abilities,  intentions  to  visualize,  and  causal  links,  this  does  not  mean  it  is 
detachable  from  its  assessability  for  accuracy,  its  intentionality.  So  I  conclude  that 
nothing in the way of interpreting conditions needs adding to the phenomenal character 
of  one's  visualization  experience,  before  one  can  become  assessable  for  accuracy  with 
respect to it. 

But if this shows that thinking, in the sense in which thinking of something consists in 
forming  an  image  of  it,  already  has  intentionality  built  into  it,  still  it  leaves  open  the 
question of what consciousness has to do with the intentionality specific to non-imagistic 
thinking.  I  argue,  in  several  stages  (Sections  8.3-5),  for  a  closer  connection  between 
phenomenology and conceptual thought than is sometimes recognized. 

The  first  step  is  to  notice  that  there  is  a difference  between  the  way  it  seems  to  you  to 
hear what you or others say, when understanding or following what is being said, and the 
way  it  seems  to  you  to  hear  this  uncomprehendingly--and  this  difference  need  not  be 
accompanied by any difference in the phenomenal character of one's imagery or sensory 
experience.  Thus  there  are  differences  in  the  phenomenal  character  of  experience--the 
experience of understanding, hence of consciously thinking--that transcend differences in 
the way it seems to visualize or sense. The same point can be made by drawing attention 
to  wordless  imageless  thought--sudden  realizations,  or  turns  of  thought,  that  occur 
unverbalized. 

The next step is to recognize that these sorts of differences are not phenomenally all the 
same.  These  more-than-sensory  differences  in  phenomenal  character  are  many  and 
continuously various, as the sensory ones are. This is illustrated both by what I call the 
phenomenon of "interpretive switch" as well as by changes in the direction of wordless 
imageless  thought.  But  if  non-imagistic  (or  "non-iconic")  thought  is  phenomenally 
conscious in this way, it remains to be clarified just how intimately these differences in 
the way it seems to us to think are related to the intentionality of thought--to the fact that 
one is assessable for truth in virtue of what one thinks. 

I characterize the relationship as follows. "If during some period of time t, it seems to x 
as it seems to me on some occasion to think non-iconically that p, then there is some q, 
such  that  during  t,  x  thinks  that  q."  (p.  284)  To  put  this  another  way:  each  of  us  non-
iconic thinkers, to whom it seems some way to think, are such that, if it seems some way 
to someone else the way it thus seems to us (if someone is our counterpart in respect of 

"noetic phenomenal features"), then that entity is also a non-iconic thinker. Moreover, for 
any  such  noetic  phenomenal  counterpart  x,  there  are  conditions  such  that  when  they 
obtain, it follows that what x thinks is true--and since these conditions do not constitute 
an interpretation of x or x's features, x's phenomenal noetic features are not merely ones 
in respect of which, but onesin virtue of which x is assessable for truth--therefore they are 
intentional features. 

I describe things in this manner, instead of more straightforwardly (say, by claiming that 
if it seems to x as it does to me to think that p, x thinks that p) for a couple of reasons. 
First, I want to make it clear that when it seems to me as it does to think that p, there can 
be others ways of characterizing what I (or my counterpart) think, other than as a thought 
that  p,  that  have  just  as  good  title  to  be  reports  of  what  I  (or  he  or  she)  then  thinks. 
Moreover, at least if we allow that thoughts can be "externally individuated" there will be 
some values of p, such that, when it seems to my counterpart the way it seems to me to 
think that p, it will not be the case that he or she thinks that p (as for instance, when I 
think, of the pen I am holding, that this is out of ink). 

I argue for this conception partly by arguing that the sorts of reasons that may lead one to 
think that noetic phenomenality could not guarantee non-iconic thought do not withstand 
examination. To those for whom the Wittgensteinian dictum that understanding is not an 
inner  process  has  the  ring  of  truth,  we  may  grant  that  there  is  no  essentially  isolable 
experience the speaker or hearer has that guarantees some understanding of what is said. 
For there is no reason to suppose that its seeming to us the way it does for us to think is 
an essentially isolable experience. We have no reason to think phenomenal experience is 
too  atomistic  to  exhibit  whatever  holism  is  essential  to  intentionality.  Furthermore,  we 
must  be  careful  to  distinguish  the  idea  that  it  may  seem  to  one  as  it  does  to  think  and 
understand  ,  while  one  has  only  a  very  flawed  or  partial  understanding  of  what  one  is 
saying, from the idea that it may seem this way to one, while one understands or thinks 
nothing  whatsoever.  Also,  we  must  beware  of  the  misleading  claim  that  no  "feeling  of 
understanding" can guarantee understanding--for what is at issue here is not a "feeling" at 
all,  in  the  sense  where  this  suggests  either  sensation  or  emotion,  and  it  is  not  some 
phenomenal character allegedly common to all cases of understanding. 

Now  there  are  "extraphenomenal"  conditions  (causal  links  to  the  natural  substances  in 
one's environment, membership in a certain linguistic community) that certain influential 
arguments  (associated  with  Saul  Kripke,  Hillary  Putnam,  and  Tyler  Burge)  tell  us  are 
involved  in  the  identity  of  thought  and  belief.  Is  this  an  indication,  either  that  one's 
phenomenal  twins  might  be  literally  devoid  of  thought,  or  else  that  something  on  the 
order of interpretation is necessary before what they think is determinate enough to make 
them assessable for truth? I argue for a negative answer to this question. Let us allow that 
one has no genuine water thoughts where a causal link to an H2O infested environment is 
lacking, and one is surrounded merely by "watery" XYZ. And let us allow that one thinks 
no  bona  fide  arthritis  thoughts  when  one  is  no  part  of  a  language  community  whose 
arthritis  experts  assert  that  arthritis  can  afflict  only  the  joints:  one  thinks  at  most 
"tharthritis" thoughts. Finally, let us allow that this link and this membership cannot be 
guaranteed  by  one's  phenomenal  features.  Still,  it  does  not  follow  that  my  phenomenal 

twin, who lacks the relevant causal links, might think nothing whatsoever when he says 
"Do not waste water," and "Someone's put water in the whisky bottle," etc. And it does 
not  follow  that  my  phenomenal  homologue  may,  failing  membership  in  an  appropriate 
linguistic community, just express no thought at all, when he says "My dog's got terrible 
arthritis,"  "These  arthritis  pills  do  not  work  worth  a  darn,"  etc.  Nor  should  we  assume 
that, if extraphenomenal conditions make me and my twin thinkers of distinct thoughts, 
these  conditions  have  the  status  of  interpretations  added  to  phenomenal  experience, 
without  which  one  would  not  be  assessable  for  truth  in  respect  of  one's  noetic 
phenomenal  features.  We  can  explain  what  makes  me  truth-assessable  relative  to  my 
environment,  while  my  twin  is  instead  truth-assessable  relative  to  his  environment, 
without assuming that these environments furnish an interpretation to noetic phenomenal 
character, whose absence would leave what one thinks totally indeterminate. 

I conclude that no separable interpreting conditions need adding to our phenomenal lives 
to  make  us  the  thinkers  of  non-iconic  thoughts--so  our  phenomenality  is  as  inseparable 
from  the  intentionality  of  our  conceptual,  non-imagistic  thinking,  as  it  is  from  the 
intentionality of our imagery and sense perception. 

9. The Value of Consciousness 

Even  if  in  Chapters  Seven  and  Eight  I  rescue  phenomenal  consciousness  from  a 
belittlement  that  rests  on  dissociating  it  from  intelligence  and  intentionality,  or  on 
underestimating  its  range  and  diversity,  a  question  about  its  importance  still  needs 
explicit treatment. Although I do make some remarks about the efficacy of consciousness 
and epiphenomenalism (Section 9.1), my main interest is in what value consciousness has 
for  us,  quite  apart  from  what  it  is  good  for--quite  apart  that  is,  from  what  other  good 
things  it  brings  us,  for  the  sake  of  which  we  value  it.  What  I  investigate  primarily  in 
Chapter Nine is the sense in which, and the extent to which, we value consciousness for 
its own sake. 

That  we  often  value  the  look,  taste,  smell,  and  feel  of  things  to  us,  not  just  for  some 
separable  payoff  they  provide,  but  for  themselves,  may  seem  too  clear  to  merit  much 
examination. But I think it is not entirely obvious just what it means to value experience 
for its own sake, what shows that we do, and how great this sort of value is. It might seem 
that to value x for its own sake, means to value it, even when nothing else for the sake of 
which one values it is forthcoming. But it is far from clear that I would still think it better 
to have certain forms of conscious experience than not, even if everything else I normally 
assume  comes  with  this,  for  the  sake  of  which  I  want  experience,  is  denied  to  me--say 
because I am locked forever in some kind of experience inducing virtual reality machine. 

I take the question of the intrinsic value of consciousness to be that of whether we value 
having  phenomenal  features,  but  not  only  for  the  sake  of  what  other  non-phenomenal 
ones  we  think  will  come  with  them  (Section  9.2).  Instead  of  testing  this  by  asking 
whether  there  is  conscious  experience  you  think  it  better  to  have,  come  what  may,  you 

 
might, it seems, simply ask yourself, regarding some kind of phenomenal experience you 
value  having--say,  the  visual  experience  of  form  and  color,  taste  experience,  sexual 
experience--do  you  value  having  it merely  for  the  sake  of  the  non-phenomenal  benefits 
you believe they offer? I take it that if you answer this question sincerely in the negative, 
then,  if  you  have  no  reason  to  think  you're  mistaken,  you  have  reason  to  think  you're 
correct, and thus you do value phenomenal experience for its own sake. 

What might give you reason to think you're mistaken? Presumably if, when offered the 
chance  to  get  the  nonphenomenal  goods  either with  or  without  consciousness,  you  find 
yourself  either  indifferent  between  the  two  options,  or  inclined  to  accept  the  no-
consciousness plan, then it turns out you did not really value the conscious experience for 
its own sake after all. But what if, on the other hand, you find yourself still going for the 
"with  consciousness"  option,  even  if  you  thought  you  could  get  all  the  nonphenomenal 
goods  you  wanted  without  it?  Then,  it  seems,  not  only  have  you  not  found  evidence 
against your initial assertion that you value (certain forms of) consciousness intrinsically, 
you  have  found  more  reason  to  think  that  you  do  thus  value  it.  Of  course,  we  do  not 
actually  know  any  way  to  arrange  for  this  option  for  anyone  (how  for  example  to  give 
them  blindsight  or  blind  taste  that  would  get  them  all  the  extraphenomenal  benefits  of 
conscious vision or gustation). So we can run this test only as an experiment in thought. 
Even so, it seems you can legitimately use it to bolster the conviction that you do value 
having certain kinds of conscious experience for its own sake. And while probably few 
will  be  unable  to  verify  in  this  way  the  intrinsic  value  they  accord  their  experiences  of 
food, drink and sex, the preceding chapters' elucidation of the ways in which differences 
in  sensory  recognition  and  intelligence  as  well  as  in  non-imagistic  thought  are 
phenomenally manifest, prepare us to see that this sort of value pertains to far more than 
uncultivated or merely sensory pleasures. 

It may seem that in testing our evaluation of conscious experience by asking whether we 
would miss it even  when  offered the chance of a partial or total "zombified" existence, 
replete  with  same  nonphenomenal  goods,  we  must  abandon  the  relative  metaphysical 
austerity  to  which  I  earlier  limited  myself  in  explaining  the  notion  of  phenomenal 
consciousness and formulating my standard for consciousness neglect. But notice that I 
ask  here  merely  how  you  would  respond  to  your  options  if  you  came  to  think  it  was 
possible  for  you  to  maintain  as  good  as  normal  nonphenomenal  capacities,  after  a  total 
excision  of  relevant  talents  for  phenomenal  experience.  To  answer  this  question  in  a 
manner that reveals a commitment to valuing consciousness for its own sake, you need 
not actually believe that it is possible, in any sense, for this "zombification" to happen to 
you, or to anyone else. 

This way of framing the issue still leaves unresolved the question of how much intrinsic 
value we accord conscious experience. But with an appropriate variation in the thought 
experiment, I argue we can see that we intrinsically value consciousness this much: it is 
on  account  of  our  valuing  the  having  of  conscious  experience  for  its  own  sake  that  we 
would regard a future in which we lack it altogether as little or no better than no future 
for  ourselves  at  all  (Section  9.3).  I  do  focus  most  on  versions  of  this  value-clarifying 
thought  experiment  that  are  egocentric  in  character:  I  ask  the  reader  to  ask:  "Would  I 

think it better that I got to keep phenomenal experience, even if I thought I could get all 
the  nonphenomenal  goodies  for  the  sake  of  which  I  want  it,  but  in  the  absence  of  the 
phenomenal?"  However,  similar  exercises  can  also  reveal  the  ways  in  which  we  each 
value  others'  possession  of  conscious  experience  for  its  own  sake.  Though  it  seems  we 
can in this way show ourselves to value others' experience intrinsically so much that we 
would  regard  their  zombification  as  little  or  no  better  than  their  death,  only  if  we  are 
willing  to  countenance  the  idea  that  others'  total  and  permanent  loss  of  consciousness 
would entail their death--that is, a complete extinction of the persons they are. 

To all of this, one may say: "Fine, that shows we do as a matter of fact value our own and 
others'  possession  of  phenomenal  features  for  its  own  sake,  but  is  not  the  more 
philosophical question that of whether we should so value this?" However, I think where 
intrinsic value is concerned there is little to do to argue someone into its acceptance from 
a  position  of  non-acceptance  or  rejection.  But  what  we  can  do,  is  to  make  clear  to 
ourselves that we do already value consciousness for its own sake, and then to defend this 
value by considering that we have no reason to abandon it. Such reasons as I can imagine 
being  offered  depend  only  on  some  misconception  about  phenomenal  consciousness 
(Section 9.4). 

In closing I add that, in addition to whatever valuable work we may think consciousness 
does  for  us,  and  beyond  whatever  intrinsic  value  we  find  in  it,  phenomenal  character 
offers  this  further  reason  to  hold  our  reflective  interest:  it  is  a  pervasive,  real,  and 
multifarious  way  in  which  human  sensory  and  conceptual  intelligence  shows  itself.  To 
forfeit  interest  in  it  is  then  to  relinquish  philosophy's  and  psychology's  longstanding 
concern to describe and explain human perception, imagery and linguistically expressed 
thought. If accounts of these do not explain their phenomenal manifestations for us, they 
are  radically  incomplete.  And  if  they  are  incompatible  with  accurate  phenomenological 
description, they are false (Section 9.5). 

While the conception of phenomenal consciousness at which one will have arrived at the 
close  of  my  book  may  make  one  better  able  to  grasp  the  problems  that  have  often 
dominated  philosophical 
thinking  about  consciousness--questions  about  how 
consciousness relates to the brain, and how it is woven into the causal order of nature--I 
do  not  pretend  my  view  makes  these  problems  any  easier  to  solve.  But  that  does  not 
threaten  to  justify  its  rejection.  Maybe  we  should  see  the  mind-body  problem  as 
peculiarly recalcitrant, or at least, as unanswerable to the sorts of solutions that some, in 
the  name  of  scientific  materialism,  have  claimed  to  give.  However,  if  I  give  aid  to  the 
thesis  that  the  goal  of  fitting  consciousness  into  the  explanatory  framework  of  natural 
science will forever elude us, that is an aid I take no special joy in giving. But I would 
indeed be glad if my perspective on consciousness made us regard more seriously a range 
of issues about it that may, I believe, be examined while taking a break from the mind-
body problem. Once we are clearer about what we mean by phenomenal consciousness 
and character, and how they relate to the intentionality of thought and perception, we are 
better  placed  for  a  new  and  deeper  examination  of  a  range  of  other  important  and 
interesting  issues.  We  are,  for  example,  better  able  to  examine:  the  ways  in  which 
emotion  and  volition  are  manifested  in  conscious  experience;  distinctions  between 

conceptual and nonconceptual forms of representation, intentionality or intelligence; the 
nature  of  attention  and  its  relation  to  intentionality  (both  first  and  higher  order);  the 
relative richness or poverty of experience; the unity of consciousness and its relation both 
to the unity of persons, and to the distinctiveness of first-person knowledge; and we can 
also better reflect on the relative value of different kinds of experience, and the bearing 
this has on the value of persons and their productions. 

References 

Block,  N.  (1995).  On  a  confusion  about  a  function  of  consciousness.  Behavioral  and 
Brain Sciences, 19, 227-247. 

Chalmers,  D.  (1996).  The  conscious  mind:  In  search  of  a  fundamental  theory  Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Churchland,  P.M.  (1981).  Eliminative  materialism  and  the  propositional  attitudes. 
Journal of Philosophy, 78, 67-90. 

Churchland, P.S. (1988) Reduction and the neurobiological basis of consciousness. In A. 
Marcel  &  E.  Bisiach  (Eds.),  Consciousness  in  contemporary  science.  (pp.  273-304). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Dennett, D.C. (1988). Quining qualia. In A. Marcel & E. Bisiach (Eds.), Consciousness 
in contemporary science. (pp. 42-77). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Dennett, D.C. (1991). Consciousness explained. Boston: Little, Brown. 

Gopnik, A. (1993). How we know our own minds: The illusion of first-person knowledge 
of intentionality. Brain and Behavioral Sciences, 16, 1-14. 

Jaynes, J. (1976). The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 

Marcel, A. & Bisiach, E. (Eds.). (1988). Consciousness in contemporary science. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Nisbett,  R.E.  &  Wilson,  T.D.  (1977).  Telling  more  than  we  know:  Verbal  reports  on 
mental processes. Psychological Review, 86, 474-97. 

Rosenthal,  D.  (1986/1991).  Two  concepts  of  consciousness.  In  D.  Rosenthal  (Ed.),  The 
nature of mind. (pp. 462-477). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

 
Rosenthal,  D.  (1991).  The  independence  of  consciousness  and  sensory  quality.  In  E. 
Villanueva  (Ed.),  Philosophical  issues:  Vol.1.  Consciousness.  (pp.  15-36).  Atascadero, 
CA: Ridgeview. 

Rosenthal,  D.  (1993).  Thinking  that  one  thinks.  In  M.  Davies  and  G.  W.  Humphreys 
(Eds.),  Consciousness:  Psychological  and  philosophical  essays.  (pp.  197-223).  Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell. 

Tye, M. (1996). Ten problems of consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Weiskrantz,  L.  (1986).  Blindsight:  A  case  study  and  implications.  Oxford:  Oxford 
University Press.  

 
