A

Abandonment

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Although children who are abandoned tend to be
infants or young children (who are called foundlings),
abandonment still
is important to consider when
studying the period of adolescence. Abandonment
potentially relates to adolescents in two major ways.
First, abandonment is relevant to adolescents in that
they can be abandoned or in that the feeling of being
abandoned leads youth to leave their parents by, for
example, running away from their homes (Thompson
et al. 2008). Second, abandonment is relevant to ado-
lescents because they may be at risk for abandoning
their own children. These propositions may be true
but, regrettably, research on abandonment is consider-
ably inadequate and does not support them conclu-
sively. For example, researchers and policy makers lack
reliable statistics regarding how many children are
abandoned, their basic characteristics and situations,
as well as the characteristics of those who abandon
them. Even the most comprehensive federal statistics
reporting on the incidence and common features of
child maltreatment do not report abandonment rates
or characteristics (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 2009). Thus, studies do not have
a ﬁrm grip on the number of cases involving abandon-
ment, but they do provide a sense that it is an impor-
tant issue that may affect adolescents.

turns out

Abandonment

to be a much more
complicated legal and social concept than might be
initially imagined. Legally, children are abandoned
when their parents leave them without the supervision
of an appropriate person for what is deemed to be an
inappropriate amount of time. Typically, the parents do
not intend to return and relinquish their control over

the child’s care; and the child is abandoned outside of
legal adoption. As with other types of child maltreat-
ment, abandonment is regulated by both civil and
criminal law. Child abandonment is a criminal offense
in every state; but what constitutes abandonment varies
from one state to another. Variations focus on what the
parents do, the child’s characteristics, and the penalties.
Much variation exists in the civil context as well.
Variation in this context also focuses not only on
what parents do as well as on the child’s characteristics
and situations but also on the rights of parents
involved and the types of resources that might be
provided to the parents and families. In the civil con-
text, abandonment also arises when a court decides to
terminate the natural rights of parents on the grounds
of abandonment in order to permit adoption or other
state interventions on behalf of the child. Importantly,
pursuing abandonment in criminal or civil contexts
has consequences, especially in terms of protections
individuals would have and what would be appropriate
outcomes for the parents as well as the children:
criminal justice systems would aim to prosecute and
punish parents in ways that might remove them from
their homes while civil, child welfare systems would
aim to consider, in appropriate cases, the potential
rehabilitation of parents as well as reuniﬁcation with
their families.

The law remains equally complicated when dealing
with abandonment from the perspective of adolescents
who might be the ones to abandon their own children.
Adolescents who have children may be at higher risk of
abandoning their infants, and this supposition has led
to important legal developments relating directly to the
legal regulation of abandonment. Although adolescents
may be deemed at higher risk, research has yet to
provide supporting evidence to that effect. It has been
adolescent (and other young) mothers, however, who
have tended to attract attention from society and policy
makers. That attention recently contributed to the
development of “Safe Haven Laws.” Every state now

Roger J.R. Levesque (ed.), Encyclopedia of Adolescence, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1695-2,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011

2 A Abnormality

has laws permitting parents to abandon their children
at a safe place, such as with ﬁre station departments,
emergency medical personnel, hospitals, police
departments, and in some cases, churches (Pollock
and Hittle 2003). Although these laws have been
described as permitting parents to abandon their chil-
dren anonymously and without fear of prosecution,
that description actually may not be the case depending
on state laws. Again and as with all other areas of child
welfare and criminal law, laws can be quite complicated
and can vary from state to state.

State laws vary considerably in their approaches to
regulating safe havens for children who would be aban-
doned. They vary in the manner that they restrict the
age of babies who can be legally relinquished, vary in
terms of who they allow to relinquish the children, and
vary to the extent that they assure anonymity. Equally
they vary in the speciﬁc protection
importantly,
granted to those who seek to relinquish, for example,
if a child has been abused; the case is likely to be treated
as an abandonment rather than relinquishment, and
the relinquisher can be prosecuted for their abusive
actions. States also vary in terms of who can accept
the baby and the protections that they would get from
liability. In addition, states vary in terms of the rights of
the relinquishing parent (e.g., whether they can change
their minds) as well as the rights of the children (e.g.,
whether their medical history can be taken by the
relinquisher). The rights of fathers also vary, with
some states requiring a search for the natural father.
Although it may be a general rule that safe haven laws
permit abandonment without fear or prosecution,
is permitted certainly varies and that
then, what
variation highlights well some of the important con-
siderations that can arise in cases of abandonment.

In addition to their remarkable variation, safe
haven laws are notable for the extent to which they
have attracted considerable controversy as well as
their relative ineffectiveness (Sanger 2006). Although
they have helped assuage fears of children being killed
or otherwise harmed by parents who no longer wanted
them, available evidence has yet to support their effec-
tiveness (see Pollock and Hittle 2003). The legal
responses also have been seen as problematic in that
they do not seek to identify and serve the young women
who feel isolated and lack access to resources and
support in times of crisis leading to abandonment.
This lack of a broader perspective makes this area

important to the study of adolescence as it necessarily
involves the need to address broader issues relating
to adolescent sexuality and pregnancy, enhance com-
munication among youth, families, and communities,
and develop supportive networks for adolescents in
need. These broader issues go to the core of the study
of adolescence as well as the core of efforts that can
eventually address abandonment and its consequences.

Cross-References
▶ Runaway Youth

References
Pollock, K., & Hittle, L. (2003). Baby abandonment: The role of child
welfare systems. Washington, DC: Child Welfare League of America.
Sanger, C. (2006). Infant safe haven laws: Legislating the culture of

life. Columbia Law Review, 106, 753–829.

Thompson, S. J., Bender, K. A., Lewis, C. M., & Watkins, R. (2008).
Runaway and pregnant: Risk factors associated with pregnancy
in a national sample of runaway/homeless female adolescents.
The Journal of Adolescent Health, 43(2), 125–132.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2009). Child
Maltreatment, 2007. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.

Abnormality

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Conceptions of abnormality are at the center of the
study of mental health and healthy development, both
generally and as applied to the adolescent period. Yet,
what constitutes abnormality continues to be the
considerable debate and controversy.
subject of
A close examination of the study of abnormality and
disorder reveals that there are many ways to approach
the notion of abnormality, all of which have their
limitations and strengths.

Controversies surrounding conceptions of disorder
and abnormality emerged quite forcefully a few decades
ago, especially in popular culture, as they were sparked
by the writings of Thomas Szaz (1971, 1974) who
argued that mental disorders could be conceived as
a function of subjective societal values and were, in
essence, myths. Although his model was unable to

Abnormality A 3

A

explain why some socially disapproved beliefs were not
deemed pathological (such as rudeness or some forms
of racism), his conceptualization did focus on a key
point of abnormality, which is that abnormality at least
partly constitutes conditions deemed undesirable and
that societal conditions ﬁgure prominently in determin-
ing what should be deemed undesirable in the ﬁrst
instance. This approach was championed by many
who questioned whether the concept of mental disorder
actually existed, and viewed it as a myth that justiﬁed
the use of medical power to intervene in socially
disapproved behavior (see Foucault 1964/1965; Sarbind
1969). This skeptical view, having made important
points, still left much to be examined, as highlighted
by other efforts to deﬁne and understand abnormality.
One of the most expected ways to conceptualize
abnormality relies on the statistical conception of nor-
mal. Cohen (1981) provided the most authoritative
statement on a statistical approach to disorder in
which he viewed disease as a quantitative deviation
from the statistical norm. The approach has consider-
able merit, as statistical deviations are critical to several
deﬁnitions of disorders, such as intelligence. Yet, statis-
tical deviation above the norm may be viewed as
healthy, and even arguing that deviation must be in
the negative direction to be deemed abnormal in the
sense of being a disorder remains problematic since
some behaviors can be statistically deviant but still
not disorders (such as immoral or criminal behaviors).
Still, disorders often are statistically deviant, and deter-
mining what would constitute a disorder would require
imposing either subjective or objective judgments on
that statistical deviance.

Another approach to determining what constitutes
abnormality relies on the notion that it simply is what
health professionals treat (see Taylor 1976). This
approach has some appeal in that it takes a pragmatic
approach focusing on conditions that elicit interven-
tions from mental health professionals, centers on
patients and professionals, and may circumvent issues
relating to broader societal value judgments. Still, the
approach has its limitations in that many conditions
treated by professionals (e.g., pregnancy or parent–
child conﬂicts) may not be pathological yet still evoke
a need for professional assistance. Perhaps even more
problematic, this approach runs the risk of having both
patients and professionals being wrong about what
constitutes a disorder and, equally problematically, it

can lead to not viewing disorders as disorders until
those in treatment view them as such. Thus, this
approach may have considerable merit but it still
lacks a general concern for broader societal or group
judgments.

Other models focus less on enlisting social criteria
and personal value judgments and more on invoking
biological criteria. Some, for example, have argued that
abnormality should be deﬁned by relying strictly on
such biological criteria derived from evolutionary
theory (see Kendell 1975). These would include iden-
tifying as abnormal conditions that reduced one’s life
span or reduced reproductive ﬁtness. Although this
approach has the advantage of trying to be objective,
it still necessarily relies on value judgments in determi-
nations of what would be considered disadvantageous.
The approach also encounters important limitations in
that many disadvantages may be due to environments,
and many disadvantages are tied to intrinsic conditions
(males die younger than females) and not to disorders.
Yet another approach conceives of abnormality as
harmful dysfunction. This approach (see Wakeﬁeld
1992) champions a view that takes into account social
values in the concept of harm and more objective
approaches through focusing on dysfunction. The
approach seeks to distinguish conceptions of abnor-
mality that are socially constructed from those that are
arguably more scientiﬁc. Although the approach has
considerable merit, it too is subject to limitations in
that there are no clear cut deﬁnitions of dysfunction
and adaptive functions, and there may not be clear
dividing
and abnormal
functioning.

lines between normal

Arguably, the most widely accepted view of abnor-
mality and disorder comes from the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual (DSM), now in its 4th edition and
published by the American Psychiatric Association
(2000). The DSM’s deﬁnition has been relatively
unchanged since its third edition. Its criteria for
disorder
focus on notions of distress, disability,
expectability, and dysfunction. The concept of disabil-
ity is meant to capture behavioral and observable com-
ponents while the notion of distress seeks to capture the
more subjective and experiential aspects of mental dis-
order. The focus on expectability highlights a focus on
statistical norms and what is likely within a normal
range. The focus on dysfunction denotes a breakdown
or disruption indicating a failure to perform functions,

4 A Abortion Counseling

which was meant to provide a more objective view of
abnormality that resisted a focus on social value judg-
ments. Although the DSM’s approach brings together
many others, it too has been widely criticized, as illus-
trated by studies highlighting different manifestations
of mental disorders worldwide (see, e.g., Kleinman and
Cohen 1997) as well as by commentaries highlighting
the inherent problems with the use of terms like “dys-
function” to deﬁne disorder (see, e.g., Wakeﬁeld 1992)
and arguing that the approach to diagnoses lacks sufﬁ-
cient clinical utility (see Andersson and Ghaderi 2006).
revolving around deﬁnitions of
abnormality are likely to continue. They likely are to
do so given the challenges of identifying clear criteria
for abnormality and changing societal views of what
can be deemed valued. Still, despite these controversies,
researchers and theorists do tend to rely on overlapping
criteria for what constitutes abnormality, a tendency
that helps to account for the remarkable consensus that
does exist regarding whether speciﬁc conditions could
be deemed abnormal.

Controversies

Cross-References
▶ Disease
▶ Normality

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders DSM-IV-TR. Washington, DC:
Author.

Andersson, G., & Ghaderi, A. (2006). Overview and analysis of the
behaviourist critism of the diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders. Clinical Psychologist, 10, 67–77.

Cohen, H. (1981). The evolution of the concept of disease. In A. L.
Caplan, H. T. Engelhardt Jr., & J. J. McCartney (Eds.), Concepts of
health and disease: Interdisciplinary perspectives (pp. 209–220).
Reading: Addison Wesley.

Foucault, M. (1965). Madness and civilization: A history of insanity in
the age of reason. (trans: Howard, R.) New York: Pantheon
(Original work published 1964).

Kendell, R. E. (1975). The concept of disease and its implications for
psychiatry. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 127, 305–315.
Kleinman, A., & Cohen, A. (1997). Psychiatry’s global challenge.

Scientiﬁc American, 276, 74–77.

Sarbin, T. (1969). The scientiﬁc status of the mental illness metaphor.
In S. C. Pond & R. B. Edgerton (Eds.), Changing perspectives in
mental illness (pp. 1–16). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Szasz, T. S. (1971). The sane slave. American Journal of Psychotherapy,

25, 228–239.

Szasz, T. S. (1974). The myth of mental illness: Foundations of a theory

of personal conduct (Rev. ed.). New York: Harper & Row.

Taylor, F. K. (1976). The medical model of the disease concept. The

British Journal of Psychiatry, 128, 588–594.

Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (1992). The concept of mental disorder: On the
facts and social values. The

boundary between biological
American Psychologist, 47, 373–388.

Abortion Counseling

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Unwanted pregnancies leading to abortions are com-
mon life events, and they relate directly to youth.
Approximately 22% of the 205 million annual preg-
nancies end in abortion (Sedgh et al. 2007), and in 2004
individuals less than 19 comprised approximately
17.4% of completed abortions while 32.8% were ages
20–24. Despite its prevalence, abortions raise a host of
social and legal issues that challenge basic values and
foster intense controversy. Indeed, researchers often
charge that the scientiﬁc enterprise in this area of
study is being manipulated and that research ﬁndings
are being misrepresented to justify particular social
agendas, especially efforts involving access to contra-
ception and abortion (see Russo and Denious 2005).
Those controversies likely will continue, especially as
they relate to mothers’ mental health outcomes relating
to abortions, and particularly as they relate to adoles-
cents and their status (with research noting varied
outcomes and mostly focusing on adult women; see
Major et al. 2009). Although controversies tend to
focus on elective abortions, this essay examines all
three main types of abortion – therapeutic, elective,
and spontaneous abortions, and some of the important
legal and clinical issues they might raise for adolescents.
Therapeutic and elective abortions typically are
considered together, although they can be deemed
considerably different. Therapeutic abortion is the
deliberate termination of a pregnancy aimed at pre-
serving the mental or physical health of the mother,
preventing the birth of a lethally defective fetus, or
reducing the number of fetuses in multiple conceptions
to reduce health risks. Thus, an elective abortion is one
done for any other reason. Over 90% of abortions
occur during the ﬁrst trimester, either utilizing surgical

Abortion Counseling A 5

A

or nonsurgical procedures. Vacuum aspiration may be
used during weeks 6–12, and medicinal abortion
between weeks 0–9. Surgical options available after
the ﬁrst trimester are dilation and curettage used
during 12–15 weeks, and dilation and evacuation is
used 15–12 weeks. Dilation and extraction, performed
after 21 weeks, is largely illegal in the USA since the
passing of the Partial-birth Abortion Ban of 2003,
which the Supreme Court upheld in Gonzales v.
Carhart (2007). The legal foundation of that case is
important to consider given that it directly concerns
many of the legal and policy issues relating to elective
and therapeutic abortions, and those issues directly
relate to counseling contexts.

In Carhart, the Court held that the partial-birth
abortion ban did not impose an undue burden on the
due process right of women to obtain an abortion. The
Court did so by noting that the burden was not imper-
missible as framed under precedents assumed to be
controlling, such as the Court’s prior decisions in Roe
v. Wade (1973) and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern
Pennsylvania v. Casey (1992). Roe v. Wade had recog-
nized that a right to privacy under the due process
clause in the Fourteenth Amendment to the United
States Constitution extends to a woman’s decision to
have an abortion, but it had noted that the right needed
to be balanced against the government’s legitimate
interests for regulating abortions (protecting prenatal
life and protecting the mother’s health). Finding that
the state’s interests grew over the course of the preg-
nancy, the Court ruled in favor of permitting greater
state regulation depending on the trimester of the
pregnancy. That approach would be modiﬁed later to
permit a right to abortion up to the point of viability,
which is usually placed at 7 months (28 weeks) but may
occur earlier. The Court adopted the viability approach
in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v.
Casey (1992).

In Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania
v. Casey (1992), a deeply divided Court rendered
a plurality opinion that recognized viability as the
point at which the state interest in the life of the fetus
outweighs the rights of the woman and abortion may
be banned entirely except where it is necessary, in
appropriate medical judgment, for the preservation of
the life or health of the mother. The plurality opinion in
Casey also crafted the rule that a restriction would be
impermissible if it posed an undue burden on women’s

rights to seek an abortion, with the undue burden
deﬁned as a restriction that had the purpose or effect
of placing a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman
seeking an abortion of a nonviable fetus. Speciﬁcally in
this case, the Court used the standard to ﬁnd imper-
missible the need for spousal notiﬁcations but upheld
the use of 24-hour waiting periods, informed consent,
and parental consent requirements on the grounds that
they did not pose undue burdens. The focus on
informed consent was to ensure that women had fuller
knowledge of what abortions were and parental
consent requirements were efforts to ensure (with
some exceptions) that parents were involved in the
minor’s decision-making. These provisions highlight
the tension between a focus on individual rights and
a focus on seeking to ensure that individuals make
deliberate decisions.

The tension between individual rights and those of
others who might have a stake in the abortion decision
is worth highlighting in that it is particularly important
for adolescents. As noted, the Court in Planned Parent-
hood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey (1992)
had considered, among other provisions, the parental
consent measure of an abortion statute. The statute
provided that, except in a medical emergency, the
informed consent of at least one parent (or guardian)
was required before an unemancipated minor could
obtain an abortion. The statute also provided a judicial
bypass procedure, if neither parent gave consent, upon
a ﬁnding that the young woman was sufﬁciently mature
or that an abortion would be in her best interests. The
Court ruled that a state may require a minor seeking an
abortion to obtain the consent of a parent or guardian,
provided that there is an adequate judicial bypass
procedure. That approach conﬁrmed what the Court
had previously noted, in passing, in prior cases, most
notably Bellotti v. Baird (1979). It was in Bellotti that
the Court had noted criteria that could make for
a constitutional bypass provision. The provision must
allow the minor to bypass the consent requirement if
she establishes that she is mature enough and well
enough informed to make the abortion decision inde-
pendently, must allow the minor to bypass the consent
requirement if she establishes that the abortion would
be in her best interests, must ensure the minor’s ano-
nymity, and must provide for expeditious bypass pro-
cedures. The Court strictly foreclosed parents’ absolute
right to be consulted about, much less veto, their child’s

6 A Abortion Counseling

decision to abort. This recognition has led the Court to
require states to provide access to an alternative deci-
sion-maker, such as a judge, when the state imposes
parental notice and consent conditions on the minor’s
abortion decision. This balance serves as a compromise
position between according minors the right to make
their own decisions concerning the continuation of
a pregnancy and according parents or guardians’
unchallenged authority to determine whether the preg-
nancy must be continued to term. But it does recognize
that parents can serve important functions in that
minors typically lack valuable attributes and resources
(such as ﬁnancial stability, education, and maturity)
that an adult would be more likely to bring to a situation
of unwanted motherhood. Clearly, whether parents are
notiﬁed or give consent raises important tensions, and
these same tensions emerge in counseling.

Important issues arise in counseling contexts, and
they can vary throughout the decision-making process.
In therapeutic abortion, individuals must ﬁrst decide
whether to continue with the pregnancy despite the
risks. If indeed the pregnancy is wanted and possibly
difﬁcult to achieve, efforts are made to address poten-
tial feelings of uncertainty, grief, or despair. In these
contexts, ethical and religious questions likely arise. In
procedures involving elective abortion, pre-abortion
counseling seeks to aid in the decision-making process
and consideration of reasons and options. Counseling
involves considering not only obstacles from their aca-
demic, career, and life plans but also responses from
families or communities. Adolescent girls likely are in
different positions than adults in that they also likely
must consider their readiness for parenthood, stunted
development, and family discord. In elective abortion
contexts, postabortion counseling may not be neces-
sary, as a range of emotions may be present including
sadness, anxiety, guilt, regret, but also positive emo-
tions. Counseling most likely is needed in contexts
where the adolescent lacks social support, feels coerced
in the decision-making, has high ambivalence, or has
other preexisting circumstances that can contribute to
negative postabortion reactions. For postabortion
counseling, no standards have been published; how-
ever, women generally are helped to identify emotions
and life circumstances impacted by their decision.
Psychoeducation may be given regarding new coping
skills, and religious aspects may be considered to facil-
itate personal resolution. Importantly and depending

on resolutions, counseling may be provided during the
process itself, and it also may be needed later.

Spontaneous abortions, or miscarriages, occur
before 27 weeks of pregnancy and result in infant
death. While 12–15% of clinically known pregnancies
end in miscarriage, many more occur before anyone
recognizes the pregnancy, thus increasing the miscar-
riage rate to an estimated 45–50% of all pregnancies.
Risk appears to increase with age, with women ages
20–24 having a 9% chance. Sometimes miscarriages
may be physically painful processes, with the negative
experiences sometimes compounded by the very pri-
vate nature of the event. Miscarriage puts individuals at
risk for depressive symptoms, major depression, anxi-
ety, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and posttraumatic-
stress disorder (Klier et al. 2002; Geller et al. 2004).
Some women may be concerned about immediate
medical issues and underlying factors for the miscar-
riage. Here, post-loss counseling aims to validate death
and normalize feelings of grief. Symptom reduction,
grief management, utilization of coping resources, and
psychosocial factors also may be addressed. Research in
this area has not centered on the needs of adolescents,
although adolescents’ status and developmental needs
may raise distinct issues.

Whether intentional or unintentional, abortion
remains prevalent. It necessarily involves numerous
complex and difﬁcult issues. Those issues are likely
even more complex when dealing with adolescents.
In addition to dealing with psychological, moral,
and social considerations, this area of adolescents’
experiences also involves complex laws that raise
important issues and try to balance many rights and
responsibilities. Despite
and
perhaps because of intense controversies, research rel-
evant to adolescents has been sporadic and much of the
research in this area, including writings that focus on
clinical
issues, tends not to focus on adolescents’
particular needs (see Coleman 2006; Levesque 2000).

complexities

those

Cross-References
▶ Abortion Rights

References
Bellotti v. Baird. (1979). 443 U.S. 622.
Coleman, P. K. (2006). Resolution of unwanted pregnancy during
adolescence through abortion versus childbirth: Individual and
family predictors and psychological consequences. Journal of
Youth and Adolescence, 35, 903–911.

Abortion Rights A 7

A

Geller, P. A., Kerns, D., & Klier, C. M. (2004). Anxiety following
miscarriage and the subsequent pregnancy: A review of the
Journal of Psychosomatic
literature and future directions.
Research, 56, 35–45.

Gonzales v. Carhart. (2007). 550 U.S. 124.
Klier, C. M., Geller, P. A., & Ritsher, J. B. (2002). Affective disorders in
the aftermath of miscarriage: A comprehensive review. Archives
of Women’s Mental Health, 5, 129–149.

Levesque, R. J. R. (2000). Adolescents, sex, and the law: Preparing
adolescents for responsible citizenship. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Major, B., Appelbaum, M., Beckman, L., Dutton, M. A., Felipe Russo, N.,
& West, C. (2009). Abortion and mental health: Evaluating the
evidence. The American Psychologist, 64(9), 863–890.

Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey.

(1992) 505 U.S. 833.

Roe v. Wade. (1973) 410 U.S. 113.
Russo, N. F., & Denious, J. E. (2005). Controlling birth: Science,

politics and public policy. Journal of Social Issues, 61, 181–191.

Sedgh, G., Henshaw, S., Singh, S., Ahman, E., & Shah, I. H. (2007).
Induced abortion: Rates and trends worldwide. Lancet, 307,
1338–1345.

Abortion Rights

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

One of the most important issues facing adolescents
involves the extent to which their right to privacy will
be respected, and that right is implicated in a broad
variety of potential contexts and circumstances. In the
United States, a key area where this issue has been
litigated has been in the context of abortion. This
context is of signiﬁcance in and of itself as well as for
demonstrating how the legal system approaches the
rights of adolescents. As a result, Bellotti v. Baird
(1979), the leading Supreme Court case dealing with
adolescents’ rights to access abortions without the
involvement of their parents, is one of the most impor-
tant United States Supreme Court decisions dealing
with the adolescent period. The case and this area of
law address the fundamental issue of the extent to
which adolescents can have rights of their own and,
equally importantly, the extent to which they can
control the exercise of those rights.

Bellotti involved a Massachusetts law requiring par-
ents to consent for minors who were seeking abortions.

refuse consent,

The law had provided that if one or both parents of the
the minor could obtain
minor
a judicial order permitting the abortion if they were
able to show good cause. On appeal to the United
States Supreme Court, the Justices were unable to
agree on a single opinion that would announce the
rule and reasoning for its decision, but eight members
of the Court agreed that the Massachusetts statute
violated the United States Constitution. The law,
according to the Supreme Court, violated the indepen-
dent rights of minors to seek and obtain abortions.
Among other ﬁndings,
the Court required states
to respect mature minors’ rights to exercise their
right to access abortions and, by doing so, recognized
minors’ own rights without requiring parental involve-
ment. That general rule is worth exploring in greater
detail as it has important consequences for protecting
the rights of adolescents, especially those rights that
would be deemed fundamental and highly protected if
they were adults.

The case had multiple opinions that focused on
different aspects of adolescents’ rights. One of the
opinions (by four members of the Court) provided
the key ruling in the case. The opinion reasoned that
states need not require parental involvement in adoles-
cents’ decisions regarding abortions. However, if they
do seek to require a pregnant minor to obtain one or
both parents’ consent to an abortion, they also must
provide an alternative procedure for obtaining autho-
rization for the abortion. Alternative procedures must
allow a pregnant minor the opportunity to show either
(1) that she is mature enough and well enough
informed to make her abortion decision, in consulta-
tion with her physician, independently of her parents’
wishes, or (2) that even if she is not able to make the
decision independently, the abortion desired would be
in her best interests. The state also must ensure that
such proceedings assure that a resolution of the issue,
and any appeals that might follow, will be completed
with anonymity and with sufﬁcient expedition to
provide an effective opportunity for an abortion to be
performed. Following that reasoning, the Court held
that the Massachusetts statute unduly burdened the
constitutional right to seek an abortion because it
permitted the withholding of judicial authorization
for an abortion for a minor found to be mature
and fully competent to decide to have an abortion; it
was also unconstitutional because it required parental

8 A Abortion Rights

consultation or notiﬁcation in every instance, without
affording a pregnant minor an opportunity to receive
an independent judicial determination that she is
mature enough to consent to an abortion or that an
abortion would be in her best interests.

The case also had an important concurring opinion
and a strong dissent. A concurring opinion (also by
four members of the Court) expressed the view that
a pregnant minor’s right to make the abortion decision
may not be conditioned on the consent of one parent,
especially given the Court’s earlier decisions holding
that a woman’s right to decide whether to terminate
a pregnancy is entitled to constitutional protection.
Given that reasoning, the statute was unconstitutional
because under it no minor, no matter how mature and
capable of informed decisionmaking, might receive an
abortion without the consent of either both of her
parents or a judge, there thus being, in every instance,
an absolute third-party veto to which a minor’s deci-
sion to have an abortion was subject. A dissenting
opinion expressed the view that the statute was not
unconstitutional in requiring parental consent when
an unmarried woman under 18 years of age seeks an
abortion.

In addition to being important for this area of
jurisprudence, as noted above, the case was important
for what it highlighted about the rights of minors. The
Court emphasized that minors are not beyond the
protection of the Constitution. The Court noted that
the legal system typically favors the rights of parents to
raise their children as they see ﬁt, it did so by highlight-
ing three fundamental rationales for justifying the
conclusion that the constitutional rights of children
cannot be equated with those of adults: the peculiar
vulnerability of children; their inability to make critical
decisions in an informed, mature manner; and the
importance of the parental role in child rearing. By
supporting the power of parents to control the rights
of adolescents under those conditions, the Court also
laid the groundwork for the opposite. That is, when
rights, adolescents are
dealing with fundamental
increasingly given control over those rights if they can
show that they are not peculiarly vulnerable, can make
informed and mature decisions, and the parents’ role is
attenuated in the matter. If these conditions are met,
then adolescents are more likely to be able to control
their own rights or states are more likely to provide
mechanisms for them to demonstrate that they should

be able to exercise their rights. The legitimacy of this
approach was conﬁrmed in this case’s approval of the
“judicial bypass” provision – the stipulation that states
must provide minors with an opportunity to demon-
strate that they are mature enough to not engage their
parents and can make their own decisions or, in the
alternative, another decision maker can decide what
course of action should be taken if the minor is not
mature enough.

The case is of signiﬁcance for recognizing the rights
of minors to control some very important decisions, as
it arguably includes the right to privacy on which
abortion decisions are made. But the case actually is
considerably limiting (see Levesque 2000). For exam-
ple, in practice, the judicial bypasses have tended to be
unnecessary since adolescents tend to be quite mature
if they can ﬁgure out that they can seek a judicial bypass
and, as it turns out, most are found mature by judges.
Also in practice, especially as it relates to abortions, the
need for appearances in court results in delays and
other obstacles which, in theory, should be avoided
due to the urgencies involved and, as many have
argued, since the use of the judicial bypass brings little
of value to the minors or their families. Despite these
and other criticisms, the bypass requirements are likely
to continue given that they do provide a balance
between the rights of parents and those of their chil-
dren and they do, in many ways, help reinforce parental
rights, which remains the dominant standard. In fact,
the focus on judicial bypasses was what allowed the
Supreme Court to permit laws requiring parental
notiﬁcation that minors were seeking abortions (see
Hodgson v. Minnesota 1990). The provision of alterna-
tives means that the major rule, the rights of parents,
remains, which is something of considerable signiﬁ-
cance given that it is not clear whether and how
adolescents will know of alternatives and thus avail
themselves of them.

Cross-References
▶ Abortion Counseling

References
Bellotti v. Baird, 443 U.S. 622 (1979).
Hodgson v. Minnesota, 497 U.S. 417 (1990).
Levesque, R. J. R. (2000). Adolescents, sex, and the law: Preparing
adolescents for responsible citizenship. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Abstention

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Abstention refers to a deliberate act of self-denial. The
period of adolescence involves considerable absten-
tion, especially in the form of social and legal efforts
to encourage adolescents to abstain from engaging in
numerous types of behaviors. Included among the
most
frequent behaviors that adolescents abstain
from are smoking (Jacobsen et al. 2005), consuming
alcohol and illicit drugs (Rosenberg et al. 2008), engag-
ing in sexual activity (Loewenson et al. 2004), as well as
general delinquency (Boutwell and Beaver 2008). Our
society has developed and continues to support numer-
ous institutions that help adolescents abstain and that
even can use the force of law to have adolescents abstain
from activities deemed problematic. Illustrative of
justice
these efforts are the juvenile and criminal
systems, schools, health-care institutions, as well as
families. These institutions also embrace efforts to
help adolescents abstain from more socially acceptable
and legally permissible activities, such as using poten-
tially harmful products like caffeine (Oberstar et al.
2002), sugared products (French et al. 2003), and
even the media (Levesque 2007). Given the recognition
of the need to prevent negative health and its associ-
ated outcomes, the period of adolescence always has
been a period that has attracted considerable efforts to
foster habits that would result in having adolescents
abstain from an ever-increasing amount of activities
deemed potentially problematic. These efforts always
have attracted considerable controversy, as evidenced
sexuality
most
education (Levesque 2000), since they go to the heart
of what it means to be an adolescent: someone who is
considered to be in transition and who needs special
supports to transition through a period that likely
will have an important
later
development.

impact on their

abstinence-based

strikingly

in

Cross-References
▶ Abstinence
▶ Desistance from Crime and Delinquency

Abstinence A 9

A

References
Boutwell, B. B., & Beaver, K. M. (2008). A biosocial explanation of
delinquency abstention. Criminal Behavior and Mental Health,
18, 59–74.

French, S. A., Story, M., Fulkerson, J. A., & Gerlach, A. F. (2003). Food
in Secondary Schools: A` La Carte, Vending
Environment
Machines, and Food Policies and Practices. American Journal of
Public Health, 93, 1161–1168.

Jacobsen, L. K., Krystal, J. H., Mencl, W. E., Westerveld, M., Frost,
S. J., & Pugh, K. R. (2005). Effects of smoking and smoking
abstinence on cognition in adolescent tobacco users. Biological
Psychiatry, 57, 56–66.

Levesque, R. J. R. (2000). Adolescents, sex, and the law: preparing
adolescents for responsible citizenship. Washington: American
Psychological Association.

Levesque, R. J. R. (2007). Adolescents, media, and the law: what
developmental science reveals and free speech requires. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Loewenson, P. R., Ireland, M., & Resnick, M. D. (2004). Primary and
secondary sexual abstinence in high school students. Journal of
Adolescent Health, 34, 209–215.

Oberstar, J. V., Bernstein, G. A., & Thuras, P. D. (2002). Caffeine use
and dependence in adolescents: one-year follow-up. Journal of
Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 12, 127–35.

Rosenberg, H., Baylen, C., Murray, A., Phillips, K., Tisak, M. S.,
Versland, A., et al. (2008). Attributions for abstinence from illicit
drugs by university students. Drugs: Education, Prevention and
Policy, 15, 365–377.

Abstinence

N. TATIANA MASTERS
School of Social Work, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA

Overview
The majority of teenagers in the USA begin their
adolescence in a state of sexual abstinence and end it
sexually active. These before and after points are
known, but there is much about adolescents’ absti-
nence behavior and meaning-making that is not. This
essay summarizes the state of scientiﬁc and scholarly
knowledge about abstinence in the lives of teenagers. It
places abstinence in its social and political context,
discusses various deﬁnitions of abstinence, examines
research on the goals of abstinence and whether it
achieves them, and considers potential beneﬁts and
harms of abstinence to adolescents, while highlighting
gaps in knowledge and areas of controversy.

10 A Abstinence

The majority of teenagers in the USA begin their ado-
lescence in a state of sexual abstinence and end it
sexually active. While fewer than one in eight 15 year
olds have ever had sex, 70% of 19 year olds have had
vaginal sexual intercourse (Abma et al. 2004). Though
these before and after points are known, there is much
about adolescents’ abstinence behavior and meaning-
making that is not. This essay will summarize what
is known about abstinence in the lives of teenagers
while highlighting gaps in knowledge and areas of
controversy.

The Social and Political Context
of Abstinence
Any consideration of abstinence among US adolescents
must be situated within the socio-political context of
abstinence-only education. Unlike other wealthy,
industrialized democracies, for the past few decades,
the USA has emphasized sexuality education programs
for teenagers that instruct adolescents to abstain from
sex until they are married or to become “secondary
virgins” by ceasing sexual activity until marriage. This
federal policy, only very recently ended, has brought
the concept of abstinence to prominence among those
who study and provide care for adolescents, but has left
it ill-deﬁned and not well understood.

Abstinence is most often studied in the context
of research into sexual behavior, cognitions, and
emotions. This context has had several effects upon
the populations generally studied. It can be difﬁcult
to obtain parental consent, institutional approval, and
funding for the study of sexuality-related phenomena
among young adolescents, unless these adolescents are
members of a group seen as particularly vulnerable to
negative sexual outcomes such as teen pregnancy or
sexually transmitted infections
the
majority of studies that investigate abstinence either
work with older, easier to reach adolescents such as
college students, or they focus on these “at-risk”
groups, especially African-American teenagers and
girls. Two important exceptions are data on abstinence
and sexual behavior from the National Longitudinal
Study of Adolescent Health, a nationally representative
study of seventh- to twelfth-graders that began in 1995,
and data from a nationally representative sample of
adults reporting on their adolescent experiences in
the National Sexual Health Survey, carried out in
1995–1996.

(STIs). Thus,

What is Abstinence?
Clinicians, educators, and parents often assume that
adolescents regard “having sex” and “being abstinent”
as opposites. In fact, research suggests that youths’
understanding of these constructs is more complex.
There is a solid consensus across studies of how adoles-
cents deﬁne abstinence that vaginal intercourse “counts”
as having sex, and that avoiding all erotic contact, even
kissing, constitutes abstinence. However, much less
agreement is found about behaviors such as mutual
masturbation, oral sex, and anal sex. Some adolescents
deﬁne these acts as sex, while others, possibly working
from an “anything but vaginal intercourse” point of
view, deﬁne them as abstinence (Byers et al. 2009).

The appropriate role of abstinence in youths’ lives is
another topic on which adolescents’ perspectives may
diverge from those of some adults. Many adolescents
report thinking of abstinence as a way of protecting
themselves against the potentially negative social and
physical consequences of sex. Others report viewing
the practice of abstinence as a moral or religious
choice. However, most youth also see abstinence as
a developmental stage rather than a steady state, and
perceive it as part of the trajectory that eventually leads
to partnered sexual activity (Ott et al. 2006). In this
conceptualization, adolescents who have stepped onto
the “sexual escalator” start at abstinence and move
toward sex (Masters et al. 2008).

Abstinence may be consciously chosen by some
teenagers as a values-driven practice, as a sexual risk
reduction method, or as a combination of both. This
notion of abstinence applies to youth who have oppor-
tunities to engage in partnered sexual behavior but
chose not to do so. However, research suggests that
many teenagers, both those who have already experi-
enced ﬁrst intercourse and those who have not, simply
lack frequent sexual opportunities. They may not have
a sexual partner, or having a willing partner, may not
have the privacy, space, or time for sex. These youths’
behavior – not having sex – may appear from the
outside to be identical to that of youth who are absti-
nent on purpose, but the behavior’s meaning to them,
and its role in their sexual and relational development,
is likely to be very different.

These deﬁnitional issues are of both practical and
conceptual interest to those who work with youth.
Practically, adolescents who view their behavior (e.g.,
oral sex) as abstinent rather than as sexual may be less

likely to practice sexual risk reduction, thus increasing
their risk of STIs. Attempts to be abstinent according to
the “anything but vaginal
intercourse” deﬁnition
apparently held by some teenagers may paradoxically
lead to even higher risk sexual behavior, such as the
anecdotal reports of young women substituting anal
sex, with its attendant higher risk of HIV transmission,
for vaginal sex as a method of “virginity preservation.”
Conceptually, researchers and clinicians attempting to
assess adolescents’ abstinence practices may need to be
more behaviorally explicit about how they ask their
questions, rather than assuming a shared deﬁnition of
abstinence. Attention to why adolescents are abstinent
also seems warranted: There are likely to be important
differences between the abstinence of an 18-year-old
Catholic girl who is saving intercourse for marriage and
that of a 15-year-old boy from a secular family who also
has never had partnered sex, but who aspires to do so at
the earliest opportunity.

Does Abstinence “Work”?
Abstinence is sometimes described as being 100%
effective in preventing pregnancy and STIs. However,
if abstinence is considered as a contraceptive or STI
prevention method rather than as a values-governed
practice, it has, like all such methods, a failure rate. This
failure rate is the difference between perfect use
(abstaining from sex at every sexual opportunity) and
typical use (intending to be abstinent, but not having
100% success doing so). Prevention methods such as
condoms are susceptible to both user failure and
method failure; all abstinence failure, clearly, is user
failure.

Very little research investigating the failure rate of
abstinence as a contraceptive or STI preventative has
been done. Mathematical modeling based on the
assumption that typical abstinence use is less than
100% demonstrates that partial abstinence (infrequent
sex) provides some protection against infections with
a low per-act probability of transmission, such as HIV.
However, for those infections with a high per-act prob-
ability of transmission, such as syphilis and Chlamydia,
and for pregnancy, abstinence needs to be nearly
perfect to reduce risk effectively (Pinkerton 2001).
A study using nationally representative data examined
the effectiveness of virginity pledges (public statements
of commitment to abstinence until marriage) in reduc-
ing STI rates among young adults. Rates of STI, as

Abstinence A 11

measured with biomarkers, did not differ between
young adults who had taken abstinence pledges as
adolescents and those who had not (Bruckner and
Bearman 2005). Both of these ﬁndings suggest the
relative ineffectiveness of abstinence, as practiced in
real life, at preventing most STIs and pregnancy.

A

Is Abstinence Good for Adolescents?
Abstinence until marriage, the average age of which –
now 27 for men and 25 for women – is older with each
generation, seems increasingly unlikely for most ado-
lescents (Finer 2007). Nonetheless, some abstinence
advocates assert that premarital sex is inherently dan-
gerous to teenagers, likely to result in physical and
psychological harm. Any given sex act may indeed result
in a negative physical, social, or emotional outcome
such as contracting an STI, becoming unintentionally
pregnant, being teased or stigmatized by peers, or
wounded feelings. However, research suggests that
whether people’s initial sexual experiences occur before
marriage does not affect their long-term physical or
emotional health. Rather, the context in which an ado-
lescent begins to have partnered sex is the more critical
factor: If the experience is pre-pubertal, incestuous,
forced, or coerced, then this is likely to affect later
functioning; otherwise, premarital sex is not associated
with negative health outcomes in adulthood (Else-
Quest et al. 2005). Another study using nationally rep-
resentative data classiﬁed ages at ﬁrst intercourse as early
(lowest quartile, mean age 14), normative (middle two
quartiles, mean age 17), or late (highest quartile, mean
age 22) based on adults’ reports of their adolescent
experiences. Both early and late sexual initiations were
associated with problems in sexual functioning, espe-
cially among men. Initiation before marriage, but within
normative age ranges, was not associated with sexual
difﬁculties or general ill-health (Sandfort et al. 2008).

Other research suggests that not only may absti-
nence, in some situations, offer little beneﬁt to youth, it
may also have its own potentially harmful effects. Teen-
agers’ identiﬁcation of themselves as people committed
to abstinence may keep them from considering situa-
tions in which they might someday choose to engage in
sexual behavior and from learning how they might then
protect themselves against unwanted pregnancy and
STIs. Uncritical endorsement of abstinence as the
only appropriate choice for adolescents is often linked
with a view of sexual behavior that minimizes the role

12 A Abstinence Education

of personal choice and agency in making sexual deci-
sions, particularly for young women (Tolman 2002).
“Virginity pledging” is associated with a reduced like-
lihood of contraceptive or condom use at ﬁrst inter-
course (Bearman and Bruckner 2001).

Abstinence advocacy by educators, policy makers,
and health care providers can also cause social harm to
the adolescents it excludes. Such discussions rarely
acknowledge the experience of sexual minority adoles-
cents. This lack can be attributed to the inﬂuence of
teen pregnancy and out-of-wedlock birth prevention
goals on contemporary thinking about abstinence;
conceptualizations of abstinence that frame it as a way
to avoid “illegitimate” births will naturally tend to be
hetero-centric. One of the tenets of the pro-abstinence
movement in the USA is that a monogamous married
relationship is the standard of human sexual activity.
Since gay men and lesbians cannot legally marry in the
majority of states, sexual minority teens are left with no
guidance on how to make an informed, values-driven
decision about whether or when to begin partnered
sexual activity. This exclusion can contribute to the
marginalization of an already vulnerable group of
adolescents.

For some adolescents, in some situations, absti-
nence can be a very positive choice. Most youth will
experience an abstinent period during which they are
riding the “sexual escalator” but do not yet feel ready
for intercourse. They may experiment with physical
intimacy and participate in relationships that include
noncoital sexual behavior during this period. Some
youth will be members of communities with a moral
or religious framework that values abstinence until
marriage, and choosing to enact this value consistently
in their own lives may be a practice of empowerment,
safety, and integrity for them. However, youth with
different ethical frameworks may initiate partnered
sex outside of marriage, and it is equally possible for
them to take this action with empowerment, safety, and
integrity.

Adolescents have many choices for safe, healthy,
ethical expression of their sexuality,
including the
choice of abstinence. Teenagers who are informed of
these options by adults, and taught skills both for
refusing unwanted sex and for negotiating wanted
sex, sexual safety, and pregnancy prevention, will be
more likely to traverse their adolescence successfully
and establish fulﬁlling adult relationships.

Cross-References
▶ Sexuality Education

References
Abma, J. C., Martinez, G. M., Mosher, W. D., & Dawson, B. S. (2004).
Teenagers in the United States: Sexual activity, contraceptive use,
and childbearing, 2002. National Center for Health Statistics.
Vital Health Statistics, 23(24).

Bearman, P. S., & Bruckner, H. (2001). Promising the future: Virgin-
ity pledges and ﬁrst intercourse. The American Journal of Sociol-
ogy, 106(4), 859–912.

Bruckner, H., & Bearman, P. S. (2005). After the promise: the STD
consequences of adolescent virginity pledges. The Journal of
Adolescent Health, 36, 271–278.

Byers, E. S., Henderson, J., & Hobsman, K. M. (2009). University
students’ deﬁnitions of sexual abstinence and having sex.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 665–674.

Else-Quest, N. M., Hyde, J. S., & DeLamater, J. D. (2005). Context
counts: Long-term sequelae of premarital intercourse or absti-
nence. Journal of Sex Research, 42(2), 102–112.

Finer, L. B. (2007). Trends in premarital sex in the United States,

1954–2003. Public Health Reports, 122(1), 3–78.

Masters, N. T., Beadnell, B., Morrison, D. M., Hoppe, M. J., &
Gillmore, M. R. (2008). The opposite of sex? Examining adoles-
cents’ thoughts about abstinence and sex, and their sexual behav-
ior. Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 40, 87–93.
Ott, M. A., Pfeiffer, E. J., & Fortenberry, J. (2006). Perceptions of
sexual abstinence among high-risk early and middle adolescents.
The Journal of Adolescent Health, 39(2), 192–198.

Pinkerton, S. D. (2001). A relative risk-based, disease-speciﬁc
deﬁnition of sexual abstinence failure rates. Health Education &
Behavior, 28(1), 10–20.

Sandfort, T. G. M., Orr, M., Hirsch, J. S., & Santelli, J. (2008). Long-term
health correlates of timing of sexual debut: Results from a national
US study. American Journal of Public Health, 98(1), 155–161.
Tolman, D. L. (2002). Dilemmas of desire: Teenage girls talk about

sexuality. Cambridge: Harvard University.

Abstinence Education

2

1, ERIC R. BUHI
PATRICIA GOODSON
1Department of Health & Kinesiology, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA
2Department of Community and Family Health,
College of Public Health, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL, USA

Overview
“Abstinence education” (also known as abstinence-only,
abstinence-only-until-marriage
abstinence-plus,

or

education) has, in recent years, become a specialized
label, a technical term employed by educators, politi-
cians, youth advocates, and public health workers in
the USA. The label identiﬁes a particular moral and
educational agenda shaping what has been taught
about human sexuality within USA public schools,
since the 1980s. Approaches to teaching sexuality that
lack the characteristics of
this particular agenda
(described in more detail, below) are titled, in turn,
“comprehensive sexuality education.” Labeling or
branding these educational efforts has facilitated their
polarization, their validation as entrepreneurial efforts,
and their entanglement in an ongoing, bitter dispute
over the best strategies to teach children and adoles-
cents about sexual health.

This brief essay – far from an exhaustive account of
the issue – reviews the polemics surrounding absti-
nence education, summarizes abstinence education’s
history in the USA, and reﬂects on the role sexual
abstinence plays in adolescent development. In each
of these segments, readers will ﬁnd the views of absti-
nence education proponents presented alongside the
perspectives of its critics. As abstinence education and
comprehensive sexuality education have coexisted
within US public schools, the juxtaposition presented
here is intentional because it highlights the complex
dynamics and “subtle dance” between two distinct
sexuality education paradigms.

It is important to bear in mind that abstinence
education is not unique to the USA, however. Uganda,
for instance, has promoted a public health campaign to
prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS based on the “ABC”
approach (“abstain, be faithful, condomise”; see http://
www.avert.org/abc-hiv.htm for details on the varia-
tions on the ABC deﬁnition). Nevertheless, many of
the abstinence education initiatives being implemented
in various countries have their philosophical and
methodological origins in the USA movement. Due to
space constraints, this essay will focus exclusively on
abstinence education efforts in the USA.

Abstinence Education or
Comprehensive Sexuality Education?
Participants on both sides of the issue tend to agree on
a basic, bare-bones deﬁnition of abstinence education:
Abstinence education directs children and adolescents
to deliberately and voluntarily avoid “having sex”
(speciﬁcally, to avoid penile–vaginal intercourse) until

Abstinence Education A 13

A

behaviors,

they are married, in order to prevent an unintended
pregnancy or various sexually transmitted infections
(or STIs). Such restraint is viewed as the healthiest
way of circumventing the undesirable consequences
associated with certain sexual
and
maintaining the sexual health of children and adoles-
cents. While proponents and critics of abstinence
education tend to agree on this basic deﬁnition, how-
ever, they differ signiﬁcantly regarding the scope and
methods for teaching abstinence in a developmentally
appropriate manner. Some of the questions ﬁercely
debated by friends and foes include, for example,
“Abstinence from which behaviors, speciﬁcally, should
be taught?” And, “Should information about sexual
anatomy and physiology also be presented?”

When evaluating a particular type of abstinence
education – programs funded by Title V in Texas
between the years 2000 and 2005 (see description of
Title V funding, below) – the authors of this essay and
their evaluation team quickly learned that programs’
deﬁnitions of abstinence (and, by extension, of absti-
nence education) were surprisingly more nuanced and
complex than the bare-bones deﬁnition presented
above. The team learned that abstinence consisted of
not only avoiding sexual activity (however sexual activ-
ity was deﬁned), but also adopting or assimilating
a series of behaviors, intentions, and attitudes, perti-
nent to an “abstinent-life-style.” In other words, to be
considered truly “abstinent” by abstinence education
proponents, adolescents should also adopt a positive
view of sexless relationships, of their own academic/
themselves as worthy
professional
of
human
▶ self-esteem). Alongside this repertoire of attitudes,
“truly abstinent
teens” should also avoid many
noncoital sexual behaviors (in some instances, even
hand-holding) and other practices such as becoming
friends with peers who are sexually active, using/abus-
ing alcohol and drugs, and consuming media with
sexual content (pornography, erotic movies, rap lyrics).
For a detailed study of the nuances associated with
various deﬁnitions of abstinence, see Goodson et al.
2003. For a discussion of what constitutes abstinence,
from the perspective of one abstinence education
program funded by Title V, see Mann et al. 2000.

future, and of
(i.e.,

possess

beings

levels

high

Motivated by such an idiosyncratic and multifacto-
rial deﬁnition of abstinence, programs anchor their
pedagogy in the teaching of virtues such as honesty,

14 A Abstinence Education

integrity, and loyalty. Abstinence education curricula
also place a strong emphasis on inﬂuencing/shaping
individual-level psychological factors such as percep-
tions of social norms and, ultimately, self-esteem. Little
(and sometimes no) emphasis is placed on teaching
about healthy sexuality in its various dimensions
(relationships, sexual communication, sexual identity,
sexual anatomy, physiology, reproduction, contraception,
infection prevention).

In contrast, comprehensive sexuality education is
less directive and places stronger emphasis on teaching
about all the dimensions of sexual health, including
abstinence, using developmentally appropriate strate-
gies. Those who support comprehensive sexuality
education do so grounded in the assumption that
knowledge is power, and withholding information
from youth (information that could, potentially, save
their lives and protect their health) is nothing short of
unethical and tantamount to educational misconduct.
Comprehensive sexuality education, therefore, pro-
poses that youth should have access to all available
knowledge about human sexuality, in ways that are
appropriate for their age. While such knowledge
includes information about sexual anatomy, physiol-
ogy, and protection from diseases or unwanted preg-
nancies, abstinence from risky sexual behavior is
equally an essential element of this knowledge-base.

comprehensive

This assumption – that information imparted in
developmentally appropriate ways is empowering and
ethical – has led one of the major organizations
involved in promoting
sexuality
education in the USA – the Sexuality Information and
Education Council of the United States (SIECUS) – to
propose a set of guidelines for educators teaching
sexual health to various age groups. These recommen-
dations can be found in the publication Guidelines for
Comprehensive Sexuality Education: Kindergarten –
12th Grade (National Guidelines Task Force 2004).
The document, now in its third edition, was heralded
as a signiﬁcant “breakthrough in sexuality education”
at the time it was released and to this day remains an
important
sexuality
educators.

comprehensive

resource

for

Despite the emphasis on teaching all dimensions of
sexual health, comprehensive sexuality education has
consistently highlighted the message that abstinence
from intercourse is the healthiest form of “sexually
being in the world” for all children and most

adolescents. As in the case of abstinence education,
comprehensive sexuality education views the teaching
of sexual abstinence as healthy and desirable. Compre-
hensive sexuality education’s dispute with abstinence
education centers, however, in abstinence education’s
approaches (not providing information about the var-
ious aspects of sexual health), its assumptions (that
teaching abstinence from sex and teaching ways to
protect oneself provide youth with mixed, ambiguous
messages), and the socially conservative and pro-
marriage agendas being championed through these
programs (for instance, the promotion of marriage as
the only acceptable venue for sexual relationships).

To better understand comprehensive sexuality
education’s various concerns, it is important to learn
about the legislative efforts put in place to support both
comprehensive sexuality and abstinence education
programs in the USA, in recent decades. The section
below provides a brief outline of these laws.

Brief History of Legislation Efforts
Supporting Comprehensive Sexuality
and Abstinence Education in the USA
Attempts to educate USA children and adolescents in
the public school system about health and sexuality
enjoy a lengthy, yet conﬂicted, history. Prior to the
1980s, schools focused on providing students basic
information about puberty and personal hygiene, obe-
dient to the charge of forming healthy and productive
citizens.

In the early 1980s, conservative groups (led by
political and religious leaders) initiated focused and
systematic efforts to inﬂuence the teaching of sexuality
education in public schools. These efforts hinged on,
and were nourished by, the argument that the then-
available approach to sexuality education (comprehen-
sive) had been ineffective in halting the epidemics of
unplanned teenage pregnancies and STIs in the USA.
Comprehensive sexuality education had achieved little,
if anything, in terms of prevention, and was deemed
a “miserable failure” by these conservative groups.
According to abstinence advocates, what was needed
was a different modus operandi, a different worldview
for teaching adolescents about healthy sexuality: an
approach that went beyond merely minimizing risk
behaviors and emphasized eliminating sexual risks,
altogether. Abstinence education was proposed, there-
fore, as a “much-needed” variant of school-based

Abstinence Education A 15

A

sexuality education or as an alternative approach to
comprehensive sexuality education. Many proponents
viewed it as the only alternative, however, and claimed
abstinence education should replace all comprehensive
sexuality education (Mann et al. 2000).

forms of risky sexual behaviors yet,

This latter point-of-view hinged on the belief that
comprehensive sexuality education, besides having
proven ineffective for prevention, bore the potential,
in fact, to harm adolescents. Defenders of abstinence
education claimed (then and now) that comprehensive
approaches send teenagers an ambiguous message: the
message that youth can (and should) choose to abstain
from all
in
circumstances where they cannot, they should protect
themselves
from unintended consequences. This
“ambiguous message” communicates the notion that
abstinence is, indeed, too difﬁcult a choice, and there
are other ways to negotiate sexual relationships (Mann
et al. 2000). According to abstinence education
proponents, this apparent contradiction generates too
much uncertainty for children and adolescents regard-
ing their sexual decision-making and should not be
taught as a healthy option. In an effort to purge this
ambiguity from the school-based sexuality education
available then, religious and politically conservative
groups began (in the 1980s) to effectively advocate for
federal funding of abstinence-only education, in which
the message regarding abstinence from coital activity
would be strengthened, and the information about
protection from pregnancy and STIs would be
weakened.

Below is a brief outline of the main legislative efforts
put forth in the last 4 decades to support comprehen-
sive sexuality and abstinence education. It is important
to bear in mind that, while attempts to promote absti-
nence were in place as early as the 1980s, it was the 1996
legislation that represented a major shift in the history
of school-based sexuality education. The 1996 legisla-
tion has had, thus far, the most signiﬁcant impact on
the teaching of sexuality education in US public
schools. It stands out as a unique innovation in the
realm of morality politics and government oversight of
the content taught in health and sexuality education
classes. (To better understand why the 1996 legislation
represents an innovation in public policy and sexuality
education, see Doan and Williams 2008.)

1970 – Family Planning Services and Population
Research Act (PL 91–572). The Act established the

Ofﬁce of Population Affairs in the Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare. Title X funds were
allocated for “family planning services, training, infor-
mation, and education programs” (Doan and Williams
2008, p. 26).

1978 – Adolescent Health Services and Pregnancy
Prevention Care Act. Spearheaded by Senator Edward
Kennedy (D-MA), “this act intended to reduce teen
pregnancy by increasing access to federally funded con-
traception and abortion services” (Doan and Williams
2008, p. 26).

1981 – Adolescent Family Life Act (AFLA; PL 97–35).
This represented the ﬁrst “federally funded, and sanc-
tioned, sex education legislation” (Doan and Williams
2008, p. 28). Generated in response to pressure from
conservative Christians, it was included in the Omni-
bus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 – “signed into
law as Title XX of the Public Health Service Act”
(Doan and Williams 2008, p. 28). Title XX funded
many initiatives emphasizing “abstinence and adop-
tion as an alternative to abortion” and, therefore,
opened wide the doors for funding focused exclusively
on abstinence-only-until-marriage education in 1996
(Doan and Williams 2008, p. 28).

1996 – Personal Responsibility and Work Opportu-
nity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA). This was a welfare
reform omnibus bill. According to Doan and Williams
(2008), “omnibus legislation refers to the practice of
packaging numerous, disparate policy issues into one
massive bill” (p. 15) whose details often get approved
without discussion. Thus, absent any public or
Congressional debate (similar to the creation of Title
XX in 1981), $50 million of federal funding were allo-
cated, annually,
for abstinence-only-until-marriage
programs. Title V funding, then, became available for
“educational or motivational” programs willing to
comply with eight well-deﬁned parameters for the
teaching of abstinence (known as the “A-through-H
Deﬁnition” – see Glossary for deﬁnition).

2000/2001 – Special Projects of Regional and
National Signiﬁcance – Community-Based Abstinence
Education (SPRANS-CBAE). This was an abstinence
program advocated by the George W. Bush adminis-
tration that “bypasse[d] state intervention by pro-
to
viding [federal government] money directly
community organizations, including faith-based orga-
nizations” (Doan and Williams 2008, p. 41). Recipients
of these funds had to comply with the requirements

16 A Abstinence Education

spelled out in Title V (described above), including
abiding by the “A-through-H Deﬁnition.” SPRANS-
CBAE programs were required to shift from a focus
on reducing risky behavior to one promoting preparation
for marriage (Doan and Williams 2008, p. 32). Between
2001 and 2006, funding for CBAE increased over 450%
(SIECUS 2008). According to Advocates for Youth,
“from 1998 to 2003, almost a half a billion dollars in
state and federal funds were appropriated to support
the Title V initiative” (Hauser 2008).

2007 – Legislation passed by Congress requiring absti-
nence education programs funded by Title V comply with
all of the eight characteristics of the “A-through-H Deﬁ-
nition.” In addition to the compliance mandate, states
were now required to provide assurances that funded
curricula and materials “meaningfully represent[ed]
each element of the deﬁnition” (SIECUS 2008).

2009 – End to Reauthorization of Title V funding.
Funding for the Family Life Act remained stable, but
signiﬁcant cuts were made to CBAE’s budget for ﬁscal
year 2009.

2009 – Baucus Amendment (The Personal Responsi-
bility Education for Adulthood Training) and Hatch
Amendment (Abstinence-Only-Until-Marriage Educa-
tion). Both amendments were approved by the Senate
Finance Committee on September 29, 2009. The
Baucus Amendment proposed to fund comprehensive
sexuality education, with $75 million allotted to
evidence-based programs and $25 million, to “inno-
vative programs as well as research and evaluation”
(SIECUS 2009). The Hatch Amendment proposed to
reinstate Title V funding for abstinence education. Both
amendments are part of the Patient Affordable Care Act
(also known as the “Healthcare Reform Bill” – H.R.
3590) that will be voted by the US House and Senate, in
the near future. At the time of this writing, the US
House of Representatives had voted in favor of the
Act, and the Senate had approved a motion to move
forward with discussion (consideration) of the Act.

Although extensive, the list above does not tell
a complete story: it fails to reﬂect many other streams
of funding (from both federal and state monies) that
have supported abstinence education. Speciﬁcally, the
list does not include support being provided through
earmarked grants awarded to certain states and to
speciﬁc organizations
(SIECUS 2008). Moreover,
according to a recent SIECUS report: “Abstinence-
also receiving
only-until-marriage providers

are

funds
through traditional HIV/AIDS and STD
[sexually transmitted diseases] prevention accounts
such as
administered by HHS and the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)”
(SIECUS 2008).

those

Finally, it is important to note that, in addition to
all government-generated support, abstinence educa-
tion initiatives have spawned a multimillion-dollar
business in the USA, centered on nonproﬁt organiza-
tions and curriculum developers. Examples include
organizations
such as “Aim for Success” (www.
aimforsuccess.org) and curricula such as “Worth the
Wait,” sponsored by a healthcare agency (www.
worththewait.org). Therefore, even if Title V and
other major abstinence education initiatives become
defunded through legislative acts during President
Obama’s administration (2009 onward), the impact
this might have on the abstinence education agenda
in the USA remains unknown.

Evaluations of Abstinence Education
Initiatives
In July 2009, the CDC reported data from the National
Vital Statistics System in the USA focusing on the
sexual and reproductive health of persons aged 10–24
years. The data were collected over a 5-year period,
2002–2007 (Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion 2009). The report concluded that after a signiﬁcant
decline between 1991 and 2005, birth rates as well as
syphilis infection among teenagers 15–19 years old
increased between the years 2005 and 2007 (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention 2009, p. 02).
When the initial declines were documented, abstinence
education advocates were quick to claim the credit for
these statistical improvements. As the rates began to
increase, however, critics readily pointed to the ineffec-
tiveness of abstinence education programming as the
main culprit.

While documentation of abstinence education
programs’ successes or failures was scarce prior to the
Title V authorization in 1996, evaluations of these
programs and concomitant publication of evaluation
reports have grown exponentially, since then. A few
states that received Title V funding,
for instance,
opted to carry out an independent evaluation of their
initiatives (perhaps instigated by the requirement that
states provide a substantial amount of matching funds
of their own, to support these programs). Texas was

one of
the states putting in place a multiyear,
multiphase evaluation (carried out by an evaluation
team that included the authors of this essay). Other
states conducting their own evaluations during the ﬁrst
5 years of Title V funding included Maryland,
Missouri, Nebraska, Arizona, Florida, Oregon, Wash-
ington, Iowa, Pennsylvania, and California (who ceased
to receive Title V funding after its evaluation revealed
the programs were not effective) (Hauser 2008). The
only attempt to evaluate Title V, nationwide, was
implemented
ﬁrm,
Mathematica Inc. (Trenholm et al. 2007).

research/evaluation

the

by

Findings from all of these evaluations have been
mixed and non-convincing: state-level evaluations as
well as Mathematica national data suggest abstinence
education programs fail to foster, among participants,
both the intention and the practice of waiting to have
sex until marriage. Findings do suggest, however, that
in terms of changing youth’s attitudes toward absti-
nence (“It’s ‘cool’ to be abstinent!”), improving their
perceptions of the social norms regarding sexual activ-
ity among teens (“People around me think abstinence
is best for me . . .”), and increasing their awareness of
the beneﬁts of postponing sexual relationships, the
programs have experienced some measure of success.
The programs have failed, however, in helping teens
“translate” this awareness, these attitudes and these
beliefs into actual intentions, motivations, and behav-
iors (Guide to Community Preventive Services 2009).
Evaluations of abstinence education have failed to
demonstrate strong and long-term, sustainable indica-
tors of program effectiveness, but the reasons for such
failure are multiple and complex. Most of the evalua-
tions, themselves, have failed to employ rigorous exper-
imental or quasi-experimental designs (for various,
often valid reasons), limiting conﬁdence in the ﬁndings
(United States Government Accountability Ofﬁce
2006). According to a report evaluating abstinence
education interventions to prevent HIV/AIDS, other
STIs, and pregnancy, released by the Task Force on
Community Preventive Services at the CDC, “there is
insufﬁcient evidence to determine the effectiveness of
group-based abstinence education . . . evidence was
considered insufﬁcient due to inconsistent results
across studies” (Guide to Community Preventive
Services 2009). Unquestionably, reasons for lack of
effectiveness also lie within the programs. For example,
most evaluated programs revealed a conspicuous

Abstinence Education A 17

A

absence of sound theoretical grounding. Only 2 of the
32 programs evaluated in Texas proposed to develop
their curricula based on well-tested health behavior or
youth development theories (Goodson et al. 2006b).

According to the Texas and the Mathematica eval-
uations, programs had, instead, an implicit, unstated
theory-of-action (or causal explanations for why cer-
tain activities in the program might promote abstinent
behavior among participants). Remarkably,
these
theories-of-action, more often than not, mirrored the
wisdom available in the scientiﬁc literature, and
targeted variables correlated with teens’ sexual behav-
ior. Nonetheless, when it came to delivering the pro-
frequently placed too much
grams,
emphasis on factors only minimally associated with
behaviors and intentions.

lesson plans

A telling example of this misplaced focus has been
the forceful messages targeting adolescents’ self-esteem.
The logic behind the messages: higher self-esteem will
lead to more conﬁdent and healthier choices, thus
fostering avoidance from risky behaviors. While self-
esteem has been found, at times, to be correlated with
sexual attitudes,
intentions, and behaviors among
youth, the quality of the evidence is questionable, the
strength of the association is modest, at best, and at
times the relationship between self-esteem and sexual
behavior has been inverse (i.e., higher levels of self-
esteem are associated with lower levels of preventive/
protective behaviors; for a systematic review of this
issue, see Goodson et al. 2006a). Empirical evidence
does not support the disproportionate importance
abstinence education programs have placed on the
self-esteem factor; therefore, despite an internal logic
that echoes scientiﬁc ﬁndings, abstinence education
programs tend to – in practice – “overdo” certain
factors and ignore others, thus transforming their
efforts into a-theoretical interventions with diminished
probabilities of success (Goodson 2010).

Continued evaluations of abstinence education pro-
grams will remain an important area of study, even if
these programs ﬁnd themselves stripped of federal
funding in the future: the question of how to teach
human sexuality with emphasis on abstinence from
risky sexual activity, in developmentally appropriate
manners, remains a valid and pedagogically important
question. Only since the advent of federally funded
abstinence education initiatives have sexuality educa-
tors begun to pay any serious attention to the question.

18 A Abstinence Education

Abstinence Education: Its Role in
Adolescent Development
Despite the political and pedagogical controversies
surrounding the teaching of abstinence, as they have
played themselves out in the history of sexuality
education in the USA, does abstinence education have
a role to play in the healthy development of children
and adolescents? The answer to this question is quite
simple: While abstinence education as an ideological
agenda may have proven less than helpful to American
teenagers given these programs’
inability to affect
youth sexual behavior, the notion of abstaining from
practices that may pose health and social risks for
adolescents is, undoubtedly, valid, and valuable.

Abstinence from sexual/coital behavior during
childhood and adolescence is the healthiest and ideal
practice for youth and – as an ideal construct – ﬁnds
support at many levels of arguments: for children and
adolescents it makes sense to avoid sexual intercourse,
based on biological, psychological, social, economic,
legal, and spiritual arguments. Because children’s and
adolescents’ bodies, sexual organs, sexual physiology,
and emotional make-up lack maturity, they are consid-
erably more vulnerable to diseases,
infections, and
emotional traumas with lasting consequences (some-
times life-long effects, such as in the case of infertility
caused by Chlamydia infection, or infection with the
cancer-causing strain of the ▶ Human Papillomavirus
(HPV) and HPV Vaccines). From a psychological
perspective, adolescents do not have the cognitive and
emotional maturity to make wise decisions regarding
personal relationships that might impact their futures.
From a social interaction perspective, choices to couple
with certain partners have important implications for
teens’ existing social networks, either exposing them to
risk-prone environments (where they may engage in
other risky behaviors such as alcohol consumption or
drug use), or destroying extant supportive networks.
Economically, because adolescents are, mainly, con-
sumers and not producers in a capitalist economy,
they are not equipped to face the ﬁnancial challenges
posed by an unplanned pregnancy, and the conse-
quences associated with raising an unexpected child.
Legally, sexual relationships with minors are against the
law in the USA, a notion that often seems neglected,
only to be resurrected when a “case” happens, a couple
is “caught,” and the justice system is invoked. Lastly,
the spiritual lives of adolescents can become seriously

affected by premature sexual relationships, leading to
existential angst, doubt, and uncertainty. Because sex-
ual relationships do not occur in a vacuum but are,
instead, embedded in people’s set of values, beliefs, and
commitments, the potential ramiﬁcations for youth’s
spiritual lives, of engaging early in a sexual relationship
(or more than one) can lead to cognitive dissonance,
lack of healthy attachments, and personal distress.

While the notion of abstinence from risky sexual
activity can be defended on many grounds as the ideal
for children and adolescents, it is important to remem-
ber that youth (worldwide) inhabit an imperfect world
and live nonideal
lives. Granted, many teenagers
engage in sexual activity without experiencing any of
the difﬁculties outlined above. Nevertheless, most of
the available scientiﬁc and social science evidence
supports the notion that, the younger the child or
to
adolescent,
experiencing these ills. The odds are not in teenagers’
favor, compared to their adult counterparts, when it
comes to their sexual health and well-being. While
teaching the ideal, sexuality educators must also
ground themselves in their social realities and provide
teens with the resources (information and social
support) to minimize potential risks.

the higher his/her

vulnerability

therefore,

The intrinsic value of sexual abstinence for children
and adolescents,
is easily supported by
empirical data and logical arguments, from multiple
perspectives. It is, indeed, a healthy practice and it plays
a major role in adolescents’ psychosocial, physical, and
spiritual development. Unfortunately,
abstinence
education debates in the USA have been mired in
controversies about political agendas, pedagogical
approaches, and content coverage; it is here that expert
opinions conﬂict and clash, often to the neglect of the
adolescents themselves.

Cross-References
▶ Birth Control
▶ Condom Use
▶ Sexuality Education

References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2009). Sexual and
reproductive health of persons aged 10-24 years - United States,
2002–2007. Surveillance summaries. Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report (MMWR), 58(SS-6), 1–62.

Doan, A. E., & Williams, J. C. (2008). The politics of virginity: Absti-

nence in sex education. Westport: Praeger.

Goodson, P. (2010). Theory in health promotion research and practice:

Thinking outside the box. Boston: Jones & Bartlett.

Goodson, P., Suther, S., Pruitt, B. E., & Wilson, K. (2003). Deﬁning
abstinence: Views of directors, instructors, and participants in
abstinence-only-until-marriage programs in Texas. Journal of
School Health, 73(3), 91–96.

sexual

attitudes,

behaviors,

Goodson, P., Buhi, E. R., & Dunsmore, S. C. (2006a). Self-esteem and
adolescent
intentions:
A systematic review. Journal of Adolescent Health, 38(3), 310–319.
Goodson, P., Pruitt, B. E., Suther, S., Wilson, K., & Buhi, E. (2006b). Is
abstinence education theory based? The underlying logic of
abstinence education programs in Texas. Health Education &
Behavior, 33(2), 252–271.

and

Guide to Community Preventive Services. (2009). Prevention of
HIV/AIDS, other STIs and pregnancy: Abstinence education
from http://www.thecommunityguide.org/hiv/
interventions,
RRabstinence_ed.html

of
the

(2008).
years
Five
education: Assessing

abstinence-only-until-
Hauser, D.
marriage
impact. Retrieved
November 2009, from http://www.advocatesforyouth.org/index.
php?option=com_content&task=view&id=623&Itemid=177
Mann, J., McIlhaney, J. S., & Stine, C. C. (2000). Building healthy
futures: Tools for helping adolescents avoid or delay the onset of
sexual activity. Austin: The Medical Institute for Sexual Health.
National Guidelines Task Force. (2004). Guidelines for comprehensive
sexuality education: Kindergarten - 12th grade (3rd ed., 1st ed.
1991). New York: SIECUS.

SIECUS. (2008). The Federal Government & abstinence-only-until-
marriage programs. Retrieved September 2, 2009, from http://
www.communityactionkit.org/index.cfm?pageId=892

SIECUS. (2009). Dueling amendments on sex education pass senate
from http://www.siecus.org/index.cfm?

ﬁnance
fuseaction=Feature.showFeature&FeatureID=1802

committee,

Trenholm, C., Devaney, B., Fortson, K., Quay, L., Wheeler, J., & Clark, M.
(2007). Impacts of Four Title V, Section 510 Abstinence Education
Programs. Princeton: Mathematica Policy Research.

United States Government Accountability Ofﬁce. (2006). Abstinence
education: Efforts to assess the accuracy and effectiveness of feder-
to Congressional Requesters,
ally funded programs. Report
Washington: GAO-07-87.

Academic Achievement:
Contextual Influences

APRILE D. BENNER
Population Research Center, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, USA

Academic achievement subsumes a number of indica-
to measure cognitive gains and progression
tors

Academic Achievement: Contextual Influences A 19

A

through the US educational system. Regardless of the
operationalization, the link between academic achieve-
ment and later life prospects is well established in the
extant literature. Adolescents who earn poorer grades
in school are more likely to be retained in grade, to fall
behind in credit accrual, and to earn lower achievement
test scores, all of which are associated with lower high
school completion rates and higher dropout rates
(Battin-Pearson et al. 2000; Stearns et al. 2007). High
in turn, have lower household
school dropouts,
incomes, lower occupational status, difﬁculty ﬁnding
and maintaining employment, higher incarceration
rates, and greater health issues, all of which cost society
in terms of lost tax revenue and increased reliance on
governmental
(Rumberger 2001).
services
Although academic achievement is strongly associated
with cognitive ability and motivation (Eccles et al.
2003), a comprehensive understanding of adolescents’
academic achievement must take into account how the
ecological contexts in which adolescents are embedded
promote or inhibit their academic achievement.

social

Academic Achievement in Context
There is a growing recognition among developmentalists
that environmental contexts, such as families, schools,
and peers, affect numerous developmental domains,
including academic achievement (Chung and Steinberg
2006; Cook et al. 2002). Ecological theory provides
one lens for exploring the interactions between the
individual and both distal and more proximal ecolog-
ical
that ultimately drive
adolescent development, including academic achieve-
ment (Bronfenbrenner 1979). During adolescence, the
most common proximal contexts in individuals’ lives
are families, schools, and peers (Steinberg and Morris
2001). The structures of these environments as well as
the interactions that occur therein can either promote
or inhibit adolescents’ academic achievement.

interactions

contexts,

An exploration of adolescents’ academic achieve-
ment must also be situated in an understanding of the
larger stratiﬁcation systems in the US, stratiﬁcation
reﬂected in the achievement gap between low-income
and more afﬂuent youth as well as the gap between
African-American and Latino youth as compared to
their White and Asian-American peers (Farkas 2003).
Although a more distal factor, the sociohistorical con-
text in which adolescents develop, including existing
stratiﬁcation systems in the US generally and in the

20 A Academic Achievement: Contextual Influences

American educational system more speciﬁcally, shapes
educational opportunities and academic prospects. As
such, a comprehensive understanding of adolescents’
academic achievement must entail understanding the
larger stratiﬁcation systems as well as the more proxi-
mal contexts of adolescents’ development.

Stratification and Academic
Achievement
The achievement gap between African-American and
Latino students and their White and Asian-American
peers is well established, as is the achievement gap
between poor and non-poor youth in the US. National
statistics show that African-American youth are most
likely to have been retained in grade before ninth grade
(16%), followed by Latino (11%) and White (8%)
students. Poor students’ retention rates (23%) are
almost ﬁve times that of non-poor students (5%).
Moreover,
the achievement divide between these
demographic groups only widens across time. Dropout
rates for Asian-American (3%) and White (6%)
students are relatively low compared to those of
African-American (12%) and Latino students (20%),
and the dropout rates of
low-income youth are
approximately ﬁve times that of high-income youth
(NCES 2009).

Research further metes out the gaps reﬂected in
overall national trends. In comparing standardized
achievement test scores for the various race/ethnic
groups, research consistently documents the achieve-
ment divide (Anderson and Keith 1997; Caldas and
Bankston 1997; Lee 2007). These differences are
observed across content areas (i.e., English/language
arts, writing, mathematics,
science, history) and
widen from early to late adolescence (Gregory and
Weinstein 2004). The race/ethnic achievement gap is
also observed for adolescents’ grades in school (Fuligni
1997; Lohman et al. 2007) and their dropout status
(Lee and Burkam 2003). Consistent with research on
the achievement gap across race/ethnic groups, an
achievement gap between low-income and high-
income youth is also observed for achievement test
scores (Blair et al. 1999; Caldas and Bankston 1997),
and the proportion of life spent in poverty is associated
with lower reading comprehension achievement test
scores during adolescence (Eamon 2005). A more
detailed discussion of the effects of household socio-
economic status (including not only income but also

family structure and educational and occupational sta-
tus) as a structural characteristic of families is discussed
in greater detail below.

Academic Achievement and the
Family Context
Numerous studies have explored the link between the
structural characteristics of families and adolescents’
academic achievement, with the vast majority focusing
on various facets of family socioeconomic status (SES).
Higher family SES, as measured by parental educa-
tional and occupational status and income, is associ-
ated with higher achievement test scores (Felner et al.
1995; Gregory and Weinstein 2004; Lee 2007). More-
over, higher-SES adolescents earn higher grades in
school (Fuligni 1997; Lohman et al. 2007; Stewart
2008) and are less likely to drop out of school (Lee
and Burkam 2003). More extensive reviews of the pov-
erty literature (see Bradley and Corwyn 2002; McLoyd
1998) detail the pernicious effects of being poor or low-
SES for adolescents’ academic achievement measured
in a number of ways (i.e., achievement test scores, class
failure, retention in grade, graduation rates, dropout
rates). In addition to SES, family structure is also
associated with adolescents’ academic achievement –
adolescents reared in single-parent headed households
earn lower achievement
scores (Caldas and
Bankston 1997; Lee 2007) and lower grades in school
(Lohman et al. 2007; Stewart 2008), are less likely to
complete high school, and are more likely to drop out
of school (Rumberger 1987) than those reared in intact,
two-parent families.

test

In addition to the inﬂuence of familial structural
characteristics, the processes that occur within families
also inﬂuence adolescents’ academic achievement.
Parents’ support for academics, discussions around
academics, and provision of educational enrichment
in the home are associated with better academic per-
formance, in terms of adolescents’ achievement test
scores and grades in school (Eamon 2005; Steinberg
et al. 1992; Woolley and Grogan-Kaylor 2006). Parents’
direct involvement in their adolescents’ schools, via
activities such as open house attendance, parent–
teacher
and classroom
volunteering, are positively associated with higher test
scores and grades (Gutman and Eccles 1999; Park and
Bauer 2002; Shumow and Miller 2001). In their meta-
analysis of middle-school-aged adolescents’ parental

association participation,

Academic Achievement: Contextual Influences A 21

A

involvement, Hill and Tyson (2009) found that aca-
demic socialization practices (e.g., discussions around
academics,
fostering educational aspirations) were
more effective in promoting academic achievement
than home-based supports or school-based involve-
ment, ﬁndings consistent with an earlier meta-analysis
of secondary students residing in urban areas (Jeynes
2007).

In addition to direct involvement in their children’s
education, other processes within the home also play
a role in adolescents’ academic success. For example,
adolescents who believe their parents are warm and
supportive tend to earn higher grades in school (Bean
et al. 2003; Benner and Kim 2010; LeCroy and Krysik
2008), have higher achievement test scores (Portes
1999), and show greater growth in achievement test
scores across adolescence (Gregory and Weinstein
2004). In contrast, adolescents who report greater emo-
tional distance between themselves and their parents as
well as those who report higher levels of conﬂict and
harsh discipline often earn lower grades and score more
poorly on standardized achievement tests (Benner and
Kim 2010; Crosnoe 2004; Dotterer et al. 2008; Gutman
and Eccles 1999). Parents’ behavioral control of their
adolescents, in terms of monitoring adolescents’ activ-
ities, is positively associated with higher achievement
test scores (Blair et al. 1999; Gregory and Weinstein
2004) and grades (Bean et al. 2003), although the
inﬂuence of parental monitoring has been found to
vary across race/ethnic groups.

In addition to these individual indicators of family
processes and interactions, scholars have also examined
multiple aspects of parenting simultaneously to iden-
tify parenting proﬁles or typologies, generally focusing
on parental warmth and control (see Baumrind 1971;
Maccoby and Martin 1983). Studies examining the link
between parenting proﬁles and adolescents’ academic
achievement ﬁnd that youth whose parents employ
authoritative parenting (high warmth combined with
high levels of control) earn higher grades and better
achievement test scores than those whose parents
employ other parenting styles, although again, some
differences emerge across race/ethnic groups (Fletcher
et al. 1999;
Jeynes 2007; Steinberg et al. 1992).
For example, it appears that White and Latino adoles-
cents beneﬁt more academically from authoritative
parents than African-American and Asian-American
adolescents.

Overall, this body of research suggests that family
characteristics, particularly those directly related to
economic well-being, inﬂuence the academic achieve-
ment of adolescents. However, the processes that occur
within families can promote stronger achievement –
adolescents beneﬁt academically when they have fam-
ilies who are involved in the educational process and
who provide warmth and support but also appropriate
monitoring of adolescents’ day-to-day lives.

structural

Academic Achievement and the
School Context
The school is another primary context of socialization
during adolescence, and the relationship between
school
characteristics and adolescents’
performance is well established. Adolescents in high-
poverty schools (generally measured by the percentage
lunch
of students qualifying for the federal school
program) and schools with high percentages of race/
ethnic minority students generally experience more
academic difﬁculties than their peers attending more
afﬂuent schools and schools with fewer race/ethnic
minority students (Benner and Graham 2009; Caldas
and Bankston 1997; Lee and Croninger 1994; Leventhal
and Brooks-Gunn 2004). Although not as consistent, in
general greater school diversity is associated with
higher grades in school and stronger educational
attainment (Borman et al. 2004; Goza and Ryabov
2009). Additionally, adolescents enrolled in large
schools tend to perform more poorly on standardized
tests and exhibit less growth in achievement across time
(Lee et al. 1997), earn lower grades in school (Benner
and Graham 2009), and have higher dropout rates
(Baker et al. 2001; Lee and Burkam 2003) than students
attending smaller schools. Similar academic difﬁculties
emerge for adolescents in schools with higher student-
to-teacher ratios (Baker et al. 2001; McNeal 1997).

Tracking systems are another structural character-
istics of many American middle and high schools.
Tracking, whether it emerges de facto or as a more
systemic practice, “places students who appear to
have similar educational needs and abilities into sepa-
rate classes and programs of instruction” (Oakes 1987,
p. 131). Higher socioeconomic diversity and race/
ethnic diversity are associated with more pronounced
de facto tracking in mathematics and English courses in
American schools (Lucas and Berends 2002), and in
general, research suggests that track placement serves to

22 A Academic Achievement: Contextual Influences

only promote and reinforce existing academic inequal-
ities, with African-American and Latino adolescents and
low-income adolescents being placed in the “lower”
tracks at substantially higher rates than their White,
Asian-American, and more afﬂuent peers
(Oakes
2005). Not surprisingly, adolescents’ track placement
has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on changes in their academic
achievement across time, such that placement in higher
tracks
(i.e., honors, advanced) promotes greater
achievement than placement in lower tracks (i.e., very
basic, basic; Hallinan 1994; Oakes 2005). The structure
of
tracking systems also inﬂuences adolescents’
achievement – when there is immobility within track-
ing systems (i.e., little movement of students changing
academic tracks across time), a greater achievement
gap in achievement test scores exists between tracks,
whereas high levels of inclusiveness in a tracking system
(i.e., proportion of students in a college-preparatory
curriculum) are associated with a smaller gap in
achievement across tracks (Gamoran 1992).

School

transitions, normative experiences

that
occur when adolescents enter middle or junior high
school and high school, involve a shift in both the
structural characteristics of the schools adolescents
attend and the relationships and interactions that
occur within and across the school contexts. As such,
it is not surprising that school transitions are inﬂuen-
tial
for adolescents’ academic achievement. Initial
research posited that the academic challenges experi-
enced in early adolescence were due to the develop-
mental transition into adolescence, but Simmons and
Blyth’s (1987) groundbreaking work illustrated that the
transition to middle school was a driving force in
explaining early adolescents’ academic declines. Subse-
quent research has corroborated these initial ﬁndings,
documenting substantial declines in both grades and
teacher-rated academic performance from elementary
to middle school (Gutman and Midgley 2000; Rudolph
et al. 2001). Although less is known about the transi-
tion to high school, scholars identify similar achieve-
ment disruptions across the high school transition
(Barber and Olsen 2004; Reyes et al. 1994). Research
suggests that the declines observed across the high
school transition persist across the ﬁrst 2 years of high
school and are particularly disruptive for incongruent
African-American and Latino adolescents who transi-
tion to high school with few same-ethnicity peers
(Benner and Graham 2009).

adolescents’

also inﬂuence
Interactions

Interactions that occur within schools, beyond the
changes in those interactions observed across school
transitions,
academic
achievement.
speciﬁcally around aca-
demics, beyond the obvious instructional activities,
promote academic achievement during adolescence.
For example, when adolescents believe their teachers
have high regard for them as students, they earn higher
grades in school (Roeser and Eccles 1998), consistent
with the extensive teacher expectancies literature that
highlights a strong link between teachers’ educational
expectations for students and students’ academic
achievement (Gill and Reynolds 1999; Muller et al.
1999; Smith et al. 1998). Although teacher opinions
about particular students can inﬂuence academic
achievement, teachers’ overall views of the academic
caliber of students in their schools are also linked to
adolescents’ academic success. For example, teachers’
general ratings of the achievement orientation of the
student body are associated with adolescents’ reading
and math achievement test scores as well as their grades
in school (Brand et al. 2008).

adolescents

relationships,

teacher perceptions of

In addition to interactions and processes directly
tied to academics, the emotional connections within
schools are also important for adolescents’ academic
achievement. When adolescents feel closer to their
teachers and express more positive perceptions about
student–teacher
exhibit
stronger academic achievement, in terms of achieve-
ment test score growth, grades in school, and dropout
status (Crosnoe 2004; Gregory and Weinstein 2004; Lee
and Burkam 2003; Woolley and Grogan-Kaylor 2006),
the
although interestingly,
student–teacher relationship are not predictive of
adolescents’ achievement (Brand et al. 2008). Similar
trends are observed for more general ratings of school
climate – adolescents who view their schools more
favorably and feel more connected to their schools
receive higher grades (LeCroy and Krysik 2008; Stewart
2008; Zand and Thomson 2005) and earn higher scores
on achievement tests (Eamon 2005) than those who
view their schools more negatively. Perceptions of
speciﬁc aspects of the school climate are also important
for adolescents’ academic success. For example, adoles-
cents who report more positive evaluations of their
schools’
interracial climates have better academic
achievement (Mattison and Aber 2007). Similarly,
perceptions of school safety also promote academic

performance – when adolescents are in schools that
they perceive as more safe or that their teachers rate
as more safe, they perform better on achievement tests
(Brand et al. 2008; Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn 2004)
and are less likely to drop out of school (Rumberger
1995). Adolescents also perform better academically
when in schools where teachers rate the student body
as less disruptive (Brand et al. 2008).

Overall, the patterns of inﬂuence observed in the
school context closely mirror those observed at the
family level. The structural characteristics of schools,
particularly the SES and racial/ethnic make-up of
schools, are directly related to adolescents’ academic
achievement. Yet this body of research suggests that
the processes and interactions that occur within schools
can promote the academic achievement of all students,
with adolescents beneﬁtting from close bonds with their
teachers speciﬁcally and their schools more generally.

Academic Achievement and the Peer
Context
Although research linking the structural characteristics
of peer/friendship groups to academic achievement is
more rare, evidence suggests that these characteristics
do in fact play a role in adolescents’ achievement. For
example, adolescents with higher-SES peers generally
earn higher grades and are more likely to complete high
school than those with lower SES peers, although these
effects are often race/ethnic dependent (Goza and
Ryabov 2009). The academic achievement of an
adolescents’ peer group is also linked to their own
academic achievement. Whether examining recipro-
cated friendships or larger peer networks, the grades
of those with whom adolescents are closest are posi-
tively associated with adolescents’ own grades in school
(Altermatt and Pomerantz 2005; Mounts and Steinberg
1995; Ryan 2001). Similarly, when adolescents are
embedded in highly dense networks of high achieving
peers, they have the highest achievement levels, whereas
adolescents embedded in highly dense networks of
low-achieving peers have the worst achievement
(Maroulis and Gomez 2008). Related to this, adoles-
cents who have more friends who have dropped out of
school have a greater likelihood of later dropping out
themselves (Ream and Rumberger 2008).

In addition to the structural characteristics of peer
groups and friendship groups, the quality and support
adolescents receive from these signiﬁcant others also

Academic Achievement: Contextual Influences A 23

A

are

inﬂuences their academic achievement. Not surpris-
achievement
ingly, when adolescents’ peers
oriented and provide academic support, adolescents
typically earn higher grades in school (Herman 2009;
LeCroy and Krysik 2008; Steinberg et al. 1992; Stewart
2008; Wentzel et al. 2004) and have a lower likelihood
of later school dropout (Ream and Rumberger 2008).
More generally, associating with prosocial peers is
linked to higher grades in school (Wentzel et al.
2004), whereas having more deviant and disruptive
peers is associated with poorer school performance
during adolescence (Berndt and Keefe 1995; Fuligni
et al. 2001). Feeling accepted by peers, whether mea-
sured as a reciprocated friendship or by more general
ratings of support and acceptance, is positively associ-
ated with adolescents’ academic achievement (Hartup
1996; Wentzel et al. 2004; Wentzel and Caldwell 1997).
Victimization by peers, in contrast, is associated with
poorer school performance (Graham et al. 2006;
Juvonen et al. 2000).

The link between peer processes and achievement
has received particular attention from scholars exam-
ining oppositional identity and the “burden of acting
white” for African-American adolescents (Fordham
and Ogbu 1986). Fordham and Ogbu argued that the
underachievement of African-American adolescents is
linked, in part, to a peer culture that devalues academic
effort and achievement,
labeling it “acting white.”
A number of studies have challenged the theses of
Fordham and Ogbu, acknowledging that although
adolescents of color may experience peers’ accusations
of acting White, these accusations do not inﬂuence
achievement
adolescents’
(Ainsworth-Darnell and Downey 1998; Bergin and
Cooks 2002). Moreover, Tyson and colleagues (2005)
identify not only racialized peer pressure with African-
American adolescents, but also class-based peer
pressure with White adolescents, where lower-income
White adolescents equate academic achievement with
acting “high and mighty” (p. 598).

subsequent

academic

Overall, although the research linking adolescents’
peer groups to their academic achievement is more
scarce, a clear pattern emerges. When adolescents
have friends who perform better in school, are more
oriented to school, and provide more academic sup-
port, adolescents beneﬁt academically. In addition to
the academic characteristics of peers and academically
based interactions, more general emotional support

24 A Academic Achievement: Contextual Influences

and friendship quality also seemingly promote
academic success during adolescence, whereas rejection
and victimization by peers is detrimental to adoles-
cents’ academic well-being.

Future Directions of the Adolescent
Academic Achievement Literature
Across the primary contexts of adolescents’ develop-
ment – families, schools, and peer groups – a consistent
pattern of ﬁndings links both the structural character-
istics of each context and the processes and interactions
that occur therein with adolescents’ academic achieve-
ment. When contexts are characterized by more
resources and less social marginalization, adolescents
perform better
academically. Moreover, warm,
academics-oriented relationships within each context
promote academic achievement and educational
growth. Although these patterns are clear, much is left
to explore in relation to adolescents’ academic achieve-
ment, and ecological theory serves as an important
guide for future inquiry.

First, ecological theory suggests a fundamental
interplay between the structural characteristics of
a given ecological context and the processes that
occur within that context, yet researchers sometimes
conﬂate structure and process and create models that
do not differentiate between the two. Future research
on adolescents’ academic achievement should examine
how the structural characteristics of families, schools,
and peer groups inﬂuence the processes and interac-
tions that occur within these contexts (see Benner et al.
2008 for an example). Investigation of the differential
effects of structure and process will provide insights
into what aspects of contexts are more amenable and
malleable to change in order to better promote adoles-
cents’ academic success.

schools,

A second area ripe for future inquiry relates to the
interplay across the ecological contexts of adolescence.
The contexts of adolescents’ development do not exist
within a vacuum – parents attend activities at their
children’s
academic
involvement and support in homes, peers interact
both within and outside the conﬁnes of school. These
cross-context interactions, as well as the consistency in
relations across contexts, inﬂuence adolescent develop-
ment, yet researchers have, with few exceptions,
ignored these mesosystemic inﬂuences. Those scholars

teachers’ promote

who have explored cross-system interactions have
highlighted the importance of these for adolescents’
academic achievement. For example, Crosnoe (2004)
found that close relations to parents were associated
with higher grades in school when adolescents also
attended schools with more positive student–teacher
bonds. Similarly, Gregory and Weinstein (2004) found
that monitoring and regulation by parents and teachers
exerted an additive effect for adolescents’ mathematics
achievement. Future research should further explore
the additive (and possibly compensatory) nature of
relationships across ecological contexts as well as the
extent to which the structural characteristics of a given
context might inﬂuence cross-context interactions. It is
through understanding these more nuanced processes
and interactions that we will be able to more effectively
promote the academic achievement of all adolescents.

Cross-References
▶ Educational Aspirations
▶ Vocational Education

References
Ainsworth-Darnell, J. W., & Downey, D. B. (1998). Assessing the
oppositional culture explanation for racial/ethnic differences in
school performance. American Sociological Review, 63, 536–553.
Altermatt, E. R., & Pomerantz, E. M. (2005). The implications of
friends:

having
A longitudinal analysis. Social Development, 14, 61–81.

high-achieving

low-achieving

versus

Anderson, E. S., & Keith, T. Z. (1997). A longitudinal test of a model
of academic success for at-risk high school students. Journal of
Educational Research, 90, 259–268.

Baker, J. A., Derrer, R. D., Davis, S. M., Dinklage-Travis, H. E., Linder,
D. S., & Nicholson, M. D. (2001). The ﬂip side of the coin:
Understanding the school’s contribution to dropout and com-
pletion. School Psychology Quarterly, 16, 406–426.

Barber, B. K., & Olsen, J. A. (2004). Assessing the transitions to
middle and high school. Journal of Adolescent Research, 19, 3–30.
Battin-Pearson, S., Newcomb, M. D., Abbott, R. D., Hill, K. G.,
Catalano, R. F., & Hawkins, J. D. (2000). Predictors of early
dropout: A test of ﬁve theories. Journal of Educational Psychology,
92, 568–582.

Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental authority. Devel-

opmental Psychology Monographs, 4, 1–103.

Bean, R. A., Bush, K. R., McKenry, P. C., & Wilson, S. M. (2003). The
impact of parental support, behavioral control, and psychologi-
cal control on the academic achievement of African American
and European American adolescents.
Journal of Adolescent
Research, 18, 523–541.

Benner, A. D., & Graham, S. (2009). The transition to high school as
a developmental process among multiethnic urban youth. Child
Development, 80, 356–376.

Academic Achievement: Contextual Influences A 25

A

Benner, A. D., Graham, S., & Mistry, R. S. (2008). Discerning indi-
vidual and conjoint effects of ecological structures and processes
on adolescents’ educational outcomes. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 44, 840–854.

Benner, A. D., & Kim, S. Y. (2010). Understanding Asian American
adolescents’ developmental outcomes: Insights from the family
stress model. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 20, 1–12.
Bergin, D. A., & Cooks, H. C. (2002). High school students of color
talk about accusations of “acting White”. The Urban Review, 34,
113–134.

Berndt, T. J., & Keefe, K. (1995). Friends’ inﬂuence on adolescents’
adjustment to school. Child Development, 66, 1312–1329.
Blair, S. L., Blair, M. C. L., & Madamba, A. B. (1999). Racial/ethnic
differences in high school students academic performance:
Understanding the interweave of social class and ethnicity in
the family context. Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 30,
539–555.

Farkas, G. (2003). Racial disparities and discrimination in education:
What do we know, how do we know it, and what do we need to
know? Teachers College Record, 105, 1119–1146.

Felner, R. D., Brand, S., DuBois, D. L., Adan, A. M., Mulhall, P. F., &
Evans, E. G. (1995). Socioeconomic disadvantage, proximal
environmental experiences, and socioemotional and academic
adjustment in early adolescence: Investigation of a mediated
effects model. Child Development, 66, 774–792.

Fletcher, A. C., Steinberg, L., & Sellers, E. B. (1999). Adolescents well-
being as a function of perceived interparental consistency.
Journal of Marriage and Family, 61, 599–610.

Fordham, S., & Ogbu, J. U. (1986). Black students’ school success:
Coping with the “burden of ‘acting White’”. The Urban Review,
18, 176–206.

Fuligni, A. J. (1997). The academic achievement of adolescents from
immigrant families: The roles of family background, attitudes,
and behavior. Child Development, 68, 351–363.

Borman, K. M., Eitle, T. M., Michael, D., Eitle, D. J., Lee, R., Johnson,
L., et al. (2004). Accountability in a postdesegregation era: The
continuing signiﬁcance of racial segregation in Florida’s schools.
American Educational Research Journal, 41, 605–631.

Fuligni, A. J., Eccles, J. S., Barber, B. L., & Clements, P. (2001). Early
adolescent peer orientation and adjustment during high school.
Developmental Psychology, 37, 28–36.

Gamoran, A. (1992). The variable effects of high school tracking.

Bradley, R. H., & Corwyn, R. F. (2002). Socioeconomic status and
child development. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 371–399.
Brand, S., Felner, R. D., Seitsinger, A., Burns, A., & Bolton, N. (2008).
A large scale study of the assessment of the social environment of
middle and secondary schools: The validity and utility of
teachers’ ratings of school climate, cultural pluralism, and safety
problems for understanding school effects and school improve-
ment. Journal of School Psychology, 46, 507–535.

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development:
Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

American Sociological Review, 57, 812–828.

Gill, S., & Reynolds, A. J. (1999). Educational expectations and school
achievement of urban African American children. Journal of
School Psychology, 37, 403–424.

Goza, F., & Ryabov, I. (2009). Adolescents’ educational outcomes:
Racial and ethnic variations in peer network importance. Journal
of Youth and Adolescence, 38, 1264–1279.

Graham, S., Bellmore, A. D., & Mize, J. (2006). Peer victimization,
aggression, and their co-occurence in middle school: Pathways to
adjustment problems. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 34,
363–378.

Caldas, S. J., & Bankston, C. (1997). Effect of school population
socioeconomic status on individual academic achievement.
Journal of Educational Research, 90, 269–277.

Gregory, A., & Weinstein, R. S. (2004). Connection and regulation at
home and in school: Predicting growth in achievement for ado-
lescents. Journal of Adolescent Research, 19, 405–427.

Chung, H. L., & Steinberg, L. (2006). Relations between neighborhood
factors, parenting behaviors, peer deviance, and delinquency
among serious juvenile offenders. Developmental Psychology, 42,
319–331.

Cook, T. D., Herman, M. R., Phillips, M., & Settersen, R. A., Jr.
(2002). Some ways in which neighborhoods, nuclear families,
friendship groups, and schools jointly affect changes in early
adolescent development. Child Development, 73, 1283–1309.
Crosnoe, R. (2004). Social capital and the interplay of families and

Gutman, L. M., & Eccles, J. S. (1999). Financial strain, parenting
behaviors, and adolescents’ achievement: Testing model equiva-
lence between African American and European American single-
and two-parent families. Child Development, 70, 1464–1476.
Gutman, L. M., & Midgley, C. (2000). The role of protective factors in
supporting the academic achievement of poor African American
students during the middle school transition. Journal of Youth
and Adolescence, 29, 223–248.

Hallinan, M. T. (1994). School differences in tracking effects on

schools. Journal of Marriage and Family, 66, 267–280.

achievement. Social Forces, 72, 799–820.

Dotterer, A. M., Hoffman, L., Crouter, A. C., & McHale, S. M. (2008).
A longitudinal examination of the bidirectional links between
academic achievement and parent adolescent conﬂict. Journal of
Family Issues, 29, 762–779.

Eamon, M. K. (2005). Social-demographic, school, neighborhood,
and parenting inﬂuences on the academic achievement of Latino
young adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 34, 163–174.
Eccles, J. S., Wigﬁeld, A., & Byrnes, J. (2003). Cognitive development
in adolescence. In R. M. Lerner, M. A. Easterbrooks, & J. Mistry
(Eds.), Handbook of psychology: Developmental psychology (Vol. 6,
pp. 325–350). Hoboken: Wiley.

Hartup, W. W. (1996). The company they keep: Friendships and their
developmental signiﬁcance. Child Development, 67, 1–13.
Herman, M. R. (2009). The Black-White-other achievement gap:
Testing theories of academic performance among multiracial
and monoracial adolescents. Sociology of Education, 82, 20–46.

Hill, N. E., & Tyson, D. F. (2009). Parental involvement in middle
school: A meta-analytic assessment of teh strategies that promote
achievement. Developmental Psychology, 45, 740–763.

Jeynes, W. H. (2007). The relationship between parental involvement
and urban secondary school student academic achievement:
A meta-analysis. Urban Education, 42, 82–110.

26 A Academic Achievement: Contextual Influences

Juvonen, J., Nishina, A., & Graham, S. (2000). Peer harassment,
functioning in early

psychological adjustment, and school
adolescence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92, 349–359.
LeCroy, C. W., & Krysik, J. (2008). Predictors of academic achieve-
ment and school attachment among Hispanic adolescents.
Children and Schools, 30, 197–209.

Lee, H. (2007). The effects of school racial and ethnic composition on
academic schievement during adolescence. The Journal of Negro
Education, 76, 154–172.

Lee, V. E., & Burkam, D. T. (2003). Dropping out of high school: The
role of school organization and structure. American Educational
Research Journal, 40, 353–393.

Lee, V. E., & Croninger, R. G. (1994). The relative importance
of home and school in the development of literacy skills for
middle-grade students. American Journal of Education, 102,
286–329.

Lee, V. E., Smith, J. B., & Croninger, R. G. (1997). How high
school organization inﬂuences te equitable distribution of
learning in mathematics and science. Sociology of Education,
70(2), 128–150.

Leventhal, T., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2004). A randomized study of
neighborhood effects on low-income children’s educational
outcomes. Developmental Psychology, 40, 488–507.

Lohman, B. J., Kaura, S. A., & Newman, B. M. (2007). Matched or
family and
mismatched environments? The relationship of
school differentiation to adolescents’ psychosocial adjustment.
Youth and Society, 39, 3–32.

Park, H.-S., & Bauer, S. (2002). Parenting practices, ethnicity, socio-
economic status, and academic achievement in adolescents.
School Psychology International, 23, 386–396.

Portes, P. R. (1999). Social and psychological factors in teh academic
achievement of children of immigrants: A cultural history puzzle.
American Educational Research Journal, 36, 489–507.

Ream, R. K., & Rumberger, R. W. (2008). Student engagement, peer
social capital, and school dropout among Mexican American and
non-Latino White students. Sociology of Education, 81, 109–139.
Reyes, O., Gillock, K. L., & Kobus, K. (1994). A longitudinal study of
school adjustment in urban, minority adolescents: Effects of
a high school transition program. American Journal of Commu-
nity Psychology, 22, 341–369.

Roeser, R. W., & Eccles, J. (1998). Adolescents’ perceptions of middle
school: Relation to longitudinal changes in academic and
psychological adjustment. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 8,
123–158.

Rudolph, K. D., Lambert, S. F., Clark, A. G., & Kurlakowsky, K. D.
(2001). Negotiating the transition to middle school: The role of
self-regulatory processes. Child Development, 72, 929–946.
Rumberger, R. W. (1987). High school dropouts: A review of issues
and evidence. Review of Educational Research, 57, 101–121.

Rumberger, R. W.

(1995). Dropping out of middle school:
A multilevel analysis of students and schools. American Educa-
tional Research Journal, 32, 583–625.

Rumberger, R. W. (2001). Why students drop out and what can be

done. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Civil Rights Project.

Lucas, S. R., & Berends, M. (2002). Sociodemographic diversity,
correlated achievement, and de facto tracking. Sociology of
Education, 75, 328–348.

Ryan, A. M. (2001). The peer group as a context for the development
of young adolescent motivation and achievement. Child Devel-
opment, 72, 1135–1150.

Maccoby, E., & Martin, J. (1983). Socialization in the context of teh
family: Parent-child interaction. In E. M. Hetherington (Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Socialization, personality, and social
development (Vol. 4, pp. 1–101). New York: Wiley.

Maroulis, S., & Gomez, L. M. (2008). Does “connectedness” matter?
Evidence from a social network analysis within a small-school
reform. Teachers College Record, 110, 1901–1929.

Mattison, E., & Aber, M. S. (2007). Closing the achievement gap: The
associations of racial climate with achievement and behavioral
outcomes. American Journal of Community Psychology, 40, 1–12.
McLoyd, V. C. (1998). Socioeconomic disadvantage and child devel-

Shumow, L., & Miller, J. D. (2001). Parents’ at-home and at-school
academic involvement with young adolescents. Journal of Early
Adolescence, 21, 68–91.

Simmons, R. G., & Blyth, D. A. (1987). Moving into adolescence: The
impact of pubertal change and school context. Hawthorn: Aldine.
Smith, A. E., Jussim, L., & Eccles, J. (1998). Self-fulﬁlling prophecies,
perceptual biases, and accuracy at the individual and group
levels. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 34, 530–561.
Stearns, E., Moller, S., Blau, J., & Potochnick, S. (2007). Staying back
and dropping out: The relationship between grade retention and
school dropout. Sociology of Education, 80, 210–240.

opment. American Psychologist, 53, 185–204.

Steinberg, L., & Morris, A. S. (2001). Adolescent development.

McNeal, R. B., Jr. (1997). High school dropouts: A closer examination

Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 83–110.

of school effects. Social Science Quarterly, 78, 209–222.

Mounts, N. S., & Steinberg, L. (1995). An ecological analysis of
peer inﬂuence on adolescent grade point average and drug use.
Developmental Psychology, 31, 915–922.

Muller, C., Katz, S. R., & Dance, L. J. (1999). Investing in teaching and
learning: Dynamics of the teacher-student relationship from
each actor’s perspective. Urban Education, 34, 292–337.

National Center for Education Statistics. (2009). Condition of educa-

tion 2009. Washington: U.S. Department of Education.

Oakes, J. (1987). Tracking in secondary schools: A contextual

perspective. Educational Psychologist, 22, 129–153.

Oakes, J. (2005). Keeping track: How schools structure inequality.

New Haven: Yale University Press.

Steinberg, L., Dornbusch, S. M., & Brown, B. B. (1992). Ethnic
differences in adolescent achievement. American Psychologist,
47, 723–729.

Stewart, E. (2008). School structural characteristics, student effort,
involvement. Education and

peer associations, and parental
Urban Society, 40, 179–204.

Tyson, K., Darity, W., Jr., & Castellino, D. R. (2005). It’s not “a Black
thing”: Understanding the burden of acting White and other
dilemmas of high achievement. American Sociological Review,
70, 582–605.

Wentzel, K. R., & Caldwell, K. (1997). Friendships, peer acceptance,
and group membership: Relations to academic achievement in
middle school. Child Development, 68, 1198–1209.

Wentzel, K. R., Barry, C. M., & Caldwell, K. A. (2004). Friendships in
middle school: Inﬂuences on motivation and school adjustment.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 96, 195–203.

Woolley, M. E., & Grogan-Kaylor, A. (2006). Protective family factors
in the context of neighborhood: Promoting positive school out-
comes. Family Relations, 55, 93–104.

Zand, D. H., & Thomson, N. R. (2005). Academic achievement
among African American adolescents: Direct and indirect effects
of demographic, individual, and contextual variables. Journal of
Black Psychology, 31, 352–368.

Academic Self-efficacy

1, PATRIZIA STECA

2, ANTONELLA DELLE FAVE

MARTA BASSI
1Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche Luigi Sacco,
Universita` degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
2Dipartimento di Psicologia, Universita` degli Studi di
Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy

1

in the school

Overview
Time spent in learning accounts for a large portion of
an adolescent’s life. Enjoyment in learning activities,
setting, and academic
adjustment
achievement represent desired attainments for both
students and their families. A vast literature addition-
ally shows that these attainments inﬂuence children’s
course of life, by affecting their scholastic choices and
professional aspirations, as well as their psychosocial
development and well-being. Among the factors
contributing to these attainments are academic self-
efﬁcacy beliefs and optimal experience in learning.
The ﬁrst part of this essay will
illustrate the two
constructs and related assessment methodologies. The
short- and long-term developmental outcomes of the
constructs will also be outlined, as well as the contex-
tual and individual factors contributing to optimal
learning environment and experience. The second
part will present a model combining academic self-
efﬁcacy beliefs and optimal experience, and will bring
forward future directions for research and practice.

Introduction
Learning at school is one of the major means through
which culturally relevant information is transmitted,
with the view to provide individuals with the

Academic Self-efficacy A 27

A

knowledge required to identify and fulﬁll their role in
society. On the one hand, a great number of studies
attest to the natural human tendency to learn and the
thirst for knowledge in young children (Shernoff and
Csikszentmihalyi 2009). On the other hand, ﬁndings in
western countries highlight that once children enter the
formal school system, they start to report lack of inter-
est, disengagement, and apathy toward learning, which
can lead to poor concepts assimilation and eventually
to school dropout. Obstacles to learning usually
include disruptive thoughts, dysfunctional emotional
reactions, negative interpersonal relationships, and
poor organizational skills. This is much more true of
adolescents who tend to be even less engaged in school
activities. In order to shed light on the reasons for such
learning disaffection and to identify intervention strat-
egies promoting engagement
in school activities,
scholars in the 1960s and 1970s have advocated the
agentic role of students in regulating academic learn-
ing. In particular, two theories have proved successful
in providing sound empirical evidence and models of
academic learning: Bandura’s social-cognitive theory
(1997) and Csikszentmihalyi’s ﬂow theory (1975/
2000). The ﬁrst part of this essay will illustrate the
two theoretical frameworks, related methodology, and
major ﬁndings connected to the learning domain. The
second part will present a model building a bridge
between the two theories, and will bring forward future
directions for research and practice.

Self-efficacy Beliefs in Bandura’s
Social-Cognitive Theory
Bandura’s social-cognitive theory stresses the active
and proactive role individuals play in shaping the
course of their life (Bandura 1986, 2001). People are
viewed as self-regulating agents whose development
takes place in complex transactions within a network
of socio-structural and psychosocial inﬂuences, where
individuals are both producers and products of their
social systems. During these transactions, individuals
play a decisive role in setting goals, in choosing which
paths to follow, and in selecting the activities and social
relationships that are most appropriate to their choices.
the mechanisms of human agency,
a pervasive inﬂuence is played by self-efﬁcacy beliefs,
namely, the beliefs that individuals hold about their
capacity to exert control over the events that affect

Among

28 A Academic Self-efficacy

their lives, and to organize and execute courses of
action to attain designed goals. Any other factor that
may operate as motivator in people’s efforts to reach
their goals is rooted in the core belief that one has the
power
to produce effects by one’s own actions
(Bandura 1997, 2001). Self-efﬁcacy beliefs directly
contribute to decisions, actions, and experiences, as
people reﬂect upon their capacities when deciding
whether to undertake challenging activities or to persist
in pursuing difﬁcult tasks. Findings have documented
the inﬂuential role of self-efﬁcacy beliefs in various
domains of functioning such as learning, work, sports,
health, social adjustment, and well-being, in different
conditions and phases of life (for a review, see Bandura
1997, 2001). Moreover, the functional role of perceived
self-efﬁcacy and the processes through which it operates
have been conﬁrmed across cultures (Bandura 2002).

Compared to other psychological

constructs,
perceived self-efﬁcacy has a variety of distinctive
characteristics. First, it concerns perceived capacities
to perform an activity or to manage a task, and not
personality traits (i.e., extraversion) or other general
psychological characteristics (i.e., self-esteem). Second,
self-efﬁcacy beliefs are not only domain-speciﬁc, but
may also be context- and task-speciﬁc. Moreover, they
vary across several dimensions, such as level, generality,
and strength. The level of perceived self-efﬁcacy refers
to its dependence on the difﬁculty level of a particular
task (i.e., a math addition problem); generality refers to
the transferability of one’s efﬁcacy judgements across
different tasks, contexts, or domains; ﬁnally, strength
pertains to the conﬁdence with which one can perform
a speciﬁc task or activity.

Self-efficacy Beliefs’ Assessment
The distinctive features of self-efﬁcacy described above
have implications for the construct measurement. As
the efﬁcacy beliefs system is not a global trait but
a differentiated set of self-beliefs linked to distinct
realms of functioning, only multi-domain measures
can adequately reveal the pattern and degree of gener-
ality of people’s sense of personal efﬁcacy. The “one
measure ﬁts all” approach has a limited explanatory
and predictive value because most of the items in such
a measure may have little or no relevance to the speciﬁc
domain of functioning or task one is interested to
evaluate. Self-efﬁcacy beliefs covary across distinct
domains only when different spheres of activity are

governed by similar subskills, or when skills in diverse
domains are developed together.

All over the world, scales were developed to
measure people’s self-efﬁcacy beliefs in different life
domains. In the academic settings, there are scales
assessing students’ perceived capabilities to learn spe-
ciﬁc subjects (e.g., the “Self-efﬁcacy to Learn Statistics”
scale; Finney and Schraw 2003); scales measuring the
perceived capabilities to apply successful learning strat-
the “Self-Efﬁcacy for Learning Form”;
egies (e.g.,
Zimmerman et al. 2005); and multi-domain scales,
assessing students’ capacity to enlist social resources,
to learn speciﬁc subjects, and to self-regulate their
learning activities (e.g., the measure developed by
Bandura 2006).

New scales can be designed by scholars and educa-
tors interested in measuring self-efﬁcacy beliefs in
speciﬁc contexts and in relation to particular domains
or tasks. The guidelines developed by Bandura (2006)
enlist the main rules that have to be respected in order
to build a proper self-efﬁcacy scale. First, the construc-
tion of a scale primarily relies on a good conceptual
analysis of the domain of interest, as the knowledge
of
the activity domain speciﬁes which aspects of
personal efﬁcacy should be measured. In particular,
a comprehensive efﬁcacy assessment should be linked
to the behavioral factors that mostly determine the
quality of functioning in the domain and over which
people can exercise some control. Second, efﬁcacy
items should accurately reﬂect the construct of self-
efﬁcacy. They should be phrased in terms of “can do”,
as the “can” phrase reﬂects a judgment of capability
(“Can you ﬁnish your homework assignments by dead-
line?”). Perceived self-efﬁcacy should be measured
against levels of task demands that represent challenges
or difﬁculties to successful performance. Self-efﬁcacy
judgements reﬂect the level of difﬁculty individuals
believe they can surmount. If there are no obstacles to
overcome, the activity is easily performable, and every-
one is highly efﬁcacious. For instance, every student
can state he or she feels able to “get him or herself to
study” when there is no challenge or impediment, but
only the most efﬁcacious will judge themselves very
capable to “get themselves to study when there are
other interesting things to do”. The nature and level of
the challenges against which personal efﬁcacy is judged
will vary depending on the sphere of activity and may
be graded in terms of level of exertion, accuracy,

threat, or

productivity,
self-regulation required.
Constructing scales to assess self-efﬁcacy thus requires
preliminary work to identify speciﬁc challenges and
impediments. In preliminary phases, people are usually
asked to describe the things that make it hard for them
to perform the required activities on a regular basis.
The identiﬁed challenges or impediments are then
inserted into the efﬁcacy items, and respondents are
asked to judge their ability to meet the challenges or to
overcome the various impediments. At last, item for-
mat should present sufﬁcient gradations to guarantee
a variety of answers in the population and to avoid
ceiling effects.

Self-efficacy Beliefs in Educational
Settings
Research on adolescents’ academic perceived self-
efﬁcacy, namely, their self-beliefs in managing activities
connected to learning processes and success at school,
is extremely wide and has been conducted in different
cultures (see for major reviews: Bandura 1997; Pajares
1996, 1997; Schunk and Pajares 2004). Studies used
various assessment
scales and adopted different
research designs. In experimental studies, self-efﬁcacy
beliefs were usually manipulated in order to assess their
effect on students’ performance. In nonexperimental
studies, the relationship of efﬁcacy beliefs with indica-
tors of students’ performance or well-adjustment was
evaluated cross-sectionally or longitudinally. Other
studies speciﬁcally evaluated the effectiveness of long-
term interventions aimed to strengthen students’ per-
ceived self-efﬁcacy through trainings based on the
sources of self-efﬁcacy identiﬁed by Bandura. Overall,
research demonstrated that self-efﬁcacy beliefs inﬂu-
ence students’ academic and career choices, as well as
motivational
that
promote success at school.

factors and learning strategies

Academic Choices and Career
Self-efﬁcacy beliefs inﬂuence academic choices as stu-
dents are prone to engage in tasks in which they feel
conﬁdent and avoid those in which they do not. Espe-
cially in high school and college, where students have
greater control over activity selection, their efﬁcacy
beliefs strongly inﬂuence course choices and academic
career (Britner and Pajares 2006). For example, several
studies conducted in the areas of science and mathe-
matics showed that perceived self-efﬁcacy is more

Academic Self-efficacy A 29

predictive of interest in and choice of these learning
domains than prior achievement and outcome expec-
tations (e.g., Lent et al. 1993; Pajares and Miller 1995).
In addition, adolescents’ academic self-efﬁcacy has
been demonstrated to affect career trajectories through
occupational self-efﬁcacy (Bandura et al. 2001).

A

set

Motivation and Learning Strategies
Once an activity is chosen, self-efﬁcacy beliefs contrib-
through a number of
ute to its accomplishment
motivational factors (see Schunk and Miller 2002, for
a review). Perceived self-efﬁcacy determines the effort
students will expend on activities and their persever-
ance in front of obstacles and difﬁculties (e.g.,
Bouffard-Bouchard et al. 1991; Gore 2006). Conﬁdent
students approach difﬁcult tasks as challenges to be
mastered rather than as threats to be avoided. They
themselves
intrinsic motivation,
have greater
challenging goals, and maintain strong commitment
to them. Moreover, they more quickly regain their
conﬁdence after failures or setbacks, and they attribute
failure to insufﬁcient effort or lack of acquirable knowl-
edge and skills (Schunk 1998; Zimmerman et al. 1992).
Conversely, students with low self-efﬁcacy tend to
believe that things are more difﬁcult than they really
are, and they are likely to attribute their failure to
inborn and permanent lack of ability. Both sets of
thoughts foster negative emotions and determine low
conﬁdence in personal capabilities. Students with
higher self-efﬁcacy beliefs also use more effective cog-
nitive and meta-cognitive learning strategies and show
greater ﬂexibility in their use, as shown by Zimmerman
and his colleagues in their extensive line of inquiry on
the relationships between self-efﬁcacy beliefs, academic
self-regulatory strategies, and academic achievement.
They demonstrated that self-efﬁcacy beliefs inﬂuence
self-regulatory processes such as goal setting, self-
monitoring,
use
(Zimmerman and Cleary 2006).

self-evaluation,

strategy

and

Academic Achievement
There is ample empirical evidence that self-efﬁcacy
beliefs are related to and exert an inﬂuence on academic
achievement, either directly or through the inﬂuence
of other personal achievement predictors, such as
previous achievement, skills, and mental abilities (see
Pajares and Schunk 2001, for a review). Early adoles-
cents’ perceived academic self-efﬁcacy has also been

30 A Academic Self-efficacy

demonstrated to mediate the inﬂuence of external
factors such as parents’ own efﬁcacy beliefs and aspira-
tions, and the family’s socioeconomic status (Bandura
et al. 1996).

Longitudinal studies attested to the long-lasting
effect of efﬁcacy beliefs on academic achievement and
likelihood of dropping out of school (Caprara et al.
2008). A general decline in efﬁcacy beliefs has also
been observed from junior high to high school, as
a consequence of the increasing demands and pressures
on children’s academic performance. However, that
decline is weaker for children with higher self-efﬁcacy
beliefs. The effects of efﬁcacy beliefs on achievement are
usually stronger for high school and college students
than for elementary students. In particular, recent
empirical studies and meta-analyses demonstrated the
strong predictive value of efﬁcacy beliefs on late ado-
lescents’ performance in college (Gore 2006; Robbins
et al. 2004). The strongest effects were obtained when
achievement was assessed through basic skills measures
or classroom-based indices such as grades. Moreover,
although a reciprocal inﬂuence between self-efﬁcacy
beliefs and school attainments can be hypothesized,
Schunk and his colleagues showed the causal inﬂuence
of perceived self-efﬁcacy on students’ achievement-
related behaviors. In particular, they detected that the
increase of self-efﬁcacy through instructional strategies
resulted in improved academic performances (e.g.,
Schunk and Swartz 1993).

Factors Promoting Students’
Self-efficacy Beliefs
Bandura (1986, 1997) identiﬁed four main sources of
self-efﬁcacy: personal mastery, physiological reactions,
vicarious experiences, and forms of persuasion. (1)
Personal mastery experiences are the strongest source
for enhancing perceptions of self-efﬁcacy. In general,
frequent successes boost self-efﬁcacy, whereas consis-
tent failure experiences usually undermine it. However,
this process is not completely automatic, as personal
accomplishments are interpreted in light of one’s
self-regulatory processes,
self-evaluations,
attributions, and goal setting. For instance, perceived
self-efﬁcacy depends on the individual evaluation of
circumstances and external factors; if a student does
well on a math test but judges it easier than typical
math tests, it is unlikely that his or her efﬁcacy beliefs
will change. (2) Physiological reactions can also

such as

inﬂuence a student’s efﬁcacy judgement. If a student
gets extremely anxious during a classwork, he or she
may interpret the rapid heart rate as an indicator of
personal
ineffectiveness. (3) Adolescents also judge
their level of self-efﬁcacy through vicarious experi-
ences, such as modeling, deﬁned as the behavioral,
cognitive, and affective changes resulting from observ-
ing other individuals. Models may be different types of
individuals (peers or adults) and can take various
forms (live or symbolic). Their effectiveness will be
strongest when observers believe they are similar to
the model
in terms of age, gender, and ability.
(4) Finally, also social persuasion can shape students’
efﬁcacy perceptions. In the learning settings, teachers
and parents may promote students’ positive efﬁcacy
beliefs using various form of verbal persuasion aimed
at encouraging (e.g., “I’m sure you can do it”) and
reassuring them (e.g., “You will do better on the next
exam”), as well as providing speciﬁc feedback that
clearly link performance and its progress, with strategy
use (e.g., “You failed because you used a wrong way to
study. I’ll suggest...”). This form of social persuasion
has a strong long-lasting effect as it encourages students
to view academic success and failure in terms of
controllable personal strategies that can be learned
and progressively improved.

in the educational

Optimal Experience and
Psychological Selection
Another line of research that has brought about
valuable contributions
setting
focuses on the phenomenology of learning experience.
Csikszentmihalyi’s ﬂow theory (1975/2000) belongs to
the well-established humanistic tradition in psychol-
ogy, stressing the crucial role of subjective experience in
individuals’
interaction with their daily context.
Subjective experience comprises cognitive, emotional,
and motivational components, and represents the
conscious processing of information coming from the
individual’s outer and inner worlds. As attentional
processes regulating the stream of conscious experience
are a limited psychic resource, only a selected amount
of this information will be processed (Csikszentmihalyi
1978). Csikszentmihalyi has identiﬁed the quality of
experience as the selection criterion of the content in
consciousness. In their daily lives, individuals associate
activities and situations with different experiential
states, based on the challenges or opportunities for

action perceived in such activities and situations, and
on the skills they perceive to possess in facing such
challenges. In particular, empirical ﬁndings showed
that people report a globally positive and complex
experience in activities or situations in which they
perceive high challenges matched with adequate
high skills (Massimini et al. 1987). Such condition
has been deﬁned as optimal experience or ﬂow. It is
characterized by deep concentration, absorption,
enjoyment, control of the situation, clear-cut feedback
on the course of the activity, clear goals, and intrinsic
reward. The term “ﬂow” expresses the feeling of
ﬂuidity and continuity in concentration and action
described by most participants (Csikszentmihalyi and
Csikszentmihalyi 1988).

Several

studies,

cross-cultural

conducted on
samples widely differing in age, educational level, and
occupation, have shown that optimal experience can
occur during the most various activities of daily life,
such as work, study, parenting, sports, arts and crafts,
social interactions, and religious practice (Delle Fave
and Bassi 2009; Delle Fave and Massimini 2004;
Hektner et al. 2007; Massimini and Delle Fave 2000).
However, regardless of the activity, the onset of optimal
experience is associated with a speciﬁc condition: The
ongoing task has to be challenging enough to require
concentration and engagement, and to promote
satisfaction in the use of personal skills.

These studies also shed light on the psychological
structure of optimal experience (Delle Fave and
Massimini 2005). It comprises a cognitive and stable
core, represented by components such as high concen-
tration and control of the situation. These components
do not show remarkable variations across samples and
activities. On the contrary, affective and motivational
variables widely vary across activities. Therefore,
optimal experience represents a multifaceted construct
with stable cognitive features, around which motiva-
tional and emotional components ﬂuctuate in intensity
according to the associated activities. More speciﬁcally,
regarding motivational variables, wide cross-domain
variations were detected in the values of perceived
goals and short-term activity desirability. In particular,
in productive activities – such as study and work – the
perception of goals is prominent, but the short-term
desirability is perceived as signiﬁcantly lower than in
other domains. Social interactions and leisure activities
are characterized by both short-term desirability and

Academic Self-efficacy A 31

A

high values of long-term goals; passive entertainment
activities, such as watching TV, are characterized by
short-term desirability, but by the lowest perception
of goals.

Research has shown that, by virtue of its positive
and complex characteristics, optimal experience repre-
sents an important indicator of individuals’ optimal
psychological functioning. From the wider perspective
of the theory of psychological selection (Massimini and
Delle Fave 2000), ﬂow experience plays a key role in
promoting individuals’ long-term development. The
positive features of this complex state of consciousness
foster the active investment of time and effort in the
practice and cultivation of the associated activities.
This progressively leads to an increase in related skills
and competencies, and to the search for higher
challenges in order to support the engagement, con-
centration, and involvement that characterize optimal
experience (Delle Fave et al. 2009). This process there-
fore gives rise to a virtuous cycle promoting individual
development, through both the selective acquisition of
increasingly complex information and the reﬁnement
of related personal competencies (Massimini and Delle
Fave 2000). It also supports the creation of an individ-
ual life theme, that is, the interests and goals a person
preferentially
life
(Csikszentmihalyi and Beattie 1979).

cultivates during his or her

The Investigation of Optimal
Experience: Instruments and Models
Several research procedures have been developed to
investigate the daily ﬂuctuations of subjective experi-
ence and the occurrence of ﬂow. Among them, the
most widely used are Experience Sampling Method
(ESM) (Csikszentmihalyi et al. 1977; Hektner et al.
2007), Flow Questionnaire (Csikszentmihalyi 1975/
2000; Delle Fave and Massimini 1991), and the Flow
State Scale-2 (Jackson and Eklund 2002). The ﬁrst two
instruments were widely used in the educational setting
and are thus described below.

Experience Sampling Method (ESM) provides
information on contextual and experiential aspects of
daily life through online repeated self-reports that
participants ﬁll out during the real unfolding of daily
events and situations. In a standard ESM study, partic-
ipants carry for 1 week an electronic device sending
random signals six to eight times a day during waking
hours. They are asked to ﬁll out a form at each signal

32 A Academic Self-efficacy

reception. ESM forms comprise open-ended questions
investigating the ongoing activities, location and social
context, the content of thought, the desired activities,
places and interactions, if any. Likert-type scales assess
the level of affective, cognitive, motivational variables,
as well as the level of perceived challenges and skills,
personal satisfaction, short- and long-term importance
of the activity. In order to explore the relationship
between challenge and skill perception on the one
side and the quality of experience on the other side,
a model of analysis has been developed, the Experience
Fluctuation Model (EFM; Massimini et al. 1987). The
analysis of ESM data through the EFM showed
a recurrent association between speciﬁc challenge/skill
ratios and speciﬁc experiences.
the
perception of challenge and skill values as balanced
above average is associated with optimal experience.
the balance between perceived
On the opposite,
below-average values of challenges and skills is associ-
ated with a state of disengagement and disorder deﬁned
as apathy.

In particular,

Optimal experience can also be assessed by means
of single administration questionnaires, among which
Flow Questionnaire is the most commonly used in the
educational setting. Participants are asked to read three
quotations that describe optimal experience, to report
whether they have ever had similar experiences in their
life and, if so, to list the associated activities or situa-
tions (also deﬁned optimal activities). Subsequently,
participants are asked to describe such an experience
through 0–8 point
investigating cognitive,
affective, and motivational variables. The individual
and environmental conditions which contribute to
the onset and maintenance of optimal experience are
also investigated.

scales

Optimal Experience and Learning
Research on optimal experience and learning has
mainly been conducted with ESM, thus allowing for
the online investigation of learning activities as well
as the quality of associated experience. Studies on
adolescents were performed in different countries and
cultures, shedding light on the quality of experience in
learning, the contextual and individual factors contrib-
uting to ﬂow onset in learning activities, as well as
the impact of optimal experience in learning activities
on students’ short-term well-being and long-term
development.

Quality of Experience in Learning
Based on ESM assessments, adolescents devote between
40% and 78% of their daily time budget to learning
activities, be they academic tasks performed at school
or studying at home (Hektner et al. 2007). Across
cultures, learning activities represent potentially chal-
lenging opportunities for self-expression and creativity
(Delle Fave and Massimini 2005; Hektner et al. 2007;
Shernoff and Csikszentmihalyi 2009). In particular,
students associate them with high cognitive invest-
ment, the perception of long-term goals, and short-
term stakes. However, they also describe low levels of
happiness, intrinsic motivation, and short-term desir-
ability. When students report a match between high
challenges and high skills, as in optimal experience, the
quality of the learning experience improves in its cog-
nitive, emotional, and motivational dimensions, even
though short-term desirability still hits negative values.
In addition, a difference emerged between school-
work activities – such as listening to lectures and taking
notes – and homework tasks (Bassi and Delle Fave
2004; Hektner et al. 2007). The former are more
frequently associated with apathy and disengagement,
whereas the latter with optimal experience. Such
difference can be related to the degree of perceived
autonomy and self-regulation students describe in the
two contexts. At school, learning activities are primar-
ily directed by the teachers, both in terms of lesson
contents and of amount of time devoted to a given
task. In this condition, adolescents mostly report pas-
sively listening to lessons, ﬁnding in it low meaningful
challenges and no room for skill investment. While at
home, on the other hand, they are in control of learning
activities, are free to decide how much time to devote to
learning, and are thus more likely to experience ﬂow
and active engagement in the task at hand.

Contextual and Individual Variables
Favoring Flow in Learning
Contextual factors play a relevant role in the occur-
rence and cultivation of optimal experience. The pro-
cess of psychological selection is partially regulated by
the set of norms and rules that characterizes the cul-
tural system individuals live in (Csikszentmihalyi and
Massimini 1985). Cultural constraints also contribute
to deﬁne the range and variety of activities available
to the individuals as potential opportunities
for
optimal experiences (Delle Fave and Massimini 2004).

Academic Self-efficacy A 33

A

In particular, formal education is crucial both for indi-
viduals’ adjustment to society and for the transmission
and perpetuation of cultural information. Cultures dif-
fer in the importance attached to academic learning
and the strategies adopted to transmit it. For example,
studies have shown that Asian and Asian-American
students tend to report a more positive learning expe-
rience, and to retrieve more opportunities for optimal
experience in school activities than their Western Cau-
casian counterparts (Asakawa and Csikszentmihalyi
1998; Shernoff and Schmidt 2008).

Family and school represent the proximal environ-
ment in the ﬁrst stages of development that strongly
inﬂuences individual’s discovery and cultivation of opti-
mal activities. The interaction patterns within the family
can facilitate or hamper the natural tendency of children
to selectively reproduce rewarding activities. Studies on
the role of family in sustaining adolescents’ active
engagement in learning have shown that parents can
represent models of commitment to self-determined
goals (Hektner 2001). In particular, children whose
parents place high relevance on academic activities
and provide both support and challenge in the learning
process are more likely to enjoy learning and to associ-
ate it with optimal experience (Rathunde 2001).

At the school level, various factors have been shown
to impact on students’ retrieval of optimal experiences.
A notion-centered school environment can lead stu-
dents to the development of a passive and compulsory
learning strategy; on the opposite, a learning environ-
ment that enables students to ﬁnd meaningful relations
between study contents and personal experience and
goals can help them discover the rewarding features
of knowledge and the potential of learning tasks as
opportunities for optimal experience (Shernoff and
Csikszentmihalyi 2009). As shown above, teachers
play a major role in promoting students’ optimal expe-
rience at school through the degree of autonomy they
give to learners. Teachers frequently report that stu-
dents’ engagement in academic activities supports their
optimal experiences in teaching; in their turn, students
indicate that their ﬂow in learning is related to the
teachers’ enthusiasm (Hektner et al. 2007). However,
the simultaneous ESM assessment of students’ and
teachers’ experience at school has shown an alarming
discrepancy: While teachers mostly report ﬂow while
teaching, students mostly report apathy while listening
to classes and taking notes. Again, this may be related to

the difference in perceived control. While teaching,
teachers are in control of instruction, but students are
not. This tentative explanation can also apply to the
different quality of experience students associate with
various
learning activities. Comparing ﬁve most
common in-class activities (TV/video, lecture, group
work, individual work, and test/quiz), studies have
shown that adolescents are more engaged in group
and individual work than while listening to a lecture
or watching TV or a video; while taking a test or quiz,
students report very high levels of concentration but
low enjoyment (Shernoff and Csikszentmihalyi 2009).
Also individual factors play a relevant role in the
occurrence and cultivation of optimal experience in
learning (Delle Fave et al. 2009). Evidence has shown
that biological predispositions and speciﬁc talents inﬂu-
ence the orientations of psychological selection and the
perceived opportunities for optimal experience. Studies
with talented teenagers (Csikszentmihalyi et al. 1993)
have highlighted the relationship between talents in
speciﬁc domains, such as music or mathematics, and
the selective long-term engagement in these domains as
opportunities for optimal experiences and skill cultiva-
tion. Also, personality characteristics are associated
with the occurrence of optimal experience in learning;
these include optimism, self-esteem, and extraversion
(Schmidt et al. 2007). Moreover, female high school
students tend to report ﬂow in classrooms more
frequently than males (Shernoff and Schmidt 2008).
However, this may be related to the higher frequency of
optimal experience reported by girls across all contexts.
Finally, studies with US participants also identiﬁed
differences in optimal experience based on age, with
older students (12th graders) reporting more occasions
for ﬂow than younger students (10th graders) (Hektner
et al. 2007; Shernoff and Schmidt 2008).

Short-Term and Long-Term Impact of
Flow on Adolescent’s Development
A great number of studies have shown that the associ-
ation of learning activities with optimal experience has
both short- and long-term consequences (Hektner
et al. 2007, and Shernoff and Csikszentmihalyi 2009,
for a review). In the short term, students derive enjoy-
ment, intrinsic reward, and sense of mastery from
learning tasks (Delle Fave and Bassi 2000). They
additionally report high levels of engagement which,
in its turn, is reﬂected in high academic achievement

34 A Academic Self-efficacy

and grades (Shernoff and Schmidt 2008). In the long
term, research has highlighted the role of optimal
experience in sustaining commitment in learning and
in shaping individual
life themes (Asakawa and
Csikszentmihalyi 1998; Delle Fave and Massimini
2005). Students report longitudinal coherence in the
amount of time devoted to study over a 3-year period
in secondary school (Hektner 2001). The association of
ﬂow with learning activities further contributes to
predicting the level of academic career students are
willing to pursue, and to shaping adolescents’ long-
term goals and future work interests (Csikszentmihalyi
and Schneider 2000; Hektner 2001; Wong and
Csikszentmihalyi 1991).

Merging Perspectives: Self-efficacy
Beliefs and Optimal Experience in
Learning
In the learning domain, recent attempts have been
made to fruitfully join the social-cognitive perspective
underlying academic self-efﬁcacy research with the
humanistic-phenomenological perspective underlying
ﬂow studies (Bassi et al. 2007). Both approaches share
the view that individuals are active agents in the inter-
action with their environment, and stress the role of
self-regulation processes
in programming future
actions on the basis of expectations and beliefs, on the
one hand, and of perceived quality of experience, on
the other. In addition, both underline the role of per-
ceived abilities and sense of mastery in facing environ-
mental challenges. However, the two approaches also
show some differences: Social-cognitive theory places
special emphasis on expectancy about success or fail-
ure, and on beliefs about one’s ability and performance,
while the theory of psychological selection focuses on
the intrinsic value of engaging in learning activities and
its impact on achievement and future plans.

With the aim to better understand adolescents’
learning behavior in the short and long term, the cog-
nitive and experiential constructs were combined into
a broader framework. It was suggested that self-efﬁcacy
beliefs may inﬂuence behavior through the mediating
effect of associated quality of experience. To put this
framework to the test, two groups of Italian secondary
school students were selected on the basis of their high
and low perceived academic self-efﬁcacy. Through ESM,
for 1 week online information was collected on the daily
activities and associated quality of experience of the two

groups. In line with expectations, high self-efﬁcacy stu-
dents devoted more time to learning, especially at home,
than low self-efﬁcacy students. They also reported
a more positive quality of experience during learning,
primarily associating schoolwork (listening to lectures,
taking notes), classwork (oral and written tests), and
homework with optimal experience. On the contrary,
low self-efﬁcacy students did not perceive a great
amount of opportunities for optimal experience in
learning tasks, and they reported different experiential
proﬁles according to the type of learning activities. More
speciﬁcally, they primarily associated schoolwork and
homework with low challenging experiences, such as
apathy and relaxation, and tests and exams with anxiety,
reporting a perceived lack of skills in facing the task.

Conclusions and Future Directions
Findings reported in this essay highlight the impor-
tance of adolescents’ academic self-efﬁcacy beliefs and
optimal experience in learning activities as key factors
in the promotion of well-adjustment at school, quality
learning, and long-term development. The centrality of
these constructs is going to increase in contemporary
society, where information technologies are introduc-
ing extensive changes in educational settings and
increasing importance is assigned to students’ personal
control over learning. Suggestions for intervention as
well as future directions in research can be derived from
these studies.

At the intervention level (see Pajares and Schunk
2001, and Shernoff and Csikszentmihalyi 2009), results
bring forward the need to provide students with learn-
ing activities which are challenging enough in the face
of personal skills. Lack of challenges can lead to expe-
riences of apathy or disengagement that do not sustain
enjoyment in learning and long-term academic com-
mitment (Bassi et al. 2007; Delle Fave and Bassi 2000).
At the same time, sense of competence and conﬁdence
in one’s skills can primarily be raised through success-
ful experiences with the task at hand, namely, through
mastery experiences. For example, a series of studies
(Pajares and Schunk 2001) showed that students’ self-
efﬁcacy beliefs increased through the use of instruc-
tional strategies such as modeling, goal setting, strategy
training, as well as provision of proximal rather than
distal goals, rewards, and attributional or progress
feedback. Emphasis should also be placed on the devel-
opment of students’ self-regulatory habits, providing

Academic Self-efficacy A 35

A

students with optimal learning environments in which
both autonomy and initiative are supported.
Concerning future research directions,

further
studies are needed to devise and test a formal model
including academic self-efﬁcacy beliefs and quality of
experience in learning. Self-efﬁcacy beliefs are expected
to direct behavior through the mediation of perceived
quality of experience, and of optimal experience in
particular. However, optimal experience in learning
activities could have both synchronic and diachronic,
cumulative
consequences. By providing intrinsic
reward, optimal experience can sustain long-term
perseverance and effort in cultivating associated activ-
ities. It could also represent a feedback to perceived
self-efﬁcacy. Direct experience of competence in high
challenge/high skill situations could be cognitively
elaborated into rather stable self-efﬁcacy beliefs. In
their turn, these beliefs could direct time and energy
investment into activities in which individuals perceive
themselves as highly competent in the face of current
challenges. This process would facilitate the retrieval of
optimal experiences and the development of lasting
high self-efﬁcacy beliefs. In the long run, this process
could go on in a virtuous circle, promoting individual
development, with respect to skill cultivation, satisfac-
tion, and goal setting. Shedding light on the mutual
inﬂuences between self-efﬁcacy and ﬂow can advance
understanding of adolescents’ motivational processes
and offer guidelines for promoting enjoyment and
engagement in the school setting.

References
Asakawa, K., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1998). The quality of experi-
ence of Asian American adolescents in academic activities: An
exploration of educational achievement. Journal of Research on
Adolescence, 8, 241–262.

Bandura, A., Barbaranelli, C., Caprara, G. V., & Pastorelli, C. (2001).
Self-efﬁcacy beliefs as shapers of children’s aspirations and career
trajectories. Child Development, 72, 187–206.

Bassi, M., & Delle Fave, A. (2004). Adolescence and the changing
context of optimal experience in time: Italy 1986–2000. Journal of
Happiness Studies, 5, 155–179.

Bassi, M., Steca, P., Delle Fave, A., & Caprara, G. V. (2007). Academic
self-efﬁcacy beliefs and quality of experience in learning. Journal
of Youth and Adolescence, 36, 301–312.

Britner, S. L., & Pajares, F. (2006). Sources of science self-efﬁcacy
beliefs of middle school students. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 43, 485–499.

Bouffard-Bouchard, T., Parent, S., & Larive`e, S. (1991). Inﬂuence of
self-efﬁcacy on self-regulation and performance among junior
and senior high-school aged students. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 14, 153–164.

Caprara, G. V., Fida, R., Vecchione, M., Del Bove, G., Vecchio, G. M.,
Barbaranelli, C., et al. (2008). Longitudinal analysis of the role of
perceived self-efﬁcacy for self-regulated learning in academic
continuance and achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology,
100(3), 525–534.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975–2000). Beyond boredom and anxiety.

San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1978). Attention and the holistic approach to
behavior. In K. S. Pope & J. L. Singer (Eds.), The stream of
consciousness (pp. 335–358). New York: Plenum.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Beattie, O. (1979). Life themes: A theoretical
and empirical exploration of their origins and effects. Journal of
Humanistic Psychology, 19, 45–63.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Csikszentmihalyi, I. (Eds.). (1988). Optimal
studies of ﬂow in consciousness.

experience – Psychological
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., Larson, R., & Prescott, S. (1977). The ecology
of adolescent activity and experience. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 6, 281–294.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Massimini, F. (1985). On the psychological
selection of bio-cultural information. New Ideas in Psychology,
3, 115–138.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., Rathunde, K., & Whalen, S. (1993). Talented
teenagers: The roots of success and failure. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Schneider, B. (2000). Becoming adult: How

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social

teenagers prepare for the world of work. New York: Basic Books.

cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁcacy: The exercise of control. New York:

Freeman.

Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective.

Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 1–26.

Bandura, A. (2002). Social cognitive theory in cultural context. Journal
of Applied Psychology: An International Review, 51, 269–290.
Bandura, A. (2006). Guide for constructing self-efﬁcacy scales. In
F. Pajares & T. Urdan (Eds.), Self-efﬁcacy beliefs of adolescents
(Vol. 5, pp. 307–337). Greenwich: Information Age Publishing.
Bandura, A., Barbaranelli, C., Caprara, G. V., & Pastorelli, C. (1996).
Multifaceted impact of self-efﬁcacy beliefs on academic func-
tioning. Child Development, 67, 1206–1222.

Delle Fave, A., & Bassi, M. (2000). The quality of experience in
adolescents’ daily life: Developmental perspectives. Genetic,
Social & General Psychology Monographs, 126, 347–367.

Delle Fave, A., & Bassi, M. (2009). Sharing optimal experiences
and promoting good community life in a multicultural society.
Journal of Positive Psychology, 4, 280–289.

Delle Fave, A., Bassi, M., Massimini, F. (2009). Experiencia o´ ptima
y evolucio´ n humana [Optimal experience and psychological
selection]. In C. Vasquez & G. Hervas (Eds.), La ciencia del
bienestar. Fundamentos de una psicologı´a positiva (pp. 209–230).
Madrid: Alianza Editorial.

Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (1991). Modernization and the quality
of daily experience in a Southern Italy village. In N. Bleichrodt &

36 A Acculturation

P. J. D. Drenth (Eds.), Contemporary Issues in Cross-Cultural
Psychology (pp. 110–119). Amsterdam: Swets & Zeitlinger B.V.

Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2004). The cross-cultural investiga-
tion of optimal experience. Ricerche di Psicologia, 27, 79–102.
Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2005). The investigation of optimal
experience and apathy: Developmental and psychosocial impli-
cations. European Psychologist, 10, 264–274.

Finney, S. J., & Schraw, G. (2003). Self-efﬁcacy beliefs in college
statistics courses. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 28,
161–186.

Gore, P. A. (2006). Academic self-efﬁcacy as a predictor of college
outcomes: Two incremental validity studies. Journal of Career
Assessment, 14, 92–115.

Hektner, J. M. (2001). Family, school, and community predictors of
adolescent growth conducive experiences: Global and speciﬁc
approaches. Applied Developmental Science, 5, 172–183.

Hektner, J. M., Schmidt, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2007). Experience
sampling method. Measuring the quality of everyday life.
Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Jackson, S. A., & Eklund, R. C. (2002). Assessing ﬂow in physical
activity: The ﬂow state scale-2 and dispositional ﬂow scale-2.
Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 24, 133–150.

Lent, R. W., Lopez, F. G., & Bieschke, K. J. (1993). Predicting
mathematics-related choice and success behaviors: Test of an
expanded social cognitive model. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
42, 223–236.

Massimini, F., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Carli, M. (1987). ESM and the
monitoring of optimal experience: A tool for psychiatric reha-
bilitation. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175, 545–549.
Massimini, F., & Delle Fave, A. (2000). Individual development in
a bio-cultural perspective. American Psychologist, 55, 24–33.
Pajares, F. (1996). Self-efﬁcacy beliefs in academic settings. Review of

Educational Research, 66, 543–578.

Pajares, F. (1997). Current directions in self-efﬁcacy research. In
M. Maehr & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Advances in motivation and
achievement (Vol. 10, pp. 1–49). Greenwich: JAI Press.

Pajares, F., & Miller, M. D. (1995). Mathematics self-efﬁcacy and
mathematics outcomes: The need for speciﬁcity of assessment.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 42, 190–198.

Pajares, F., & Schunk, D. H. (2001). Self-beliefs and school success:
Self-efﬁcacy, self-concept, and school achievement. In R. J.
Riding & S. G. Rayner (Eds.), International perspectives on
individual differences (vol. 2): Self-perception (pp. 239–265).
Westport: Ablex.

Rathunde, K. (2001). Family context and the development of
undivided interest: A longitudinal study of family support and
challenge and adolescents’ quality of experience. Applied Devel-
opmental Science, 5, 158–171.

Robbins, S. B., Lauver, K., Le, H., Davis, D., Langley, R., & Carlstrom, A.
(2004). Do psychosocial and study skill factors predict college
outcomes? A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 261–288.
Schmidt, J., Shernoff, D., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2007). Individual
and situational factors related to the experience of ﬂow in
adolescence: A multilevel approach. In A. D. Ong & M. van
Dulmen (Eds.), The handbook of methods in positive psychology
(pp. 542–558). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Schunk, D. H. (1998). Teaching elementary students to self-regulate
practice of mathematical skills with modeling. In D. H. Schunk &
B. J. Zimmerman (Eds.), Self-regulated learning: From teaching to
self-reﬂective practice (pp. 137–159). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.

Schunk, D. H., & Miller, S. D. (2002). Self-efﬁcacy and adolescents’
motivation. In F. Pajares & T. Urdan (Eds.), Academic motivation
of adolescents (pp. 29–52). Greenwich: Information Age.

Schunk, D. H., & Swartz, C. W. (1993). Goals and progress feedback:
Effects on self-efﬁcacy and writing achievement. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 18, 337–354.

Schunk, D. H., & Pajares, F. (2004). Self-efﬁcacy in education
revisited: Empirical and applied evidence. In D. M. Mcinerney
& S. Van Etten (Eds.), Big theories revisited (pp. 115–138).
Greenwich: Information Age Publishing.

Shernoff, D., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). Flow in schools. Culti-
vating engaged learners and optimal learning environments. In
R. Gilman, E. Huebner, & M. Furlong (Eds.), Handbook of positive
psychology in schools (pp. 131–145). New York: Taylor & Francis.
Shernoff, D., & Schmidt, J. (2008). Further evidence of an engage-
ment-achievement paradox among U.S. high school students.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 37, 564–580.

Wong, M. M., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1991). Motivation and
academic achievement: The effects of personality traits and the
quality of experience. Journal of Personality, 59, 539–574.

Zimmerman, B., Bandura, A., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1992). Self-
motivation for academic attainment: The role of self-efﬁcacy
beliefs and personal goal setting. American Educational Research
Journal, 29, 663–676.

Zimmerman, B. J., & Cleary, T. J. (2006). Adolescents’ development of
personal agency: The role of self-efﬁcacy beliefs and self-
regulatory skill. In F. Pajares & T. Urdan (Eds.), Self-efﬁcacy
beliefs of adolescents (Vol. 5, pp. 45–69). Greenwich: Information
Age Publishing.

Zimmerman, B. J., Kitsantas, A., & Campillo, M. (2005). Evaluacio´ n
de la Autoeﬁcacia Regulatoria: Una Perspectiva Social Cognitiva
[Assessment of
regulatory self-efﬁcacy: A social-cognitive
perspective]. Evaluar, 5, 1–21.

Acculturation

2
1, MARTICA BACALLAO
PAUL R. SMOKOWSKI
1School of Social Work, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
2Department of Social Work, University of North
Carolina – Greensboro, Greensboro, NC, USA

Overview
Acculturation was ﬁrst deﬁned as “phenomena which
result when groups of individuals having different

Acculturation A 37

A

cultures come into continuous ﬁrst hand contact with
subsequent changes in the original culture patterns of
either or both groups” (Redﬁeld et al. 1936, p. 149).
This original deﬁnition stressed continuous, long-term
change and allowed for the process to be bidirectional,
wherein both of the interacting cultures could make
accommodations. The course of the acculturation pro-
cess has been described as ﬂowing from contact between
dominant and nondominant cultural groups to conﬂict
or crises between those groups that eventually results in
adaptations by one or both of the conﬂicting groups.
Based on the relationships to the immigrant’s culture
of origin and the host culture, researchers have
emphasized four cultural adaptation styles: separation,
assimilation, biculturalism, and cultural marginality.
Separation or enculturation has been linked to higher
self-esteem. Assimilation appears to be a risk factor for
poor health and mental health. Biculturalism has been
reported to be the healthiest cultural adaptation style.

Background and Definitions

Acculturation
Acculturation was ﬁrst deﬁned as “phenomena which
result when groups of individuals having different
cultures come into continuous ﬁrst hand contact with
subsequent changes in the original culture patterns of
either or both groups” (Redﬁeld et al. 1936, p. 149).
This original deﬁnition stressed continuous, long-term
change and allowed for the process to be bidirectional,
wherein both of the interacting cultures could make
accommodations. During the Cold War era, the deﬁni-
tion of acculturation was gradually modiﬁed to denote
linear, unidirectional change (Trimble 2003) as a result
of interactions between dominant and nondominant
groups, with nondominant groups taking on the
language, laws, religions, norms, and behaviors of the
dominant group (Berry 1998; Castro et al. 1996. For
example, Smith and Guerra (2006) referred to accul-
turation as “the differences and changes in values and
behaviors that individuals make as they gradually
adopt the cultural values of the dominant society”
(p. 283). Many factors, such as differences in attitudes
between generations and sociopolitical trends, have
inﬂuenced the conceptualization of acculturation, leav-
ing no universally accepted deﬁnition of the term.

Adding further complexity, many other constructs
in cultural research, such as assimilation, enculturation,

acculturation stress,
segmented assimilation, and
biculturalism, have been invoked under the umbrella
of acculturation research. The term acculturation,
which denotes the bidirectional process of cultural
contact and adaptation,
is often erroneously used
interchangeably with the term assimilation, which
captures unidirectional adaptations made by minority
individuals to ﬁt into the host society. Consequently,
the original Redﬁeld (Redﬁeld et al. 1936) deﬁnition
captures the bidirectional notion of acculturation,
whereas the description offered by Smith and Guerra
(2006)
assimilation
approach. These competing unidirectional and bidirec-
tional approaches dominate acculturation research,
inﬂuencing conceptualization, measurement, analytic
strategies, and results of empirical studies in this area
(Cabassa 2003).

unidirectional

denotes

the

the
Berry (1980) characterized the course of
acculturation process as ﬂowing from contact between
dominant and nondominant cultural groups to conﬂict
or crises between those groups that eventually results in
adaptations by one or both of the conﬂicting groups.
These acculturation phases not only characterize large-
scale sociological group dynamics over long periods,
but also cultural interactions between social groups
during different eras as well as individual psychological
and social processes that affect a person’s adjustment to
a new cultural situation. Cultural conﬂict may develop
gradually and extend continuously over generations, as
it did for Native American people, or it may be quite
abrupt and intense, such as the unsettling immersion
experienced by a newly immigrated Latino or Asian
child who speaks no English when he or she enters
a US school for the ﬁrst time. Although acculturation
stages describe a sociological phenomenon that occurs
between groups, a parallel
interpersonal process is
thought to occur among immigrant individuals and
families.

several

Within this overarching sociological process of
acculturation,
frameworks have
theoretical
been developed to describe what happens to individ-
uals and families during acculturation (Lafromboise
et al. 1993). These various approaches can be divided
into two competing frameworks: assimilation theory
and alternation theory. While proponents of these two
theories agree that there are two criteria for accultura-
tion – whether or not the acculturating individual or
group retains cultural identity and whether or not

38 A Acculturation

a positive relationship to the dominant society is
established (Berry 1998) – they posit different views
on how the acculturation process should end.

Acculturation Theories of Adaptation
Assimilation theorists say that individuals lose cultural
identity in order to identify with the dominant cultural
group. The assimilation model assumes that an indi-
vidual sheds her or his culture of origin in an attempt to
take on the values, beliefs, ways, and perceptions of the
target culture (Berry 1998; Trimble 2003). The domi-
nant culture is seen as more desirable, while the culture
of origin is seen as inferior. In this model, change is
directional, unilinear, nonreversible, and continuous.
Assimilation theory is so pervasive that many accultur-
ation theorists incorrectly use the terms acculturation
and assimilation interchangeably (Lafromboise et al.
1993). This assimilation concept is captured by the
notion of America as a “melting pot” where immi-
grants become “American,” losing their prior culture
and language in order to adapt to the host culture.

Alternation theorists, or proponents of the bicul-
tural model, believe that individuals can both retain
cultural identity and establish a positive relationship
with the dominant culture. Researchers are now
reconsidering linear conceptualizations of acculturation
and are revisiting the original deﬁnition that allowed for
dynamic bidirectional change (Trimble 2003). Alterna-
tion theorists believe that there is great value in the
individual maintaining her or his culture of origin
while acquiring the second culture. Thus, biculturalism,
or having the ability to competently navigate within two
different cultures, is the optimal end point for the pro-
cess of cultural acquisition (LaFromboise et al. 1993).

In contrast

to the unidirectional assimilation
approach, the bidirectional approach from alternation
theory considers enculturation (i.e., adoption and
maintenance of behaviors, norms, values, and customs
from a person’s culture of origin), ethnic identity (i.e.,
a person’s self-deﬁnition based on membership in
a distinct group derived from a perceived shared
heritage), and biculturalism (i.e., ability to integrate
attributes of two cultures and competently navigate
between cultural
(Gonzales et al. 2002;
LaFromboise et al. 1993) as important aspects of the
acculturation process.

systems

To summarize, acculturation is the overall process
involvement, conﬂict, and change that

of contact,

occurs when two independent cultural systems meet.
Within this large acculturation process, there are two
critical dimensions to consider;
the individual or
families’ relationship to the culture of origin and the
relationship to the host culture. Bringing these two
dimensions together, acculturation researchers discuss
four different cultural adaptation styles (Berry 1998)
that are shown in Table 1. The common notion of
assimilation entails persons losing their culture-of-
origin identity to identify with the dominant (host)
cultural group. Integration, or biculturalism, would
ensue from both retaining ethnic cultural identity and
establishing a positive relationship with the dominant
culture. Retaining culture-of-origin identity without
establishing a positive relationship to the dominant
culture would indicate rejection of
the dominant
culture, separation, and unwillingness to assimilate.
Finally, losing cultural identity without establishing
a positive relationship to the dominant culture would
be the hallmark of deculturation or cultural marginality
(Berry 1980; LaFromboise et al. 1993). Acculturation is
the overall process of cultural involvement. Assimila-
tion is generally associated with high levels of host
culture involvement. A moderate-to-high level of
involvement in both cultures marks integration or
biculturalism. Separation or maintaining
ethnic
identity alone (enculturation) is associated with high
levels of involvement in the culture of origin.

These cultural adaptation styles are important
when considering the research on adolescent accultur-
ation and health behavior. Several decades of empirical
research ﬁndings lead researchers to conclude that
assimilation is an important risk factor for increases
in negative health behaviors and mental health prob-
lems (Amaro et al. 1990; Marks et al. 1990; Miranda
et al. 2000; Vega et al. 1998). Conversely, biculturalism
appears to be emerging as a protective factor that
buffers acculturation stress, enhances sociocognitive

Acculturation. Table 1 Acculturation and adaptation
styles

Culture-of-origin
involvement

Host culture involvement

Low

High

Low Cultural

Assimilation

marginality

High Enculturation Biculturalism

functioning, and increases academic achievement
(Feliciano 2001; Gil et al. 1994; Gomez and Fassinger
1994; Haritatos and Benet-Martinez 2002; Lang et al.
1982; Miranda and Umhoefer 1998). Each of these
acculturation adaptation styles will be examined in
the sections below.

and

norms,

customs

Enculturation
There are several important underlying concepts within
the overarching acculturation process. In contrast to
acculturation, which occurs between cultural groups,
enculturation is the adoption and maintenance of
behaviors,
from
values,
a person’s culture of origin. Every culture indoctrinates
children by exposing them to, or socializing them with,
speciﬁc ideas, beliefs, routines, rituals, religious prac-
tices, languages, and ways of being in the world. The
resulting cluster of beliefs and behaviors culminates in
a person’s ethnic identity. This sense of ethnic identity
is a person’s self-deﬁnition based on membership in
a distinct group derived from a perceived shared
heritage (Phinney and Ong 2007). The broad concept
of enculturation encompasses the individual’s level of
involvement in his or her culture of origin, which is
nurtured through early childhood exposure to cultural
symbols and messages transmitted primarily through
family interactions. By early adulthood, consistent
exposure to these cultural beliefs and behaviors leads
to an individual’s working sense of ethnic identity (e.g.,
an afﬁliation with a cultural group and an understand-
ing of how that cultural group expects its members to
be in the world). The enculturation process both
deﬁnes the characteristics of the group and secures its
future by indoctrinating new members.

Retaining enculturation or culture-of-origin iden-
tity alone without establishing a positive relationship
to the dominant culture would indicate separation and
unwillingness to assimilate. The enculturation quad-
rant in Table 1 represents strong enculturation and
low assimilation into the dominant or host society.
Separation is the adaptation style that characterizes
most immigrant parents who cling strongly to their
culture-of-origin identity and who ﬁnd the accultura-
tion process particularly stressful.

Enculturation is an important

in the
three phases of acculturation given above. During
intercultural contact, differences
in enculturation
between the two groups become apparent. For

factor

Acculturation A 39

A

instance, Native Americans believed that land was
a gift from the Creator, and no individual owned this
gift. In contrast, the pilgrims, indoctrinated in the
European currency economy and believing that they
were God’s chosen people, saw no difﬁculty in buying,
trading for, or taking land for personal ownership.
Differences between worldviews make groups wary of
outsiders, triggering an urge to close ranks, and defend
the way of life the group understands. It is easy to
see how conﬂict may arise. With the future at stake,
enculturation prompts individuals to choose us versus
them – our beliefs and ways of doing things or theirs.

that power. Usually,

Assimilation
The central issue after different cultures make contact
becomes who has power and control, and how will the
dominant group use
the
nondominant group is strongly inﬂuenced to take on
norms, values, and behaviors espoused by the domi-
nant group. The intensity and negativity associated
with this process is largely contingent upon the recep-
tivity of the dominant group in welcoming, respecting,
or stigmatizing the nondominant group (Berry 1998).
Further, the attitudes held by the dominant group
inﬂuence the adoption of policies for relating to the
nondominant group. For example, dominant group
attitudes toward immigrants that inﬂuence policy are
reﬂected in the debate in the USA regarding whether
English should be declared the country’s ofﬁcial
language, whether school districts support English
immersion or bilingual education programs, and
restrictions requiring certain forms of identiﬁcation
that are difﬁcult for immigrants to obtain in order to
receive a driver’s license.

During the conﬂict and adaptation phases of accul-
turation, antagonistic attitudes from the dominant
group toward immigrants often prompt calls for assim-
ilation or elimination. The term acculturation, which
denotes the bidirectional process of cultural contact
and change, is often erroneously used interchangeably
with the term assimilation, which captures unidirec-
tional adaptations made by minority individuals to
conform to the dominant group.

The common notion of assimilation entails persons
losing their culture-of-origin identity to identify with
the dominant cultural group. That is, a movement in
Table 1 from separation to assimilation, which a person
completes by swapping the positive relationship with

40 A Acculturation

his or her culture of origin for a positive afﬁliation with
the dominant culture. The assimilation model assumes
that an individual sheds her or his culture of origin in
an attempt to take on the values, beliefs, behaviors, and
perceptions of the target culture (Chun et al. 2003).
The individual perceives the dominant culture as
more desirable, whereas the culture of origin is seen
as inferior. In this model, change is “directional,
unilinear, nonreversible, and continuous” (Suarez-
Orozco and Suarez-Orozco 2001, p. 8).

Assimilation theory has been applied in a range of
policies and practice situations. For example, English as
a Second Language (ESL) programs in which instruc-
tors speak only English and policy proposals that
declare English to be the state’s or country’s “ofﬁcial”
language have deep roots in assimilationist ideology. In
1998, California voters passed Proposition 227, which
requires that all public school instruction be conducted
in English by a wide margin (61% vs. 39%; now EC
300–340 of the California Education Code). Similarly,
Arizona’s voters passed Proposition 203 in 2000, which
mandates school instruction must be in English and
severely limits opportunity for bilingual instruction.
Both propositions are examples of the assimilationist
Structured English Immersion approach to educating
immigrants who are not proﬁcient in English.

In general, higher levels of assimilation are associ-
ated with negative health behaviors and mental health
difﬁculties for both adolescents and adults (Rogler et al.
1991; Miranda et al. 2000; Smokowski et al. 2009). In
comparison to their less-acculturated peers, Latinos
who have become more assimilated to the host culture
less
display higher levels of alcohol and drug use,
consumption of nutritionally balanced meals, and
more psychiatric problems (Amaro et al. 1990; Marks
et al. 1990; Vega et al. 1998; Alegrı´a et al. 2008).

Most research on acculturation and adolescent
health behavior has focused on youth violence and
aggressive behavior. Recently, Paul Smokowski et al.
(2009) conducted a comprehensive review of studies
examining the relationship of Latino adolescent
acculturation and youth violence. Among the studies
reviewed, the association between acculturation and
youth violence outcomes was examined in 16 studies;
13 of these investigations examined the perpetration of
violence as the outcome, and these studies examined
fear of being a victim of violence as the outcome.
The results favored a signiﬁcant positive association

status,

between assimilation and youth violence. Nine of
the thirteen studies reported that higher adolescent
assimilation (deﬁned in different ways by time in the
USA, generational
language use, or with
multidimensional measures) was associated with
increased youth violence (Buriel et al. 1982; Sommers
et al. 1993; Vega et al. 1993, 1995; Brook et al. 1998;
Samaniego and Gonzales 1999; Dinh et al. 2002; Bui
and Thongniramol 2005; Smokowski and Bacallao
2006; Schwartz et al. 2007).

Integration
While assimilation theory continues to be popular,
a growing body of research has begun to question
whether it is indeed adaptive for a person to give up
his or her cultural identity to ﬁt into the dominant
culture (de Anda 1984; Feliciano 2001; Suarez-Orozco
and Suarez-Orozco 2001). Critics of the assimilation
model usually support the further development of
alternation theory, a framework that rejects linear
conceptualizations of acculturation and revisits the
Redﬁeld deﬁnition of acculturation that allowed for
dynamic bidirectional change (Trimble 2003). Follow-
ing Table 1, integration, or biculturalism, would ensue
identity and
from both retaining ethnic cultural
establishing a positive relationship with the dominant
culture. In contrast to the unidirectional approach of
assimilation,
the bidirectional approach considers
enculturation (i.e., adoption and maintenance of
behaviors, norms, values, and customs from a person’s
culture of origin), ethnic identity (i.e., a person’s
self-deﬁnition based on membership in a distinct
group derived from a perceived shared heritage), and
biculturalism (i.e., ability to integrate attributes of two
cultures and competently navigate between cultural
systems (Gonzales et al. 2002; LaFromboise et al.
the acculturation
1993) as
process.

important aspects of

Alternation theorists believe that individuals can
both retain cultural identity and establish a positive
relationship with the dominant culture. Proponents
of the alternation theory of cultural acquisition assert
that there is great value in the individual maintaining
her or his culture of origin while acquiring the second
culture (Feliciano 2001). These theorists believe that
the unidirectional change approach espoused by assim-
ilationists may have ﬁt prior groups of white European
immigrants but does not adequately characterize

Acculturation A 41

A

adaptations made by subsequent waves of immigrants
from Latin America or Asia (de Anda 1984). In this
perspective, biculturalism, or having the ability to
competently navigate within and between two different
cultures, is the optimal end point for the process of
cultural acquisition (Coleman and Gerton 1993). For
the immigrant individual and her or his family, alter-
nation theory supports the integration of cognition,
attitudes, and behaviors from both the culture of origin
and the culture of acquisition. This integration may
result in bilingualism, cognitive code-switching, and
the development of multiple identities (e.g., immigrant
adolescents behaving “American” at
school and
“Latino” at home) to meet disparate environmental
demands (Dolby 2000; Suarez-Orozco and Suarez-
Orozco 2001; Trueba 2002).

Of course, the inﬂuence of the dominant or host
culture plays an important role in the acculturation
process. Just as assimilation ideology pushes immi-
grants to accept host culture norms and behaviors,
environmental contexts that actively support and
value multiculturalism can also prompt individuals
and families
toward integration or biculturalism
(Berry 2001; de Anda 1984). Beginning in the 1960s,
multiculturalism gained traction, prompting melting-
pot metaphors to be replaced with references to
a cultural salad bowl or cultural mosaic. In this newer
multicultural approach, each “ingredient” retains its
integrity and ﬂavor while contributing to a successful
ﬁnal product. However, considering the backdrop of
stress and tension, these ethnic relations are better
characterized as a simmering stew than a salad bowl.
In recent years, this multicultural approach has been
ofﬁcially promoted in traditional melting-pot societies
such as Australia, Canada, and Britain, with the intent
of becoming more tolerant of immigrant diversity.
Meanwhile, the USA continues to vacillate between
assimilation and alternation (or multicultural)
approaches to immigration and ethnic relations.

Alternation theory has been used in practice, but
few macro policies have been based on this framework.
English as a Second Language (ESL) and Two-Way
Immersion programs that
in both
English and Spanish are underpinned by alternation
theory. Bicultural skills training programs are another
reﬂection of how alternation theory has been applied to
practice (e.g., see Szapocznik et al. 1984; Bacallao and
Smokowski 2005).

teach content

Research ﬁndings have linked biculturalism with
more adaptive, positive mental health outcomes than
either low- or high-assimilation levels. Alternation
theorists believe that biculturalism is an important,
positive cultural adaptation style within the accultura-
tion process. There is research evidence for this as a
hypothesis. In a study comparing low- and high-
assimilated Latinos, researchers found that bicultural
Latinos obtained higher levels of quality of life, affect
balance, and psychological adjustment (Lang et al.
1982). Miranda and Umhoefer (1998) reported bicul-
tural individuals displayed high levels of social interest
and low levels of depression. In a sample of 252 Latina
undergraduate students, Gomez and Fassinger (1994)
found bicultural women had wider repertoires of
behavioral styles than either their low- or high-
acculturated peers. Other studies found that bicultural
individuals have increased creativity (Carringer 1974),
and greater attention control (Bialystok 1999; Bialystok
et al. 2004). Benet-Martinez et al. (2006) argue that the
more complex mainstream and ethnic cultural repre-
sentations developed by bicultural individuals relate to
their higher levels of both cultural empathy (i.e., the
ability to detect and understand other’s cultural habits
or pressures) and cultural ﬂexibility (i.e., the ability to
quickly switch from one cultural strategy or framework
to another).

Rivera-Sinclair (1997) investigated biculturalism in
a sample of 254 Cuban adults. She measured bicultur-
alism using the Bicultural Involvement Questionnaire
(BIQ), and found biculturalism was related to a variety
of factors, including length of time a person had lived
in the USA, age, family income, education level, and
general anxiety level. Her ﬁndings showed that the
study participants who were more likely to report
high levels of biculturalism were those individuals
who had been in the USA longer, had higher incomes,
and had more education. In addition, she found that
younger
inclined to be
bicultural than were older persons. Most important,
this analysis showed that anxiety levels decreased as
biculturalism levels increased.

individuals were more

Gil et al. (1994) found bicultural adolescents had
the lowest levels of acculturation stress and were less
likely to report low family pride as compared with
low- and high-assimilated Latino adolescents. For
these bicultural adolescents, the acculturation process
did not erode levels of family pride – a dynamic that

42 A Acculturation

usually takes place as adolescents become highly
assimilated.

ethnic

identity,

instead of

In a study with 323 Latino adolescents living in
North Carolina and Arizona (Smokowski and Bacallao
2007), biculturalism was a cultural asset associated with
fewer internalizing problems and higher self-esteem.
Interestingly,
it was
individuals’ high level of involvement in non-Latino
culture (i.e., US culture) that fueled the protective
effect of biculturalism. However, ethnic identity or
involvement in the culture of origin is strongly related
to self-esteem and familism (e.g., family cohesion).
Similarly, Coatsworth et al. (2005) compared the accul-
turation patterns of 315 Latino youth, and found that
bicultural youth reported signiﬁcantly higher levels of
academic competence, peer competence, and parental
monitoring.

Berry et al. (2006) conducted the largest and most
elaborate investigation of acculturation and adaptation
in immigrant youth in a study that encompassed youth
from 26 different cultural backgrounds in 13 countries.
In all, 7,997 adolescents participated, including 5,366
immigrant youth and 2,631 national youth (ages 13–18
years; mean age of 15 years). These researchers were
able to conﬁrm empirically the four cultural adaptation
styles discussed in this essay. Integration or bicultural-
ism was the predominant adaptation style with 36.4%
immigrant youth ﬁtting this proﬁle (22.5%
of
[separation], 18.7%
displayed an ethnic proﬁle
a national or assimilation proﬁle, and 22.4% a diffuse
or marginalized proﬁle). This bicultural way of living
included reporting diverse acculturation attitudes,
having both ethnic and national cultural identities,
being proﬁcient in both ethnic and national language
knowledge and use, having social engagements with
both ethnic and national peers, and endorsing the
acceptance of both obligations to family and parents,
as well as believing in adolescents’ rights. This high level
of biculturalism (i.e., integrative cultural adaptation
style) in youth supports earlier ﬁndings with adult
immigrants (Berry and Sam 1997).

In this study, Berry and colleagues (2006) found
that the longer youth had lived in the new culture, the
more likely they were to have a bicultural adaptation
style. Further, these researchers found the integrative
cultural adaptation style was associated with both
positive psychological adaptation (measured by indi-
cators of life satisfaction, self-esteem, and psychological

sociological

and positive

problems)
adaptation
(measured by school adjustment and behavioral prob-
lems). In comparison, the ethnic cultural adaptation
style was linked to better psychological adaptation but
worse sociological adaptation, whereas both the
national and diffuse styles were associated with poor
psychological and sociological adaptation. Although
boys had slightly better psychological adaptation than
girls, they had poorer sociocultural adaptation. These
studies provide mounting evidence that psychological
and social beneﬁts
associated with being
bicultural.

are

Deculturation
Finally, losing cultural identity without establishing
a positive relationship to the dominant culture would
be the hallmark of deculturation or cultural marginality
(Berry 1980; LaFromboise et al. 1993). Less common
than the other three adaptation styles, deculturation
may be a stressful stage experienced by many immi-
grants as they construct a new or integrated cultural
identity. Some authors
to deculturation as
“cultural homelessness,” a state in which individuals
do not feel an afﬁliation with any cultural group
(Vivero and Jenkins 1999).

refer

involvement

Conclusions
To summarize, acculturation is the overall process of
cultural involvement. Assimilation is generally associ-
ated with high levels of host culture involvement.
A moderate-to-high level of
in both
cultures marks integration or biculturalism. Separation
or maintaining ethnic identity alone (enculturation) is
associated with high levels of
involvement in the
culture of origin, whereas having no afﬁliation with
either culture is the hallmark of deculturation or
marginalization. These four cultural adaptation styles
and two major theories of cultural change (assimilation
and alternation theories) capture much of the dynamic
complexity within the overall acculturation process.
Revisiting Berry’s (1998) criteria, assimilation theory
posits that a positive relationship to the dominant
society is established without retention of ethnic
identity, whereas in alternation theory, a moderate-
to-strong positive relationship to the dominant society
is established and a moderate-to-strong positive rela-
tionship to ethnic identity or culture of origin is
retained. Neither theory has much to say about cultural

marginality, which occurs when a positive relationship
is not formed with either the new culture or the culture
of origin. Cultural marginality can result in apathy, lack
of interest in culture, or the formation of a negative
relationship with both cultures.

Flannery et al. (2001) conducted the earliest direct
comparison of
the assimilation and alternation
models. In a sample of 291 Asian-Americans, they
reported that both models had adequate predictive
validity for use in acculturation research. They
recommended using the unidirectional assimilationist
model as an economical proxy measure of accultura-
tion, and using the bidirectional alternation model for
investigations of acculturation”
“full
(Flannery et al. 2001, p. 1035).

theoretical

Turning our attention back to the conceptualiza-
tions of acculturation, alternation theory is aligned
with the original Redﬁeld deﬁnition that allows for
dynamic bidirectional adaptations to occur in either
or both cultures. Assimilation theory is aligned with
the modiﬁed deﬁnition of acculturation that assumes
unidirectional change from the dominant
to the
nondominant group. Assimilation and alternation
theories, and the various cultural adaptation styles
introduced above, are fascinating sociological con-
structs; however, these ideas become ever more critical
when linked to health and mental health. Assimilation
and alternation theories have both inspired several
decades of research and knowledge development.
Neither theory has been able to marshal enough empir-
ical support to dominate the other. Rogler et al. (1991)
reviewed 30 investigations to determine if consensus
existed on the link between acculturation and mental
health. Their review found evidence supporting each of
the proposed relationships – positive, negative, and
curvilinear – between acculturation and mental health.
The relationship depends upon the speciﬁc mental
health issue (e.g., drug use, aggressive behavior, depres-
sion, anxiety)
scrutiny. Research
is under
conducted after this review suggests that assimilation
is an important risk factor, especially for youth
violence, and biculturalism is a salient cultural asset,
promoting psychological and social well-being.

that

Cross-References
▶ Assimilation
▶ Bicultural Stress
▶ Immigration

Acculturation A 43

A

References
Alegrı´a, M., Canino, G., Shrout, P. E., Woo, M., Duan, N., Vila, D.,
et al. (2008). Prevalence of mental illness in immigrant and non-
immigrant U.S. Latino groups. American Journal of Psychiatry,
165(3), 359–369.

Amaro, H., Whitaker, R., Coffman, G., & Heeren, T. (1990). Accul-
from
turation and marijuana and cocaine use: Findings
HHANES 1982–1984. American Journal of Public Health, 80
(Suppl), 54–60. doi:10.2105/AJPH.80.Suppl.54.

Bacallao, M. L., & Smokowski, P. R. (2005). Entre dos mundos
(between two worlds) bicultural skills training and Latino
immigrant
Journal of Primary Prevention, 26(6),
485–509.

families.

Benet-Martı´nez, V., Lee, F., & Leu, J. (2006). Biculturalism and
cognitive complexity: Expertise in cultural representations.
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 37(4), 386–407. doi:10.1177/
0022022106288476.

Berry, J. W. (1980). Acculturation as varieties of adaptation. In A. M.
Padilla (Ed.), Acculturation: Theory, models, and some new
ﬁndings (pp. 9–25). Boulder: Westview Press.
J. W. (1998). Acculturation stress.

In P. B. Organista,
K. M. Chun, & G. Marin (Eds.), Readings in ethnic psychology
(pp. 117–122). New York: Routledge.

Berry,

Berry, J. W. (2001). A psychology of immigration. Journal of Social

Issues, 57(3), 615–631.

Berry, J. W., Phinney, J. S., Sam, D. L., & Vedder, P. (2006).
Immigrant youth: Acculturation,
identity and adaptation.
Applied Psychology, 55(3), 303–332. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.
2006.00256.x.

Berry, J. W., & Sam, D. L. (1997). Acculturation and adaptation. In
J. W. Berry, M. H. Segall, C. Kagitcibasi (Eds.), Handbook of
Cross-Cultural Psychology: Social Behavior and Applications
(Vol. 3, pp. 291–326) (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Bialystok, E. (1999). Cognitive complexity and attentional control in
636–644.

the bilingualmind. Child Development,
doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00046.

70(3),

Bialystok, E., Fergus, I. M., Craik, R. K., & Viswanathan, M. (2004).
Bilingualism, aging, and cognitive control: Evidence from the
Simon Task. Psychology and Aging, 19(2), 290–303. doi:10.1037/
0882-7974.19.2.290.

Brook, J. S., Whiteman, M., Balka, E. B., Win, P. T., & Gursen, M. D.
(1998). African American and Puerto Rican drug use:
A longitudinal study. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36(9), 1260–1268. http://journals.lww.
com/jaacap/Abstract/1997/09000/African_American_&_Puerto_
Rican_Drug_Use__A.19.aspx.

Bui, H. N., & Thongniramol, O. (2005). Immigration and self-
reported delinquency: The interplay of immigration, genera-
tions, gender, race, and ethnicity. Journal of Crime and Justice,
28(2), 71–80. http://www.ncjrs.gov/App/Publications/abstract.
aspx?ID=234264.

Buriel, R., Calzada, S., & Vasquez, R. (1982). The relationship
of traditional Mexican American culture to adjustment and
delinquency among three generations of Mexican American
male adolescents. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 4(1),
41–55. doi:10.1177/07399863820041003.

44 A Acculturation

Cabassa, L. J. (2003). Measuring acculturation: Where we are and
where we need to go. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Studies,
25(2), 127–146. doi:10.1177/0739986303025002001.

Carringer, D. C. (1974). Creative thinking abilities of a Mexican
youth: The relationship of bilingualism. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 5(4), 492–504. doi:10.1177/002202217400500409.
Castro, F. G., Coe, K., Gutierres, S., & Saenz, D. (1996). Designing
health promotion programs for Latinos. In P. M. Kato & T. Mann
(Eds.), Handbook of diversity issues in health psychology (pp. 319–
346). New York: Plenum.

Chun, K. M., Organista, P. B., & Marı´n, G. (Eds.). (2003). Accultur-
ation: advances in theory, measurement, and applied research.
Washington: American Psychological Association.

Coatsworth, J. D., Maldonido-Molina, M., Pantin, H., & Szapocznik, J.
(2005). A person-centered and ecological
investigation of
acculturation strategies in Hispanic immigrant youth. Journal of
Community Psychology, 33(2), 157–174. doi:10.1002/jcop. 20046.
de Anda, D. (1984). Bicultural socialization: Factors affecting the

minority experience. Social Work, 29(2), 101–107.

Dinh, K. T., Roosa, M. W., Tein, J.-Y., & Lopez, V. A. (2002). The
relationship between acculturation and problem behavior prone-
ness in a Hispanic youth sample: A longitudinal mediation
model. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 30(3), 295–309.
doi:10.1023/A:1015111014775.

Dolby, N. (2000). Changing selves: Multicultural education and the
challenge of new identities. Teachers College Record, 102(5),
898–912.

Feliciano, C. (2001). The beneﬁts of biculturalism: Exposure to
immigrant culture and dropping out of school among Asian
and Latino youths. Social Science Quarterly, 82(4), 865–879.
Flannery, W. P., Reise, S. P., & Jiajuan, Yu. (2001). An empirical
comparison of acculturation models. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 27(8), 1035–1045.

Gil, A. G., Vega, W. A., & Dimas, J. M. (1994). Acculturative stress and
personal adjustment among Hispanic adolescent boys. Journal of
Community Psychology,
doi:10.1002/1520-
22(1),
6629(199401)22:1<43::AID-JCOP2290220106>3.0.CO;2-T.
Gomez, M. J., & Fassinger, R. E. (1994). An initial model of Latina
achievement: Acculturation, biculturalism, and achieving styles.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 41(2), 205–215. doi:10.1037/
0022-0167.41.2.205.

43–54.

Gonzales, N. A., Knight, G. P., Morgan-Lopez, A. A., Saenz, D., &
Sirolli, A. (2002). Acculturation and the mental health of Latino
youths: An integration and critique of the literature. In J. M.
Contreras, K. A. Kerns, & A. M. Neal-Barnett (Eds.), Latino
children and families in the United States (pp. 45–76). Westport:
Greenwood.

Haritatos, J., & Benet-Martinez, V. (2002). Bicultural identities: The
interface of cultural, personality, and socio-cognitive processes.
Journal of Research in Personality, 36(6), 598–606. doi:10.1016/
S0092-6566(02)00510-X.

LaFromboise, T., Coleman, H. L., & Gerton, J. (1993). Psychological
impact of biculturalism: Evidence and theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 114(3), 395–412.

community. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 4(4),
433–450. doi:10.1177/07399863820044002.

Marks, G., Garcia, M., & Solis, J. M. (1990). Health risk behaviors of
Hispanics in the United States: Findings from the HHANES
1982–1984. American Journal of Public Health, 80(Suppl),
20–26. doi:10.2105/AJPH.80.Suppl.20.

Miranda, A. O., & Umhoefer, D. L. (1998). Depression and social
interest differences between Latinos in dissimilar acculturation
stages. Journal of Mental Health Counseling, 20(2), 159–171.
Miranda, A. O., Estrada, D., & Firpo-Jimenez, M. (2000). Differences
in family cohesion, adaptability, and environment among Latino
families in dissimilar stages of acculturation. Family Journal,
8(4), 341–350. doi:10.1177/1066480700084003.

Phinney, J. S., & Ong, A. D. (2007). Conceptualization and measure-
ment of ethnic identity: Current status and future directions.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 54(3), 271–281.

Redﬁeld, R., Linton, R., & Herskovits, M. J. (1936). Memorandum
for the study of acculturation. American Anthropologist, 38,
149–152.

Rivera-Sinclair, E. A. (1997). Acculturation/biculturalism and its
relationship to adjustment in Cuban-Americans. International
Journal of Intercultural Relations, 21(3), 379–391. doi:10.1016/
S0147-1767(96)00040-5.

Rogler, L. H., Cortes, D. E., & Malgady, R. G. (1991). Acculturation
and mental health status among Hispanics: Convergence and
new directions
for research. American Psychologist, 46(6),
585–597. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.46.6.585.

Samaniego, R. Y., & Gonzales, N. A. (1999). Multiple mediators of the
effects of acculturation status on delinquency for Mexican
American adolescents. American Journal of Community Psychol-
ogy, 27(2), 189–210.

Schwartz, S. J., Zamboanga, B. L., & Jarvis, L. H. (2007). Ethnic
identity and acculturation in Hispanic early adolescents: Medi-
ated relationships to academic grades, prosocial behaviors, and
externalizing symptoms. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority
Psychology 13 (4): 364–373. doi:10.1037/1099-9809.13.4.364.
Smith, E. P., & Guerra, N. G. (2006). Introduction. In N. G. Guerra &
E. P. Smith (Eds.), Preventing youth violence in a multicultural
(pp. 3–14). Washington: American Psychological
society
Association.

Smokowski, P. R., & Bacallao, M. (2006). Acculturation and aggres-
sion in Latino adolescents: A structural model focusing on
cultural risk factors and assets. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 34(5), 657–671. doi:10.1007/s10802-006-9049-4.
Smokowski, P. R., & Bacallao, M. L. (2007). Acculturation, internal-
izing mental health symptoms, and self-esteem: Cultural experi-
ences of Latino adolescents in North Carolina. Child Psychiatry &
and Human Development, 37(3), 273–292. doi:10.1007/s10578-
006-0035-4. http://springerlink.metapress.com/content/1573-
3327/?k=merican. Accessed September 29, 2009.

Smokowski, P. R., David-Ferdon, C., & Stroupe, N. (2009). Accultur-
ation, youth violence, and suicidal behavior in minority adoles-
cents: A review of the empirical literature. Journal of Primary
Prevention, 30(3/4), 215–264. doi:10.1007/s10935-009-0173-0.

Lang, J. G., Munoz, R. F., Bernal, G., & Sorensen, J. L. (1982). Quality
life and psychological well-being in a bicultural Latino

of

Sommers, I., Fagan, J., & Baskin, D. (1993). Sociocultural inﬂuences
on the explanation of delinquency for Puerto Rican youths.

Hispanic
doi:10.1177/07399863930151002.

of Behavioral

Journal

Sciences,

15(1),

36–62.

Suarez-Orozco, C., & Suarez-Orozco, M. M. (2001). Children of

immigrants. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Szapocznik, J., Santisteban, D., Kurtines, W., Perez-Vidal, A., &
Hervis, O. (1984). Bicultural effectiveness training: A treatment
intervention for enhancing intercultural adjustment in Cuban
American families. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 6(4),
317–344. doi:10.1177/07399863840064001.

Trimble, J. E. (2003). Introduction: Social change and acculturation.
In K. M. Chun, P. B. Organista, & G. Marin (Eds.), Acculturation:
in theory, measurement, and applied research.
advances
Washington: American Psychological Association.

Trueba, H. T. (2002). Multiple ethnic, racial, and cultural identities in
action: From marginality to a new cultural capital in modern
society. Journal of Latinos and Education, 1(1), 7–28.

Vega, W. A., Gil, A. G., Warheit, G. J., Zimmerman, R. S., & Apospori, E.
(1993). Acculturation and delinquent behavior among Cuban
American adolescents: Toward an empirical model. American
Journal of Community Psychology, 21(1), 113–125. doi:10.1007/
BF00938210.

Vega, W. A., Zimmerman, R. S., Khoury, E. L., Gil, A. G., & Warheit,
G. J. (1995). Cultural conﬂicts & problem behaviors of Latino
adolescents in home and school environments.
Journal of
Community Psychology, 23(2), 167–179. doi:10.1002/1520-
6629(199504)23:2<167::AID-JCOP2290230207>3.0.CO;2-O.
Vega, W. A., Kolody, B., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Alderete, E., Catalano, R.,
& Caraveo-Anduaga, J. (1998). Lifetime prevalence of DSM-III-R
psychiatric disorders among urban and rural Mexican Americans
in California. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55(9), 771–778.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.55.9.771.

Vivero, V. N., & Jenkins, S. R. (1999). Existential hazards of the
multicultural individual: Deﬁning and understanding cultural
homelessness. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology,
5(1), 6–26.

Achievement Motivation

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Achievement motivation may be understood as an
individual’s concern for becoming successful, doing
well, meeting obligations, overcoming obstacles, and
attaining a sense of excellence. In the ﬁeld of psychol-
ogy, the concept ﬁrst emerged as one of the basic needs
identiﬁed in Henry Murray’s (1938) groundbreaking
theory of human motivation. Murray proposed that
internal states of disequilibrium drive individuals’
behaviors, and that disequilibrium emerges when

Achievement Motivation A 45

A

individuals have a sense that they lack something and
a need to address it. Murray classiﬁed needs as being
primary (such as those that are biologically based like
the need for food, air, water) or as secondary (such as
those either driven by biological needs or an individ-
ual’s psychological makeup, like need for afﬁliation,
power, recognition, autonomy). Murray conceptual-
ized the need for achievement as a secondary need.
That need has been one of the most studied, along
with the need for power and afﬁliation, and has
mushroomed into several areas of research that relate
to the period of adolescence.

The study of achievement motivation initially was
popularized by the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT;
McClelland et al. 1953) and efforts to link the need for
achievement with other characteristics and their out-
comes. The TAT gives high scores to those who work
well under moderate risk, seek new information,
advice, and feedback. Individuals who delay gratiﬁca-
tion, who get along well with others, and also attribute
their success to internal factors and failure to external
factors receive high TAT scores. Although the tendency
has been to view the need to achieve as a good dispo-
sition, this is not always the case, as those with a high
need to achieve also have been found more likely to use
illegal or deceitful means
to achieve their goals
(McClelland 1985). Still, studies using the TAT have
been among the most fruitful as they have led to
important research and theoretical developments.

Deﬁned as an operationalization of Max Weber’s
protestant ethic, TAT achievement scores have been
found to be less reliable for predicting achievement in
certain situations (McClelland 1961). These differences
essentially have revolutionized the ﬁeld. For example,
TAT scores are less reliable when measuring academic
achievement motivation for school and more reliable
for predicting frustration in political ﬁgures. In addi-
tion, TATmeasures and direct measures of achievement
motivation do not appear to correlate; they are associ-
ated with different actions and life outcomes. These
important ﬁndings contributed to a considerable
amount of research seeking to explain them. The result
of that research has led researchers to conclude that
the TAT measures intrinsic motivation, while direct
measures look more at social rewards for achievement
(see Spangler 1992) and that two distinct but related
motivational
systems exist: explicit and implicit
achievement motivation (see McClelland et al. 1989;

46 A Achievement Motivation

Thrash et al. 2007). These developments have been
shown to have important implications. Notably, they
reveal that different types of achievement motivations
affect cognitive activities, self-regulatory strategies,
and expectations for success. These differences have
practical implications given how intrinsically or extrin-
sically motivated individuals can respond differently to
different performance contexts (Story et al. 2009).

(1966)

Researchers have provided other important ways to
measure and understand achievement motivation. For
example, Atkinson and Feather
created
a multivariate model that includes achievement moti-
vation and the probability of success. This approach
helped researchers to understand not only longitudinal
pathways and outcomes but also the development of
the theory of motivational behavior, such as separate
components for approach and avoidance of achieve-
ment. Another group of researchers conceptualized
achievement needs in a way that has become known
as expectancy value theory, a theory developed to
understand the mental calculations that take place in
attitude development (Fishbein and Ajzen 1975). For
example, their model views beliefs about achievement
beliefs (e.g., self-perceptions of competence) and behav-
iors (e.g., persistence) as determined both by the expec-
tancy youth have for success and the subjective value
they place on succeeding (Wigﬁeld and Eccles 2000).

Much research has focused on sex and cultural
differences as well as developmental aspects of motiva-
tions for achievement. Historically, researchers viewed
arousal and expression as differing by gender; however,
comprehensive reviews have found no such pattern
(Stewart and Chester 1982; Smith 1992). International
studies generally have conﬁrmed results from the USA;
however, ideas of achievement differ depending on
their cultural context (McClelland 1961), with achieve-
ment motivation associating with cultural differences
in the perception and selection of domains, goals, and
behaviors
(Hofer et al. 2010). Developmentally,
evidence has shown that parenting styles that train
children for healthy independence – those with
warmth, encouragement, and low control – cultivate
high motivational achievement (McClelland 1985;
Turner et al. 2009). As expected, these results do not
always carry through from one study to the next, but
general themes continue to gain support.

The study of achievement motivation has grown
considerably given that several researchers have now

offered different ways to understand it, sometimes
using a variety of terms, and an increasing focus on
the factors that contribute to what would be deemed
achievement motivation. For example, Maehr (1984),
who focused on educational contexts, hypothesized
that motivation for achievement depends on the mean-
ing that the learner creates for it, and this in turn
inﬂuences how much time and energy the learner
invests. For Maehr, meaning was comprised of three
facets: an individual’s current personal goals, that indi-
vidual’s sense of self, and that individual’s perceptions
of what could be achieved in the classroom. These three
facets were proposed to be inﬂuenced by four anteced-
ents: available information, characteristics of the learn-
ing situation, personal
experience, and broader
sociocultural
contexts. Achievement motivation,
under this approach, depends on all of these factors
and, not surprisingly, all of these factors have been the
subject of increasing research. Most notably, the sense
of self that is now known as “self-efﬁcacy” has received
considerable interest. Self-efﬁcacy, an individual’s
belief that they can perform a task, is part of under-
standing the self; it has been shown to be positively
related to academic behaviors such as persistence,
and achievement
strategy use,
effort,
(Bandura 1997). Similarly, peer environments have
been viewed as particularly important for adolescents.
Belonging, peer interest in learning, and peer resistance
to school norms might all be related to classroom
environments. Positive associations have been shown
between perceived peer investment in class activities
and grades and their achievement. Acceptance and
value also enhance a sense of belonging, as well as the
sense that classrooms support mastery and improve-
ment. And adolescents’ social groups may promote or
discourage certain behaviors, such as an achievement
orientation, which could include a lack of it (Nelson
and DeBacker 2008). These important lines of research
conﬁrm the complexity of this area of study and the
need for research to focus on multiple factors.

cognitive

The study of achievement motivation has grown
considerably since it was conceptualized in the early
1900s. Although several researchers continued to use
the term and have devised important measures to
understand it, more recent research appears to focus
more on its related components and on speciﬁc
contexts of the need to achieve, such as in academic
settings (see Steinmayr and Spinath 2009) and work-

based contexts (Kenny et al. 2010). These studies high-
light key points, such as the importance of families,
peers, and other social environments in fostering and
shaping individuals’ sense of self related to the need to
achieve. The fragmentation may leave an impression of
a reduced interest in understanding achievement moti-
vation, but the reality appears to be that researchers have
increased their interest in it, especially in understanding
its developmental roots and potential outcomes.

References
Atkinson, J. W., & Feather, N. T. (1966). A theory of achievement

motivation. New York: Wiley.

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁcacy: The exercise of control. New York:

WH Freeman.

Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior:
An introduction to theory and research. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Hofer, J., Busch, H., Bender, M., Ming, L., & Hagemeyer, B. (2010).
Arousal of achievement motivation among student samples in
three different cultural contexts: Self and social standards of
evaluation. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 41, 758–775.
Kenny, M. E., Walsh-Blair, L. Y., Blustein, D. L., Bempechat, J., &
Seltzer, J. (2010). Achievement motivation among urban adoles-
cents: Work hope, autonomy support, and achievement-related
beliefs. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 77, 205–212.

Maehr, M. L. (1984). Meaning and Motivation: Toward A Theory of
Personal Investment. In C. Ames & R. Ames (Eds.), Research on
motivation in education: Student motivation (Vol. 1, pp. 115–144).
New York: Academic.

McClelland, D. C. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton: Van

Nostrand.

McClelland, D. C. (1985). Human motivation. Glenview: Scott

Foresman.

McClelland, D. C., Atkinson, J. W., Clark, R. A., & Lowell, E. L.

(1953). The achievement motive. New York: Appleton.

McClelland, D. C., Koestner, R., & Weinberger, J. (1989). How do self-
attributed and implicit motives differ? Psychological Review, 96,
690–702.

Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New York: Oxford

University Press.

Nelson, R. M., & DeBacker, T. K. (2008). Achievement motivation in
adolescents: The role of peer climate and best friends. Journal of
Experimental Education, 76, 170–189.

Smith, C. P. (Ed.). (1992). Motivation and personality: Handbook
of thematic content analysis. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Spangler, W. D. (1992). Validity of questionnaire and TATmeasures of
need for achievement: Two meta-analyses. Psychological Bulletin,
112, 140–154.

Steinmayr, R., & Spinath, B. (2009). The importance of motivation as
a predictor of school achievement. Learning and Individual
Differences, 19, 80–90.

Stewart, A. J., & Chester, N. L. (1982). Sex Differences in Human
Social Motives: Achievement, Afﬁliation, and Power. In A. J.

Achievement Tests A 47

Stewart (Ed.), Motivation and society (pp. 172–218). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

A

Story, P. A., Hart, J. W., Stasson, M. F., & Mahoney, J. M. (2009).
Using a two-factor theory of achievement motivation to examine
performance-based outcomes and self-regulatory processes.
Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 391–395.

Thrash, T. M., Elliot, A. J., & Schultheiss, O. C. (2007). Methodolog-
ical and dispositional predictors of congruence between implicit
and explicit need for achievement. Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy Bulletin, 33, 961–974.

Turner, E. A., Chandler, M., & Heffer, R. W. (2009). The inﬂuence of
parenting styles, achievement motivation, and self-efﬁcacy on
academic performance in college students. Journal of College
Student Development, 50, 337–346.

Wigﬁeld, A., & Eccles, J. S. (2000). Expectancy-value theory of
achievement motivation. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
25, 68–81.

Achievement Tests

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Achievement tests are evaluations that seek to measure
knowledge or skills gained after training, instruction,
or other experiences (Gibson and Mitchell 2008;
McMillan and Schumacher 2010). These types of tests
are taken by adolescents throughout their educational
careers, even though they sometimes may not even
realize that they are taking them. Although a wide
variety of achievement tests exists, they can be grouped
into categories according to their primary purpose and
the scope of comparison (Whiston 2009). For example,
norm-referenced achievement tests compare an indi-
vidual’s test score in a speciﬁc area to those of other
test-takers. Criterion reference tests compare an
individual’s scores to a preset of knowledge or abilities.
Some tests can be a mixture of both, such as some
diagnostic achievement tests that are given to individ-
to determine academic progress or identify
uals
strengths and weaknesses.

Efforts to measure achievement have grown, and
their increase has resulted in considerable controversy.
In educational environments, most notably, these tests
often have become known as “high-stakes tests.” These
types of tests are those that can have important conse-
quences for individuals, such as their moving to the

48 A Acting Out

next grade, graduating, being allowed to take certain
classes, or earning admittance into a school. Perhaps
the most familiar use of achievement tests are group
entrance exams taken by college-bound adolescents,
such as the Scholastic Aptitude Tests (SATs) that play
a critical role in the admissions criteria used by colleges
and universities. It is these tests that have attracted the
most controversy since they potentially have a powerful
effect on an individual’s life. The increasing controver-
sies that these tests attract include, for example, con-
cern that they use arbitrarily set standards, that they do
not test important skills, that they shift the learning
environment away from more creative learning, that
they disadvantage particular groups in society, and that
they are being used inappropriately (like for closing
schools deemed problematic)
(see, e.g., Whiston
2009). Despite these controversies, the tests can remain
useful tools that reveal the extent of an individual’s
knowledge and how they might perform in certain
environments. It seems clear that, despite criticisms,
these types of tests are likely to continue to play an
important role in adolescence, a role that seems to
increase in signiﬁcance even when controversies and
resistance abound.

References
Gibson, R., & Mitchell, M. (2008). Introduction to counseling and

guidance. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education.

McMillan, J., & Schumacher, S. (2010). Research in education:
Evidence-based inquiry. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education.
Whiston, S. (2009). Principles and applications of assessment in

counseling. Belmont: Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning.

Acting Out

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

The term “acting out” can have a variety of meanings
as well as be executed at different levels of intensity.
Acting out typically describes situations involving an
individual’s failure to exercise proper control over their
actions, which is why acting out also tends to be used as
a pejorative term. It indicates that the individual has
failed to censor their taboo primitive impulses and

signals a lack of assimilation into basic social norms
is
(e.g., a faulty upbringing). Because acting out
considered destructive, self-destructive, and socially
undesirable, it usually is reserved for an observation
of others’ behaviors. Acting out can be understood
from the perspective of several disciplines, but it ﬁgures
most prominently in therapeutic settings and those
concerned with delinquent or other risky behavior
(see Alexander and Sexton 2002; Overbeek et al.
2005). Almost invariably, acting out has been associ-
ated with the adolescent period, with acting out even
seen as acting adolescent.

Therapeutic and criminological views of acting out
show well its manifestations. From the perspective of
psychotherapy and clinical science, acting out is con-
sidered the emergence of inner conﬂict without inten-
tion or insight (see Richarz and Romisch 2002). Some
therapists see acting out as a means for personal growth
and self-expression, while others see it as detrimental
because it causes catharsis without insight. Acting out
can involve demonstrating inner thoughts against
a person’s better judgment, divulging emotions that
they do not want to acknowledge, or enacting experi-
ences that they do not want to process. Criminological
views tend to view acting out as an expression of
deviance, violence (to the self or others), and risk
taking (see, e.g., Overbeek et al. 2005). Acting out
behavior may not be a usual characteristic of an
individual; however, some individuals act out as
a normal part of their lives. The therapeutic and
criminological views, then, complement one another
well in the manner they give a broader view of acting
out, with one viewing it in constructive ways while the
other viewing it as essentially problematic and in need
of control.

The criminological view that

focuses on risk
taking likely is the most generally recognized form
of “acting out” as it reﬂects popular perceptions of
some adolescents. Indeed, some view adolescents as
quintessentially linked to acting out; they regard the
adolescent period as one marked by actions destructive
to themselves or others in the manner they hamper the
effective development of
feelings and social skills.
Although leading commentators may lament this neg-
ative view of adolescents, considerable research does
support the claim that much of “acting out” revealed in
antisocial behavior occurs during adolescence, that
much of antisocial behavior is adolescence-limited

(see Mofﬁtt 2003). Becoming mature and thus able not
to act out typically means developing the ability to
express conﬂicts safely and constructively, and being
able to exercise appropriate impulse control, personal
development, self-care, and relationship skills (see, e.g.,
Barker and Galambos 2005; Schultz et al. 2003).

fantasies or

Although popular images of acting out associate it
with the adolescent period, researchers tend to ﬁnd acting
out as part of everyday life and ﬁnd it in many contexts.
The most notable contexts include acting out desires and
fears through dreaming (see Richarz and Romisch 2002)
or acting out
socially inappropriate
thoughts by watching or otherwise interacting with
media that can mimic real-life situations (see Bo¨sche
2009). Despite those contributions, acting out likely
will continue to be a term pejoratively associated with
youth. Seen more comprehensively, however, the con-
cept of acting out clearly has been quite useful as it has
made important contributions to our understanding of
adolescents’
their relative
impulses and behaviors,
levels of maturity and deviance, as well as their
developmental challenges and outcomes.

Cross-References
▶ Delinquency
▶ Risk-Taking

References
Alexander, J. F., & Sexton, T. L. (2002). Functional family therapy:
A model for treating high-risk, acting-out youth. In F. W. Kaslow
(Ed.), Comprehensive handbook of psychotherapy: Integrative/
eclectic (pp. 111–132). New York: Wiley.

Barker, E. T., & Galambos, N. L. (2005). Adolescents’ implicit theories
of maturity: Ages of adulthood, freedom, and fun. Journal of
Adolescent Research, 20, 557–576.

Bo¨sche, W. (2009). Violent content enhances video game perfor-

mance. Journal of Media Psychology, 21, 145–150.

Mofﬁtt, T. E. (2003). Adolescence- limited and life-course persistent
antisocial behaviour: A developmental taxonomy. Psychological
Review, 100, 674–701.

Overbeek, G., Vollebergh, W., Engels, R., & Meeus, W. (2005). Juve-
nile delinquency as acting out: Emotional disturbance mediating
the effects of parental attachment and life events. European
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 2, 39–46.

Richarz, B., & Romisch, S. (2002). Acting-out: its functions within
analytic group psychotherapy and its transformation into dreams.
International Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 52, 337–354.
Schultz, L. H., Selman, R. L., & LaRusso, M. D. (2003). The assessment of
psychological maturity in children and adolescents: Implications
for the evaluation of school-based character education programs.
Journal of Research in Character Education, 1, 67–87.

Activism A 49

A

Activism

BEN KIRSHNER
School of Education, University of Colorado, Boulder,
CO, USA

Overview
Youth activism is a form of political engagement in
which young people identify common interests, mobi-
lize their peers, and work collectively to make their
voices heard in the public square. Research on youth
activism is interdiscipinary, emerging out of scholar-
ship on youth development, civic engagement, cultural
studies, and social movements. Youth activism is an
important domain of research for two broad reasons.
First, youth activists defy societal stereotypes about
teenagers, such as that they are self-involved, impulsive,
or unprepared for participation in mature community
activities. Understanding youth’s accomplishments in
activism can challenge and expand conventional
notions about adolescence as a developmental stage.
Second, understanding youth activism as a develop-
mental context is important, particularly for youth
who feel marginalized from their schools or communi-
ties. Settings that support youth activism exemplify
principles of learning that are relevant to other kinds
of learning environments, such as schools and after-
school programs.

Introduction
Young people seek to make their voices heard and
improve their communities or schools in a lasting way
by engaging in activism and organizing. Youth may not
have opportunities to vote or hold formal seats on
decision-making bodies, but many contribute to social
action campaigns that give voice to their hopes and
concerns (Checkoway and Richards-Schuster 2006).
For example, activist groups have worked to strengthen
failing schools, performed action research to expose
environmental polluters, and developed partnerships
between gay and straight youth to promote safety and
inclusion (Sadowski 2007; Warren et al. 2008). Here
the term “activism” is used synonymously with “orga-
nizing” in order to capture the broad range of groups
that engage young people in social change. Typically,
such groups are based in community organizations,

50 A Activism

The developmental

churches, or after-school youth programs, but in some
cases they may arise from school classes or clubs. In
contrast to community service programs where youth
clean parks, tutor children, or serve food to the home-
less, youth activism groups seek to inﬂuence public
policy or change institutional practices, often with
a social justice focus (Kahne and Westheimer 1996). In
this sense such groups exemplify a critical form of civic
engagement, in which youth are encouraged to chal-
lenge the status quo and envision better alternatives for
themselves and their peers (Watts and Flanagan 2007).
literature on youth activism
discussed in this essay focuses on middle-school-aged
and high-school-aged youth, as distinct from research
about activism among college students. Much of the
research on activism among youth between the ages of
12 and 18 has focused on young people from commu-
nities that have been systematically left out of decision
making or who are deprived of adequate opportunities
to learn in their schools and neighborhoods. For exam-
ple, in the USA, research on activism has described
efforts by African-American, Latino, and Asian-
American youth from low-income neighborhoods to
become collectively organized and participate in the
public square. The term “marginalized” is broader
than just ethnicity, however. Gay–straight alliances,
for example, represent efforts by gay, lesbian, bisexual,
and transgender (GLBT) youth and their heterosexual
allies to create safe spaces in schools for GLBT students
(Sadowski 2007). Research on youth activism tends to
focus on marginalized youth because, historically, it is
through organizing that oppressed groups gain power
and accomplish social change.

Youth activism has proven to be an interdisciplin-
ary ﬁeld that attracts developmentalists, sociologists,
anthropologists, and political scientists, among others.
scholars have conducted
Adolescent development
studies that demonstrate the kinds of developmental
competencies associated with activism (e.g., Larson &
Hanson, 2005). Sociologists have examined activism in
terms of broader questions about age segregation,
inequality, and resistance (Ginwright et al. 2006; Gor-
don 2010). Education researchers focus on the political
impact of youth organizing, such as in the arena of
school reform (Oakes and Rogers 2006; Warren et al.
2008).

For the most part, research has relied on case
studies of youth groups that draw upon ethnographic

observation and interviews (e.g., Ginwright 2007;
Kirshner 2009; Larson and Hansen 2005). Several
reasons account for this pattern. First, youth activism
is an emerging domain of research. In early stages of
research, open-ended, exploratory inquiry is called for
in order to understand the domain. This was particu-
larly the case with youth organizing, because scholars
argued that conventional measures of civic engage-
ment, such as those that measure volunteering or
future intention to vote, did not capture the kinds of
grassroots community engagement activities of low-
income youth (Cohen 2006). Second, because activism
is signaled by authentic behavior and action, it is best
studied in real-world, naturalistic contexts, rather than
through laboratory simulations. In this sense the
research has been driven by practice. Third, youth
activist groups tend to be self-selecting. Unlike schools,
they attract participants who elect to be there, which
means that it would not make sense to impose random
assignment on such groups and expect results to have
ecological validity.

Scholars have begun to develop measures that can
be used in surveys with larger populations of youth that
tap into personal behavior or attitudes associated with
organizing and activism. Measures focus on constructs
that include political voice, competencies for civic
action, participation in boycotts or demonstrations,
political efﬁcacy, and perceptions of inequality and
injustice. A comprehensive list of these survey measures
can be found in Flanagan et al. (2007).

Youth Activism as a Context for
Development
This section idenﬁties common features of settings that
engage youth in efforts to improve their schools and
communities.

Authentic Interests
Youth activism campaigns emerge from struggles that
youth experience in their everyday lives, such as pollu-
tion, lack of safety, and substandard schools (Ginwright
and James 2002; Delgado and Staples 2007). Effective
organizers invite youth to reﬂect on what they want to
see improved about their environment – in short, to
articulate their interests (Boyte 2004). Organizing
a project around people’s self-interests means the
stakes are high – it has real consequences for the
participants.

Activism A 51

A

Collective Problem Solving
Researchers have noted that the collective focus of
youth activism is one of its deﬁning features (Youniss
and Hart 2005). Participation involves a shift in focus
from individual to group – from “what I can do” to
“what we can do together.” Members learn how to work
effectively with others because their projects would
otherwise not succeed. Watkins et al. (2007) showed
that through working together on a social action
campaign, youth participants learned how to “bridge
differences” related to race, ethnicity, gender, and
sexual orientation. Such experiences may contribute
to feelings of collective efﬁcacy. In a case study of
a youth organizing group, young people commonly
invoked the slogan “power in numbers” or “strength
in numbers” to recruit others to their cause, suggesting
the formation of a sense of collective efﬁcacy (Kirshner
2009).

From the perspective of cognitive science,
the
emphasis on collective problem solving in youth activ-
ism embodies a distinct form of distributed cognition,
which refers to the ways in which problem solving is
distributed across people and tools (Hutchins 2000).
According to this view, cognition is not just inside
a person’s head, but is instead distributed across
a range of people and technological tools. Similarly,
tasks in youth activism groups are often distributed
among participants (Kirshner 2008). For example,
include
a group designing a press release might
a computer-savvy writer, a talented artist, and someone
who is good at keeping people on task. In such
a scenario, each person may not master all of the
same skills, but together they made an effective team.
The collaborative, distributed nature of work in
activism groups enables participants to accomplish
goals they would be hard-pressed to accomplish on
their own. Consider some of the complex cognitive
and social tasks required in effective political action
campaigns. For example, participants must develop
long-term strategies and respond to unexpected
contingencies. They need to construct arguments that
are sensitive to audience, such as when speaking before
a city council. And along the way they need to build
support among their peers and community members.
Young people’s accomplishments in campaigns defy
predictions about what adolescents are capable of
doing according to standard developmental theory
(Youniss and Hart 2005).

When effective, youth organizing groups comprise
highly interdependent systems that provide the neces-
sary scaffolding and resources for youth to accomplish
challenging goals. In this sense, activism groups engage
young people’s “zone of proximal development”
(ZPD), which refers to the distance between what
a person can do alone and what she can do in collab-
oration with peers or an experienced adult (Vygotsky
1978). Activities targeted toward the upper end of the
zone of proximal development are said to stimulate
development – they comprise “leading activities” for
development, helping to support and stimulate young
people’s maturing psychological functions (Grifﬁn and
Cole 1999). When organized optimally, social action
campaigns may serve as leading activities for the devel-
opment of
thinking and sociopolitical
awareness.

strategic

Youth–Adult Partnerships
Much of the literature about youth activism fore-
grounds the actions and accomplishments of youth
themselves. But this emphasis on “youth” obscures the
fact that activism groups typically embody cross-age
collaborations in which young adults (usually in their
twenties) play critical roles as organizers and advisors.
The quality of relationships between youth and
young adults has become a topic of
for
researchers (Larson et al. 2005). Adults who work
with high-school-aged or middle-school-aged youth
often experience dilemmas about their roles. For exam-
ple, some adults may seek to empower youth by letting
them formulate campaign strategy; they step aside so
that youth can assume leadership. But these same
adults may have greater expertise in campaign strategy
or how to facilitate group decision making. Tensions
between youth empowerment goals and adult exper-
tise, therefore can pose challenges for adult leaders
(Kirshner 2008).

interest

Forms of youth–adult interaction vary considerably
across groups. Some groups aspire to be “youth-led,” in
which case adults act simply as facilitators who help
youth formulate their own goals and plans (Larson
et al. 2005). Other groups seek to develop partnerships
characterized by shared roles and egalitarian decision
making (Camino 2005). Still others embrace an
apprenticeship approach, in which veteran activists
model what it means to engage in social action or
community organizing (Kirshner 2006). As in craft

52 A Activism

apprenticeships, experienced adults gradually “fade” so
that youth can take over the activities of the group.
And, of course, there are additional ways of parsing
gradations of youth–adult interaction, as suggested by
Hart’s (1992) “ladder of participation,” which is used
widely by youth organizations (see also Hart 2006 for
an updated commentary on this framework).

Regardless of the speciﬁc type of collaboration, the
very fact that youth interact with adults as they carry
out activism campaigns is signiﬁcant, given a broader
societal context in which age segregation is common
(Hart 2006; Heath 1999; Zeldin et al. 2003). As Rogoff
et al. (2003) write, “Instead of routinely helping adults,
children are often involved in specialized child-focused
exercises to assemble skills for later entry in mature
activities” (p. 181). Urban high schools, in particular,
are often too large, anonymous, and lacking in oppor-
tunities for meaningful connections between teachers
and students (National Research Council 2003. Youth
groups, therefore, provide an important venue for
young people to develop relationships with adults in
the context of task-oriented activities.

Alternative Frames for Identity
Youth activists forge identities that challenge stereo-
types about low-income youth of color. One way they
do this is through the actions they take in the public
realm. By participating in civic venues, such as school
board or city council meetings, youth position them-
selves – and are positioned by others – as competent
political actors (Nasir and Kirshner 2003). Youth activ-
ism groups also provide alternative frames for identity
through the kinds of sociopolitical ideologies that they
espouse. As Youniss and Yates (1997) have written, in
order to develop a civic identity, adolescents must
come to identify with transcendent values and ideolo-
gies that link the self to a past and present. Here the
term ideology is not limited to speciﬁc political sys-
tems, but instead connotes the need to ﬁnd meaning –
to identify with beliefs that link one to a broader social
and cultural context (Furrow and Wagener 2003).
Experiences that expose teenagers to political view-
points support civic identity development because
they enable young people to reﬂect on sociopolitical
issues and to see themselves as active producers of
society (Kirshner 2009).

Social justice-oriented youth activism groups, in
particular, seek to foster awareness of the inﬂuence of

social forces on individual behavior as well as a belief in
the power of ordinary people to accomplish social
change (Freire 1970; Watts and Flanagan 2007). Such
conversations may be especially relevant to low-income
youth of color who have experienced a disjuncture
between American ideals and their lived experiences
of poverty or racism (Rubin 2007). Activism projects
enable youth to see how issues that are typically treated
as a private responsibility can be reframed as
a collective responsibility. This way of framing social
problems can be signiﬁcant in identity development
because it contributes to feelings of empowerment
and collective self-determination (Flores-Gonzales
et al. 2006). For example, Ginwright (2007) described
the case of a young mother seeking her high-school
diploma who encountered barriers to ﬁnding child care
during school hours. Rather than interpret the situa-
tion as her own isolated problem, she organized other
teenage mothers to make their case to the district
superintendent, who decided to keep the child-care
center open. Although longitudinal research is called
for to understand precisely how social action experi-
ences
identity development,
Ginwright’s study suggests that taking action may
contribute to a sense of collective identity that is related
to positive youth development outcomes.

inﬂuence

this

like

Engagement in Academic and Civic
Institutions
Social action can be a vehicle for making academic
skills relevant to youth’s everyday lives (Tate 1995).
For example, Rogers et al. (2007) write about the
history, language arts, and statistics skills that youth
employed to accomplish projects documenting ineq-
uities in the Los Angeles school system. Youth partici-
pants described these academic practices as “tools” to
accomplish goals they cared about – rather than view
school subjects as foreign or alienating, they sought to
become more proﬁcient so that they could ﬁnd and
document evidence for their projects. Similarly, Mitra
(2004) has written about the powerful competencies
that students develop when they pursue strategies to
gain greater “student voice” in their schools. Propo-
nents of student voice aim to create opportunities for
a broad range of students to be heard in decision
making and planning, by creating new structures that
convene youth and adults to work together, such as
assessment and strategic planning, student-guided

Activism A 53

A

neighborhood tours for teachers, or leading profes-
sional development workshops for teachers (Mitra
2007; Yonezawa and Jones 2007).

Activism groups also connect youth to mainstream
civic institutions. Campaigns typically culminate in
presentations to civic decision makers, outreach to
community residents, or closed-door meetings with
policymakers where youth present policy proposals or
grievances (Kirshner and Geil (in press)). Political
encounters such as these represent concrete access
points for youth. Such access points offer some of the
few public channels through which young people can
transgress age segregation and contribute their voice to
political decision making.

Debates and Knowledge Gaps

Measures of Civic Action
Efforts to quantify civic engagement through surveys
struggle with what counts as civic action. Some argue
that existing measures of civic engagement, such as
intention to vote or volunteer, are too narrow and
discount other important forms of engagement, such
as helping out a neighbor in need, providing informal
mentoring to neighborhood children, or performing
a socially conscious hip-hop song. Ethnographic
research has sought to uncover and report a more
expanded set of behaviors and practices that scholars
include when talking about youth civic engagement. At
the same time, some scholars argue that research
should demarcate behaviors that are explicitly political
in nature, such as efforts to change policies or institu-
tional structures that contribute to inequality.

Insider and Outsider Approaches to
Youth Voice and Activism
Insider strategies tend to work from within the system
by building partnerships between students and adult
personnel
that contribute to site-based decision
making and changes to classroom instruction (Mitra
2006). Such opportunities go beyond student councils
by creating new structures that convene youth and
adults to work together to improve their school. One
especially promising strategy is student action research
(Jones and Yonezawa 2008; Rubin and Jones 2007).
Administrators, parents, and students share a common
interest in high-quality data that captures features
of school quality and climate that are absent from

NCLB-mandated measures, but which are relevant to
school improvement. In a project described by Jones
and Yonezawa (2008), for example, students collected
data showing a wide discrepancy between students and
teachers’ views of the level of challenge in their classes,
which provoked conversations among teachers about
how to respond. In another example, students in Oak-
land created a youth-authored School Accountability
Report (SAR) that included variables such as student
achievement, teacher quality, health and nutrition, and
facilities
(Duncan-Andrade n.d.). These ﬂedgling
efforts to create broader measures of school quality
leverage students’ expertise about their worlds and
school leaders’ desire for useful data to complement
measures of test performance. One potential limitation
of insider strategies is if they become focused solely on
technical questions, such as how to improve grading
procedures or create stronger teacher–student relation-
ships, without also addressing broader issues of equity
in a school or district (Renee et al. 2009). Another
limitation is if student roles are just window dressing
or tokenistic (Zeldin et al. 2003).

Youth and community organizing groups based
outside of schools, on the other hand, have sometimes
shown their ability to hold political decision makers
accountable to constituents and thereby promote equi-
table reforms (Oakes and Rogers 2006; Warren et al.
2008). Kwon (2006), for example, described how a pan-
ethnic coalition of youth groups successfully defeated
a plan to build a “super jail” for juvenile offenders in
California. Youth organizing groups may be more likely
to appeal to students who feel marginalized in school or
are not academically successful. Further research is
needed, however, that compares the effectiveness of
insider and outsider approaches for accomplishing
equity-based school reform.

Effects of Activism on Development
Qualitative case study research suggests that extended
social action or youth voice campaigns provide oppor-
tunities to develop and practice powerful competen-
cies, such as decision making, social trust, strategic
thinking, civic efﬁcacy, and intergroup understanding
(Larson and Hansen 2005; Watkins et al. 2007; Mitra
2004; Ginwright 2007). Because of the self-selected
populations and lack of comparison studies, however,
some scholars have questioned the causal inferences
that people make about these studies. It could be that

54 A Activism

the key drivers of development in these settings have
more to do with their small size, the personalities of
adult leaders, or the fact that they are self-selected in
their composition.

These unresolved debates have important implica-
tions for civic education. For example, if youth were
required or randomly assigned to join a social action
group as part of the school curricula, would such expe-
riences show the same effects? Forced participation
such as this would likely undermine the basic principles
of empowerment settings. Nevertheless, efforts to apply
youth organizing principles in a more general way to
schools represent an important future direction for
research and practice. It is an open question whether
the guiding principles of community-based activism
groups would show similar successes engaging youth
if they were formalized as part of a school-based civic
education curricula.

A related area for research pertains to the impact of
activism on youth development
and resiliency.
Although there have been longitudinal studies of par-
ticipants in the Civil Rights movement (discussed in
Youniss and Yates 1997), few studies of contemporary
youth activism have examined participants’ trajectories
of development over several years. It is not known how
short-term experiences contribute to youth’s long-term
sociopolitical identities or other developmental out-
comes. This kind of research is particularly challenging
because young people tend to self-select into such
groups, making causal inferences difﬁcult. Neverthe-
less, careful longitudinal studies need not be random-
ized experiments
to help us understand how
participants change over time and how social action
experiences become meaningful in their lives.

Understudied Populations
In 2006, there were widespread rallies for immigration
reform in the USA. Many of the participants were
undocumented youth. But with some exceptions (e.g.,
Perez 2009), few scholars have studied the precursors or
outcomes of activism for undocumented immigrant
youth. This is partly because undocumented youth
need to conceal their status for fear of deportation or
other consequences
families
(Gonzalez 2007). Despite barriers to participation,
many undocumented youth are taking active roles
trying to lobby legislators to pass immigration reform
and the Dream Act.

them and their

for

Another understudied population is socially con-
servative youth, such as those who organize to restrict
abortion or promote prayer in schools. Activism is
often viewed as the province of politically progressive
groups, but scholarship on activism will be limited if it
does not also explore its conservative varieties.

Conclusion
In the context of developmental psychology, adoles-
cence has historically been portrayed as a stage between
childhood and adulthood. For some, the stage-based
approach implies a view of teenagers as “unﬁnished”
or “undeveloped,” which has contributed to social
policies that restrict them from the public sphere
(Vadeboncoeur 2005). Although neurological and
biological research has shown that adolescence is a time
of heightened physiological change, the implications for
adolescent roles are under-determined. For example,
some interpret evidence of
the
prefrontal cortex as a rationale for limiting youths’ roles
or treating them as a separate class from adults. Others
point to such evidence to show how important it is that
youth gain complex experiences interacting with adult
systems and learning how to participate in them as agents
of change. The research on youth activism discussed in
this essay provides support for the argument that the
most effective response to youth’s transitional status is to
provide authentic opportunities to participate, rather
than maintain their segregation from adult institutions.

the immaturity of

References
Boyte, H. C. (2004). Everyday politics: Reconnecting citizens and public

life. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Camino, L. (2005). Pitfalls and promising practices of youth-adult
partnerships: An evaluator’s reﬂections. Journal of Community
Psychology, 33(1), 75–85.

Checkoway, B. N., & Richards-Schuster, K. (2006). Youth participa-
tion for educational reform in low-income communities of color.
In S. Ginwright, P. Noguera, & J. Cammarota (Eds.), Beyond
resistance: Youth activism and community change (pp. 319–332).
New York: Routledge.

CIRCLE. (2008). Civic and political engagement of youth with no
college experience: Summary of focus groups in Baltimore, MD.
Medford: Center for Information and Research on Civic Learn-
ing and Engagement.

Cohen, C. (2006). African American youth: Broadening our under-
standing of politics, civic engagement, and activism. Youth activ-
ism SSRC web forum. Retrieved from http://ya.ssrc.org/african/
Cohen/pf.

Delgado, M., & Staples, L. (2007). Youth-led community organizing:

Theory and action. New York: Oxford University Press.

Duncan-Andrade, J. M. R. (n.d.). A pedagogy of indignation: Reading
and reclaiming the world through critical research literacies. San
Francisco: Ce´sar Cha´vez Institute, San Francisco State University.
Flanagan, C. A., Syvertsen, A. K., & Stout, M. D. (2007, May). Civic
measurement models: Tapping adolescents’ civic engagement
(Working paper 55). College Park: The Center for Information
& Research on Civic Learning & Engagement.

Flores-Gonzales, N., Rodrı´guez, M., & Rodrı´guez-Mun˜iz, M. (2006).
From hip-hop to humanization: Batey Urbano as a space for
Latino youth culture and community action. In S. Ginwright,
P. Noguera, & J. Cammarota (Eds.), Beyond resistance: Youth
activism and community change: New democratic possibilities for
policy and practice for America’s youth (pp. 175–196). London:
Routledge.

Freire, P. (1970/2002). Pedagogy of

the oppressed. New York:

Continuum.

Furrow, J. L., & Wagener, L. M. (2003). Transcendence and adolescent
identity: A view of the issues. In J. Furrow & L. Wagener (Eds.),
Beyond the self:
identity and transcendence. Special Issue.
Applied Developmental Science, 7(3), 116–118.

Ginwright, S. (2007). Black youth activism and the role of critical
in Black community organizations. American

social capital
Behavioral Scientist, 51(3), 403–418.

Ginwright, S., & James, T. (2002). From assets to agents of change:
Social justice, organizing, and youth development. New Direc-
tions for Youth Development, 96(winter), 27–46.

Ginwright, S., Noguera, P., & Cammarota, J. (Eds.). (2006). Beyond
resistance! Youth activism and community change: New democratic
possibilities for policy and practice for America’s youth. Oxford:
Routledge.

Gonzalez, R. G. (2007). Wasted talent and broken dreams: The lost
potential of undocumented students. Immigration Policy in
Focus, 5(13), 1–12.

Gordon, H. R. (2010). We ﬁght to win: Inequality and the politics of
youth activism. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Grifﬁn, P., & Cole, M. (1999). Current activity for the future: the
Zo-ped. In P. Lloyd & C. Fernyhough (Eds.), Lev Vygotsky:
Critical assessments. Volume III, The zone of proximal development
(pp. 276–295). London: Routledge. (Reprinted from Children’s
learning in the zone of proximal development, by B. Rogoff &
J. V. Wertsch, Eds., 1984, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass).

Hart, R. A. (1992). Children’s participation: From tokenism to citizen-
ship. Florence: UNICEF International Child Development Center.
Hart, R. A. (2006). Stepping back from “the ladder:” Reﬂections on
in group decision-making.

a model of child/adult relations
Unpublished manuscript.

Heath, S. B. (1999). Dimensions of language development: Lessons
from older children. In A. S. Masten (Ed.), Cultural processes in
child development (Vol. 29, pp. 59–75). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Hutchins, E. (2000). Distributed cognition. San Diego: University of

California.

Jones, M., & Yonezawa, S. (2008). Student-driven research. Educa-
tional Leadership, 66(4). Retrieved January 19, 2009, from http://
www.ascd.org/publications/educational_leadership

Kahne, J., & Westheimer, J. (1996). In the service of what? The politics

of service learning. Phi Delta Kappan, 77(9), 593–599.

Activism A 55

A

Kirshner, B., & Geil, K. (in press). “I’am about to bring it!” Access
points between youth activists and adult policymakers. Children,
Youth Environments.

Kirshner, B. (2006). Apprenticeship learning in youth activism. In
P. Noguera, S. Ginwright, & J. Cammarrota (Eds.), Beyond
resistance: Youth activism and community change: New democratic
possibilities for policy and practice for America’s youth (pp. 37–57).
Oxford, UK: Routledge.

Kirshner, B. (2008). Guided participation in youth activism: Facilita-
tion, apprenticeship, and joint work. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 17(1), 60–101.

Kirshner, B. (2009). “Power in numbers”: Youth organizing as
a context for exploring civic identity. Journal of Research on
Adolescence, 19(3), 414–440.

Kwon, S. A. (2006). Youth of color organizing for juvenile justice. In
S. Ginwright, P. Noguera, & J. Cammarota (Eds.), Beyond
resistance: Youth activism and community change: New democratic
possibilities
youth
(pp. 215–228). Oxford: Routledge.

for policy and practice

for America’s

Larson, R. W., & Hansen, D. (2005). The development of strategic
thinking: Learning to impact human systems in a youth activism
program. Human Development, 48(6), 327–349.

Larson, R., Walker, K., & Pearce, N. (2005). A comparison of high
quality youth-led and adult-led youth programs: Balancing
inputs from youth and adults. Journal of Community Psychology,
33(1), 57–74.

Mitra, D. L. (2004). The signiﬁcance of students: Can increasing
student voice in schools lead to gains in youth development?
Teachers College Record, 106(4), 651–688.

Mitra, D. L. (2006). Educational change on the inside and outside:
The positioning of challengers. International Journal of Leader-
ship Education, 9(4), 315–328.

Mitra, D. (2007). Student voice in school reform: From listening to
leadership. In D. Thiessen & A. Cook-Sather (Eds.), The interna-
tional handbook of student experience in elementary and secondary
school (pp. 727–744). Dordrecht: Springer.

Nasir, N., & Kirshner, B. (2003). The cultural construction of moral
and civic identities. Applied Developmental Science, 7, 138–147.
National Research Council. (2003). Engaging schools: Fostering high
school students’ motivation to learn. Washington: The National
Academies Press.

Oakes, J., & Rogers, J. (2006). Learning power: organizing for education

and justice. New York: Teachers College Press.

Perez, W. (2009). We ARE Americans: Undocumented students pursu-

ing the American Dream. Sterling: Stylus Publishing.

Renee, M., Welner, K., & Oakes, J. (2009). Social movement organiz-
ing and equity-focused educational change: Shifting the zone of
mediation. In A. Hargreaves, A. Lieberman, M. Fullan, &
D. Hopkins (Eds.), International handbook of educational change,
23(1), 153–168.

Rogers, J., Morrell, E., & Enyedy, N. (2007). Studying the struggle:
Contexts for learning and identity development for urban youth.
American Behavioral Scientist, 51(3), 419–443.

Rogoff, B., Paradise, R., Arauz, R. M., Correa-Chavez, M., &
Angelillo, C. (2003). Firsthand learning through intent partici-
pation. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 175–203.

56 A Acute Brain Disorders

Rubin, B. C. (2007). “There’s still not justice”: Youth civic identity
development amid distinct school and community contexts.
Teachers College Record, 109(2), 449–481.

Rubin, B., & Jones, M. (2007). Student action research: Reaping the
beneﬁts for students and school leaders. National Association of
Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 91(4), 363–378.

Sadowski, M. (2007). Growing up in the shadows: School and the
identity development of sexual minority youth. In M. Sadowski
(Ed.), Adolescents at school: Perspectives on youth, identity, and
education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.

Schutz, A. (2006). Home is a prison in the global city: The tragic
strategies.

school-based community engagement

failure of
Review of Educational Research, 76(4), 691–744.

Tate, W. (1995). Returning to the root: A culturally relevant approach
to mathematics pedagogy. Theory into Practice, 34(3), 166–173.
Vadeboncoeur, J. (2005). Naturalised, restricted, packaged, and sold:
Reifying the ﬁctions of “Adolescent” and “Adolescence”. In
J. Vadeboncoeur & L. P. Stevens (Eds.), Re/Constructing “the
Adolescent”: Sign, symbol, and body (pp. 1–24). New York:
Peter Lang.

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher
psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Warren, M. R., Mira, M., & Nikundiwe, T. (2008). Youth organizing:
From youth development to school reform. New Directions for
Youth Development, 2008(117), 27–42.

Watkins, N. D., Larson, R. W., & Sullivan, P. J. (2007). Bridging
intergroup difference in a community youth program. American
Behavioral Scientist, 51(3), 380–402.

Watts, R., & Flanagan, C. (2007). Pushing the envelope on civic
engagement: A developmental and liberation psychology
perspective. The Journal of Community Psychology, 35, 779–792.
Yonezawa, S., & Jones, M. (2007). Using students’ voices to inform
and evaluate secondary school reform. In D. Thiessen &
A. Cook-Sather (Eds.), The international handbook of student
experience in elementary and secondary school (pp. 681–710).
Dordrecht: Springer.

Youniss, J., & Yates, M. (1997). Community service and social respon-

sibility in youth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Youniss, J., & Hart, D. (2005). Intersection of social institutions with
civic development. New Directions for Child Development, 109,
73–81.

Zeldin, S., Camino, L., & Calvert, M. (2003). Toward an understand-
ing of youth in community governance: Policy priorities and
research directions (Social Policy Report series). Ann Arbor, MI:
Society for Research in Child Development.

Acute Brain Disorders

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Acute brain disorders, sometimes referred to as acute
brain syndromes, are various psychiatric syndromes

that are temporary, reversible, and diffuse in their
impairment. Acute refers to the process’ reversibility.
The impairment is typically caused by head injury, use
of drugs, or an infection. More recently, delirium has
become the preferred term to use to label the tempo-
rary in the ability to focus, sustain, or shift attention as
well as a change in thinking (e.g., in memory and
disorientation) or perceptual disturbances that ﬂuctu-
ate in severity (see Brown and Boyle 2002).

References
Brown, T. M., & Boyle, M. F. (2002). The ABC of psychological
medicine: Delirium. British Medical Journal, 325, 644–647.

Adaptation

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Adaptation involves ﬁtting or conﬁrming to an envi-
ronment. Adaptation generally implicates the assump-
tion that it is advantageous; thus, “maladjustment”
results from unsuccessful adaptation and “adjustment”
results from successful adaption. Importantly, adapta-
tion typically is viewed as involving a combination
of changing the self as well as altering the external
environment.

The term gained renewed popularity with the rise
of modern sociobiology. Sociobiology examined both
species level and individual explanations for behaviors
(see Wilson 1975). Species level types of explanations
(“ultimate explanation”) involve the function (or
adaptation) that a speciﬁc behavior serves and the
evolutionary process (or phylogeny) that resulted in
the behavior or trait’s functionality. Individual level
types of explanations focus on the development of the
individual (ontogeny) and the proximate mechanisms
involved in the behavior or trait (such as speciﬁc
hormones). Sociobiologists deem phenotypic traits
adaptive if they provide organisms with a reproductive
advantage.

How adolescents adapt

to their environments
ﬁgures prominently in the study of adolescence.
Illustrative is how adolescents develop career goals,
which involves an adaptation of their expectations to

Addiction A 57

A

the opportunities provided by their environments.
Adolescents have been shown to simultaneously adapt
their career goals to their interests, scholastic achieve-
ment, and environmental opportunities (see Hirschi
and Vondracek 2009). How adolescents adapt to their
environments also, for example, has been important
to studies addressing adolescents’ immigration and
cultural adaptation (see, e.g., Chuang and Gielen
2009) as well those examining adolescent mental health
(see, e.g., Williamson et al. 2009). It is difﬁcult to ﬁnd
an area of study relating to adolescents that does not
eventually relate to adolescents’ adaptation.

References
Chuang, S. S., & Gielen, U. P. (2009). Understanding immigrant
families from around the world: Introduction to the special
issue. Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 275–278.

Hirschi, A., & Vondracek, F. W. (2009). Adaptation of career goals to
self and opportunities in early adolescence. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 75, 120–128.

Williamson, P., Koro-Ljungberg, M. E., & Bussing, R. (2009). Analysis
of critical incidents and shifting perspectives: Transitions in
illness careers among adolescents with ADHD. Qualitative
Health Research, 19, 352–365.

Wilson, E. O. (1975). Sociobiology: The new synthesis. Cambridge:

Harvard University Press.

Addiction

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Addiction is a behavioral disorder marked by a physical
or psychological dependency that results in signiﬁcant
negative disruptions in an individual’s quality of life.
Formally, addictions relate to drug (including alcohol)
use, although the term often is used colloquially
to include apparent compulsive behavior and dedica-
tion to activities. The important sign of addiction is
the continued engagement in self-destructive behavior
despite negative
self-
destructive behaviors involve a loss of control, compul-
sive seeking, and vulnerability to relapse. Importantly,
dependency and addiction are often used interchange-
ably, but dependency actually relates to physiological
effects while addiction relates to behaviors; and both

consequences. Addiction’s

often coexist although they need not do so. Ceasing to
use depended on drugs typically (but not always) leads
to withdrawal and produces an abstinence syndrome.
Although traditionally limited to drug use, the term
has been the subject of considerable scientiﬁc debate
that has considered whether to include other addictive
behaviors under the classiﬁcation of addiction. The
commonly proposed behavioral addictions include
pathological gambling, compulsive buying, compulsive
exercise, workaholism, computer addiction, Internet
addiction, and sexual addiction (see Albrecht et al.
2007). Efforts to include other behavioral addictions
continue, such as the recent recognition that mobile
phone use by adolescents may result in addiction
(Cho´ liz 2010). Research on mobile phone use reveals
some of the most characteristic symptoms of depen-
dence – those symptoms include excessive use; prob-
lems with parents due to excessive use; interference
with usual activities; an increase in use to reach same
levels of satisfaction, including efforts to obtain new
models and devices; and the need to frequently use
phones. Although it may be tempting to not view
behavioral problems as addictive, there are increasing
efforts to expand the use of the term addiction to non-
substance-use related conditions (see Potenza 2006;
Albrecht et al. 2007).

Epidemiological evidence has long shown that
individuals who begin experimenting with drugs of
abuse during early adolescence are more likely to
develop substance use disorders. Despite that relation-
ship, research has yet to conﬁrm a causal link (see
Schramm-Sapyta et al. 2009). Although the adolescent
brain may be vulnerable to certain drugs, the level of
maturity, for example, may not permit it to be vulner-
able to certain aspects of drugs. As an example,
cocaine-sensitive neuronal circuits continue to mature
during adolescence, which may account for the well-
established ﬁnding in indicating a decreased behavioral
response to cocaine in adolescents as compared to
adults (Cao et al. 2007).

References
Albrecht, U., Kirschner, N. E., & Gru¨sser, S. M. (2007). Diagnostic
instruments for behavioral addiction: An overview. GMS Psycho-
Social Medicine, 4, 1–11.

Cao, J., Lotﬁpour, S., Loughlin, S. E., & Leslie, F. M. (2007). Adoles-
cent maturation of cocaine-sensitive neural mechanisms.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 32, 2279–2289.

58 A Adjudicative Competence

Cho´ liz, M. (2010). Mobile phone addiction: A point of issue. Addic-

tion, 105, 373–374.

Potenza, M. N. (2006). Should addictive disorders include non-

substance-related conditions? Addiction, 101, 142–151.

Schramm-Sapyta, N. L., Walker, Q. D., Caster, J. M., Levin, E. D., &
Kuhn, C. M. (2009). Are adolescents more vulnerable to drug
addiction than adults? Evidence from animal models. Psycho-
pharmacology, 206, 1–21.

Adjudicative Competence

2,

1, PRAVEEN KAMBAM
1

H. ERIC BENDER
CHRISTOPHER THOMPSON
1Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human
Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA
2University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland,
OH, USA

Overview
Juvenile adjudicative competence is a complex topic
that involves neurobiology, ethics, and legal consider-
ations. To understand adjudicative competence’s layers,
one must ﬁrst understand its legal deﬁnitions, consti-
tutional bases, and components. Such understanding
requires familiarity with the evolution and implemen-
tation of the concept of adjudicative competence in the
juvenile justice system. Additionally, recent psycholog-
ical and neurobiological research has underscored the
potential impact of mental illness and developmental
immaturity on juveniles’ adjudicative competence.
Recognizing the biology of the adolescent mind helps
inform what has proven to be a long-standing, ethically
controversial subject.

Introduction
Adjudicative competence refers to a defendant’s com-
petence to proceed with and participate in the adjudi-
cative process, either in juvenile court or adult criminal
court. At least three fundamental competencies are
integrated into adjudicative competence: competence
to waive counsel, competence to enter a guilty plea
(and thereby relinquish a variety of trial-related rights),
and competence to stand trial.
In addition to
establishing these competencies, a defendant must
competence.”
also demonstrate

“pre-adjudicative

Pre-adjudicative competence includes competence to
confess or to waive one’s Miranda rights (i.e., one’s
right to remain silent, to know that anything said may
be used against one in court, and to consult with an
attorney, among other things).

Constitutional Basis
Competence to stand trial is an established principle of
jurisprudence that extends back to at least the seven-
teenth century. Adjudicating incompetent defendants
violates several Amendments of the U.S. Constitution
(in addition to English Common Law),
including
a defendant’s 6th Amendment
trial-related rights
(e.g., the right to effective assistance of counsel, the
right to confront one’s accusers, and the right to pre-
sent evidence) and the Due Process clause of the 14th
Amendment (“Nor shall any State deprive any person
of life, liberty, or property, without due process of
law”). Ensuring that defendants are competent to pro-
ceed in the adjudicative process safeguards the accuracy
of any criminal adjudication, helps guarantee a fair
trial, and helps to make certain the defendant,
if
found guilty, knows why he/she is being punished. In
short, it preserves the dignity and integrity of the legal
process.

Select Case Law Regarding
Adjudicative Competence
In the 1960 case of Dusky v. U.S., the U.S. Supreme
Court established the substantive standard for compe-
tence to stand trial, one aspect of adjudicative compe-
tence. The Dusky standard for competence to stand trial
is “whether the accused has sufﬁcient present ability to
consult with his lawyer with a reasonable degree of
rational understanding and whether he has a rational
as well as factual understanding of the proceedings
against him” (Dusky v. U.S. 1960). This standard is
employed in some form or other in every state and in
federal court. The ruling in Dusky v. U.S. requires that
a defendant currently possess two capabilities: (1) the
ability to understand the charges and proceedings
against him and (2) the ability to work with his attor-
ney in preparation of his defense. Dusky does not
require that a mental disorder be the cause of
incompetence.

A judge, defense attorney, or prosecutor can raise
the issue of adjudicative competence. However, com-
petence is presumed unless the defendant proves

otherwise by a preponderance of the evidence (i.e.,
“more likely than not”). In order for a defendant to
be found incompetent to stand trial (IST), most states
require that either a developmental disability (e.g.,
mental retardation) or a mental disease, defect, or
disorder be the cause of the deﬁcits that render the
defendant incompetent. Mere ignorance or simple
unwillingness to participate in the adjudicative process
does not render a defendant IST. If a defendant is
likely be considered competent.
educable, he will
Until recently, courts and legislatures had essentially
remained silent on the topic of whether developmental
immaturity may be viewed as a potential cause of
incompetence in either juvenile or adult criminal
court (see later for more recent development in this
domain). For example, the California Standard for
Adjudicative Competence (California Penal Code,
2011, } 1170.17) dictates, “A defendant is mentally
incompetent for purposes of this essay if, as a result of
mental disorder or developmental disability, the defen-
dant is unable to understand the nature of the criminal
proceedings or to assist counsel in the conduct of
a defense in a rational manner.” The federal standard,
modiﬁed by the Insanity Defense Reform Act of 1984,
deﬁnes incompetence to stand trial as “a present mental
disease or defect [that] renders the defendant unable
to understand the nature and consequences of the
proceedings against him or to assist in his defense.”

Since Dusky, the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that
a defendant’s right to be competent is “so fundamental
to an adversary system of justice” that conviction of an
incompetent defendant or failure to adhere to proce-
dures designed to assess a defendant’s competence
(when doubt has been raised regarding it) violates
the Due Process Clause of
the 14th Amendment
(Drope v. Missouri 1975). Additional cases have also
discussed complex aspects of competence to stand
trial. In Jackson v. Indiana (1972), the Court addressed
what should happen to defendants who will never be
competent to stand trial. In Jackson, the U.S. Supreme
Court opined, “A defendant cannot be held more than
the reasonable period of time necessary to determine
whether there is a substantial probability that he will
regain competence in the foreseeable future.” The
Court also noted that, “Due process requires that the
nature and duration of conﬁnement bear some reason-
able relation to the purpose for which the individual
is
is committed.” Therefore, operationally once it

Adjudicative Competence A 59

apparent that restoration of a defendant’s competence
is unlikely, he/she must be released or civilly committed.

A

for

Components of Competence
In 1973, the McGarry Criteria operationalized the
“competence to stand trial” concept. Four main areas
comprise the McGarry Criteria for competence:
(1) understanding of
the charges and potential
consequences, (2) understanding of the trial process,
(3) capacity to participate with an attorney in defense,
and (4) potential
courtroom participation.
“Understanding of the charges and their potential
consequences” includes the abilities to appreciate the
charges and their relative seriousness, to understand
possible dispositional consequences of guilty, not
guilty, and not guilty by reason of insanity (NGRI)
verdicts or pleas, to appreciate the range and nature
of possible penalties, and to realistically appraise the
likely outcomes of the trial. “Understanding the trial
process” requires the ability to understand the roles
judge,
of participants
defense attorney, prosecutor, witnesses, and jury), to
understand the trial process and potential conse-
quences of pleading and plea bargaining, and to grasp
events
the
(Laboratory of Community Psychiatry, Harvard
Medical School 1973).

in the trial process (e.g.,

pretrial/trial

sequence

general

of

the

coherent description of

According to the McGarry Criteria, a defendant is
capable of “participating with an attorney in one’s
defense” if he can: display the abilities to adequately
trust or work collaboratively with an attorney, disclose
a reasonable,
facts
pertaining to the charge to the attorney, reason about
available options by weighing their consequences,
and realistically challenge prosecution witnesses and
monitor trial events. “Potential for courtroom partici-
pation” is measured by the defendant’s ability to testify
coherently and relevantly, if testimony is needed, con-
trol one’s behavior during trial proceedings, manage
the stress of trial, and display self-serving motivation
(Laboratory of Community Psychiatry and Harvard
Medical School 1973).

Assessment of Competence

Competence Assessment Instruments
Although the cornerstone of assessing competence
thorough forensic psychiatric/psychological
is

a

60 A Adjudicative Competence

examination by a skilled examiner, Competence
Assessment Instruments (CAIs) can serve as adjunctive
tools that can help guide and assist the examiner.

be familiar with the court process. This may have
negatively impacted the test’s validity for use in
mentally retarded pretrial detainees.

The Georgia Court Competency Test (GCCT),
which was initially developed in 1978 and revised in
1988 (Georgia Court Competency Test – Mississippi
State Hospital Version (GCCT-MSH)), is a standard-
ized, 21-item instrument (Nicholson et al. 1988). Its
questions address six domains: (1) physical layout of
the court, (2) functions of court participants in a trial,
(3) the defendant’s charges, (4) helping one’s attorney,
(5) the alleged crime, and (6) potential consequences.
The administration of the exam takes 10–15 min, and it
is scored from 0 to 100, with a score <70 indicating that
further examination of competence-related abilities is
likely warranted. The GCCT-MSH has shown good
inter-rater reliability; however, it has been criticized
for being too focused on the defendant’s knowledge
of the trial process and not focused enough on the
defendant’s ability to assist in his/her defense. The
GCCT-Juvenile Revision (GCCT-JR) was an additional
variation developed in 1997.

In 1997, Richard Bonnie and his colleagues (Hoge
et al. 1997) developed the MacArthur Competence
Assessment Tool – Criminal Adjudication (MacCAT-
CA) (see Bonnie and Grisso 2000). This standardized,
22-question instrument requires approximately 30 min
to administer. Competence is scored along three axes:
understanding, reasoning, and appreciation. For each
measured domain, defendants can score within three
levels of impairment: none or minimal (<1.0 standard
deviations (SD) below the mean of the “presumed
competent” sample), mild (1.0–1.5 SD below the
(>1.5 SD below
mean), or clinically signiﬁcant
mean). While some examiners ﬁnd working with its
hypothetical case difﬁcult, the exam has good internal
reliability.

For defendants with mental retardation, the Com-
petence Assessment for Standing Trial for Defendants
with Mental Retardation (CAST-MR) commonly is
used. It includes 40 multiple-choice items and ten
items
related to the defendant’s particular case.
Defendants evaluated by this instrument must have
a 4th-grade reading level, but the questions, which
require narrative answers, can be read to the defendant.
The CAST-MR was initially tested on subjects with
mental retardation in the community, not criminal
defendants; therefore, the subjects were less likely to

Structured Interview
In 2005, Grisso et al. developed the Juvenile Adjudica-
tive Competence Interview (JACI). This structured
interview was designed to guide clinicians in assessing
youths’ reasoning, understanding, and appreciation of
is speciﬁcally
the adjudicative process. The JACI
designed to allow examiners to obtain information
about errors or distortions that arise because of ado-
lescents’ developmental characteristics. Through its
provisions for retesting of defendants to evaluate reten-
tion of material, examiners may determine whether or
not defendants are educable. While the JACI is slowly
becoming the “standard of care and practice,” research
and experience with its use is still somewhat limited.

Limitations
Available competence assessment instruments have
some limitations, some of which are particularly evi-
dent when attempting to utilize them with juveniles.
With the exception of the JACI, the instruments were
all developed on adults. Many of them are weighed
more toward “understanding” than the other assessed
domains. If global scores are used, speciﬁc deﬁcits that
may prevent defendants from being competent (e.g.,
delusions) potentially can be masked by proﬁciency in
other areas. Additionally, only cognitive (rather than
both cognitive and psychosocial) factors are typically
assessed. The difference between these factors and the
implications of assessing only cognitive factors will be
discussed later.

Adjudicative Competence and the
Juvenile Justice System
The juvenile justice system – juvenile referring to
a person who has not yet reached the age at which
one is treated as an adult by the criminal
justice
system – has its origins in 1899 with the Illinois
legislature, which founded the ﬁrst juvenile court in
Chicago. This court invoked as the operating principle
a parens patriae doctrine (“parent of
the state”)
rather than a police power doctrine. The court focused
on helping/rehabilitating the delinquent rather than
punishing the crime and protecting the public. Due
process protections, such as assuring adjudicative

competence, generally were not considered because the
court fashioned itself as strictly rehabilitative and
because the proceedings were considered civil, not
criminal, in nature (Scott 2000).

Until the 1960s, juvenile courts operated unfettered
by the constitutional mandates that applied to adult
criminal court proceedings. Judges had a great deal of
discretion in almost every aspect of delinquency
proceedings,
including the ultimate disposition of
youths adjudicated delinquent. Not surprisingly, there
were some abuses of power.

Relevant Case Law
In the 1960s, the lack of due process in juvenile court
proceedings was challenged in a number of cases. Kent
v. United States (1966) was the ﬁrst U.S. Supreme Court
case involving juvenile court proceedings. Its ruling
established that prior to waiver/transfer to adult
court, juveniles are entitled to a hearing, access by
counsel
to the records involving the waiver, and
a written statement by the judge outlining the reasons
for the waiver.

To date, In re Gault (1967) has proven to be the
most signiﬁcant U.S. Supreme Court case involving
juvenile court proceedings. The ruling established
that in hearings that could result in commitment to
an institution (considered a serious deprivation of
liberty), juveniles have the right to notice of charges,
counsel, confrontation and cross-examination of
witnesses, and privilege against
self-incrimination
(i.e., Fifth Amendment rights). Presiding Justice Abe
Fortas stated, “Neither the 14th Amendment nor the
Bill of Rights is for adults only” and referred to the
Gault court as a “kangaroo court.” Of note, no right to
appeal was granted.

Additional cases addressed juvenile justice matters
throughout the 1970s. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled
during In re Winship (1970) that the proper standard of
proof
in delinquency adjudications was “beyond
a reasonable doubt” not “preponderance of the evi-
dence.” The U.S. Supreme Court’s opinion in McKeiver
v. Pennsylvania (1971) held that the due process clause
of the 14th Amendment does not require jury trials in
juvenile court.

Ultimately, through the “criminalization of the
juvenile court system,” the U.S. Supreme Court has
determined that due process protections apply to juve-
nile court proceedings. As a result of the Gault hearing,

Adjudicative Competence A 61

A

the accountability of youths has been acknowledged,
but the special character of the juvenile justice system
has been maintained. Many viewed such changes as
fairly sweeping; nevertheless, adjudicative competence
still was not viewed as an important issue because the
jeopardy adolescents faced in juvenile court was not
perceived as particularly great and many understood
parens patriae as the operative doctrine. Although
infrequently explicitly stated,
the presumption in
adult criminal court is that juveniles tried there are
subject to the “adult competence” standard, which is
typically codiﬁed. In juvenile court, the situation is less
clear. According to Johnson’s 2006 review, approxi-
mately 35 states and the District of Columbia explicitly
recognize a juvenile’s right to adjudicative competence
(in juvenile court) through case law or statutory pro-
visions (only Oklahoma explicitly does not recognize
this right). In some cases, the adult adjudicative com-
petence standard is employed, though rarely has this
been elucidated clearly by courts or state legislatures.

for

juvenile

state provisions

With regard to IST, some states require that mental
illness or mental disease (rather than developmental
immaturity) be the cause of such incompetence, while
other
adjudicative
competence do not explicitly require predicate mental
disorders (Johnson 2006). At present, few state statutes
ofﬁcially recognize developmental
immaturity as a
cause for incompetence. Florida and Arkansas recog-
nize that, in certain cases, chronological age and devel-
opmental immaturity may prevent a juvenile offender
from being competent to stand trial. In fact, Arkansas
presumes
that youth under 13 years of age are
incompetent.

Remediation of Competence
Another area that demands more research is the resto-
ration of juvenile adjudicative competence, or what
Viljoen and Grisso (2007) refer to as “remediation of
competence” in minors deemed IST. In general, when
compared with adults, youth have cognitive and devel-
limitations (which can be compounded
opmental
by psychopathology or mental
illness) which may
adversely impact their understanding of legal proceed-
ings, their ability to assist counsel, and their apprecia-
tion of the “situation at hand.” Because of the dearth of
empirically based remediation efforts, Viljoen and
Grisso suggest drawing from research in the ﬁelds of
education and developmental and clinical psychology.

62 A Adjudicative Competence

They describe four areas to target in the remediation of
competence: (1) factual understanding, (2) rational
understanding, (3) communication with counsel, and
(4) reasoning. However, they also acknowledge the
inherent challenges in such remediation attempts.

Purposes of the Criminal Justice
System
Once a defendant is deemed competent to stand trial,
he/she enters the criminal justice system. The purposes
of the criminal
justice system are best understood
as fourfold. Deterrence aims to dissuade the future
commission of crimes by the individual and/or others.
Incapacitation, manifested as incarceration or execu-
tion, attempts to protect the public. Rehabilitation is
attempted through the participation in treatment and/
or correctional programs to correct underlying prob-
lems and prevent recidivism. Finally, retribution is
reﬂected in the idea that individuals are incarcerated
or executed because they “deserve it.”

Historical Perspectives
During the late 1980s and 1990s, youth violence
increased while
juvenile homicide precipitously
increased. With public pressure on state and federal
policymakers to use juvenile court (and adult criminal
court) as a mechanism for social control (i.e., police
power and protecting the public, rather than for reha-
bilitation of juvenile offenders), this time period was an
era of punitive reforms. This approach was manifest as
a “get tough on juvenile crime” mentality. Commonly
heard aphorisms included “juvenile offenders are
criminals who happen to be young, not children who
happen to be criminal” and “old enough to do the
crime, old enough to do the time.” While clever in
their phrasing, these notions have been criticized for
discounting the importance of youthful immaturity
in the assessment of adjudicative competence and
criminal responsibility.

Waivers to Adult Court
With the historical shift to a more punitive model,
numerous pieces of legislation (e.g., Prop 21 in Cali-
fornia in 2000) were passed with the intent to decrease
juvenile crime. The most notable effect, however, was
the increased ease with which juveniles were transferred
(“waived”) to adult criminal court from juvenile court.
The number of juveniles waived to adult court in 1994

was 73% greater than the number waived in 1986 (Stahl
1999). Additionally, the age at which juveniles could be
tried in adult criminal court was lowered. In 2009,
juveniles under 12 years of age could be prosecuted in
adult court in more than half of states, while 7-year-
olds could be tried as adults in 22 states and in the
District of Columbia (Deitch et al. 2009). Since 2006,
the federally enacted Adam Walsh Child Protection and
Safety Act requires states to place juveniles as young as
14-years-old on a sex offender registry if they are found
guilty of certain sexual offenses. “This law – and many
similar state statutes – applies not only to predatory
offenses, but also to those involving consensual sex,
public exposure, or inappropriate touching” (Annie
E. Casey Foundation 2008).

In addition to speciﬁc laws demanding that juvenile
offenders register as adult offenders in certain cases,
there are several categories of waiver from juvenile to
adult court. A legislative waiver (also referred to as
a statutory exclusion) occurs when legislature deter-
mines that charges for certain crimes must be ﬁled in
adult criminal court if the juvenile defendant is of
a minimum age (usually 14–16 years of age). A prose-
cutorial waiver (also called a direct ﬁle) can occur when
the prosecutor has fairly broad discretion in deciding
whether to ﬁle charges in juvenile or adult court. The
extent to which prosecutorial waivers occur depends
largely on prosecutors’ philosophies and the political
climate. Due to wide variation, this phenomenon has
been referred to as “Justice by Geography.”

In a judicial or discretionary waiver, the judge deter-
mines the waiver. Generally, the burden of proof is on
the prosecutor to prove that the juvenile is “not ﬁt.”
A presumptive waiver is a type of discretionary waiver
in which a juvenile is presumed not to be a “ﬁt and
proper subject” to be dealt with in juvenile court if he/
she is charged with a certain crime and is of a certain
age. However, the juvenile is entitled to a pretrial hear-
ing in juvenile court (a “ﬁtness hearing”) to rebut this
presumption.

A reverse waiver can occur if charges are directly
ﬁled in an adult criminal court and the minor is
subsequently convicted of a different charge that is
not eligible for “direct-ﬁling.” After a post-conviction
“ﬁtness hearing” in either juvenile or criminal court,
the judge can remand the case to juvenile court for
disposition. The major determinant in these cases is
whether a defendant is amenable to treatment, though

some states, such as California, have multiple deter-
mining factors (California Welfare and Institutions
Code, 2011, } 707).

The more punitive historical trend in the juvenile
justice system has shown paradoxical results. In a 2007
review of the impact of transfer laws on subsequent
violence in the juvenile offender population, the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC
2007) reported that “transfer to the adult criminal justice
system is associated with subsequent violence among
juvenile participants when compared with violence
among juveniles retained in the juvenile justice system.”
Also, the CDC noted “. . .little evidence supports the idea
that transfer laws deter juveniles in the general popula-
tion from violent crime.” Fagan et al. (1989) wrote that
juvenile offenders in adult criminal institutions were
found more likely to be assaulted physically and sexu-
ally and more likely to commit suicide.

Other Punitive Reforms
There have been other consequences of juvenile crime
initiatives as well. Some juvenile offenses have counted
toward “strikes,” while records of juvenile court pro-
ceedings may or may not be sealed or kept conﬁdential.
There has been an increased use of “blended sentenc-
ing,” that is, the juvenile justice system has jurisdiction
over an offender until age 18, at which point the
offender is turned over to the adult correctional system.
juvenile offenders have seen longer
Additionally,
periods of custody,
for example, California Youth
Authority (CYA) may keep “juveniles” in custody
until age 25. Furthermore, courts have increasingly
used “once waived, always waived” statutes, which
establish that once a juvenile has been waived to and
convicted in an adult criminal court, all subsequent
charges must be ﬁled in adult criminal court.

Factors Potentially Influencing
Juvenile Adjudicative Competence

Mental Disorders
The prevalence of mental disorders in youth in the
juvenile justice system is high. These are the same
youth in whom adjudicative competence is likely to
be at issue. Approximately 66% of juvenile pretrial
detainees or delinquents meet the American Psychiatric
Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV), criteria

Adjudicative Competence A 63

for a mental disorder (including Substance Disorders
and Conduct Disorder). Excluding conduct disorder
alone as a mental disorder only decreases the rates by
approximately 5% (Grisso 2004).

A

competence

adjudicative

In adult offenders, mental disorders that typically
into question are
call
psychotic disorders and mental retardation. Other
disorders
such as major depressive disorder or
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are
not usually considered serious enough to impair
signiﬁcantly adjudicative competence.
In contrast,
“subthreshold” disorders may have signiﬁcantly more
repercussions on adjudicative competence in juveniles
than in adults, due to the relatively immature cognitive
processes of those individuals under 15 years of age.
Additionally and obviously, juveniles generally show
more psychosocial immaturity than their adult coun-
terparts; mental retardation or borderline intellectual
functioning further increases juveniles’ risk for being
incompetent to participate in the adjudicative process.
This is important because the average IQ of youth in
the juvenile justice system is approximately one to two
standard deviations below normal. For example, Otto’s
meta-analysis (1992) showed that the rates of mental
retardation (i.e., an IQ (cid:1) 70) in the juvenile justice
population are approximately three to eight times
higher than the rates in the general population, and
the prevalence of learning disorders is 17–53%. Subse-
quent studies generally have replicated his ﬁndings.

Regardless, in juveniles, mental illness has generally
been considered a less-important etiology of adjudica-
tive incompetence than developmental
immaturity.
Many scholars have assumed this is due to the rarity
of psychosis
in childhood and early adolescence
compared to the almost ubiquitous developmental
immaturity in this age group.

Developmental (Im)maturity
Cognitive and psychosocial domains of developmental
maturity both potentially inﬂuence juvenile adjudica-
tive competence. The cognitive domain of develop-
mental maturity encompasses a defendant’s ability to
understand, reason about, and appreciate the adjudi-
cative process. More simply, this addresses the ques-
tion: Does the defendant know what he should do?
Some or all of these “cognitive” abilities may be either
impaired or newly acquired in juveniles. The psycho-
factors or
social domain integrates developmental

64 A Adjudicative Competence

traits that inﬂuence the dependability and uniformity
with which juveniles deploy their cognitive abilities.
This domain addresses
the question: What does
the defendant actually do and why? Many of these
factors/traits are transient and change as the juvenile
matures.

Initially,

adjudicative

competence.

Cognitive Domain
In the past, research typically focused on cognitive
differences between juveniles and adults that may
impair
legal
standards for CST motivated this line of inquiry. Sub-
sequently, it was discovered that age and intelligence
are the most consistent predictors of adjudicative com-
petence or the lack thereof. Juveniles younger than
14–15 years of age are generally more likely to show
deﬁcits in cognitive domains. They often view their
rights as discretionary and externally controlled rather
than automatic and inalienable. They also display
poorer understanding and valuation of the trial process
and participants than adults. However, studies query-
ing adults and juveniles 15 years of age or older about
hypothetical, nonlegal circumstances found little dif-
ference between these two groups. Unfortunately, many
of these studies did not examine delinquent youth, who
are more likely to have lower intelligence levels and
higher rates of mental illness than the general juvenile
population. Furthermore, many researchers have
questioned whether these laboratory studies are rele-
vant to stressful, emotionally charged, real-world set-
tings where youth actually may make these decisions.
Therefore, juvenile adjudicative competence must be
considered in a broader developmental framework.

Psychosocial Domain
Because juveniles have historically been viewed by
society as more impulsive, more vulnerable to peer
pressure, and more likely to engage in risky and imme-
diately gratifying (but ultimately damaging) behaviors
than adults, they are generally precluded from certain
activities (e.g., driving, serving in the military) until
they reach certain ages. Recently, researchers have
begun to examine more precisely particular domains
of “immaturity,” quantify the degree of these impair-
ments by age, and examine how these impairments
may affect adjudicative competence.

Many adolescents manifest deﬁcits in the following
domains: (1) risk appraisal, (2) time perspective,

(3) peer inﬂuence, (4) abstract thinking, (5) perceived
autonomy, and (6) “character” stability (Kambam and
Thompson 2009; Steinberg 2009). Adolescents tend to
discount and undervalue risk (risk appraisal), care
more about short-term consequences than long-term
consequences, and are less “future-oriented” than
adults (time perspective). Adolescents are much more
likely than adults to be subject and succumb to peer
inﬂuence (peer
inﬂuence). The perceptions and
decisions of youth may be based on overly concrete
ideas; they may view rights as discretionary or condi-
tional as opposed to automatic and inalienable
(abstract thinking). A child’s or adolescent’s lack of
perceived autonomy can manifest itself as passivity,
inattention, or compliance with authority or perceived
autonomy (Galvan et al. 2007; Gardner and Steinberg
2005; Scott et al. 1995; Steinberg and Cauffman 1996).
Furthermore, coherent integration of various elements
of identity does not occur until early adulthood under
the best of circumstances (“character stability”). There-
fore, while adolescent antisocial behavior (much of
which may be predicated on the above “deﬁcits”) is
extremely common, only a small percentage of
adolescents continue this behavior into adulthood
(Mofﬁtt 1993).

Case examples illustrate these psychosocial issues in
adolescents. For example, because pleading “not
guilty” would require him to remain in custody,
a minor may agree to plead guilty to a charge despite
limited evidence because he wants to be released to his
parents quickly. Here, the minor does not appropri-
ately weigh the longer-term consequences of pleading
guilty. In another scenario, a minor who has stolen
property and faces strong evidence against him may
refuse to agree to a plea bargain in an attempt to appear
“cool” to his peer group.

Neurobiological Research
Researchers have identiﬁed developmental, structural,
and functional neurobiological changes and have corre-
lated them with concurrent behavioral and cognitive
data in order to draw conclusions about the causal
mechanisms for (at least a portion of) these deﬁcits.
Reductions in gray matter density (i.e., pruning) in the
frontal and parietal lobes appear to begin around puberty
and proceed into adulthood (Sowell et al. 2001; Gogtay
et al. 2004). White matter density and volume appear
to increase with age. In fact, Bartzokis et al. (2001)

Adjudicative Competence A 65

A

found that myelin volumes in the frontal and temporal
lobes did not peak until age 45–50. Sowell et al. (2003)
found that while limbic cortices complete myelination
relatively early, frontal and parietal cortices show a less
linear pattern of maturing and continue to myelinate
into adulthood.

Psychological Research
Scholars have conducted competence studies to evalu-
ate the extent to which adolescents may differ from
adults in their abilities to participate as defendants in
trials. Thomas Grisso coordinated the MacArthur Juve-
nile Adjudicative Competence Study (1998–2002),
which found that youth under age 16 are signiﬁcantly
more likely than adults to have impaired adjudicative
competence in the areas of understanding, reasoning,
and appreciation of their legal issues; youth under age
14 and those of below-average intelligence were at
greatest risk of impairment. Ficke et al. (2006) found
that incarcerated juveniles generally have signiﬁcantly
lower IQ and achievement test scores than youth in the
general population. In particular, 9–12-year-olds and
those with IQs less than 60 demonstrated signiﬁcant
deﬁcits in understanding, reasoning, or appreciation
on the MacCAT-CA.

Limited Research
Multiple factors may explain the limited,
though
expanding, body of knowledge on assessment of
juveniles’ competence to stand trial. Juvenile compe-
tence is not explicitly recognized by statute in most
states. Juvenile proceedings have historically been con-
sidered civil (rather than criminal), non-adversarial,
and almost
adjudicative
therapeutic. Therefore,
competence generally has not been perceived as
a necessity for juveniles (at least those remaining in
juvenile court). From a more pragmatic standpoint,
few juvenile cases are appealed, thus depriving appeals
courts of
the opportunity to decide the juvenile
competence issue.

Commentary
An accumulating body of evidence suggests that juve-
niles, particularly younger adolescents and children,
frequently demonstrate deﬁcits that impair their ability
to participate effectively in the adjudicative process.
These deﬁcits are most frequently a result of develop-
mental immaturity, rather than the result of a mental

illness. Therefore, the traditional paradigm of restora-
tion of adjudicative competence (i.e., commitment to
a state hospital and treatment with medication) does
not typically apply. Rather, juveniles must attain com-
petence through normal maturation; however, keeping
children in state custody until competence is attained
likely challenges constitutional standards (see Jackson v.
Indiana (1972)) and may have a deleterious impact on
children’s or adolescents’ development. Dismissing
potentially serious charges because of incompetence
is, for many, an equally unsatisfactory solution.

The salient question remains: How does one mini-
mize the risk that juveniles’ 6th and 14th Amendment
rights will be violated by having their cases adjudicated
while incompetent, while still recognizing the govern-
ment’s and society’s legitimate interest in adjudicating
these cases? The answer may lie within modifying pol-
icy. Grisso et al. (2003) suggest implementing a “sliding
scale” of competence for juvenile court. That is, if
a juvenile defendant’s potential jeopardy is limited,
a basic understanding of the legal system and an ability
to assist counsel to some degree should be sufﬁcient. If
the charges and potential penalties are more serious,
the “bar” for competence should be set somewhat
higher. Another potential improvement would be to
afford juveniles a “non-waivable” right to counsel to
allow “assisted competence.” If a juvenile defendant
develops trust in his/her attorney and understands
that the attorney will zealously advocate for the defen-
dant’s best interests, the minor’s ability to understand
other, more subtle aspects of the adjudicative process
become somewhat less crucial.

Other policy change may include ensuring that
attorneys for juveniles have (at least) elementary train-
ing in the relevant principles of child and adolescent
psychological development. This would not only help
attorneys identify potentially incompetent clients, but
would also improve competent juveniles’ effectiveness
of participation in the adjudicative process. Another
option would involve instituting a rebuttable presump-
tion of incompetence for all juveniles waived to adult
criminal court. The prosecution would then be
required to prove the defendant is competent by
a preponderance of the evidence. If juveniles are sub-
sequently found incompetent based on adult criminal
court standards, they would be returned to juvenile
court for adjudication and disposition. Finally, more
frequent use of informal, pre-adjudicative dispositions

66 A Adjudicative Competence

or plea agreements, such as placement, mandatory
outpatient treatment, dependency court, etc., may
also help preserve the rights of the juvenile offender.
Although this does not address the problem of
potential “incompetence to plead,” this may reduce
the number of cases that require formal adjudication.
Public policy related to the adjudication of minors
in juvenile court or adult criminal court needs to evolve
as evidence base on juvenile adjudicative competence
increases. Such evolution will help preserve both juve-
nile defendants’ trial-related rights and the integrity
of the juvenile and adult criminal justice systems as
a whole.

Cross-References
▶ Juvenile Risk Assessment

References
Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2008). 2008 Kids count data book: A road
map for juvenile justice reform. Baltimore: Annie E. Casey
Foundation.

Bartzokis, G., Beckson, M., Lu, P., et al. (2001). Age-related changes in
frontal and temporal lobe volumes in men: A magnetic reso-
nance imaging study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(5),
561–565.

Bonnie, R., & Grisso, T. (2000). Adjudicative competence and youth-
ful offenders. In T. Grisso & R. Schwartz (Eds.), Youth on trial:
A developmental perspective on juvenile justice (pp. 73–103).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

California Penal Code }1170.17 (2011).
California Welfare and Institutions Code }707 (2011).
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2007). Effects on vio-
lence of laws and policies facilitating the transfer of youth from
the juvenile to the adult justice system: A report on recommen-
dations of the task force on community preventive services.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 56(RR-9), available at
www.cdc.gov/mmwR/pdf/rr/rr5609.pdf (accessed March 14, 10).
Deitch, M., Barstow, A., Lukens, L., & Reyna, R. (2009). From time out
to hard time: Young children in the adult criminal justice system.
Austin: The University of Texas at Austin, LBJ School of Public
Affairs.

Drope v. Missouri, 420 U.S. 162 (1975).
Dusky v. U.S., 352 U.S. 402 (1960).
Fagan, J., Frost, M., & Vivona, T. S. (1989). Youth in prisons and
training schools: Perceptions and consequences of the treatment –
Custody dichotomy. 40 Juvenile and Family Court J.1.

Ficke, S. L., Hart, K. J., & Deardorff, P. A. (2006). The performance of
incarcerated juveniles on the MacCAT-CA. The Journal of the
American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 34, 360–373.
Galvan, A., Hare, T., Voss, H., Glover, G., & Casey, B. J. (2007). Risk-
taking and the adolescent brain: Who is at risk? Developmental
Science, 10, F8–F14.

Gardner, M., & Steinberg, L. (2005). Peer inﬂuence on risk-taking,
risk preference, and risky decision-making in adolescence and
adulthood: An experimental study. Developmental Psychology, 41,
625–635.

Gogtay, N., Giedd, J., Lusk, L., et al. (2004). Dynamic mapping of
human cortical development during childhood through early
adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 101(21), 8174–8179.

Grisso, T. (2004). Double jeopardy: Adolescent offenders with mental

disorders. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Grisso, T., Steinberg, L., Woolard, J., et al. (2003). Juveniles’ compe-
tence to stand trial: A comparison of adolescents’ and adults’
capacities as trial defendants. Law and Human Behavior, 27(4),
333–363.

Hoge, S. K., Bonnie, R. J., Poythress, N., Monahan, J., Eisenberg, M.,
& Feucht-Haviar, T. (1997). The MacArthur Adjudicative
Competence Study: Development and validation of a research
instrument. Law and Human Behavior, 21, 141–179.

In re Gault, 371 U.S. 1 (1967).
In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358 (1970).
Jackson v. Indiana, 406 U.S. 715 (1972).
Johnson, K. M. (2006). Juvenile competency statues: A model for

state legislation. Indiana Law Journal, 81, 1067–1095.

Kambam, P., & Thompson, C. (2009). The development of decision-
making capacities in children and adolescents: Psychological
and neurological perspectives and their
for
juvenile defendants. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 27(2),
173–190.

implications

Kent v. United States, 383 U.S. 541 (1966).
Laboratory of Community Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School.
(1973). Competency to stand trial and mental illness. Rockville:
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.

McKeiver v. Pennsylvania, 403 U.S. 528 (1971).
Mofﬁtt, T. (1993). Adolescence-limited and life-course-persistent
antisocial behavior: A developmental taxonomy. Psychological
Review, 100(4), 674–701.

Nicholson, R., Robertson, H., Johnson, W., & Jensen, G. (1988).
A companion of instruments for assessing competency to stand
trial. Law and Human Behavior, 2, 313–321.

Otto, R., Greenstein, J., Johnson, M., & Friedman, R. (1992). Preva-
lence of mental disorders among youth in the juvenile justice
system. In J. Cocozza (Ed.), Responding to the mental health needs
of youth in the juvenile system (pp. 7–48). Seattle: National
Coalition for the Mentally Ill in the Criminal Justice System.
Scott, E. (2000). Criminal responsibility in adolescence: Lessons from
developmental psychology. In T. Grisso & R. Schwartz (Eds.),
Youth on trial: A developmental perspective on juvenile justice
(pp. 291–324). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Scott, E. S., Reppucci, N. D., & Woolard, J. L. (1995). Evaluation
adolescent decision making in legal contexts. Law and Human
Behavior, 19, 221–244.

Sowell, E., Mattson, S., Thompson, P., Jernigan, T., Riley, E., & Toga, A.
(2001). Mapping continued brain growth and gray matter density
reduction in dorsal frontal cortex: Inverse relationships during
post-adolescent brain maturation. The Journal of Neuroscience,
21, 8819–8829.

Adjustment A 67

A

Sowell, E., Peterson, B., Thompson, P., Welcome, S., Henkenius, A., &
Toga, A. (2003). Mapping cortical change across the human life
span. Nature Neuroscience, 6(3), 309–315.

Stahl, A. (1999). Delinquency cases waived to criminal court,
1987–1996. Fact sheet. Washington, DC: Ofﬁce of Juvenile Justice
and Delinquency Prevention.

Steinberg, L. (2009). Adolescent development and juvenile justice.

Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 5, 47–73.

Steinberg, L., & Cauffman, E. (1996). Maturity of judgment in
adolescence: Psychosocial factors in adolescent decision making.
Law and Human Behavior, 20, 249–272.

Viljoen, J., & Grisso, T. (2007). Prospects for remediating juveniles’
adjudicative incompetence. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law,
13(2), 87–114.

Adjustment

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

In developmental science, adjustment is an often used
term that refers to reactions to identiﬁable stressors,
with adjustment involving adapting the self to the
situation, changing the situation, or both. Studies
examining adjustment range widely, such as adjust-
ment to school, parental conﬂict, chronic illnesses,
adoption, victimization, or even to adolescence itself.
Adjustment can also refer to the relative presence or
absence of diagnosed psychological disorders, symp-
toms, or negative mood. The broad scope of what
constitutes adjustment is reﬂected in the wide range
of ways that it is measured, ranging from a focus on
depressive systems to how one generally copes with
a situation. The most speciﬁc way that adjustment is
used arguably is in the contexts of adjustment disor-
ders, but even those have been criticized as being too
vague, poorly deﬁned, and constituting indeﬁnite
symptomatology (see Strain and Diefenbacher 2008).
As a construct, adjustment has not been the subject
of much commentary in and of itself; it is simply
assumed to cover a broad range of factors. The notable
exception to lack of effort to conceptualize adjustment
appeared in 1940 by Sarbin (1940), who viewed adjust-
ment as focusing on conformity to cultural norms,
mores, and traditions, or as focusing on a mastery of

one’s environment in ways that are adequate and satis-
fying to individuals, or as a compromise of one’s beliefs
or needs in ways that remain satisfying, such as chang-
ing one’s standards. Although considerably dated,
more current uses of the term adjustment do seem to
fall in those three broad categories.

constitutes

Two reasons may explain the lack of effort to better
conceptualize the nature of adjustment. One reason is
that, rather than focus on adjustment itself, research on
adjustment has focused on what stress or factor adjust-
ment speciﬁcally referred to. For example, one of the
most fruitful areas of research involves adjustment to
chronic illnesses and diseases. That area has led to
adjustment.
multiple views of what
A leading example conceptualized adjustment
to
diseases as focusing on mastery of disease-related
tasks, preserving functional status, having low negative
affect and no psychological disorder, and addressing
issues of quality of life in multiple domains (such as
physical,
functional, social, sexual, and emotional
domains) (see Stanton et al. 2001). Other conceptual-
izations also have emerged to describe adjustment to
illnesses, some of which add a focus on retaining
a purpose in life, regulating distress, restoring relation-
ships with others, and maintaining a positive mood
and self-worth (for a review, see Stanton et al. 2007).
Importantly and although this area of research has
centered more on adults than on youth, it reveals how
a multitude of factors inﬂuence adjustment, such as
socioeconomic status, culture and ethnicity, gender,
as well as personality attributes and coping mecha-
nisms. This area of research also shows, however, that
the study of adjustment has become much more
specialized and focused.

Another reason for a lack of focus on a more general
concept of adjustment is a continued focus on its
extremes. Notably, there is considerable focus on mal-
adjustment, in the sense of focusing on pathology and
problem behavior. This broad focus is of signiﬁcance
even though research on the formal diagnosis of adjust-
ment disorder in adolescence is a common diagnosis
for nonpsychotic youth and research relating to it
remains quite scarce (see Pelkonen et al. 2007). Equally
importantly, research increasingly focuses on positive
adjustment, as highlighted by the positive youth devel-
opment movement. Both of these extremes of adjust-
ment provide important understandings of the nature

68 A Adjustment Disorder

of adolescence as well as factors that do contribute to
effective adjustment, although more of a focus has been
placed on the more negative side of adjustment as
opposed to the optimal side. That research, much of
which has been conducted in the United States, has
shown that most adolescents appear “adjusted” in
that they take pleasure in many aspects of their lives
and are satisﬁed with most of their relationships most
of the time (Offer and Schonert-Reichl 1992). Adoles-
cents also appear adjusted in that large national sam-
ples report that the vast majority of youth in the United
States do not show signs of psychopathology, with one
leading study showing, for example, that 78% of youth
in its national sample were deemed adjusted, with 44%
being well or adequately adjusted, and the other 34%
marginally adjusted (McDermott and Weiss 1995).
These may appear to be impressive and positive ﬁnd-
ings, but the converse is also true: approximately 20%
of youth suffer from psychopathology and are deemed
in need of mental health care. This line of research,
although focusing on the negative, highlights well the
beneﬁts that can come from research focusing on
adjustment.

Cross-References
▶ Adjustment Disorder

References
McDermott, P. A., & Weiss, R. V. (1995). A normative typology of
healthy, subclinical, and clinical behavior styles among American
children and adolescents. Psychological Assessment, 7, 162–170.

Offer, D., & Schonert-Reichl, K. A. (1992). Debunking the myths of
the
adolescence: Findings from recent research. Journal of
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 31,
1003–1014.

Pelkonen, M., Marttunen, M., Henriksson, M., & Lo¨nnqvist, J.
(2007). Adolescent adjustment disorder: Precipitant stressors
and distress symptoms of 89 outpatients. European Psychiatry,
22(5), 288–295.

Sarbin, T. R. (1940). Adjustment in psychology. Journal of Personality,

8, 240–249.

Stanton, A. L., Collins, C. A., & Sworowski, L. A. (2001). Adjustment
to chronic illness: Theory and research. In A. Baum, T. A.
Revenson, & J. E. Singer (Eds.), Handbook of health psychology
(pp. 387–403). Mahwah: Erlbaum.

Stanton, A. L., Revenson, T. A., & Tennen, H. (2007). Health
psychology: Psychological adjustment to chronic disease. Annual
Review of Psychology, 58, 565–592.

Strain, J. J., & Diefenbacher, A. (2008). The adjustment disorders:
The conundrums of the diagnoses. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 49,
121–130.

Adjustment Disorder

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Adjustment Disorder is an imprecise term for a variety
of symptoms that develop in response to an identiﬁable
stressor, such as a school transition (American Psychi-
atric Association 2000). The focus tends to be on an
individual’s
reaction to an overwhelming stress;
indeed, the disorder used to be labeled “adjustment
reaction.” When the stressor is not a traumatic event,
the diagnosis of adjustment disorder is used rather than
that of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Psychi-
atric classiﬁcatory systems require that symptoms
occur within 1–3 months of an identiﬁed stressor.
Symptoms can include anxiety, depressed mood, dis-
turbance of conduct, physical complaints, withdrawal,
or academic inhibition. The disorder’s duration is typ-
ically brief, less than 6 months. If it lasts longer than
that, the diagnosis is reevaluated and the individual is
perhaps designated into a different diagnostic category
or the diagnosis is speciﬁed as chronic, acute, or
persistent adjustment disorder.

Adjustment disorders are deemed common, and
may be the most common single psychiatric diagnosis
for adolescents and children. They occur in 2–8% in
community samples of children and adolescents and
10–30% of those in mental health outpatient settings
(see Rodgers and Tennison 2009). The disorders also
have signiﬁcant implications. Adolescents with adjust-
ment disorder are deemed at risk to abusing toxic
substances and for suicidal acts (Portzky et al. 2005).
Despite the frequency and apparent signiﬁcance of the
diagnosis, reviews reveal a pervasive lack research on
the nature and management of adjustment disorder
(Laugharne et al. 2009). Debate also continues regard-
ing the conceptual basis of the disorder and its usefulness
as a diagnostic entity (Baumeister and Kufner 2009).

Cross-References
▶ Adjustment

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington: American
Psychiatric Association. text revision.

Adolescent Turmoil A 69

A

Baumeister, H., & Kufner, K. (2009). It is time to adjust the adjust-
ment disorder category. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 22,
409–412.

Laugharne, J., van der Watt, G., & Janca, A. (2009). It is too early for
adjusting the adjustment disorder category. Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 22, 50–54.

Portzky, G., Audenaert, K., & van Heeringen, K. (2005). Adjustment
disorder and the course of suicidal process in adolescents. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 87, 265–270.

Rodgers, L. S., & Tennison, L. R. (2009). A preliminary assessment of
adjustment disorder among ﬁrst-year college students. Archives
of Psychiatric Nursing, 23, 220–230.

Adolescent Crisis

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

in affecting alterations

personas and role that results in the series of crises
taking place during this period (see Boyes and
Chandler 1992). Certainly, the task of undergoing
biological changes, concerning both physiological and
psychological dimensions of one’s self, results in the
adolescent sense of self being confronted with seeming
insurmountable difﬁculties. Arguably,
emotional
changes happening in this period prove the most
salient
in an individual’s
personality as they confront the problems inherent in
growth and development. Some have viewed the ado-
lescent crisis as helping to account for why some youth
may tend toward poor social
including
rebellious and hostile attitudes toward parents and
other authority ﬁgures, whom they tend to blame for
their own problems (see Kidwell et al. 1995). That
pattern may then persist into, or at least highly inﬂu-
ence, later developmental periods.

judgment,

Adolescent crisis can be deﬁned in many ways. Typi-
cally, it refers to the upheaval that happens during this
period, such as the changes that can take place in
multiple dimensions,
including emotional compo-
nents, psychological factors, and physical development.
The adolescent period has been conceptualized as rife
with often dramatic shifts leading to viewing psycho-
logical events during this period as crises in and of
themselves due to their being important to address
before reaching maturity. This view was one adopted
by Erik Erikson who conceived of a psychological the-
ory proposing that exploration was at the heart of the
identity crisis that needed to be resolved before youth
could address other psychosocial tasks (Erikson 1968).
Importantly, however, his view of crisis was not the one
typically associated with the term “crisis”; rather it was
a much tamer one involving the need to come to terms
with key developmental issues, and those “crises” con-
tinued throughout the life span as individuals sought to
address different issues that come with different stages
of life.

The developmental understanding of the adoles-
cent crisis is one in which adolescents are engaged in
the exploration of becoming adults, a process that may
as easily involve an ongoing, energetic,
impulsive
approach at some points and the opposite, bored,
withdrawn, seclusive response at other times. Several
have shown how it is the challenge and responsibility
that adolescents face in needing to establish their adult

References
Boyes, M. C., & Chandler, M. (1992). Cognitive development,
epistemic doubt, and identity formation in adolescence. Journal
of Youth and Adolescence, 21, 277–304

Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton
Kidwell, J. S., Dunham, R. M., Bacho, R. A., Pastorino, E., & Portes, P. R.
(1995). Adolescent identity exploration: A test of Erikson’s theory
of transitional crisis. Adolescence, 30, 785–793

Adolescent Turmoil

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Adolescent turmoil is an imprecise label applied to
adolescents during the 1970s, and which proposed
that adolescence universally involved a time of emo-
tional turmoil of ▶ storm and stress (Larson and Ham
1993). Behavioral patterns or characteristics typically
associated with this view of turmoil include rebellious-
ness, concern about identity and role, unstable moods,
and unpredictable and highly mercurial behavior. This
belief has since been disconﬁrmed, as Offer asserts
that only a minority of adolescents experience adoles-
cent turmoil (perhaps approximately 20%) and ado-
lescents typically sustain enjoyable relationships with
their families and peers, and are comfortable with their

70 A Adoption

social and cultural values (see Offer and Schonert-
Reichl 1992). However, even though most child coun-
selors and psychologists remain aware that only a small
percentage of adolescents are afﬂicted by this state, it
appears that parents, teachers, and even mental health
professionals tend to adhere to the belief that adoles-
cence is still the “terrible teens” (Offer and Schonert-
Reichl 1992). The lingering dimension of this inaccu-
rate belief, coupled with the research ﬁndings that
teenagers in the United States and other countries
experience a higher rate of negative affect and increased
rates of some behavioral and psychological problems
(Larson and Ham 1993), prompted researchers to
engage in efforts to uncover the sources of this negative
affect and these adjustment problems. In the past few
decades,
the recognition that adolescents are not
necessarily in turmoil has led to a renewed focus on
the positive aspects of development and supportive
environments (see Larson 2000).

Cross-References
▶ Storm and Stress

References
Larson, R. W. (2000). Toward a psychology of positive youth devel-

opment. American Psychologist, 55, 170–183.

Larson, R., & Ham, M. (1993). Stress and “storm and stress” in early
adolescence: The relationship of negative events with dysphoric
affect. Developmental Psychology, 29, 130–140.

Offer, D., & Schonert-Reichl, K. A. (1992). Debunking the myths of
adolescence: Findings from recent research. Journal of
the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 31,
1003–1014.

Adoption

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Adoption refers to the end of a process through which
an adult formally assumes the guardianship of a child
and incurs the rights and responsibilities of a parent.
Adoption is more than guardianship, with guardian-
ship being designed for the care of the young and
adoption effecting a permanent change in status that
requires formal legal recognition (see, e.g., Hansen and

Gupta-Kagan 2009). In the United States, that legal
recognition generally involves state law. In regulating
adoptions, states may permit them to be either open or
closed. Closed adoptions involve the total relinquish-
ment of the natural parents’ rights, while open adop-
tions permit natural parents to select adoptive parents
as well as, in some instances, negotiate visitation and
other rights (see, e.g., Gaddie 2009). States also limit
who can adopt as well who can be adopted. Thus, for
example, states permit the adoption of minors and not
necessarily adults, and they regulate who can adopt
(e.g., some states restrict adoptions by some couples,
such as same sex couples; see, e.g., Cooper 2004).
Although various ways of adopting youth have been
practiced throughout history,
research examining
adoption’s relationship to adolescent development is
quite recent. Indeed, researchers have tended not to
focus on adolescents. This essay examines key themes
emerging from research in this area of study, especially
as they relate to adolescents.

Two theoretical models particularly offer insight
into adoption’s effect on children’s development. The
ﬁrst model focuses on stress and coping, as it begins
with the assumption that adopted youth are at a higher
risk for psychological and educational difﬁculties
(Brodzinsky 1990). This approach contends that fac-
tors such as genetics, family relationships, and social
environments have an effect on children’s levels of
trust, self-conﬁdence, sense of control, personal values,
and personal awareness, which then impact their atti-
tudes about adoption and that this attitude directly
effects their adjustment. The model focuses on the
grief that most adopted adolescents experience after
realizing the meaning of their biological parents’ deci-
sion to release them for adoptions. It generally shows
that families who can navigate this phase with open
communication about the adoption generally have
more well-adjusted children. The second model is the
well-known ecological model of development. That
model focuses on children’s unique relationships with
their environment. Children’s environments involve
a number of systems like family, home, culture, and
society, all of which interact with one another and
change over time (Bronfenbrenner 1979). Each system
inﬂuences the other and thus impacts child develop-
ment. For example, the culture of a society inﬂuences
the government institutions that create adoption poli-
cies. These policies then dictate the adoption process

Adoption A 71

A

and some of the family functioning post adoption. The
way the family functions, which relates to several social
forces as well as individuals within the family, directly
impacts the adopted youth. Although focusing on dif-
ferent factors, these models highlight well how several
factors likely impact adopted youths’ development and
how understanding and responding to adolescents’
experiences requires considering multiple individual
and social inﬂuences.

Although the models that often are used to under-
stand the effects of adoption on youth have made
important contributions, few studies actually focus on
adolescents’ experiences. The small body of research
functioning has produced
on adopted adolescent
inconclusive and contradictory results. Earlier studies
had reported the percentage of adopted adolescents
residing in mental health settings as higher than their
percentage in the general population, indicating that
adopted youth are at a higher risk for disorders
(Schechter 1961). More recent research, however,
indicates this to no longer be the case or, if not, then
a considerably more nuanced picture of adopted youth
emerges. A more recent study used community-based
data and found that adopted youth were only at slightly
higher risk for maladjustment, with the risk measuring
even less in families with two parents (Miller et al.
2000). Importantly, a study from a leading research
group found adopted youth to be better adjusted than
youth in single parent homes by a biological mother
(Fergusson et al. 1995). These conﬂicting ﬁndings are
mirrored by longitudinal studies from around the
globe. Some studies have been unable to discern
patterns in the adjustment of adopted youth, while
others have found maladjustment to peak at age 11
and completely disappear by early adulthood (see,
e.g., Maughan and Pickles 1990). Yet, other studies
have found consistent differences. In the United States,
for example, a large-scale study using a representative
sampling of 90,000 US adolescents from 12 to 17 years
of age examined differences in psychological and aca-
demic adjustment among adopted and nonadopted
youth by using both adolescent
self-report and
parent-report data; the results showed group differ-
ences consistently favoring nonadopted over adopted
adolescents in areas related to school performance,
psychological well-being, and substance use (Miller
et al. 2000). In addition, several studies that have
registrar
taken advantage of Sweden’s national

containing sociodemographic and health data of all
citizens have found results that disfavor adopted
youth; although countries of origin may mask impor-
tant differences,
the general ﬁndings have shown
adopted youth to be at increased risk for psychiatric
hospitalization, suicidal behavior, severe social prob-
lems, lower cognitive functioning, and poorer school
performance (see Palacios and Brodzinsky 2010).
Despite these differences, it is important to highlight
that the magnitude of the differences is not large, and
that the differences may be due to the extreme ends of
functioning. Although adopted youth may reveal
statistically
and academic
problems than nonadopted youth, the vast majority
of adopted youth tend to be within the normal range
of adjustment (see Haaguard 1998).

greater psychological

Rather than simply comparing potential differences
in the mental health and other outcomes of adopted
youth with youth who remain with their biological
families, other research focuses on the risk factors that
can lead to adoptee’s maladjustment. Some researchers
identify prior treatment, including abuse and neglect,
as potential causes for this maladjustment (Logan et al.
1998). Other studies indicate that having adopted sib-
lings in the home lessens the risk for behavioral prob-
lems while parents’ biological children in the home
increases this risk (Howe 1997). It also has been theo-
rized that open adoptions alleviate the psychological
strain associated with the enigmatic nature of tradi-
tional adoption practices, and that it thus increases the
chances of more positive outcomes (Baran and Pannor
1990). Finally, it has been proposed that transracial
adoptions keep the adoptee from forming a cultural
identity, thus creating a heightened risk for adjustment
problems; but some research has not found such
behavioral difﬁculties between transracial adoptees
and youth raised by parents from their ethnic back-
ground (Cederblad et al. 1999). This area of research
points to the important conclusion that adjustment
problems cannot be generalized to the entire adoptive
population. Disruptions have been associated with the
age of the adoptee upon placement, length of time in
care, number of moves, number of returns to the birth
home, level of behavioral problems, overactivity, pres-
ence of preferential treatment, and the ability to show
signs of attachment. Traumatic or abusive childhoods
also cause children to adopt coping skills that reﬂect
their environment, and which unfortunately do not

72 A Adoption

transfer well to more stable environments. These ﬁnd-
ings have emerged from classic studies examining the
experiences of institutionalized children as well as more
contemporary studies that lead reviewers of these
studies to ﬁnd both signiﬁcant continuity as well as
noteworthy recovery from most of children’s experi-
ences (see Palacios and Brodzinsky 2010).

healthy

adopted

adolescents’

The understanding of risks and challenges facing
youth who have been adopted has led to suggestions for
helping youth adjust positively and avoid negative
outcomes. Though no robust research exists to support
the following approaches, their basis in the preceding
theoretical models and existing research indicates
potential for success. The stress and coping model of
adoption stresses the importance of trust and control
for
adjustment
(Brodzinsky 1990). Parents can promote this trust
and sense of control by being forthcoming with their
adopted children about the speciﬁcs of their adoption.
If an open adoption is in place, for example, parents
can involve their children in making decisions
concerning contact with their birth parents. The eco-
logical perspective also encompasses the areas beyond
the adolescent and their family that affect adolescents’
psychological health (see Bronfenbrenner 1979).
Adopted youth can sometimes feel excluded from
other adoptees or their native cultures. Parents can
arrange for these children to attend support groups
with other adopted youth, take classes in their native
language, connect with the local community from their
home country, or even visit their birth place. Parents
also can take part in the process by making connections
with other adoptive parents. Other areas affecting
adoptive youths’ lives like their school, church, and
local and national policy can be addressed by enlight-
ening teachers, church leaders, and local- and state-
elected ofﬁcials on ways they can help with issues
affecting adopted children and their families. The
emergence and recognition of these types of responses
to address adopted youths’ needs provide increasing
conﬁdence that youth can enjoy positive environments
supportive of healthy developmental outcomes.

Although there may be an increased need for adop-
tive parents, especially for adolescents who are deemed
less adoptable compared to younger children, contro-
versies continue even despite research revealing how
different family formations can provide the needed
nurturing environments. Considerable controversy

continues regarding the eligibility of some parents to
become parents. For example, transracial adoption
continues to be a topic of debate among the commu-
nity and some minority groups, despite research
demonstrating that there may not be a need for concern
if adoptions are conducted with awareness and respon-
siveness to cultural issues and those relating to diversity
(Campbell 2000). Similarly and although non-
traditional families are increasingly becoming accepted
as options for adoptees, they still experience difﬁculty
when they choose to adopt. In some cases, for example,
gay and lesbian families only are eligible to adopt older
or special-needs children (see Cooper 2004). Despite
an apparent favoring of traditional families as best
suitable for adopting youth, nontraditional families
increasingly are becoming accepted as options for
adoptees. Single men or women are choosing to
adopt children through traditional means, artiﬁcial
reproductive technology, or using a surrogate parent.
International adoptions continue to increase as societal
changes limit the pool of children domestically; for
example, effective contraception,
legalized abortion,
and a decrease in the stigma associated with unwed
motherhood, has caused the number of children
adopted from unwed mothers to drop from 80% in
1970 to 4% in 1983 (see Cole and Donley 1990); and
shifts in child welfare laws now mean that children may
not be reunited with their families or stay in foster care
drift but, instead, be placed for adoption (most likely
by their foster parents) (see Levesque 2008). With this
marked reduction in domestic adoptions, international
adoptions have skyrocketed. These different family
formations, both in terms of the adoptees and the
adopting families, still may face challenges, but it is
notable that laws, policies, and society increasingly
embrace different family formations.

The above changes are of particular signiﬁcance to
adolescents. The changes not only provide them with
families but also provide them with different issues to
address. For example, several of these changes, such as
those across countries or those dealing with open
adoptions,
likely create different opportunities and
challenges relating to birth parents. Arguably, a key
issue that coincides with the development of adoles-
cents for adopted youth is the normative focus on
discerning a healthy sense of
self and identity.
For adoptees, this normative transition has been linked
their
to an inner search involving reﬂections of

adoption (see Irhammar and Cederblad 2000), which
has been noted as a normative experience that begins in
middle childhood in the context of the developmental
changes in their understanding of adoption, eventually
translates into an outer search, typical of adolescent
and youth periods, which in turn translates into the
desire to gain more information or contact with bio-
logical parents (see Wrobel and Dillon 2009). Reviews
of research in this area reveal conﬂicting results, espe-
cially along dimensions of who searches (e.g., in terms
of their gender, mental health) (see Palacios and
Brodzinsky 2010). Given the challenge of conducting
research in this area, and the new focus on this aspect of
research, it is not surprising to ﬁnd a need for more
research to understand nuances in the experience of
being adopted.

Adoption has become a common phenomenon,
which has resulted in important research and policies.
Research has focused more on young children. As a
result, for example, while open adoption has worked
for adopted infants and there is reason to believe that it
also could work well for older youth, the beneﬁts of this
system still need to be assessed for older adoptees.
Models that have been developed to understand
adolescents’ adjustments to adoption have provided
important insights, but they also have shown how con-
siderable research needs to be conducted. As a result,
research shows a need to consider resources beyond the
family, but systematic study of post-adoption resources
must be established to make available a continuity of
care for adopters and adoptees. Indeed, more research
still is needed as more and more families choose adop-
tion as a viable means to form their families and as the
composition of adopted families continues to reﬂect
considerable diversity in response to the pressing need
for more families to adopt adolescents.

Cross-References
▶ Dependency Court Processes
▶ Foster Care

References
Baran, A., & Pannor, R. (1990). Open adoption. In D. M. Brodzinsky &
M. D. Schechter (Eds.), The psychology of adoption (pp. 316–331).
New York: Oxford Press.

Brodzinsky, D. M. (1990). A stress and coping model of adoption
adjustment. In D. M. Brodzinsky & M. D. Schechter (Eds.), The
psychology of adoption (pp. 3–24). New York: Oxford Press.

Adoption A 73

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development.

Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

A

Campbell, S. B. (2000). Taking race out of the equation: Transracial
adoption in 2000. Southern Methodist University Law Review, 53,
1599–1626.

Cederblad, M., Hook, B., Irhammar, M., & Mercke, A. (1999). Mental
health in international adoptees as teenagers and young adults:
An epidemiological study. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 40, 1239–1248.

Cole, E. S., & Donley, K. S. (1990). History, values, and placement
policy issues in adoption. In D. M. Brodzinsky & M. D. Schechter
(Eds.), The psychology of adoption (pp. 42–61). New York: Oxford
Press.

Cooper, M. (2004). What makes a family?: Addressing the
issue of gay and lesbian adoption. Family Court Review, 42,
178–188.

Fergusson, D. M., Lynskey, M., & Horwood, L. J. (1995). The adoles-
cent outcomes of adoption: A 16-year longitudinal study. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 597–615.

Gaddie, L. (2009). Open adoption. Journal of the American Academy

of Matrimonial Lawyers, 22, 499–516.

Haaguard, J. J. (1998). Is adoption a risk factor for the development of
adjustment problems? Clinical Psychology Review, 18, 47–69.
Hansen, M. E., & Gupta-Kagan, J. (2009). Raising the cut-off: The
empirical case for extending adoption and guardianship subsi-
dies from age 18 to 21. UC Davis Journal of Juvenile Law & Policy,
13, 1–23.

Howe, D. (1997). Parent-reported problems in 211 adopted children:
Some risk and some protective factors. Journal of Child Psychol-
ogy and Psychiatry, 38, 401–411.

Irhammar, M., & Cederblad, M. (2000). Outcome of inter-country
adoptions in Sweden. In P. Selman (Ed.), Intercountry adoptions.
Developments, trends and perspectives (pp. 143–163). London:
BAAF.

Levesque, R. J. R. (2008). Rethinking child maltreatment

law:

Returning to ﬁrst principles. New York: Springer.

Logan, F. A., Morrall, P. M. E., & Chambers, H. (1998). Identiﬁcation
of risk factors for psychological disturbance in adopted children.
Child Abuse Review, 7, 154–164.

Maughan, G., & Pickles, A. (1990). Adopted and illegitimate children
growing up. In L. Robins & M. Rutter (Eds.), Straight and devious
pathways from childhood to adulthood (pp. 36–61). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Miller, B. D., Fan, X., Christensen, M., Grotevant, H. D., & van
Dulmen, M. (2000). Comparisons of adopted and nonadopted
adolescents in a large, nationally-representative sample. Child
Development, 71, 1458–1473.

Palacios, J., & Brodzinsky, D. (2010). Adoption research: Trends,
topics, outcomes. International Journal of Behavioral Develop-
ment, 34, 270–284.

Schechter, M. (1961). Observations on adopted children. Archives of

General Psychiatry, 3, 21–32.

Wrobel, G. M., & Dillon, K. (2009). Adopted adolescents: Who
and what are they curious about. In G. M. Wrobel & E. Neil
(Eds.), International advances in adoption research for practice
(pp. 217–244). New York: Wiley.

74 A Adoption and Safe Families Act

Adoption and Safe Families Act

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

When a state fears for the endangerment of a child’s
health or safety, it can intervene in an otherwise auton-
omous family to resolve the threat or remove the child.
The state’s efforts to resolve the threat before removing
the child or to permit the child to return home after the
threat is removed are parts of a “reasonable efforts”
mandate. When the state retains custody of the child,
the court often orders the state to provide certain
services for the parents or orders the parents to obtain
needed services. Such services may include psycholog-
ical counseling, substance-abuse treatment, parenting
classes, homemaker assistance, and other services to
remedy deﬁciencies that led to the child’s removal
from the home. Such services serve to facilitate the
reuniﬁcation of the family. However, in certain situa-
tions, the court may relieve the state from making
reasonable efforts to reunify a family. Once a child has
been placed in foster care, the court holds periodic
reviews with the parties. Various rationales support
the need for reviews, but the major reason for their
use rests on the manner the foster care system operates
on the assumption that it provides temporary shelters
meant either to expedite children’s return to their
homes or to successful adoptions. The length of time
a particular child stays away from the family and the
ultimate decision regarding the child’s long-term care
largely depend on the nature of the state’s response, the
manner it deﬁnes and implements its reasonable efforts
mandates.

Although it may seem that children’s needs would
dictate a state’s response, the nature of the state’s
response generally depends on self-imposed burdens.
Individual states design and maintain prevention and
foster care programs. Although the states play an
important role, they are guided by the federal govern-
ment. The federal government plays a key role since it
uses the power of the purse (federal subsidies) to guide
state policies toward its preferred ways of designing
child welfare programs. Congress grants funds to states
only when their laws comply with congressional man-
dates. The Adoption and Safe Families Act (ASFA)

(Adoption and Safe Families Act 1997) currently
serves as the major federal mandate guiding the struc-
ture and implementation of foster care systems and
responses to families and children who may have need
for them.

the

Although AFSA now primarily regulates the imple-
mentation of efforts that seek to prevent and, where
necessary, provide alternative care, the statute is best
understandable in light of the statute that it amended.
groundbreaking Adoption
ASFA amended
Assistance and Child Welfare Act (“Child Welfare Act”)
(Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act 1980). The
Child Welfare Act was Congress’s ﬁrst major effort,
through its spending powers, to help states provide
services to keep children in their homes and secure
adoptions for children who cannot return home after
having entered the foster care system. Before 1980, the
federal government had reimbursed states for foster
care expenses but had not offered comparable ﬁnancial
support for adoption or prevention and reuniﬁcation
services. As passed in 1980, the Child Welfare Act con-
tinued to reimburse states for foster care maintenance
payments but it also offered additional funding for
child protection, family intervention, and adoption
services for children with special needs. The federal
government conditioned each state’s funding, however,
on their compliance with federal requirements. ASFA
pushed federal mandates into somewhat different
directions, most notably toward a more obvious focus
on ensuring child safety and hastening stability.
Together, these two statutes reveal the remarkable
extent to which federal mandates can shape responses
to children at risk.

A requirement that eventually became most rele-
vant to discussions of ASFA was Part E of the Child
Welfare Act. That part required states to have an
approved plan for administering child protective
services. Each state’s plan must provide, among other
things, that “in each case, reasonable efforts will be
made (A) prior to placement of a child in foster care,
to prevent or eliminate the need for removal of the
child from his home, and (B) to make it possible for
the child to return to his home.” This mandate has
become commonly known as the “reasonable efforts”
provision. The Child Welfare Act had sought to provide
adequate services early in order to diminish the need
for more costly foster care placements. By requiring
states to provide adequate services, the reasonable

Adoption and Safe Families Act A 75

A

efforts provision narrowed the criteria for entering
foster care to those children who could not sufﬁciently
beneﬁt
from family preservation services. Once
children entered foster care, the reasonable effort
provision narrowed the criteria for remaining in foster
care to those children who could not sufﬁciently beneﬁt
from reuniﬁcation services. The reasonable efforts
mandate, then, encouraged states to reduce the use,
especially the extended use, of the child welfare system.
The mandate did so by reducing the need for the foster
care system through family preservation efforts and
promoting
adoption incentives whose primary
economic purpose consisted of expediting exits from
the foster care system.

The general understanding of reasonable efforts as
a service enforcement provision made theoretical sense,
but it had and continues to face many practical chal-
lenges. The federal requirement to make reasonable
efforts was not guided by standards to assess reasonable
efforts. This eventually led to criticisms that the focus
on reuniﬁcation inhibited child safety and protection
and that too many children were caught in “foster care
drift” without a sense of permanency. These and
similar criticisms led to a major overhaul of the Child
Welfare Act. That overhaul took the form of the
Adoption and Safe Families Act. As the title suggests,
the focus of the new and still controlling legislative
mandates sought to promote permanency and priori-
tize child safety. Congress sought to reach the goals of
these mandates by modifying the reasonable efforts
requirement and by setting strict deadlines
for
implementing placement plans (the case plans the
state must have in place for every child under state
supervision).

Among other changes, ASFA urged two important
changes especially worth considering. The ﬁrst change
dealt with the act’s new timelines regulating the
amount of time children can remain in foster care
before being placed for adoption. The Child Welfare
Act had required that every child in foster care receive
a dispositional hearing within the ﬁrst 18 months in
state custody. ASFA reduced that time frame as it, quite
tellingly, relabeled “dispositional” hearings as “perma-
nency” hearings. ASFA required states to hold perma-
nency hearings within the child’s ﬁrst 12 months in
foster care and at least once every 12 months as long as
the child remained in state custody. ASFA also required
every child in foster care to receive a permanent plan

within 12 months. Signiﬁcantly, ASFA directed states to
petition a court for termination of parental rights once
a child had resided in state custody for 15 of the most
recent 22 months. Importantly, a state could be excused
from this obligation if: (1) the state has placed the child
in the care of a relative, (2) the state can provide
a compelling reason for maintaining the parental
relationship, or (3) the state has failed to provide
reasonable efforts to reunite the family. By establishing
a new and shortened timeline for termination of
parental
this amendment would become
rights,
ASFA’s hallmark provision.

The second change brought by ASFA involved
clarifying what was meant by reasonable efforts. The
amended section 671(a)(15) has six subparts. Subpart
(A) requires that, in making reasonable efforts and in
determining whether reasonable efforts had been
made, “the child’s health and safety shall be the
paramount concern.” Subpart (A) explicitly requires
reasonable efforts to not compromise children’s safety.
Unlike prior legislation, this mandate provides that
“reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve and
reunify families: (i) prior to the placement of a child
in foster care, to prevent or eliminate the need for
removing the child from the child’s home; and (ii) to
make it possible for a child to safely return to the child’s
home.” This subpart essentially preserves the reason-
able efforts language under the 1980 Child Welfare Act.
However, subpart (C) extends the reasonable efforts
mandate beyond family preservation and reuniﬁcation
to include permanency. Under this part, the state must
make reasonable efforts “to place the child in a timely
manner in accordance with the permanency plan, and
to complete whatever steps are necessary to ﬁnalize the
permanent placement of
the child.” Subpart (D)
excuses states from making reasonable efforts based
largely on a parent’s current and previous conduct.
This shift in focus away from preservation permits
states to not make reasonable efforts where the parent
has performed any of several speciﬁc acts: (1) subjected
the child to aggravated circumstances (as deﬁned
by state law), (2) committed murder or voluntary
manslaughter of another child of the parent, (3) aided
or abetted, attempted, conspired, or solicited to com-
mit such murder or manslaughter, or (4) committed
a felony assault that results in serious bodily injury to
the child or another child of the parent. Subpart (E)
holds that a state that adopts subpart (D)’s approach

76 A Adrenarche

must provide a permanency hearing within 30 days
rather than the usual 18 months under the Child
Welfare Act. Finally, subpart (F) explicitly authorizes
concurrent planning, a form of case management that
permits states to make, simultaneously, reasonable
efforts toward a permanent out-of-home placement
and reasonable efforts toward reuniﬁcation at the
same time. The reasonable efforts amendments and
the revised timelines signiﬁcantly redeﬁne and reduce
the force of the reasonable efforts standard that had
been meant to secure efforts to reunify children with
their families. To a large extent, by focusing on child
safety, federal legislative mandates tend to encourage
out-of-home care.

Reviews of state legislative mandates reveal that
nearly all states have enacted legislation requiring
state agencies to make reasonable efforts to preserve
or reunify families (for a comprehensive review, see
Levesque 2008). The extent to which states incorpo-
rated ASFA’s mandates in their legislation suggests a
softening of the signiﬁcance of reasonable efforts after
ASFA. This weakening of the reasonable efforts clause
can be seen in the strong emphasis states have placed on
making health and safety the paramount concern
and the relatively weak emphasis states have given to
requiring reasonable efforts to ﬁnalize a permanent
placement. The vast majority of states have enacted
legislation emphasizing the “paramount” nature of the
child’s health and safety in dependency proceedings.
Neither the “health and safety” provision nor the
provision permitting states to waive their reasonable
efforts obligation impose on states an afﬁrmative duty
to provide services. Indeed, both provisions arguably
encourage the opposite. In addition, it is important to
note that state courts have discretion to waive reason-
able efforts to protect a child’s health and safety, even if
none of the conditions that waive reasonable efforts
exists. State courts need such ﬂexibility to respond
appropriately to individual cases. Yet, granting such
ﬂexibility unintentionally weakens the requirements of
the reasonable efforts clause, as further demonstrated by
the relatively soft legislative emphasis states have placed
on reasonable efforts toward permanency and the
comparably heavy emphasis they have placed on the
provisions that waive reasonable efforts. This suggests
that states view ASFA’s clariﬁcation of reasonable efforts
primarily as legislation diluting the obligation to make
reasonable efforts to reunify families. The legislatures

thus appear to agree with the primacy ASFA accords to
the health and safety of the child.

Cross-References
▶ Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act

References
Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act. (1980). Pub. L.

No. 96-272, 94 Stat. 500.

Adoption and Safe Families Act. (1997). Pub. L. No. 105-89, 111 Stat.

2115.

Levesque, R. J. R. (2008). Rethinking child maltreatment

law:

Returning to ﬁrst principles. New York: Springer.

Adrenarche

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Adrenarche refers to the increase in activity of the
adrenal glands that occurs just before puberty. It typi-
cally begins approximately at 7 or 8 years of age, before
the signs of puberty, and continues
throughout
puberty. In humans, for both boys and girls, increases
in adrenal androgens during adrenarche are associated
with the development of pubic and axillary hair, as well
as with an acceleration in the rate of bone maturation
and skeletal growth and an increase in body odor
(Spear 2000). Androgens associated with adrenarche
are thought to be important for brain maturation
(Campbell 2006), and, as has been shown for puberty
itself, environmental conditions (such as parenting)
inﬂuence the onset of adrenarche (Ellis and Essex
2007). Levels of these androgens during the transition
through puberty have been linked to adjustment and
behavioral problems (Spear 2000).

Cross-References
▶ Gonadarche
▶ Menarche
▶ Puberty

References
Campbell, B. C. (2006). Adrenarche and the evolution of human life
history. American Journal of Human Biology, 18, 569–589.

Advertising: Do Not Buy That A 77

A

Ellis, B. J., & Essex, M. J. (2007). Family environments, adrenarche,
and sexual maturation: A longitudinal test of a life history model.
Child Development, 78, 1799–1817.

Spear, L. P. (2000). The adolescent brain and age-related behavioral
manifestations. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 24,
417–463.

Advertising: Do Not Buy That

ROGER DESMOND
School of Communication, University of Hartford,
West Hartford, CT, USA

Overview
The speciﬁc problem this essay addresses is “How do
adolescents resist advertising?” A brief review of
research about the effects of advertising on adolescents
focuses on concerns of parents regarding the dangers to
adolescents resulting from exposure to print, broad-
cast, and Internet advertising. Research on mechanisms
that facilitate adolescents’ ability to resist these effects
is reviewed. Speciﬁc programs designed to facilitate
critical thinking about advertising are explored, as are
family talk about media and the emerging social media
as aspects of advertising resistance. Suggestions for
future research are offered.

Do Not Buy That: Reducing the Impact
of Advertising on Adolescents
Adolescents are an incredibly attractive target for mar-
keters of products and services. This targeting occurs
because advertising is a $300 billion/year industry
featuring 900,000 brands, and children and adolescents
are attractive consumers: Teenagers spend over $150
billion/year on consumer products, and have a major
inﬂuence on many of their parents’ purchases (Shifrin
2006). In light of increasing media use by adolescents
and the rise of social media and other advertising
vehicles, concern about the behavioral and cognitive
effects of advertising on viewers, readers, and users of
mediated entertainment is now as severe for adoles-
cents as it has been on young children in the social
this essay is on
science literature. The focus of
populations of young men and women aged 12–17.

The speciﬁc problem this essay addresses is “How
do adolescents resist advertising?” Much of the writing

and research in advertising as media effect begins with
an often unstated premise: Since adolescents are the
target of numerous marketing campaigns, there must
be evidence of their effectiveness. A good deal of
research in the social science literature takes effective-
ness for granted. Here, I explore those areas where
adolescents resist advertising messages. Some questions
include: When and under what conditions do adoles-
cents reject advertising appeals? What is the role of
parents, siblings, and peers in encouraging resistance?
How effective are speciﬁc media and school campaigns
in raising cognitive thresholds against persuasion
designed to elicit consumer behavior?

There is scarcely a parent who does not have
a complaint about marketing to children and adoles-
cents in general as well as a host of anecdotes about
particular advertising campaigns. Not surprisingly, the
scientiﬁc literature regarding risks to these populations
reﬂects these complaints and supports many of the
suspicions of parents, teachers, and other adult ﬁgures
about the role of advertising in the lives of young
people. They include: concerns about advertising as
a factor in alcohol and tobacco use, the relationships
among drug advertising and the belief that there is
a drug that can cure all pains and worries, and subse-
quent drug abuse by adolescents. Over a decade of
research supports the signiﬁcant association between
adolescent advertising exposure and tobacco use
(Biener and Siegel 2000). A number of investigations
have reinforced the correlations among exposure to
drug advertising and adolescent beliefs in the efﬁcacy
of drugs as problem solvers (Strasburger 2001).

Parents and caregivers also worry about the por-
trayal of unrealistically trim and attractive ﬁgures as
contributing factors to low self-esteem and the rise of
eating disorders among those who are exposed to these
stereotypes in commercials and ads. Also of concern is
the dramatic increase of adolescent obesity in the past
2 decades. Young people are exposed to thousands of
ads for fast foods, sodas, and snacks containing high
levels of salt and sugar and their weights have increased
as a function of this exposure (Davies and Fitzgerald
2008).

Parents also express concern about recent research
that supports a link between advertising and earlier
onset of sexual intercourse in adolescents. Sex is used
to sell almost every product in contemporary ads,
and commercials for products to remedy erectile

78 A Advertising: Do Not Buy That

dysfunction are common in prime time TV viewing.
The multiplication of messages about these products,
in the absence of advertising for birth control products,
may send inappropriate messages
to adolescents
especially as they are not being taught well in school
sex education programs.

Research on all of these problems has supported
and extended our knowledge about all of these issues;
exposure to advertising has been connected to adoles-
cent self-image, eating disorders and obesity, drug,
alcohol and tobacco use, and early onset of sexual
experiences in the absence of information about birth
control. See, for example (Strasburger, Wilson and
Jordan 2002).

The Development of Skepticism and
Cynicism About Advertising
The teen years are a time of suspicion and rejection of
many aspects of society. Investigations of skepticism –
the degree to which young people disbelieve the claims
in advertising – have found that this disbelief is reliably
associated with education. As teachers and other role
models expose fallacies and exaggerations in argu-
ments, advertising is a natural target for questioning
the truth of advertising claims. While some members of
the educational community have gone as far as to
advocate teaching adolescents
to be skeptical of
advertising, their critics counter that this would be
intellectually dishonest in that truthful advertising
would be needlessly discounted. Apart from results
regarding education, skepticism is also an outcome of
simple maturation and the concomitant role of tradi-
tional socializing agents such as peers and the family.
Skepticism has been shown to be negatively correlated
with adolescents’ receptivity to and liking for advertis-
ing as well as onset of early alcohol and tobacco use
among youth aged 9–17 (Austin et al. 2006).

Market research on adolescent populations is regu-
larly conducted by research ﬁrms and advertising agen-
cies (HarrisInteractive 2004). Much of this qualitative
research is based on focus group studies of approxi-
mately ten adolescent subjects, guided by professionals
who record comments made by subjects. This research
reveals that while teens say that advertising has little
impact on them, they frequently discuss TV commer-
cials with their friends and are especially fond of
humorous ads and commercials that feature popular
music that they like. Similarly, they deny that Internet

banner ads inﬂuence them to purchase products, but
they spend more time on the computer than they do on
other electronic media. Word-of-mouth is a strong
factor in marketing to this population; the majority of
focus group participants admit that they learn about
new Web sites primarily from their peers. They strongly
deny that celebrity spokespersons in advertising are
effective and assert that no ad can make an unattractive
product seem to be worth buying.

From relatively recent investigations, we know that
there are two variables that predict adolescent tobacco
use beyond mere exposure to advertising: susceptibility
to advertising and novelty-seeking. Novelty-seeking
has been used as a personality trait construct in several
studies and has been shown to be positively related
to the onset of smoking in young adulthood. Several
longitudinal studies have found the relationship is
especially strong when combined with advertising
susceptibility, the ability to vividly recall speciﬁc ciga-
rette promotions and possession of tobacco-related
promotional items (Audrain-McGovern et al. 2003).

The central effect of tobacco advertising may be in
its relationship to adolescent perceptions of prevalence.
If teens think that a large portion of the population
smokes, that perception may override adolescent skep-
ticism about advertising. One study found that eighth
and ninth graders who saw a depicted convenience
store loaded with tobacco ads and products were
much higher in their estimates of how many people
smoked than were their peers who saw stores without
promotions or ads (Henricksen et al. 2002). Clearly,
advertising has the potential to suggest that more people
smoke than actual populations surveys would suggest.

Intervention Programs
While proponents of media education programs have
focused on advertising issues surrounding susceptibil-
ity to persuasive appeals for at least 30 years, the
speciﬁc use of these programs to reduce unhealthful
behaviors is more recent. Many programs have been
designed for young children, rather than adolescents.
A typical
investigation in this tradition is Austin’s
(Austin and Johnson 1997) investigation of third-
graders’ training in alcohol advertising. She trained
teachers to facilitate analysis of alcohol ads and found
that the treatment had both immediate and delayed
effects (3 weeks). Immediate effects included the
children’s increased understanding of persuasive intent

Advertising: Do Not Buy That A 79

A

of the ads, viewing of characters as less similar to people
they knew in real life and less desirable as friends. More
importantly,
there was
in the treatment group,
decreased desire to be like the characters, decreased
expectation of positive consequences from drinking
alcohol, and decreased likelihood of choosing an
alcohol-related product as a reward over a non-themed
product.
investigation of adolescents
regarding the effects of an alcohol education, an inter-
vention centered on television advertising found that
adolescents’ counter arguing of alcohol advertisements
were present a year after the intervention (Metrik
et al. 2003).

In another

In terms of adolescent populations, four investiga-
tions have afﬁrmed the efﬁcacy of the Lions Club
International’s Skills For Adolescents (SFA) program in
preventing or reducing drug and alcohol use, and
students (Crano and
smoking by middle school
Burgoon 2002). The 40-session SFA program includes
media education but also more global critical thinking
instruction about a number of life decisions related to
physical and mental health. Among the ﬁndings are
that the curriculum can help deter the initiation of
regular cigarette smoking and experimental use of
marijuana through the end of the seventh grade and
deter the initiation of regular alcohol use and binge
drinking. The data also indicate that the program can
delay the progression to regular cigarette smoking and
to experimental marijuana use among students who
had initiated regular alcohol use or binge drinking but
not regular cigarette smoking by the end of the sixth
grade. Although the program is available at no cost,
many communities do not use it because of the preva-
lence of DARE programs in school, which have not been
supported by systematic programs of research.

Family Communication and
Advertising
In the past 25 years, a good deal of research has focused
on patterns of parent–child and sibling-to-sibling
communication about media content. This tradition
is known as mediation. The majority of investigations
in mediation have focused on parent–child communi-
cation about television programming, as television is
the most-used medium used by children prior to
adolescence, and parents are the dominant agents of
socialization for young children. Mediation is the
pattern of communication by which parents comment

on television content either during or subsequent to the
child’s viewing, and communicate information about
the meaning of televised behavior, the parent’s approval
or disapproval of content, and speciﬁc rule-making by
parents about the amount and kind of television use
that they permit.

Parental mediation efforts have been conceptual-
ized as the extent of critical comments about behaviors
witnessed on television or ﬁlm (active mediation),
setting rules about how much, when, and which types
of television can be viewed (restrictive mediation), and
the presence of parents during children’s television
viewing (co-viewing) (Nathanson 2001). Active medi-
ation may take place while the child is viewing with
a parent, or after the viewing occurs, e.g., “Do you
think the toy is really as big as it looks on TV?” Restric-
tive mediation frequently occurs
in non-viewing
moments: “You are not allowed to watch that program,
it’s too violent.”

Research exploring the impact of active and restric-
tive mediation has found that it can decrease aggressive
behavior, improve children’s comprehension of televi-
sion, foster reﬁned consumer behavior, and develop
critical thinking about television’s representation of
the real world (Desmond et al. 1985).

Children and adolescents whose parents set rules
about television viewing (restrictive mediation) exhibit
higher reading scores than do unregulated viewers
(Roberts et al. 1984), tend to be more skeptical about
television reality (Desmond et al. 1985), are less likely
to ask for products advertised on television, and are less
physically aggressive (Nathanson 2001). Not all medi-
ation is positive, however, in that if children perceive
parents’ mere co-viewing as parental endorsement of
content, they may behave aggressively after watching an
aggressive wrestling program or a violent cartoon
(Desmond et al. 1990).

Both survey research and direct observation have
been used to investigate how frequently parents
actually mediate television content. While direct obser-
vations in the home suggest that active mediation
occurs less than 5% of the time, surveys indicate greater
frequency when parents self-report, or when children
corroborate parents’ estimates. Nathanson (2001)
found that parental mediation is strongly related to
parental attitudes about TV content, with parents
who dislike violent content reporting more restrictive
mediation. There is some evidence that use of the

80 A Advertising: Do Not Buy That

network’s parental advisory system and family media-
tion occurs most frequently in families with gifted or
high-achieving children who watch small or moderate
amounts of TV producing what one investigator has
labeled the “preaching to the choir” effect (Abelman
1999).

Apart from mediation, family patterns of commu-
nication have received some research attention. One
dimension of parent–adolescent interaction that is
typically associated with conversations about alcohol
and drugs is the demand/withdraw pattern, where one
party utters a demand or a threat “I’d better not catch
you drinking before you are 21” and the other interac-
tant withdraws “Ok-Leave me alone.” One study of
parents talking to adolescents found that frequent
demand/withdraw patterns in conversations were asso-
ciated with low self-esteem and high alcohol and drug
use – for both adolescents and parents (Cauglin and
Malis 2004). These health outcomes were associated
with demand/withdraw scenarios from either side’s
punctuation – that is, whether it was the parents who
were demanding and the children who were withdraw-
ing, or vice versa. They also found that criticisms and
avoidance were related to adolescents’ drug use. This
pattern held even when the topic of conversation was
about relatively bland topics, such as adolescents being
too noisy or not cleaning their bedrooms. Clearly, this
investigation suggests that parent mediation about
media content should probably take the form of posi-
tive-active mediation, such as pointing out the teens
depicted in a ﬁlm as being happy, successful, and
substance-free, rather than to initiate mediation that
may result in withdrawal and avoidance: “Don’t be like
those kids who think drinking is o.k.” Ongoing research
on family communication is promising, in that it has
the potential to provide information for parents on
how to approach the topic of advertising in a manner
that may produce critical thinking by adolescents.

The New Media Landscape
Social media is a global term meaning software that
facilitates one-to-many (and many-to-one) message
exchanges among users, and includes sites such as
Facebook, MySpace, Twitter, and others now evolving
in the early twenty-ﬁrst century. Adolescents who use
these media talk about their social lives including rela-
tionships, interactions with family and friends, and
a variety of topics germane to their current concerns.

Several recent investigations revealed that a large per-
centage (in one survey nearly 50%) of posts to these
sites by adolescents mention drinking, risky sexual
activity, and drug use. While adolescents have always
enjoyed talking about sex, drugs, and rock n’ roll with
their peers, these new media provide opportunities for
pre-adolescents to monitor what their older counter-
parts are saying about these topics.

Author of one of

these investigations, Megan
Moreno, an assistant professor of pediatrics at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, has found that,
regardless of whether teen postings reveal true behav-
ior, kids do think that what they see on social media
sites is real, and the younger they are, the more they
believe (Moreno et al. 2009). This is important,
Moreno writes, “because teenagers are powerfully
inﬂuenced by the behavior of their peers. Teenagers’
behavior also is inﬂuenced by seeing behavior on tele-
vision and hearing about it on the radio and in
music. Social media combines those two inﬂuences”
(p. 422). Therefore, attractive, popular kids who talk
about drinking and drug use may be models for
younger adolescent’s behavior.

While social media may exacerbate problems
resulting from exposure to advertising, they also have
the potential to reach adolescents in ways that were not
possible 20 years ago in prosocial ways. Marketers of
products purchased by teens are ratcheting up cam-
paigns to use Facebook, Twitter, and numerous other
Internet-based media to promote beverages, complex-
ion creams, and computer games. In recent years,
health-based social marketing campaigns have applied
these media to encourage adoption of healthy behav-
iors and avoidance of risk-taking among adolescents.
One of the most investigated campaigns is the Truth,
a campaign to prevent adolescent tobacco use. Based
on the success of a Florida campaign in the 1990s, the
TRUTH, funded by the tobacco industry’s American
Legacy Foundation campaign, became a national effort
in 2000. While not strictly a “new media” campaign,
the TRUTH employed broadcast and Internet counter-
advertising to initiate adolescent conversations about
tobacco and the industry that markets it. The primary
objectives of the truth campaign were to (1) expose
youth to truth messages and promote positive reactions
to those messages, (2) change attitudes about tobacco
use and the tobacco industry, and (3) reduce tobacco
use among youth. These three objectives led to an

Advertising: Do Not Buy That A 81

A

evaluation plan that aimed to develop measures of
adolescent exposure to the campaign and to assess the
relationship between campaign exposure and related
knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about tobacco.

The campaign was the ﬁrst to take into account the
pleasure taken by teenagers when they expose the
hypocrisies of adults, and especially regarding their
institutions. A large component of the TRUTH effort
is to facilitate adolescents’ perceptions of the tobacco
industry as an institution that not only produces prod-
ucts that cause death and disease, but also lies about the
dangers to the public. As an early social media cam-
paign, the TRUTH fared well in evaluation research.
One published study found that from 2000 to 2002 US
adolescent smoking prevalence declined from 25.3% to
18% and that TRUTH accounted for approximately
22% of that decline (Wakeﬁeld et al. 2006). This
study demonstrated that the campaign had a large
and statistically signiﬁcant
impact on adolescent
smoking, above and beyond a marked trend of declin-
ing smoking among this population. It also showed
that while most social marketing campaigns have mod-
est effect sizes by clinical standards, some campaigns
can achieve relatively large effects. The campaign-
attributable decline in smoking prevalence represents
some 300,000 fewer adolescent smokers during the
study period.

Conclusion
In many ways, parents have good reasons for their
concerns about the risks of advertising outcomes on
their children. A convincing body of research points to
negative effects of advertising in areas of health, sub-
stance abuse, sexuality, and other areas of adolescent
life. New media are being created every few years, each
with the potential to add more advertising to the
landscape with all of the concomitant risks.

Clearly, there are mechanisms that help adolescents
to ignore or reject advertising messages. Some speciﬁc
anti-advertising campaigns work to elevate adolescent
resistance to advertising. How do they do this? The
thread that unites the programs and parent efforts is
critical thinking. While adolescents like and remember
ads and commercials with humor and characters that
they admire, the development of skepticism about
the motives of advertisers in the early teen years helps
them to reject unbelievable claims about advertised
products.

Speciﬁc intervention programs help adolescents to
apply critical thinking skills to evaluating the claims of
advertising. Programs such as the Lion’s Club “Skills
For Adolescents” and the TRUTH elevate awareness of
the motives and mechanisms of advertisers for teen
audiences. Accompanied by programs of formative
evaluation, these interventions are providing young
readers and viewers with tools to evaluate advertising
and to reduce risks. Further research should investigate
how cost-effective programs can be developed for
within-and-outside of school classroom use. The pop-
ularity of the Internet among this audience may provide
a new way for the delivery of “teachable moments.”

Family communication about advertising begun
early in a child’s life can help to provide more critical
skills for adolescent audiences. A pattern of family talk,
also known as mediation, about advertising helps
a growing mind to appreciate how music, animation,
pop culture heroes, and exaggeration combine to form
powerful appeals in print, Internet, and television
messages. More work on how to help parents become
effective mediators is necessary, as is more research on
negative family patterns that may interfere with the
development of critical thinking about these topics.

In light of the popularity of social media, adoles-
cents have vast new opportunities for exposure to
advertising. As television drops lower in their media
diet, time on media like Facebook occupies a good deal
of adolescent leisure. Marketers are ratcheting up skills
to deliver commercial messages. Opportunities for
product placements are multiplied when media like
YouTube brings a smorgasbord of visual entertainment
at the click of a mouse; application of critical thinking
becomes more difﬁcult when all ads are nonverbal.
Both researchers and adolescent advocates will need
to develop new ways to counter-argue commercial
messages.

Finally, there is a huge need for integration of vari-
ables and approaches in research on these problems.
More messages and programs need to investigate, for
example, novelty-seeking and its relationship to other
aspects of advertising. Adolescents high in novelty-
seeking are more likely to be attracted to advertising
for alcohol, drugs, and tobacco. Can messages be
designed to counter ads that appeal to high novelty
seekers?

An example of research, which integrates several
dimension of the problem is an investigation of 12th

82 A Affirmation

graders media use and a construct termed “drive
thin)
for thinness” (a self-reported need to feel
(Carson, Rodriguez, and Audrain-McGovern, 2005).
Among the ﬁndings were that exposure to fashion,
entertainment, and gossip magazines had indirect,
positive effects on smoking through paths of drive for
thinness and tobacco advertisement receptivity. There
was a direct effect of health, ﬁtness, and sports maga-
zine reading on smoking. The authors of the study
concluded that adolescents who read fashion, enter-
tainment, and gossip magazines may be more likely to
smoke, in part, because of a higher drive for thinness
and greater receptivity to cigarette advertisements.
Adolescents reading Health and Fitness magazines
were less likely to report smoking. Integrative research
such as this example will help to target the need to be
thin and higher receptivity to advertising for future
interventions. It is clear that advertising to adolescents
will increase as will the media used to deliver it. Future
research needs to keep up with the avalanche.

Cross-References
▶ Forbidden Fruit

References
Abelman, R. (1999). Preaching to the choir: TV Advisory usage
among parents of gifted children. Roeper Review, 22, 22–39.
Audrain-McGovern, J., Tercyak, K., Shields, A., Bush, A., Espinel, C.,
& Lerman, C. (2003). Which adolescents are most receptive
Implications for counter-
to tobacco industry marketing?
advertising campaigns. Health Communication, 15, 499–513.
Austin, E. W., & Johnson, K. K. (1997). Immediate and delayed effects
of media literacy training on third graders’ decision making for
alcohol. Health Communication, 9, 323–349.

Austin, E. W., Chen, M. J., & Grube, J. W. (2006). How does alcohol
advertising inﬂuence underage drinking? The role of desirability,
identiﬁcation and skepticisim. Journal of Adolescent Health, 38,
376–384.

Biener, L., & Siegel, M. (2000). Tobacco marketing and adolescent
smoking: more support for a causal inference. American Journal
of Public Health, 90, 407–411.

Carson, N., Rodriguez, D., & Audrain-McGovern, J. (2005). Investi-
gation of factors linking media exposure to smoking in high
school students. Preventive Medicine: An International Journal
Devoted to Practice and Theory, 41(2), 511–520.

Caughlin, J. P., & Malis, R. S. (2004). Demand/withdraw communi-
cation between parents and adolescents: Connections with
self-esteem and substance use. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 21, 125–148.

Crano, W. D., & Burgoon, M. (2002). Mass media and drug preven-
tion: Classic and contemporary theories and research. Mahwah:
Erlbaum.

Davies, H. D., & Fitzgerald, H. (2008). Obesity in childhood and
issues. Westport:

adolescence: Medical, biological, and social
Praeger.

Desmond, R. J., Singer, J. L., Singer, D. G., Calam, R., & Colimore, K.
(1985). Family mediation patterns and television viewing: young
children’s use and grasp of the medium. Human Communication
Research, 11, 461–480.

Desmond, R. J., Singer, J. L., & Singer, D. G. (1990). Family media-
tion: Parental communication patterns and the inﬂuence of
television on children. In J. Bryant (Ed.), Television and the
American family. Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.

HarrisInteractive (2004). Teens talk about advertising: A report of
ﬁndings from online focus groups with teens. Retrieved November
23, 2009 from www.Harrisinteractive.com

Henriksen, L., Flora, J., Feighery, E., & Fortmann, S. (2002). Effects
on youth of exposure to retail tobacco advertising. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 32, 1771–1789.

Metrik, J., Frissell, K., & McCarthy, D. (2003). Strategies for reduction
and cessation of alcohol use: Adolescent preferences. Alcoholism:
Clinical and Experimental Research, 27, 74–80.

Moreno, M., Briner, L., Williams, A., Walker, L., & Christakis, D.
(2009). Real use or “real cool”: Adolescents speak out about
displayed alcohol references on social networking websites.
Journal of Adolescent Health, 45, 420–432.

Nathanson, A. (2001). Mediation of children’s television viewing:
Working toward conceptual clarity and common understanding.
In W. B. Gudykunst (Ed.), Communication yearbook 25. Mahwah:
Erlbaum.

Roberts, D., Bachen, C., Hornby, M., & Hernandez-Ramos, P. (1984).
Reading and television: Predictors of reading achievement at
different age levels. Communication Research, 11, 9–49.

Shifrin, D. L. (2006). Policy statement: American academy of pediat-

rics. Pediatrics, 118(6), 2563–2569.

Strasburger, V. (2001). Adolescents, drugs and the media. In D. Singer
& J. Singer (Eds.), Handbook of children and the media. Thousand
Oaks: Sage.

Strasburger, V., Wilson, B., & Jordan, A. (2002). Children, Adolescents,

The Media. Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Wakeﬁeld, M., Terry-McElrath, Y., Emery, S., Saffer, H., Chaloupka, F.,
Szczypka, G., et al. (2006). Effect of televised, tobacco company-
funded smoking prevention advertising on youth smoking-
related beliefs, intentions, and behavior. American Journal of
Public Health, 96, 2154–2160.

Affirmation

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Although the term “afﬁrmation” may have multiple
meanings, all converge on the assertion that something

exists, is true, and has value. In the context of human
development, the term potentially relates to several
issues. Most notably, afﬁrmation relates
to how
individuals view themselves (as studied considerably
in research on self-afﬁrmation theory) and how
others view them (as exempliﬁed by research on the
Michelangelo Phenomenon). Although research has
yet to focus explicitly on how afﬁrmation relates to
adolescents, existing research does reveal its potential
signiﬁcance to understanding adolescent development,
especially the signiﬁcance of social interactions and the
inﬂuence they may have on adolescents’ sense of self
and mental health.

Individuals generally have a strong stake in thinking
and feeling positively about themselves. Indeed, they
tend to characterize their futures as brighter than those
of their peers; and they also engage in attributions that
are self-serving, such as overestimating how they rate
on most positive characteristics. When faced with
information that threatens the positive views they
have of themselves, they embark on types of thinking
meant to preserve their positive views, such as ignor-
ing, minimizing, or simply discrediting the signiﬁcance
of the threatening thoughts and information. People
are motivated to maintain the perceived worth and
integrity of their sense of self (Steele 1988). For exam-
ple, when an event or information threatens a valued
self-image, an individual likely will seek to maintain
a global sense of self-integrity instead of focusing on
the particular situation or domain that shows them to
be lacking. When individuals afﬁrm an unrelated
aspect of their self-worth, their self-evaluation becomes
less contingent on a particular problem area, which
has
the problem less
rendering
problematic. Thus, when faced with a psychological
threat that challenges their sense of self, individuals
can restore self-integrity by drawing on alternative
sources unrelated to the threat, such as reﬂecting on
another important value. This phenomenon has been
understood through self-afﬁrmation theory, which
explains how individuals can afﬁrm valued sources of
self-worth (such as
important personal qualities,
values, or relationships), which then serves as a way
to buffer threats to their sense of self and reduce the
impact of the threats (see Sherman and Cohen 2006 for
a review).

effect of

the

The manner afﬁrmation works has important
and

relationship development

consequences

for

Affirmation A 83

A

individuals’ sense of identity (see Drigotas et al. 1999;
Kumashiro and Sedikides 2005). For example, relation-
ships are part of an individual’s identity and, as such,
positive relationships likely play a key role in the main-
tenance of self-esteem. Afﬁrmation from partners may
reduce defensiveness and increase openness in light of
challenging situations. They also may increase compas-
sion, altruism, and positive emotionality. Afﬁrmation
from partners also can reduce stress and increase
coping efﬁcacy. In a real sense, social interactions,
such as those had through close personal relationships,
involve afﬁrmation that helps individuals move closer
to their ideal selves. That process has been described as
the “Michelangelo Phenomenon,” a process by which
an individual helps their partner develop into the
partner’s ideal self. Partners’ afﬁrmations aid in the
development of their ideal self because partners have
a strong inﬂuence on situations where their partners’
ideal self can ﬂourish. Partners can increase self-esteem,
life satisfaction, and emotional well-being, as well as
relationship satisfaction. Importantly, the opposite also
can be true. Partners can seek to cultivate their partners
in a different direction than their ideal self, which
results in negative emotional consequences when part-
ners misinterpret, ignore, or undermine their partner’s
goals. Social relationships marked by afﬁrmation, then,
can facilitate healthy development; and those without
appropriate afﬁrmation can foster unhealthy outcomes
or the relationships’ dissolution.

The period of adolescence is known for adoles-
cents’ increased concern about their place in society
and social relationships as well as their focus on
exploring their sense of self (e.g., concerns about
identity). These normative concerns highlight the
importance of understanding afﬁrmation’s place in
adolescent development, and they highlight how
understanding the place of afﬁrmation in the period
of adolescence can contribute to a better understand-
ing of afﬁrmation, especially its roots and its role in
identity development as well as relationship formation
and dissolution. Still, existing research on afﬁrmation
already shows well how friends and partners facilitate
movement toward an individual’s sense of self and
how they can inﬂuence their self-worth and personal
development. A focus on adolescence can help
the ﬁeld move toward a greater understanding of
afﬁrmation’s complexities and nuances as well as
adolescence itself.

84 A Affirmative Action

References
Drigotas, S., Rusbult, C., Wieselquist, J., & Whitton, S. (1999). Close
partner as sculptor of the ideal self: Behavioral afﬁrmation and
the Michelangelo phenomenon. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 77, 293–323.

Kumashiro, M., & Sedikides, C. (2005). Taking on broad liability-
focused information: Close positive relationships as a self-
bolstering resource. Psychological Science, 16, 732–739.

Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-
defense: Self-afﬁrmation theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances
social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242).
in experimental
San Diego: Academic.

Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-afﬁrmation: Sustaining
the integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in
experimental
261–302).
social
New York: Academic.

psychology

21, pp.

(Vol.

Affirmative Action

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

and a

improved pedagogy,

“Afﬁrmative action” refers to formal efforts, including
a broad range of policies and practices, that consider an
individual’s membership in a protected group (such as
one based on race, disability, and sex) to achieve
diversity within an organization or for access to social
goods and services (e.g., schools and occupations).
These efforts seek to remedy and prevent discrimina-
tion as well as promote such societal goals as social
stability,
sense of
justice. Because the actions involve positive
equal
steps,
than simply not discriminating in
rather
a passive way, afﬁrmative action seeks to promote
equality in ways not required by antidiscrimination
law. In the application of afﬁrmative action, individuals
from one of the select groups are preferred, when all
things are equal, over individuals who do not have
such characteristics. This approach tends to attract
considerable controversy when framed in terms of
being effected through quotas, but afﬁrmative actions
that give preferences need not necessarily use quotas.
Given that
the action is more than simply not
surrounding this practice
discriminating, debates
center on two important concerns: how it remedies
actually
for past discrimination and how it
called
discriminates

group (typically

against

a

reverse discrimination) (see Schwartz 2000). This
essay examines the illustrative Supreme Court cases in
this area, which likely have a great effect on minority
youth as it inﬂuences their access to such important
resources as schools and occupations (as well as those
of their family members) and inﬂuences the type of
society in which all inhabit.

In the US, the modern history of afﬁrmative action
originated with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (1964) and
Executive Orders that directed agencies of the federal
government to employ a proportionate number of
minorities whenever possible. These efforts eventually
led to legal actions reaching the Supreme Court.
involved
Although many of
visible ones
government
involved
action
practices. The most notable cases in this area were the
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978)
case and two companion cases decided by the Supreme
Court in 2003: Grutter v. Bollinger and Gratz v.
Bollinger.

these legal disputes
the most

public universities’

contractors,

afﬁrmative

In deciding afﬁrmative action cases involving racial
preferences, the Court has used strict scrutiny analyses
because race is used to categorize individuals. Typically,
such categorizing violates the equal protection of laws
standard, since individuals are not treated equally.
However, differential treatment is permissible if the
classiﬁcation of the protected class is in furtherance of
a compelling state interest and the governmental action
relating to that class is narrowly tailored to achieve
that interest. In these cases, diversity is the compelling
state interest, and the concern is whether policies in
place to achieve afﬁrmative action impermissibly
infringe on others’ rights when they are, in effect, not
preferred over members of another group.

The Supreme Court in Bakke addressed a case
involving a white male’s rejection from the University
of California, Davis School of Medicine while other
“special applicants” were admitted with signiﬁcantly
lower academic scores than he had. These special
applicants were admitted under provisions that gave
preference to minority groups. The trial court ruled
that the special program operated as a racial quota (as
it reserved a set number of places for minority
applicants who were rated against one another, not
the entire pool of applicants) and that the quotas
were impermissible because they violated both Consti-
tutional equal protection rights and also Title VI of the

Affluent Youth A 85

A

Civil Rights Act of 1964. The California Supreme Court
similarly found the practice unconstitutional as it
noted that the special admissions program was not
the least intrusive means of achieving the goals of the
compelling state interests of integrating the medical
school and increasing the number of doctors serving
minority patients. The Supreme Court of the United
States supported the lower courts as it found racial
quotas unconstitutional. The Court, however, did so
while also ﬁnding that educational institutions could
use race as one of many factors to consider in their
admissions process. The Bakke case, however, was not
an entirely strong statement on the issue as it involved
multiple opinions from several of the justices who only
partly agreed with one another. Several years later, in
Grutter v. Bollinger and Gratz v. Bollinger, the Supreme
Court afﬁrmed the view that “quotas” were not
permissible but that race could be one factor of many
factors that could be used to meet the compelling
interest of diversity.

The Supreme Court may have settled the matter for
now, but controversies still remain (see Sanders 2003).
For example, those who argue for afﬁrmative action
adopt a group rights approach, where those who
beneﬁt from the actions need not be the ones who
were actual victims of invidious discrimination; they
get preference simply by being part of a protected class
on the grounds that afﬁrmative action programs are
a way to ensure equality to all. Opponents prefer to
have individual victims beneﬁt
from afﬁrmative
actions, and they do so on the grounds that using
classiﬁcations otherwise perpetuates stereotypes and
stigmas that afﬁrmative actions are supposed to
eradicate. Thus, rather than viewing afﬁrmative actions
as problematic for the dominant group, the actions are
seen as problematic for
the intended
beneﬁciaries. They are deemed problematic to the
extent that they run the risk of creating internal stigma
(doubt about one’s abilities) as well as external stigma
(dealing with others’ doubts of their qualiﬁcations).
Controversies are likely to continue, especially since
concerns about the effects of internal stigma are voiced
by members of protected groups, including Justice
Clarence Thomas, who belongs to a minority group
often targeted as in need of afﬁrmative action, who has
described afﬁrmative action programs as stamping
minorities with a badge of inferiority (see Adarand
Constructors, Inc. v. Pen˜a 1995).

some of

Broadly deﬁned, afﬁrmative action includes positive
steps to increase access to resources and opportunities
for individuals from historically excluded groups. These
actions become quite controversial when they result in
preferential selection, and they especially become con-
troversial when they seek equality in result rather than
equality in opportunity. These actions are problematic
in that they do not, by deﬁnition, treat people equally.
They create specially protected classes that society is
much more ready to accept as protected if it can be
shown that its members speciﬁcally suffered from invid-
ious discrimination than society is ready to accept as
deserving of special privileges without such a showing.

Cross-References
▶ Discrimination

References
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pen˜a. (1995). 515 U.S. 200.
Civil Rights Act of 1964. (1964). Pub.L. 88–352, 78 Stat. 241.
Gratz v. Bollinger. (2003). 539 U.S. 244.
Grutter v. Bollinger. (2003). 539 U.S. 306.
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke. (1978). 438 U.S. 265.
Sanders, S. R. (2003). Twenty-ﬁve years of a divided court and nation:
“Conﬂicting” views of afﬁrmative action and reverse discrimina-
tion. University of Arkansas at Little Rock Law Review, 26, 61–110.
Schwartz, D. S. (2000). The case of the vanishing protected class:
Reﬂections on reverse discrimination, afﬁrmative action, and
racial balancing. Wisconsin Law Review, 2000, 657–689.

Affluent Youth

1, NICOLE RENICK THOMSON
DEBRA H. ZAND
2
BRIANNA MANN
1Missouri Institute of Mental Health, Saint Louis,
MO, USA
2University of Missouri-Saint Louis, USA

1,

scientists

Overview
Among developmental
there has been
a growing awareness for the need to study the relation-
ship between contextual factors and child adaptation.
A substantial body of research exists documenting the
association between child development and socioeco-
nomic status. Within the academic literatures there is
a general consensus that children growing up in poor

86 A Affluent Youth

families tend to have worse physical and psychological
health, greater frequency of behavioral problems,
higher risk for drug and alcohol problems, and lower
cognitive development and academic achievement than
those who do not. Less, however, is known about youth
at the opposite end of the socioeconomic spectrum:
those who have grown up in afﬂuent families. Whether,
how and when wealth matters for child development
has been largely an unexplored area of inquiry. Posited
explanations for this research gap have included
difﬁculties understanding and collecting data on
wealth, as well as assumptions that afﬂuent youth are
a homogeneous group and at low risk for maladjust-
ment. Over the last decade, a growing body of empirical
research has begun to ﬁll this gap, pointing to many
similarities as well as important differences between the
impoverished and their afﬂuent counterparts.

Affluence: Definitional Issues
Afﬂuence is a nebulous classiﬁcation based upon
a combination of socioeconomic factors and normative
judgments, all of which can change over time and
locale. Within both the theoretical and empirical liter-
atures, operational deﬁnitions of wealth abound and
have included both absolute standards (e.g., income,
amount of property ownership/material goods, total
assets, etc.), as well as relative comparisons. Afﬂuence
has been measured at the individual, household, com-
levels, and several algorithms
munity, and national
exist that combine variables. This range of deﬁnitions
complicates cross-study comparisons and generaliza-
tions about afﬂuent youth, with sample characteristics
being indicative of afﬂuence in one study and middle
class status in another.

Affluence as a Context for Youth
Development
Ecological Systems Theory has been a leading framework
for understanding the lives of afﬂuent youth. Devel-
oped by Urie Bronfenbrenner (1979), a pioneering
the theory describes
developmental psychologist,
child development within the context of a complex
and dynamic web of nested environmental systems.
Across disciplines, discussions on afﬂuence as a
contextual variable have focused, to varying degrees,
on aspects of Bronfenbrenner’s ﬁve systems:
the
microsystem (family, peers, school, and neighborhood),
the mesosystem (the interaction of microsystems), the

exosystem (external environments), the macrosystem
(broader culture, society’s customs and values, includ-
ing socioeconomic factors), and the chronosystem
(socio-historical conditions). To date, the extent to
which these systems impact youth outcomes, however,
remains conﬂicting and difﬁcult to disentangle. While
some theoretical models have pointed to the positive
effects of afﬂuent parents and neighborhoods on youth
development (Brooks-Gunn et al. 1993), others have
argued that afﬂuence is a contextual risk factor for
maladaptation (Luthar 2003). Deﬁnitional and obser-
vational issues may explain these differing viewpoints,
as well as the possibility that the relationship between
afﬂuence and positive youth outcomes may be
nonlinear.

In 1946, renowned sociologist Max Weber intro-
duced the concept of “life chances” as the degree to
which a person has access to important societal
resources. From a Weberian perspective, wealth affects
a person’s life chances. By impacting access to a host of
valuable resources such as education, sociocultural
opportunities, healthy food, housing, healthcare, and
safe neighborhoods, wealth can create an environment
that maximizes positive developmental outcomes. For
example, afﬂuence provides parents with opportunities
to improve their children’s lives, with dollars spent
securing opportunities (e.g., private school education)
that can pave the way to additional opportunities (e.g.,
acceptance into a prestigious university, access to high-
powered social networks, etc.).

Others scholars have maintained that western
society’s overemphasis on wealth, possessions, appear-
ances (social and physical), and fame compromises
well-being. Laboring on a hedonic treadmill, theorists
have argued that as a person amasses more wealth,
expectations and desires rise in tandem. According to
economist Staffan Linder, consumers in afﬂuent coun-
tries can become single-minded in an attempt to
increase the productivity of their non-work time to
increase their wealth. The focus becomes one of relative
deprivation, with the afﬂuent perpetually assessing
their value relative to others in their environment –
colleagues at work, neighbors, and individuals in their
social circle. In this scenario, the relatively afﬂuent
feel poor in comparison with the very wealthy. As
ﬁnancially successful parents focus their attention on
career obligations and extrinsic goals,
less time is
then devoted to personal and familial relationships,

leisure time, spirituality, and community involvement.
Expecting excessively high levels of achievement, both
from themselves and their children, afﬂuent parents
may cultivate a family environment of perfectionism
in which markers of their children’s success include
high grades, trophies, and admission to prestigious
schools. According to this line of thinking, the dynamic
interaction of family pressure, social comparisons, and
emphasis on achievement places youth at risk for a host
of psychological difﬁculties.

Merging both viewpoints, a curvilinear relationship
may exist between wealth and positive youth outcomes.
According to Csikszentmihalyi (1999), after a certain
minimum threshold – which ﬂuctuates with resource
allocation in any given society – the beneﬁts of
afﬂuence are irrelevant and possibly deleterious.
Other variables may become potent in enhancing
positive outcomes beyond this threshold such as
establishing authentic relationships, achieving ﬂow
(a mental state in which a person is immersed in an
activity and experiences a sense of energized focus, full
involvement, and success in the process during which
everyday concerns are typically ignored), etc. To date,
empirical
systems
level variables on individual-level outcomes among
afﬂuent youth has been scant, and has mainly focused
on Bronfenbrenner’s microsystem. These data are
reviewed below.

investigation of

the effects of

Adjustment Disturbances Among
Affluent Youth: Empirical Findings
The work of Suniya S. Luthar, Professor of Psychology
and Education at Columbia University, and her col-
leagues comprises the majority of the empirical studies
available on afﬂuent youth. Their work has resulted in
studies spanning the past decade (1999–2009) with the
majority of the data coming from three cohorts of
secondary school students living in afﬂuent communi-
ties (n = 880); (Luthar and Becker 2002; Luthar and
D’Avanzo 1999; Luthar
and Latendresse 2005),
compared with two cohorts of inner-city students
(n = 524);
(Luthar and D’Avanzo; Luthar and
Latendresse). These researchers have operationally
deﬁned “afﬂuence” with community-level census
income data; median family incomes for their afﬂuent
samples range from $74,898 to $125,381 and median
family incomes for their inner-city comparison sam-
ples range from $27,388 to $34,658. Taken together,

Affluent Youth A 87

A

this body of literature has contributed to an improved
understanding of externalizing behavior, internalizing
behavior, and academic achievement among afﬂuent
youth, and the extent to which these outcomes may be
related to both individual-level (e.g., youth gender)
and parenting-related characteristics (e.g., closeness
to parents). A brief description of ﬁndings within
these domains is provided below.

Externalizing Behavior
Findings have generally been consistent indicating that
rates of cigarette, alcohol, marijuana, and illicit drug
use among high school samples of afﬂuent youth are
higher than rates reported nationally and by low-
income youth in particular (e.g., Luthar and D’Avanzo
1999; Luthar and Goldstein 2008). In a longitudinal
study of 289 afﬂuent 10th graders tracked through
12th grade, McMahon and Luthar (2006) found that
their substance use trends could be grouped into ﬁve
typologies, very similar to those found in other inves-
tigations: (1) minimal to no use; (2) early onset of
escalating use; (3) later onset of escalating use;
(4) very early onset of persistently high use; (5) early
onset then decreasing use. Incidence of delinquent
behavior reported by afﬂuent youth in Luthar and
D’Avanzo’s (1999) study were similar to rates of prob-
lem behaviors reported by low-income youth of the
same age (Luthar and Ansary 2005). Urban youth
tended to endorse behaviors such as physical ﬁghts
and carrying weapons, while suburban youth endorsed
higher levels of petty theft. Correlations between levels
of delinquency and substance use have also been found
(McMahon and Luthar 2006).

Internalizing Behavior
Anxiety and depression have been the most widely
examined internalizing problems among afﬂuent
youth. Luthar and D’Avanzo (1999) documented levels
of anxiety among 10th grade afﬂuent youth that were
signiﬁcantly higher than their low-income counter-
parts and levels of depression that were marginally
higher. McMahon and Luthar (2006) found links
between both physiological anxiety (rather than social
anxiety) and depression levels and substance use. Of
the ﬁve substance use typologies derived by the inves-
tigators (see Externalizing Behavior), only the group of
persistently high substance users approached clinical
levels of depression. In contrast to these ﬁndings,

88 A Affluent Youth

Luthar and Becker (2002) and Luthar and Latendresse
(2005) found that clinical depression anxiety levels
among afﬂuent “preadolescents” (sixth graders) were
similar to or lower than levels in normative samples,
and also lower than their low-income counterparts. By
seventh grade, however, internalizing problems were
quite evident among the afﬂuent, especially among
girls (see Gender Differences).

Academic Achievement
Willie’s (2001) study of the effect of socioeconomic
context of the school community on standardized
achievement test scores among elementary and middle
school students found a gradual increase in achieve-
ment test scores corresponding to increases in the aver-
age income of their families, regardless of race. The
author reports that students in afﬂuent-concentrated
schools scored an average of 27 (Black students) and 20
(White students) points higher than their low-income
counterparts. Cross-sectional studies have found that
grades are negatively correlated with substance use and
positively correlated with academic motivation, within
both low-income and afﬂuent groups (e.g., Luthar and
D’Avanzo 1999; Luthar and Ansary 2005). McMahon
and Luthar’s (2006) longitudinal study further speci-
ﬁed that declines in academic performance occurred
prior to escalation of substance use among afﬂuent high
school students speciﬁcally (they did not include a low-
income comparison); moreover, marijuana users and
“multi-problem” youth (those who engage in multiple
problem behaviors such as substance use, delinquency,
and school disengagement)
exhibited the worst
academic outcomes in Ansary and Luthar’s (2009)
3-year investigation of afﬂuent high school students.

Parenting
Researchers have more recently begun to explore the
relationships between parenting-related factors and
youth outcomes among the afﬂuent. Parenting factors
that have received empirical attention include parental
containment (youths’ belief that deviant behavior will
elicit disciplinary consequences from parents), parental
monitoring, parental
to
parents, parental criticism, dinner with parents, paren-
tal expectations, and parental emphasis on personal
character versus achievements.

commitment,

closeness

Findings suggest that afﬂuent youth perceive fewer
repercussions for substance use compared to rudeness

to others, delinquent behavior, or academic disengage-
the perception of a more relaxed
ment. Further,
parental attitude toward substance use was strongly
predictive of greater levels of actual use, particularly
the use of alcohol (Luthar and Goldstein 2008).

Afﬂuent and low-income youth appeared to be very
similar in average levels of closeness to parents (mothers
in particular) and regularity of eating dinner with at least
one parent. Furthermore, lack of after-school supervision
was linked with externalizing problems in both samples
and dinner with parents was related to maladjustment
and school performance (Luthar and Latendresse 2005).
Although both afﬂuent and low-income youth reported
comparable levels of parent values that emphasize integ-
rity, afﬂuent youth interpreted this as implying val-
uation of “getting ahead” and achievement while
low-income youths’
interpretation focused on the
closeness of the parent–child relationships.

Parental criticism and after-school supervision have
emerged as important variables to consider in the
adjustment of afﬂuent youth. Although Luthar and
Latendresse (2005) found that
low-income youth
reported more parental criticism than afﬂuent youth
and the result of parents’ criticism may differ by
for
income groups. Preliminary evidence suggests,
example, that increased rates of nonsuicidal self-injury
in afﬂuent youth compared with a community sample
(a mix of lower-middle class and upper-middle class
students) appeared to be predicted by parental criti-
cism (Yates et al. 2008). Relationships between parental
criticism and internalizing symptoms and grades have
also been found among afﬂuent youth (Luthar et al.
2006). Further, lack of after-school supervision appears
to be related to indices of maladjustment for afﬂuent
youth (Luthar and Latendresse 2005; Luthar et al.
2006). Several gender differences have emerged with
regard to parental factors; please refer to the Gender
Differences section for additional information.

Peers
Another aspect of the youth’s microsystem included in
empirical studies relates to peer relationships. Becker
and Luthar (2007) examined afﬂuent and low-income
youth’s rebelliousness, problem behaviors (physical
aggression, academic disengagement, delinquency and
substance use), academic application (effort at school/
good grades), and physical attributes (attractiveness/
athletic ability) as predictors of peer regard and

Affluent Youth A 89

A

social preference. All youth, regardless of income group,
positively regarded classmates who showed pro-social
positive traits, but also admired some physical aggres-
sion. Both groups also showed admiration for substance
abusing boys (though not a social preference), strong
admiration for academic application (more so than
grades), and admiration and social preference for phys-
ical attractiveness (afﬂuent girls in particular), and ath-
letic ability (afﬂuent boys in particular). In Luthar and
Becker’s (2002) study, substance use was related to peer
ratings of their popularity (only for seventh grade boys)
and popularity also showed modest correlations with
delinquent behavior.

Gender Differences
Many of the empirical studies report gender differences
across a variety of outcomes. For example, afﬂuent girls
reported using cigarettes and marijuana at nearly twice
the normative rate while afﬂuent boys’ rule-breaking
behavior was three to four times national norms
(Luthar and Goldstein 2008) and many studies have
reported that afﬂuent girls experience high levels of
depression (see Ansary and Luthar 2009; Luthar and
D’Avanzo 1999; Luthar and Becker 2002).

Afﬂuent boys and girls also exhibit differential
behavioral reactions to perceived parenting. Girls
reported higher anticipated consequences from par-
ents for misbehavior overall than did boys, particu-
larly for rudeness and delinquency. Boys reported
an expectation of more serious parent consequences
for academic problems than for unkindness (Luthar
and Goldstein 2008). While closeness to parents,
particularly mothers, was found to be an important
factor in girls’ and boys’ substance use and boys’
delinquency levels; girls’ closeness to fathers, not
mothers, was related to academic grades. Also pre-
dictive of academic grades was problem-behavior
for boys and absenteeism for girls (Luthar and
Becker 2002).

Gender differences in afﬂuent youth’s reactions to
peer relationships have also been documented. For
example, signiﬁcant links have been found between
boys’ substance use and peer ratings of their popularity
and between peer regard/social preference and athletic
ability (Luthar and D’Avanzo 1999; Luthar and Becker
2002; Becker and Luthar 2007); for girls, peer regard/
social preference were strongly linked to physical
attractiveness (Becker and Luthar 2007).

Neighborhood Wealth and Positive
Outcomes
The work of Luthar and her colleagues has begun to
shed light on how family afﬂuence may put youth at
risk for psychological difﬁculties; alternatively, there
has been much less empirical work examining how
access to resources may be of beneﬁt to youth in afﬂu-
ent families. Brooks-Gunn and her colleagues have
studied neighborhood-level characteristics on youth
outcomes, ﬁnding that youth residing in neighbor-
hoods with higher income families relates to pre-
schoolers’ higher verbal ability, higher childhood IQ,
fewer teenage births, less dropping out of high school,
and fewer behavior problems, even after controlling for
family-level SES. Overall, some studies suggest that
neighborhood afﬂuence may be a protective factor for
youth across
the socioeconomic spectrum (e.g.,
Brooks-Gunn et al. 1993). In line with the suggestion
that a curvilinear relationship exists between wealth
and youth outcomes (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi 1999),
Carpiano et al. (2009) found that increasing concen-
trations of afﬂuence were related to better devel-
opmental outcomes
for kindergarten children in
neighborhoods characterized by more socioeconomic
heterogeneity; scores were lower at the opposite ends
of the continuum (i.e., neighborhoods with higher
proportions of wealthy families or higher proportions
of disadvantaged families). The implications of the
Carpiano et al. (2009) study for older children
remain uncertain.

Conclusions and Future Directions
Afﬂuence is a complex, socially constructed concept. To
date, theory and research on afﬂuent youth have been
limited and have mostly focused on the relationship
between afﬂuence and a limited set of youth outcomes.
With the notable exceptions of studies conducted on
neighborhood wealth, much of the empirical data on
afﬂuent youth has come from the samples recruited by
a very small group of scholars. In most of these studies,
study participants was
“afﬂuence” of
approximated based on community-level census data
rather than collected directly from the participants
themselves. The empirical data would be strengthened
by more precise operational deﬁnitions and measure-
ment of afﬂuence that accounts for income level, as well
as other factors that are likely to be important in
deﬁning wealth (amount of property ownership/

individual

90 A Age of Consent, Majority, and License

material goods, total assets, number of wage earners in
the family, education level, profession, etc.). To
enhance the breadth and depth of the understanding
of this group of young people cross-disciplinary, multi-
method,
simultaneously
studies
investigate multiple levels of Bronfenbrenner’s model
are needed. Such studies have the potential to reveal the
multifaceted aspects of afﬂuent youths’
lives over
socio-historical context and developmental period.

longitudinal

that

Cross-References
▶ SES
▶ Underclass

achievement pressures”? Developmental Psychology, 42(3),
583–597.

McMahon, T., & Luthar, S. (2006). Substance use, emotional distress,
delinquent behavior, and social competence: A longitudinal
study of afﬂuent, suburban high school students. Journal of
Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 35, 72–89.

Willie, C. (2001). The contextual effects of socioeconomic status on
student achievement test scores by race. Urban Education, 36,
461–478.

Yates, T., Tracy, A., & Luthar, S. (2008). Nonsuicidal self-injury
among “privileged” youths: Longitudinal and cross-sectional
approaches to developmental process. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76(1), 52–62.

References
Ansary, N., & Luthar, S. (2009). Distress and academic achievement
among adolescents of afﬂuence: A study of externalizing and
internalizing problem behaviors and school performance. Devel-
opment and Psychopathology, 21, 319–341.

Becker, B., & Luthar, S. (2007). Peer-perceived admiration and social
preference: Contextual correlates of positive peer regard among
suburban and urban adolescents. Journal of Research on Adoles-
cence, 17, 117–144.

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Exper-
iments by nature and design. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

Brooks-Gunn, J., Duncan, G., Klebanov, P., & Sealand, N. (1993). Do
neighborhoods inﬂuence child and adolescent development? The
American Journal of Sociology, 99(2), 353–395.

Carpiano, R., Lloyd, J., & Hertzman, C. (2009). Concentrated
afﬂuence, concentrated disadvantage, and children’s readiness
for school: A population-based, multi-level investigation. Social
Science & Medicine, 69(3), 420–432.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). If we are so rich, why aren’t we happy?

The American Psychologist, 54, 821–827.

Luthar, S. (2003). The culture of afﬂuence: Psychological costs of

material wealth. Child Development, 74(6), 1581–1593.

Luthar, S., & Ansary, N. (2005). Dimensions of adolescent rebellion:
Risks for academic failure among high- and low-income youth.
Development and Psychopathology, 17, 231–250.

Luthar, S., & Becker, B. E. (2002). Privileged but pressured? A study of

afﬂuent youth. Child Development, 73(5), 1593–1610.

Luthar, S., & D’Avanzo, K. (1999). Contextual factors in substance
use: A study of suburban and inner-city adolescents. Develop-
ment and Psychopathology, 11(4), 845–867.

Luthar, S., & Goldstein, A. (2008). Substance use and related behav-
iors among suburban late adolescents: The importance of per-
ceived parent containment. Development and Psychopathology,
20, 591–614.

Luthar, S., & Latendresse, S. (2005). Comparable “risks” at the
socioeconomic status extremes: Preadolescents’ perceptions of
parenting. Development and Psychopathology, 17(1), 207–230.
Luthar, S., Shoum, K., & Brown, P. (2006). Extracurricular involve-
for “ubiquitous

ment among afﬂuent youth: A scapegoat

Age of Consent, Majority, and
License

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Adolescents occupy a unique place in law. Typically
deﬁned as persons between the ages of 14 and 18,
adolescents have
traditionally been regarded as
“minors” by law. Minors, as a group, are legally dis-
abled. This disability means that they are presumed to
lack the necessary skills for capable decision making
and presumed to beneﬁt from adults’ guidance and
protection. Adult-like decision making skills generally
are necessary for exercising legal rights. As a result, the
law regulates the decision making liberties of minors
far more extensively than those of adults. This
regulation results in a hodgepodge of laws that are
based on different perceptions of adolescents’ capaci-
ties for making different decisions, the state’s interests
in allowing them to make those decisions, and the
general need to respect the rights of parents to direct
their children’s upbringing.

Depending on their age, and sometimes other fac-
tors, adolescents typically are not yet considered adults
nor are they no longer children. For example, the law
sometimes treats adolescents as children in instances
that they are protected by not being able to receive the
death penalty, vote, purchase alcohol, or sign binding
contracts. Similarly, adolescents typically cannot marry,
join the military, or have surgery without parental
consent. Yet, the law sometimes does not distinguish
them from adults as it allows them to consent to certain

also

take

institutions

types of healthcare, be sexually active, purchase contra-
ceptives, and drive vehicles. The legal system also has
developed
different
that
approaches to adolescents. Some institutions typically
treat adolescents as children in need of special supervi-
sion and thus less able to control their own rights, such
as when they are in schools and seek to express them-
selves (see Levesque 2002). Some other institutions
treat them like children in some instances and adults
in others. For example, the justice system can treat
some adolescents as juveniles in need of special pro-
tections while the system can treat other adolescents as
adults without concern for protecting them differently
than they would someone who was a hardened, adult
criminal
(Levesque 2000). Adolescents occupy a
liminal and often conﬂicting position in law.

Understanding adolescents’ place in law requires
an understanding of their legal ability to exercise their
rights. In this regard, some legal concepts are important
to distinguish: age of consent, age of majority, and
age of license as well as general exceptions to them.
Although these ways to mark the end of adolescence are
often related, they help highlight the complexities and
sometimes conﬂicting ways that the law deems minors
as capable of exercising their own rights.

the age of consent

Age of consent denotes the age at which a minor
is deemed mature enough to consent to a speciﬁed act.
Examples of
include whether
the adolescent can engage in sexual intercourse, make
a contract, receive medical treatment, or join the
military. If adolescents fall below a prescribed age, the
law assumes that they are deemed incapable of fully
understanding the consequences of their actions and so
are unable to consent. Age of consent may be the same
or different from the age of majority.

The age of majority typically denotes the age at which
parents are no longer legally responsible for their
children. The age of legal majority, that is, of presumed
independence, has long been 18, rising to 21 for riskier
activities such as the consumption of alcohol. Even that
age, however, can vary. Numerous exceptions can be
made to this general rule, such as when adolescents are
emancipated from parents. These exceptions can be of
considerable signiﬁcance as they can provide adolescents
to those of adults and remove
with rights equal
protections that they would otherwise retain as minors.
The third legal concept, age of license, actually has
not been much recognized as a way to demark age but

Age of Consent, Majority, and License A 91

A

still certainly is of signiﬁcance. The age of license is the
age at which states give someone legal permission to do
something. Examples include the right to work, drive,
vote, get married, smoke, and drink alcohol. The age of
license can be either lower or higher than the age of
majority. In addition, the legal age of license may or
may not relate to the ability to consent to the extent
that a general rule can be made to assume that most
adolescents, once they have reached a certain age, are
presumed competent to make decisions relating to the
speciﬁed actions. For example, some states permit
marriage below the age of 18 for some youth while
other states place it at 18. Similarly, states do vary the
ages at which youth can earn a driver’s permit or the
conditions under which they can drive. Lastly, over
the past few decades, states have increased the age at
which individuals can purchase alcohol, raising it from
18 to 21, while states have reduced the required age to
vote, from 21 to 18.

The three general ways that adolescents’ age can
matter lead to considerable variation, and that varia-
tion can be even more pronounced in that there is
considerable variation within any of the three ways
that age marks the rights of adolescents. Laws vary
considerably in the power they give adolescents to
exercise their rights. Some states, for example, permit
adolescents to engage in sexual activity at the age of 12,
but they limit the age of their partners and the types of
sexual acts that they may engage in; other states simply
prohibit sexual activity until the age of 18 (see Levesque
2000). Some states permit sexual activity and the right
to obtain medical testing but not necessarily the right
consent.
to medical
Perhaps the most conﬂicting laws are those dealing
with juvenile offenders; these laws sometimes require
some adolescents to be treated as adults while some can
be treated as minors in need of special protection while
still others can be treated as either depending on
a prosecutor or judge’s discretion (Levesque 2000).

treatment without parental

The wide variation in laws becomes further varied
in the manner that important exceptions have been
developed to counter inadequacies of general rules.
The most important exception, and one that has
garnered much controversy,
the mature
minor doctrine. That doctrine applies, for example, to
sometimes limit parents’ right
to the
medical treatment for their minor children. In some
states, minors of a certain age have the right to give or

to consent

involves

92 A Agency

withhold consent to some forms of treatments, such as
medications or medical procedures. This principle is
known as the Mature Minor Doctrine. That doctrine,
a relatively recent development in the area of a minors’
right to consent to medical treatment, applies in
different situations where the service a minor seeks is
quite important and the parents’ interest, while still
important, can give way to the rights of minors to
exercise the rights needed to obtain the service. For
example, the doctrine permits minors to give legal
consent in a situation where their parents would be
abusive or neglectful and their involvement would be
detrimental to their well-being. Note that the mature
minor rule may require adolescents to seek judicial
intervention, a process typically known as a judicial
bypass (Bellotti v. Baird 1979). Permitting this type of
exception is deemed important to protect the rights of
parents, in case their child is not mature enough to
make decisions on its own, and it protects the minor in
that they could be deemed capable to make important
decisions on their own if they could demonstrate
sufﬁcient maturity. The mature minor exception
challenges the ﬁrmly rooted belief that minors univer-
sally lack the capacity to make decisions and it also
challenges the ﬁrmly rooted parental right to raise their
children as they see ﬁt (see Levesque 2000).

Cross-References
▶ Emancipation
▶ Mature Minor Doctrine

References
Bellotti v. Baird (1979). 443 U.S. 622.
Levesque, R. J. R. (2000). Adolescents, sex, and the law: Preparing
adolescents for responsible citizenship. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Levesque, R. J. R. (2002). Dangerous adolescents, model adolescents:
Shaping the role and promise of education. NY: Plenum/Kluwer.

contexts of people’s actions. From this perspective,
agency refers to acts that are done with intentionality,
to individuals who are producers and shapers of their
experiences and circumstances. A sense of agency is
a sense that one can be more than reactive to one’s
environment, having a sense of agency means that one
can be generative, creative, proactive, and reﬂective.
Bandura (2000, 2001) has advanced arguably the
most inﬂuential perspective of agency in the psycho-
logical sciences.

Bandura (2001) proposed that agency consists of
several key factors. It involves intentionality, the ability
to represent a course of action to be performed, to
make plans of action. Agency also involves forethought,
which is the ability to represent expected outcomes and
to make plan accordingly. In addition, agency involves
self-reactivity, which is the ability for self-regulation by
acting deliberately to ensure that plans that were
conceived can be achieved. Lastly,
it also involves
self-reﬂectiveness, which is the ability to reﬂect upon
oneself and the adequacy of thoughts and actions.
Self-reﬂectiveness is key to self-efﬁcacy, the extent to
which individuals deem themselves capable of exercis-
ing some measure of control over their own function-
ing and over environmental events. While much
research focuses on agency in terms of, for example,
moral or sexual agency, much of it has been done under
the construct of self-efﬁcacy (see Holden et al. 1990).

References
Bandura, A. (2000). Exercise of human agency through collective
efﬁcacy. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 75–78.
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective.

Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 1–26. Links.

Holden, G. W., Moncher, M. S., Schinke, S. P., & Barker, K. M. (1990).
Self-efﬁcacy of children and adolescents: A meta-analysis.
Psychological Reports, 66, 1044–1046.

Agency

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Aggression

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Although the term agency can have different meanings,
developmental sciences tend to focus on agency in the

Aggression traditionally has been viewed as behavior
that has the intention of inﬂecting physical damage on
another. Researchers have recognized several types of

Agreeableness A 93

A

aggression, with the two most common being reactive
(impulsive) and instrumental (proactive or controlled)
aggression. Reactive aggression occurs as a response to
an aversive stimulus, such as a deliberate provocation.
Instrumental aggression is goal oriented; it is aimed to
achieve a reward, such as ﬁnancial gain (see Vitaro and
Brendgen 2005). Researchers now increasingly examine
less overt aggression, such as relational aggression
aimed at damaging peers’ relationships or reputations
(e.g., Crick and Grotpeter 1995). Still, the major thrust
of research remains on understanding the nature
of reactive and proactive aggression (see Hubbard
et al. 2010).

Cross-References
▶ Externalizing and Internalizing Symptoms
▶ Proactive and Reactive Aggression
▶ Trajectories of Aggressive-Disruptive Behavior

References
Crick, N. R., & Grotpeter, J. K. (1995). Relational aggression, gender,
and social-psychological adjustment. Child Development, 66,
710–722.

Hubbard, J. A., McAuliffe, M. D., Morrow, M. T., & Romano, L. J.
(2010). Reactive and proactive aggression in childhood and
adolescence: Precursors, outcomes, processes, experiences, and
measurement. Journal of Personality, 78, 95–118.

Vitaro, F., & Brendgen, M. (2005). Proactive and reactive aggression:
A developmental perspective. In R. E. Tremblay, W. M. Hartup, &
J. Archer
(Eds.), The developmental origins of aggression
(pp. 178–201). New York: Guilford.

Agreeableness

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Agreeableness refers to a tendency to be compassionate,
generous, cooperative, and empathetic in social situa-
tions rather than suspicious or antagonistic. Rather
than being Machiavellian and overly concerned about
one’s own self-interests, people who score highly on
agreeableness traits tend to place more trust in others
and have a much more positive view of human nature.
Given its potential importance to the study of social
relationships, agreeableness has received increasing
attention. Indeed, it has long been proposed as one of

the ﬁve basic dimensions of personality, with the others
including conscientiousness, openness, extraversion,
and neuroticism (see McCrae and Costa 1987, 1997).
As with other personality traits, agreeableness is
thought to be relatively stable across development, as
one of the most enduring personality dimensions
(Roberts and DelVecchio 2000), but not with some
changes, as agreeableness has shown to increase as
people age (see Branje et al. 2007). Given that it has
been viewed as a personality disposition, much of the
research on the topic comes from personality research
and social development.

Research has examined well the numerous links
among agreeableness, personality development, and
social relationships. Agreeableness appears to emerge
developmentally from temperamental self-regulative
systems, particularly effortful control (see Rothbart
and Bates 1998). Normal development of effortful con-
trol leads to agreeableness that serves to regulate frus-
trations when dealing with social situations, with
agreeableness directly relating to the ability to control
anger (Ahadi and Rothbart 1994). This ability to
control anger helps to explain a well-noted, negative
relationship between agreeableness and adolescent
antisocial behavior and delinquency (see Robins et al.
1994). Adolescents who are agreeable are more willing
to suspend individual interests, control their negative
affect and frustration that would emerge from interac-
tions with others, and respond to conﬂict more
constructively (see Jensen-Campbell et al. 2002).
Disagreeable youth are not necessarily known to be
aggressive or violent; instead, they are likely to be
viewed as self-centered, manipulative, disputatious,
stubborn, and sometimes prone to negative outbursts
of
emotionality (Asendorpf and Wilpers 1998).
Disagreeableness appears as increasingly signiﬁcant
during adolescence when relationships during this
period begin to be dominated by voluntary afﬁliations
and difﬁculties with mutual exchanges challenge the
ability to establish and maintain friendships and gain
acceptance by peers.

In addition to being linked to less antisocial behav-
ior, agreeableness links to a higher likelihood of
prosocial behavior and more positive social relation-
ships. Although it could be argued that agreeable youth
would be agreeable and go along with peer behaviors
that are problematic, research indicates otherwise.
Prosocial youth readily understand the consequences

94 A Aid to Families with Dependent Children

that their behavior may have on others and, as a
result, are more likely to disapprove of inappropriate
or aggressive conduct and, consequently, act more
prosocially (see Nelson and Crick 1999). Other research
on agreeableness as a dimension of personality and
peer relationships reveals how agreeableness contrib-
utes to positive relationships. Agreeable peers receive
higher levels of peer acceptance and have more mutual
friends; and more agreeable youth are less likely to be
victimized over time, as they appear able to deﬂect
aggression by communicating to others that they are
liked (see Jensen-Campbell et al. 2002). Given that
victimization can lead to so many negative outcomes
and poor adjustment (see Hanish and Guerra 2002),
and that agreeableness can reduce victimization, this
line of research alone underscores the potentially deep
link between agreeableness and mental health.

Although research examining the place of agree-
ableness on mental health outcomes is scarce compared
to studies of other personality dispositions, research
that does exist reveals links between agreeableness and
greater subjective well-being (Steel et al. 2008) and
reduced risk for clinical symptoms, especially suicide
attempts (Brezo et al. 2006) and externalizing problems
(Malouff et al. 2005). One 25-year longitudinal study
found, for example, that the consequences for being
disagreeable during childhood and adolescence are pro-
found; once disagreeable youth reach middle-age they
present multiple problems when compared to the more
agreeable members of their cohort, with those negative
outcomes including elevated levels of alcoholism,
criminality, depression, and career instability (Laursen
et al. 2002). Adolescents who fail to navigate their social
world in a way that allows them to get along well with
others place themselves at higher risk of emotional,
behavioral, social, and host of other problems.

References
Ahadi, S. A., & Rothbart, M. K. (1994). Temperament, development,
and the Big Five. In C. F. Halverson Jr., G. A. Kohnstamm, &
R. P. Martin (Eds.), The developing structure of temperament and
personality from infancy to adulthood (pp. 189–207). Hillsdale:
Erlbaum.

Asendorpf, J. B., & Wilpers, S. (1998). Personality effects on social
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74,
1531–1544.

Branje, S. J. T., Van Lieshout, C. F. M., & Gerris, J. R. M. (2007). Big
Five personality development in adolescence and adulthood.
European Journal of Personality, 21, 45–62.

Brezo, J., Paris, J., & Turecki, G. (2006). Personality traits as correlates
of suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and suicide completions:
A systematic review. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 113, 180–206.
Hanish, L. D., & Guerra, N. G. (2002). A longitudinal analysis of
patterns of adjustment following peer victimization. Develop-
ment and Psychopathology, 14, 69–89.

Jensen-Campbell, L. A., Adams, R., Perry, D. G., Workman, K. A.,
Furdella, J., & Egan, S. K. (2002). Agreeableness, extraversion,
and peer relations in early adolescence: Winning friends and
deﬂecting aggression. Journal of Research in Personality, 36,
224–251.

Laursen, B., Pulkkinen, L., & Adams, R. (2002). The antecedents and
correlates of agreeableness in adulthood. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 38, 591–603.

Malouff, J. M., Thorsteinsson, E. B., & Schutte, N. S. (2005). The
relationship between the ﬁve-factor model of personality and
symptoms of clinical disorders: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 27, 101–114.

McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1987). Validation of the ﬁve-factor
model of personality across instruments and observers. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 81–90.

McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1997). Personality trait structure as
a human universal. The American Psychologist, 52, 509–516.
Nelson, D. A., & Crick, N. R. (1999). Rose-colored glasses: Examining
the social information-processing of prosocial young adoles-
cents. Journal of Early Adolescence, 19, 17–38.

Roberts, B. W., & DelVecchio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consis-
from childhood to old age:
longitudinal studies. Psychological

tency of personality traits
A quantitative review of
Bulletin, 126, 3–25.

Robins, W. R., John, O. P., & Caspi, A. (1994). Major dimensions of
personality in early adolescence: The Big Five and beyond. In
C. F. Halverson, G. A. Kohnstamm, & R. P. Martin (Eds.), The
developing structure of temperament and personality from infancy
to adulthood (pp. 267–291). Hillsdale: Erlbaum.

Rothbart, M. K., & Bates, J. (1998). Temperament. In W. Damon &
N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology (Social, emo-
tional and personality development 5th ed., Vol. 3, pp. 105–176).
New York: Wiley.

Steel, P., Schmidt, J., & Shultz, J. (2008). Reﬁning the relationship
between personality and subjective well-being. Psychological
Bulletin, 134, 138–161.

Aid to Families with Dependent
Children

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Aid to Families with Dependent Children (“AFDC”)
was a federal assistance program tied to the Social

Aid to Families with Dependent Children A 95

A

Security Act of 1935 (1935). AFDC emerged from the
Aid to Dependent Children (“ADC”) program that was
part of the original 1935 social security legislation that
served as the cornerstone of the “New Deal.” Like
AFDC, ADC was administered by the United States
Department of Health and Human Services and made
federal matching funds available to states that created
programs to aid children with a dead, disabled, or
absent parent. In 1968, the ADC program was renamed
AFDC, with the words “families with” added partly
because of concern that the ADC program had discour-
aged marriage. AFDC eventually became the major
program that provided ﬁnancial assistance to children
whose families had low or no income (see Ofﬁce of
Human Services Policy 2010). Although ADC had been
a minor part of federal social security legislation, the
program became more prominent and more contro-
versial as it became AFDC and became the major and
highly expensive antipoverty program. As the AFDC
program expanded and national politics
shifted,
Congress searched for ways to contain or reduce
costs. Although Congress engaged in extensive modiﬁ-
cations in the 1980s, it was in 1996 that a major shift
occurred and essentially resulted in the abolishment of
the program.

One of the important points about AFDC is what it
eventually became. The program was dramatically
remade as it became assimilated into the Personal
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act (PRWOA)
(1996). The new legislation drastically changed the
nature of federal programs aimed to provide for poor
children and their families. Among other notable
changes, the new legislation imposed a lifetime limit
of 5 years for the receipt of beneﬁts; it also increased
work participation rate requirements that states needed
to meet in order to receive federal assistance to pay for
their antipoverty programs. The focus on the limited
nature of the replacement program was reinforced by
calling AFDC’s successor Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (“TANF”). Despite these dramatic
shifts, many continue to refer to TANF as “welfare” or
AFDC.

PRWOA sought to end the dependence of needy
parents on governmental beneﬁts by promoting job
preparedness, work, marriage, and several measures
aimed at controlling the behaviors of
recipients
(Smith 2007). The law focused on fostering a stable
home environment through marriage and paternal

involvement. This thrust came from studies indicating
that married households were less likely to fall into
distress or poverty. It was hoped that encouraging
current welfare recipients to form stable home lives
would hasten their transition off the welfare rolls into
work, and also would prevent future generations from
what many describe as a cycle of welfare dependency.
To achieve this end, for example, the law granted states
funding to promote marriage education and relation-
ship counseling for men and women, as well as funding
for state programs promoting responsible fatherhood.
The marriage initiatives became increasingly popular
in the early 2000s and continue in popularity, especially
in the form of premarital programs (Fawcett et al.
2010).

As expected from massive legislative reforms
addressing intractable issues, the reforms have won
praise as well as intense criticism. In terms of praise,
the reforms have accomplished their goal of reducing
direct dependence on governments. The composition
of welfare recipients has changed, with a tremendous
drop from 12.2 million recipients in 1996 to 4.5 million
in 2006, and with the number of families dropping by
over 50% (Goldin 2007). Still, critics argue that the
reforms focused on those physically and mentally
competent to seek employment and failed to provide
sufﬁcient funding for adequate child care services so
that parents could comply with work requirements
(Goldin 2007). Perhaps the strongest criticisms have
come from concern about the focus on marriage and
continued discrimination, especially against minority
women (Smith 2007) as well as the use of control
measures and enlistment of the welfare system to
control behaviors (like drug use or possession) that
historically were in the province of the criminal justice
system (see Gustafson 2009).

Cross-References
▶ Family Poverty, Stress, and Coping

References
Fawcett, E. B., Hawkins, A. J., Blanchard, V. L., & Carroll, J. S. (2010).
Do premarital education programs really work? A meta-analytic
study. Family Relations, 59, 232–239.

Goldin, L. R. (2007). The safety net revisited? The continuing impact
of welfare reform in New York city and nationwide. Cardozo
Journal of Law & Gender, 14, 97–124.

Gustafson, K. (2009). The criminalization of poverty. Journal of

Criminal Law & Criminology, 99, 643–716.

96 A Alcohol Use

Ofﬁce of human services policy (2010). Aid to families with depen-
dent children and temporary aid for need families. U.S. Depart-
ment of Health & Human Services http://aspe.hhs.gov/HSP/
abbrev/afdc-tanf.htm (Accessed 12 January 2010).

Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA). (1996). Pub. L. No. 104–193, 110 Stat. 2105.

Smith, A. M.

(2007). Welfare

reform and sexual

regulation.

Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Social Security Act of 1935. (1935). Pub. L. No. 271, tit. IV, 49

Stat. 620.

Alcohol Use

KERYN E. PASCH
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education,
University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA

Overview
While alcohol use is normative among adults and is the
most commonly used drug among adolescents, adoles-
cent alcohol use is associated with multiple social,
behavioral, and developmental problems (Grant and
Dawson 1997), which can persist into adulthood. Use
of alcohol during adolescence can also affect brain
development,
impacting emotional regulation and
motivation, during a critical time when abstract think-
ing and reasoning become possible (Zucker 2006). The
factors that put adolescents at risk for alcohol use are
multilevel and encompass the home, peer, school,
social, and physical environment as well as personal
beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors. Several interventions
have been developed to prevent or reduce alcohol use;
however, alcohol use remains a prevalent behavior
among adolescents.

Prevalence of Alcohol Use
Although the rate of alcohol use has declined somewhat
since 1999 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
[CDC] 2004; Johnston et al. 2005), alcohol use among
adolescents continues to be prevalent. In 2008, 10.1
million or 26.4% of youth aged 12–20 reported using
alcohol in the last month and 6.6 million (17.4%)
reported binge drinking (Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration 2009). In 2008, alcohol
use initiation, deﬁned as having ﬁrst used alcohol in the
past year, was reported by 4.5 million youth and adults

(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Admin-
istration 2009). Almost 85% (3.8 million) of the 4.5
million new alcohol initiates in 2008 were younger than
the legal age of 21 years old at the time of initiation
(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Admin-
istration 2009).

Alcohol use begins early, with 23.8% of ninth
graders reporting drinking more than a few sips of
alcohol before the age of 13 (Eaton et al. 2008) and
3.4% of 12–13-year-olds currently using alcohol
(Substance abuse and Mental Health Services Admin-
istration 2009). By the ages of 14–15, the percentage of
youth who are currently using alcohol almost quadru-
ples to 13.1% (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration 2009). Among adolescents in
the eighth grade, 38.9% report ever using alcohol and
18% have ever been drunk (Johnston et al. 2009).
Alcohol use in the last month is also prevalent with
15.9% of eighth graders reporting current alcohol use
and 5.4% reporting they had been drunk at least once
in the past 30 days (Johnston et al. 2009). Moreover, the
prevalence of alcohol use only increases as adolescents
get older. By 12th grade, 71.9% of adolescents reported
they had used alcohol and 54.7% had ever been drunk
(Johnston et al. 2009). In addition, alcohol use in the
past 30 days was reported by 43.1% of 12th graders and
27.6% reported having been drunk at least once during
that time (Johnston et al. 2009).

Excessive alcohol use among adolescents is also
a widespread problem. The Monitoring the Future
Study found that in the 2 weeks prior to the survey
8.1% of eighth graders reported having ﬁve or more
drinks in a row (Johnston et al. 2009) . For 12th
graders, this percentage more than tripled, rising to
24.6% (Johnston et al. 2009). Among students who
reported drinking alcohol in their lifetime, 4.2% of
8th graders and 20.5% of 12th graders drank on 40 or
more occasions (Johnston et al. 2009). In addition, of
all 12th graders surveyed, 8% drank 40 or more times in
the last year and 10.3% had been drunk 40 or more
times (Johnston et al. 2009). Attitudes toward binge
drinking have also been changing from 1991 to 2003
such that a smaller percentage of students consider
regular or binge drinking to be a great risk and
a smaller percentage disapprove of others who regularly
drink alcohol or binge drink (Newes-Adeyi et al. 2005).
Adolescent alcohol use occurs across all segments of
the adolescent population. However, alcohol use rates

Alcohol Use A 97

A

do vary by race/ethnicity and gender. Alcohol use by
age 13 is most common among Hispanics (29%), then
Blacks (26.7%), then Whites (21.5%) (Eaton et al.
2008). Across 9th through 12th graders, 77.9% of
Hispanic adolescents, 76.1% of White adolescents,
and 69.1% of Black adolescents will have had at least
one drink of alcohol in their lifetime. Lifetime alcohol
use is similar among females and males in 12th grade
(72.3%, 71.7% respectively), while in 8th grade, prev-
alence of lifetime alcohol use is slighter greater among
females (39.9%) than males (37.8%) (Johnston et al.
2009). Past year alcohol use is more common among
8th grade females (33.6%) than males (30.7%); how-
ever, in 12th grade rates are again similar (65.5%, 65.6
respectively) (Johnston et al. 2009). Alcohol use before
age 13, however, is more common among males with
27.4% of males and 20.0% of females reporting use
before 13 (Eaton et al. 2008). Rates of heavy drinking
among males and females show a similar pattern with
more males reporting heavy drinking than females
(10th grade: 25.5% vs. 21.8%; 12th grade: 40.4% vs.
32.8%) (Eaton et al. 2008).

Alcohol use among adolescents is prevalent even
among youth as young as 13 years. By the time
adolescents reach age 18, almost 75% will have tried
alcohol in their lifetime and almost half will have
used alcohol in the past month. Rates of alcohol use
vary by ethnicity with Hispanic youth using the most
alcohol at the youngest ages and White youth using the
most alcohol at the end of adolescence. Boys begin
using alcohol earlier than girls, but girls quickly catch
up and even surpass the boys by eighth grade. By 12th
grade, however, alcohol use rates among boys and girls
are similar.

Consequences of Alcohol Use

Short-Term Consequences
Alcohol has been found to be a “gateway drug,” a drug
that can lead to the initiation of other substance use,
including tobacco, marijuana, and other illicit drugs
(Kandel 2002; O’Malley et al. 1998). Adolescents who
drink in early adolescence may be more likely to begin
smoking (Jackson et al. 2002) and use marijuana or
other illicit drugs (Wilson et al. 2002) in middle ado-
lescence than adolescents who do not drink alcohol in
early adolescence. Additionally, alcohol use has been
found to cluster with other health risk behaviors such

as unhealthy weight control practices (Jackson et al.
2002; Petridou et al. 1997) and risky sexual behavior
(Bonomo et al. 2001; Halpern-Felsher et al. 1996; The
Henry Kaiser Family Foundation 2002). In a review of
several studies that addressed alcohol use and risky
sexual behavior, Halpern-Felsher et al. (1996), found
that high-risk sexual activity was more likely to result
after using alcohol. In another study, 36% of youth 15–24
who reported engaging in risky sexual behaviors indi-
cated that alcohol or drug use had inﬂuenced their
decisions regarding sex (The Henry Kaiser Family
Foundation 2002). In the 2007 Youth Risk Behavior
Surveillance Survey (YRBSS), 22.5% of sexually active
9th–12th grade students reported having used alcohol
or drugs before their last sexual intercourse (Eaton
et al. 2008). Alcohol-related fatalities are another seri-
ous consequence of alcohol use in adolescence. In 2006,
25% of underage drivers who were killed in car crashes
were intoxicated (National Highway Transportation
and Safety Administration 2010). The YRBSS found
that 29.1% of 9th–12th graders had ridden with
a driver who had been drinking alcohol and 10.7%
had driven after drinking (Eaton et al. 2008).

Adolescents of ages 12–17, who reported heavy alco-
hol use (deﬁned as drinking ﬁve or more drinks in a row
at least 5 days in the past month) were the most likely to
have a serious ﬁght at work or school, take part in
a group ﬁght, attack someone with the intent to seri-
ously hurt them, steal or try to steal something worth
more than $50, sell illegal drugs, and carry a handgun in
the past year compared to any other level of drinking
(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration 2005). In addition to violent and deviant behav-
ior, adolescents who use alcohol are also more likely to
be depressed than adolescents who do not use alcohol.
In a study by Windle and Davies (1999), between 24%
and 27% of adolescents who were identiﬁed as
depressed met the criteria for heavy drinking and
between 23% and 27% identiﬁed as heavy drinkers
also met the criteria for depression. Among those iden-
tiﬁed as depressed 33–37% of boys also met the criteria
for heavy drinking whereas only 16–18.5% of depressed
girls met the criteria (Windle and Davies 1999). Suicide
is also more common among those who use alcohol
(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Admin-
istration 2002). Adolescents of ages 12–17 who
reported any alcohol use in the past year were more
than two times more likely than adolescents who did

98 A Alcohol Use

not report any alcohol use to be at risk for suicide
(thought about or tried to kill themselves) in the past
year (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration 2002). Additionally, adolescents who
had their ﬁrst drink of alcohol before age 13 were
more likely to have reduced life satisfaction than
those who had their ﬁrst drink of alcohol after 13
(Zullig et al. 2001). Excessive alcohol use in adolescence
has also been associated with altered, delayed, or
such as cognitive
disrupted developmental
maturation, moral development, social competence,
and school performance (Brody et al. 1998).

tasks

Long-Term Consequences
Early onset of drinking has been found to be a strong
predictor of lifetime drinking and the development of
alcohol use disorders and alcohol problems (Grant
1998). A younger age of ﬁrst alcohol use has been
related to a greater level of alcohol misuse in later
adolescence (Hawkins et al. 1997). In addition, the
earlier a person uses alcohol, the intensity of alcohol
use, and the frequency of heavy drinking all contribute
to later problems with alcohol use and dependence
(Guo et al. 2000, 2001). Adolescents who began drink-
ing before age 14 have been found to be more likely to
ever experience alcohol dependence and to experience
alcohol dependence within 10 years of ﬁrst drinking
(Hingson et al. 2006). Early adolescent alcohol initia-
tion is also associated with an increased adulthood risk
of drinking and driving, being in a car crash due to
drinking (Hingson et al. 2002), driving after ﬁve or
more drinks, and riding with a driver who was high
or drunk (Hingson et al. 2003b). Adults who began
drinking at earlier ages in adolescence were also more
likely to have been injured while drinking (Hingson
et al. 2003b, 2006); and to have been in a ﬁght after
drinking (Hingson et al. 2001). College students, who
currently drink and who had their ﬁrst drink of alcohol
before age 13, have been shown to be at increased risk
for having unplanned sexual intercourse as well as
having unplanned intercourse due to drinking as
compared to college students who initiated alcohol
use at age 19 or older (Hingson et al. 2003a).

In summary, alcohol use among adolescents leads
to problems with future alcohol and other drug use
including marijuana and other illicit drugs. In addi-
tion, risk behaviors such as risky sexual behavior, driv-
ing after drinking, riding in a car with someone who

has been drinking, delinquency, and violence are more
common among those adolescents who use alcohol and
these behaviors can persist into adulthood. Alcohol use
is also related to depression, increased risk for suicide,
developmental problems, and social problems.

Early Adolescent Alcohol Use
Early adolescent alcohol use is related to signiﬁcant
problems later in life. Gruber et al. (1996), found that
onset of alcohol use by age 12 was associated with
subsequent use of alcohol and problem behaviors in
later adolescence including alcohol-related violence,
injuries, drinking and driving, and absenteeism from
school or work, as well as being at increased risk for
using other drugs. Early initiation of alcohol use also
mediates nearly all of the identiﬁed risk factors for
subsequent alcohol use including parental drinking,
proactive parenting, school bonding, peer alcohol
initiation, and ethnicity (Hawkins et al. 1997). Youth
who drink before age 15 are estimated to be four times
more likely to develop alcohol dependence than those
who begin drinking after age 18 (Grant and Dawson
1997). The odds of alcohol dependence decreases by
14% with each increasing year of age at onset of use and
the odds of abuse decreases by 8% (Grant and Dawson
1997). Notably, of those adults of who began to drink
before age 12, 16% report being dependent on alcohol
in the past year (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration 2004).

all

signiﬁcantly different on nearly

Research has shown that early users of alcohol,
those who use alcohol by the start of sixth grade,
are
socio-
environmental, behavioral, and personal risk factors
examined, underscoring the need to intervene earlier
and across a wide spectrum of behavioral, intraper-
sonal and socio-environmental factors (Pasch et al.
2009). Early users of alcohol (approximately 17% of
the sample) were especially more likely to engage in
delinquent and violent behaviors and to have lower
self-efﬁcacy, positive outcome expectations, and expec-
tancies concerning alcohol use, greater access to alco-
hol, higher normative estimates of alcohol use, and
a greater number of
than
nonusers of alcohol
in sixth grade. This research
suggests that universal prevention programs targeting
students at the start of sixth grade may have already
missed a signiﬁcant portion of students who have
already begun using alcohol. Therefore, given that

friends using alcohol

Alcohol Use A 99

A

“users” are a substantial proportion of the sixth grade
it may be important, then, to design
population,
a primary prevention program for teens, prior to
sixth grade, that focuses not only on speciﬁc alcohol-
related risk factors, but also on the important develop-
mental tasks of that age group – academic achievement,
appropriate conduct, and pro-social peer relationships.
This approach, intervening at earlier ages, would allow
for universal messages about alcohol use and yet also
provide support for high-risk students who may be
lagging developmentally. A developmental approach
to reducing adolescent alcohol use was also proposed
by several researchers (Brown et al. 2008; Masten et al.
2008; Windle et al. 2008; Zucker et al. 2008).

Determinants of Alcohol Use
Alcohol use in adolescence has been conceptualized as
an interaction of social, environmental, intrapersonal,
and behavioral factors (Epstein et al. 1995a, b; Hawkins
et al. 1992; Newcomb 1995). The most consistent
socio-environmental risk factors for early alcohol use
are peer and parental factors (Donovan et al. 2004).
Regular and consistent parental monitoring, knowing
where the child is and who he or she is with, predicts
less subsequent onset of alcohol and other drug use
(Beck et al. 1999, 2004; Borawski et al. 2003; Cottrell
et al. 2003; Donovan 2004; Grifﬁn et al. 2000; Stattin
and Kerr 2000), while lower levels of parental monitor-
ing predicts increases in early alcohol use among
adolescents (Borawski et al. 2003; Duncan et al. 1998;
Ledoux et al. 2002; Li et al. 2000; Pettit et al. 2001).

Authoritative parenting, parenting that is highly
demanding and responsive, with discipline that is
reasoned, consistent and democratic, with mutual
respect and reciprocity between the parent and child,
has been found to have an inverse association with
deviant behaviors (Simons-Morton and Hartos 2002)
and alcohol use (Jackson et al. 1998). Parental support
and connectedness, dimensions of
authoritative
parenting, are protective of alcohol use (Simantov
et al. 2000), and involved parents have children who
are less likely to initiate alcohol use (Simons-Morton
et al. 2001). Unsupportive and demanding family
environments and family dysfunction also increase
the likelihood of adolescent alcohol use (Colder and
Chassin 1999).

Parent–child communication that

is open and
frequent has been suggested to be protective against

adolescent alcohol use (Kelly et al. 2002; Wills et al.
2003). Brody et al. (1998) found that frequent parent–
child conversations where both parents’ and children’s
perspectives were expressed helped to orient children
to more conservative norms for alcohol use (Brody
et al. 1998). In addition, frequent and bidirectional
parent–child conversations were
associated with
children’s abstinence-based alcohol use norms (Brody
et al. 1998). Wills and colleagues also found that
parent–child communication about drugs was related
to youth having less favorable views of substance users
(Wills et al. 2003). Project Northland, an alcohol
prevention intervention sixth to eighth graders, found
that parent–child alcohol-related communication was
an important mediator of the intervention’s effective-
ness in reducing alcohol use (Komro et al. 2001).

Parents are important role models for their chil-
dren. As such, parents who drink alcohol in the home
may be modeling that behavior for their children. In
fact, parental drinking has been associated with ado-
lescent alcohol use (Dielman et al. 1993; Nash et al.
2005; van der Vorst et al. 2005; White et al. 2000).
Mother’s alcohol use in particular has been found to
put adolescents at increased risk for binge drinking
(Reifman et al. 1998) and alcohol use (White et al.
2000). Ennett et al. (2001) found that the nonverbal
communication of parent modeling of substance use
behavior was a more powerful form of communication
substance use
than verbal communication about
(Ennett et al. 2001). Parental role modeling also
includes modeling beliefs about alcohol use as well as
overt behavior. Students whose parents
reported
greater disapproval of adolescent alcohol use reported
increased levels of parental warmth and acceptance,
increased parental monitoring, better communication,
greater self-efﬁcacy to refuse alcohol, less approval of
alcohol use among friends, fewer friends and peers who
used alcohol,
less personal alcohol use, and fewer
consequences from alcohol than those students who
reported less parental disapproval of adolescent alcohol
use (Nash et al. 2005).

Alcohol use by peers, perceptions of peer use, and
perceptions of peer inﬂuence to use, all signiﬁcantly
increase the likelihood of early alcohol use initiation
(Donovan 2004). Hawkins and colleagues found that
those children who had alcohol-using peers at ages
10–11 were more likely to initiate early alcohol use
and to misuse alcohol when they were older than

100 A Alcohol Use

children who did not have alcohol-using peers (Haw-
kins et al. 1997). It has been suggested that adolescents
with alcohol and drug use problems are more likely to
have had problematic peer relationships in childhood
(Hops et al. 1999) or associated with antisocial peers
(Patterson et al. 2000) thus increasing their risk of
alcohol problems. In fact, one longitudinal study
found that children aged 10–11 with antisocial peers
were at increased risk for alcohol abuse and dependence
at age 21 (Guo et al. 2001). Additionally, associations
with antisocial peers in fourth or ﬁfth grades have been
found to directly inﬂuence substance use initiation in
the ﬁfth or sixth grades (Oxford et al. 2000).

In addition to peer and parent factors, access to
alcohol, offers of alcohol, and normative expectations
help to create an environment that is either conducive
or prohibitive of alcohol use. Access to alcohol in the
home has been related to alcohol use among adoles-
cents (Komro et al. 2007; Resnick et al. 1997). Adoles-
cents can get access to alcohol through many sources,
from
directly from parents, taking it from home,
friends, from older adults, from other relatives or
adults, and through commercial sources. However, for
underage youth, the most common sources of alcohol
are from parents’ supplies or older friends (Hearst et al.
2007; Smart et al. 1996; Wagenaar et al. 1993). Almost
30% of adolescents in the USA report having easy
access to alcohol in the home (Swahn et al. 2002).
Intrapersonal factors such as normative beliefs and
normative estimates are also important predictors of
alcohol use (Komro et al. 2001).

Self-efﬁcacy has also been associated with drinking
behavior and positive expectations or expectancies
about drinking, may also predispose a child to early
use (Donovan 2004; Hipwell et al. 2005). Adolescents
are more likely to use alcohol at earlier ages when
they have fewer negative expectations concerning alco-
hol use (Hipwell et al. 2005). Additionally,
lower
levels of achievement and bonding to school have
been associated with increased adolescent alcohol use
(Guo et al. 2001; Hops et al. 1999). Prior research has
also shown an association between early conduct
problems at ages 7–9 and alcoholism 25 years later
(Fergusson et al. 2005). Early use of other substances
such as tobacco or marijuana, feelings of depression, and
engaging in deviant or violent behaviors also increase
the likelihood of early alcohol initiation among youth
(Donovan 2004). Time spent with family members

(Sweeting et al. 1998), participation in extracurricular
activities and sports (Harrison and Narayan 2003), and
in religious activities (Sinha et al. 2006), have all been
found to reduce the likelihood of alcohol use among
adolescents.

An important environmental inﬂuence for adoles-
cent alcohol use is exposure to alcohol advertising. Alco-
hol advertising has been found to shape adolescent’s
beliefs, attitudes, and alcohol behaviors (Anderson
et al. 2009; Ellickson et al. 2005; Grube and Waiters
2005; Pasch et al. 2007; Smith and Foxcroft 2009;
Snyder et al. 2006; Stacy et al. 2004). Exposure to
alcohol advertising leads to better brand recall, and
youth who have increased exposure are more likely to
have positive beliefs about social and ritual uses of
alcohol (Committee on Substance Abuse 2001). Alcohol
advertisements also shape knowledge, attitudes, and
perceptions about alcohol use, which in turn are pre-
dictive of positive expectancies and intentions to drink
(Fleming et al. 2004; Grube and Wallack 1994).

Increased alcohol marketing receptivity, which has
been deﬁned as owning an item or wanting to own an
item with an alcohol brand name, has been associated
with increased likelihood of initiating alcohol use and
increased current drinking among teens (Henriksen
et al. 2008; Hurtz et al. 2007; McClure et al. 2009).
Additionally, alcohol-branded merchandise ownership
has been related to alcohol use susceptibility and
predicted the initiation of alcohol use among those
who were nondrinkers at baseline (Fisher et al. 2007;
McClure et al. 2009).

Interventions to Prevent Adolescent
Alcohol Use
Adolescent alcohol use is one of the most difﬁcult
behaviors to change because of the acceptability and
normative nature of its use (National Research Council
and Institute of Medicine 2004) as well as the multilevel
nature of the risk factors. Many interventions have been
developed to prevent and reduce alcohol use among
adolescents. Project ALERT, a 2-year school-based drug
use prevention program with students in seventh to
eighth grades, found positive results noted for both
cigarette and marijuana use, but not for alcohol use
(Ellickson et al. 1993). However, a long-term follow-up
showed no signiﬁcant intervention effects at end of
12th grade. In a replication with 55 middle schools in
South Dakota, signiﬁcant intervention effects were

Alcohol Use A 101

A

found for alcohol-related problems and misuse but not
for alcohol use (Ellickson et al. 2003).

The Life Skills Training Program (LST), also
a school-based drug use prevention program that
emphasized changes in social and intrapersonal factors
as they relate to early drug use, was implemented with
seventh graders and booster sessions in eighth to ninth
grades. The ﬁrst evaluation of LST found that the
program had a signiﬁcant impact on cigarette, mari-
juana use, and drunkenness, but not on regular alcohol
use (frequency or amount) (Botvin et al. 1990). A long-
term follow-up of these students in 12th grade was
conducted with 60.4% of the sample. Among those
students who had been exposed to over 60% of the
LST activities, long-term outcomes were seen for weekly
drinking, problem drinking, and heavy drinking (Botvin
et al. 1995). LST was replicated with a sample of inner-
city, minority students in a randomized trial of six
schools and at the end of ninth grade, program effects
were seen for drinking frequency, amount of alcohol,
and drunkenness. Overall LST was successful in reduc-
ing alcohol use among inner-city adolescents by ninth
grade, and suburban/rural adolescents in the long term.
The Iowa Strengthening Families Program (SFP)
focused on preventing adolescent drug use through
family sessions with parents of all adolescents, not just
high-risk teens (Spoth et al. 1999). At 1- and 2-year
follow-up, rates of alcohol initiation were signiﬁcantly
lower among students in intervention schools than
those in control schools (Spoth et al. 1999). In another
study, the SFP was combined with LST and compared
with LST alone and a no-treatment control group with
seventh to eighth grade students. The relative reduc-
tions in alcohol use initiation were 30% in the
combined SFP–LST schools, and 4% in the LST schools
(Spoth et al. 2002), pointing to the potency of parent
interventions as a universal strategy in reducing alcohol
use initiation.

A more comprehensive model was used in the Mid-
western Prevention Project (MPP) (Johnson et al.
1990). The intervention consisted of classroom curric-
ulum, parent organizing and training, community
leader training, and mass media. MPP was evaluated
with sixth and seventh grade students and showed
a signiﬁcant impact on cigarette and marijuana use,
but no program effects on alcohol use at ninth grade.
Project Northland was the ﬁrst community-wide
intervention program to speciﬁcally target young

adolescent alcohol use, using a multicomponent inter-
vention involving school curricula, parental education
and involvement, peer leadership, and community task
forces (Perry et al. 1993, 1996, 2002). The project was
successful at reducing young adolescent alcohol use, as
well as use among high school students (Perry et al.
2002) in two separate intervention phases. Project
Northland Chicago (PNC), a randomized controlled
trial of schools and surrounding community areas in
the city of Chicago, was conducted to replicated Project
Northland in an urban setting (Komro et al. 2004,
2006, 2008). The goals of the PNC intervention were
to change personal, social, and environmental factors
that support alcohol use among young adolescents in
sixth to eighth grade (Komro et al. 2004). Overall, the
intervention was not effective in reducing alcohol use.
However, secondary outcome analyses to determine the
effects of each intervention component separately
showed that the home-based programs were associated
with reduced substance use (alcohol, marijuana, and
tobacco use combined) (Komro et al. 2008).

Cross-References
▶ Alcohol Use Disorders
▶ Alcoholics Anonymous
▶ Binge Drinking

References
Anderson, P., de Bruijn, A., Angus, K., Gordon, R., & Hastings, G.
(2009). Impact of alcohol advertising and media exposure on
adolescent alcohol use: A systematic review of longitudinal stud-
ies. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 44(3), 229–243.

Beck, K. H., Shattuck, T., Haynie, D., Crump, A. D., & Simons-
Morton, B. (1999). Associations between parent awareness,
monitoring, enforcement and adolescent
involvement with
alcohol. Health Education Research, 14(6), 765–775.

Beck, K. H., Boyle, J. R., & Boekeloo, B. O. (2004). Parental monitor-
ing and adolescent drinking: Results of a 12-month follow-up.
American Journal of Health Behavior, 28(3), 272–279.

Bonomo, Y., Coffey, C., Wolfe, R., Lynskey, M., Bowes, G., & Patton, G.
(2001). Adverse outcomes of alcohol use in adolescents. Addiction,
96, 1485–1496.

Borawski, E. A., Ievers-Landis, C. E., Lovegreen, L. D., & Trapl, E. S.
(2003). Parental monitoring, negotiated unsupervised time, and
parental trust: The role of perceived parenting practices in ado-
lescent health risk behaviors. The Journal of Adolescent Health,
33(2), 60–70.

Botvin, G. J., Baker, E., Dusenbury, L., Tortu, S., & Botvin, E. M.
(1990). Preventing adolescent drug abuse through a multimodal
cognitive-behavioral approach: Results of a 3-year study. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58(4), 437–446.

102 A Alcohol Use

Botvin, G. J., Baker, E., Dusenbury, L., Botvin, E. M., & Diaz, T.
(1995). Long-term follow-up results of a randomized drug
in a white middle-class population.
abuse prevention trial
JAMA, 273(14), 1106–1112.

Brody, G. H., Flor, D. L., Hollett-Wright, N., & McCoy, J. K. (1998).
Children’s development of alcohol use norms: Contributions of
parent and sibling norms, children’s temperaments, and parent-
child discussions. Journal of Family Psychology, 12(2), 209–219.
Brown, S. A., McGue, M., Maggs, J., Schulenberg, J., Hingson, R.,
Swartzwelder, S., et al. (2008). A developmental perspective on
alcohol and youths 16 to 20 years of age. Pediatrics, 121(Suppl 4),
S290–S310.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2004). Youth
risk behavior surveillance - United States, 2003. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, 53(SS-2), 1–29.

tobacco and alcohol use: What do parents say and does it
affect youth behavior? Journal of Marriage and the Family, 63,
48–62.

Epstein, J. A., Botvin, G. J., Diaz, T., & Schinke, S. P. (1995a). The role
of social factors and individual characteristics in promoting
alcohol use among inner-city minority youths. Journal of Studies
on Alcohol, 56(1), 39–46.

Epstein, J. A., Botvin, G. J., Diaz, T., Toth, V., & Schinke, S. P. (1995b).
Social and personal factors in marijuana use and intentions to
use drugs among inner city minority youth. Developmental and
Behavioral Pediatrics, 16(1), 14–20.

Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J., & Ridder, E. M. (2005). Show me
the child at seven: The consequences of conduct problems in
childhood for psychosocial functioning in adulthood. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46(8), 837–849.

Colder, C. R., & Chassin, L. (1999). The psychosocial characteristics
of alcohol users versus problem users: Data from a study of
adolescents at risk. Development and Psychopathology, 11,
321–348.

Fisher, L. B., Miles, I. W., Austin, S. B., Camargo, C. A., Jr., & Colditz,
G. A. (2007). Predictors of initiation of alcohol use among US
adolescents: Findings from a prospective cohort study. Archives
of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 161(10), 959–966.

Committee on Substance Abuse. (2001). Alcohol use and abuse:

A pediatric concern. Pediatrics, 108(1), 185–189.

Cottrell, L., Xiaoming, L., Harris, C., D’Alessandri, D., Atkins, M.,
Richardson, B., et al. (2003). Parent and adolescent perceptions
of parental monitoring and adolescent
risk involvement.
Parenting: Science and Practice, 3(3), 179–195.

Dielman, T. E., Butchart, A. T., & Shope, J. T. (1993). Structural
equation model tests of patterns of family interaction, peer
alcohol use, and intrapersonal predictors of adolescent alcohol
use and misuse. Journal of Drug Education, 23(3), 273–316.
Donovan, J. E. (2004). Adolescent alcohol initiation: A review of
psychosocial risk factors. Journal of Adolescent Health, 35(6),
529, e527-e518.

Donovan, J. E., Leech, S. L., Zucker, R. A., Loveland-Cherry, C. J.,
Hester, J. M., Fitzgerald, H. E., et al. (2004). Really underage
drinkers: Alcohol use among elementary students. Alcoholism,
Clinical and Experimental Research, 28(7), 341–349.

Duncan, S. C., Duncan, T. E., Biglan, A., & Ary, D. (1998). Contri-
butions of the social context to the development of adolescent
substance use: A multivariate latent growth modeling approach.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 50(1), 57–71.

Eaton, D. K., Kann, L., Kinchen, S., Shanklin, S., Ross, J., Hawkins, J.,
et al. (2008). Youth risk behavior surveillance–United States,
2007. MMWR: Surveillance Summaries, 57(4), 1–131.

Ellickson, P. L., Bell, R. M., & Harrison, E. R. (1993). Changing
adolescent propensities to use drugs: Results from Project
ALERT. Health Education Quarterly, 20(2), 227–242.

Ellickson, P. L., McCaffrey, D. F., Ghosh-Dastidar, B., & Longshore,
D. L. (2003). New inroads in preventing adolescent drug use:
Results from a large-scale trial of project ALERT in middle
schools. American Journal of Public Health, 93(11), 1830–1836.

Ellickson, P. L., Collins, R. L., Hambarsoomians, K., & McCaffrey,
D. F. (2005). Does alcohol advertising promote adolescent drink-
ing? Results from a longitudinal assessment. Addiction, 100(2),
235–246.

Ennett, S. T., Bauman, K. E., Foshee, V. A., Pemberton, M., & Hicks,
K. A. (2001). Parent-child communication about adolescent

Fleming, K., Thorson, E., & Atkin, C. K. (2004). Alcohol advertising
exposure and perceptions: Links with alcohol expectancies and
intentions to drink or drinking in underaged youth and young
adults. Journal of Health Communication, 9(1), 3–29.

Grant, B. F. (1998). Age at smoking onset and its association with
alcohol consumption and DSM-IV alcohol abuse and depen-
dence: Results from the National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemi-
ologic Survey. Journal of Substance Abuse, 10(1), 59–73.

Grant, B. F., & Dawson, D. A. (1997). Age at onset of alcohol use and
its association with DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence:
Results from the National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic
Survey. Journal of Substance Abuse, 9, 103–110.

Grifﬁn, K. W., Botvin, G. J., Scheier, L. M., Diaz, T., & Miller, N. L.
(2000). Parenting practices as predictors of substance use, delin-
quency, and aggression among urban minority youth: Moderat-
ing effects of family structure and gender. Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors, 14(2), 174–184.

Grube, J. W., & Waiters, E. (2005). Alcohol in the media: Content and
effects on drinking beliefs and behaviors among youth. Adoles-
cent Medicine Clinics, 16(2), 327–343. viii.

Grube, J. W., & Wallack, L. (1994). Television beer advertising and
drinking knowledge, beliefs, and intentions among schoolchildren.
American Journal of Public Health, 84(2), 254–259.

Gruber, E., DiClemente, R. J., Anderson, M. M., Lodico, M. (1996).
Early drinking onset and its association with alcohol use and
problem behavior in late adolescence. Preventive Medicine, 25(3),
293–300.

Guo, J., Collins, L. M., Hill, K. G., & Hawkins, J. D. (2000). Develop-
mental pathways to alcohol abuse and dependence in young
adulthood. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 61(6), 799–808.

Guo, J., Hawkins, J. D., Hill, K. G., & Abbott, R. D. (2001). Childhood
and adolescent predictors of alcohol abuse and dependence in
young adulthood. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 62(6), 754–762.
Halpern-Felsher, B. L., Millstein, S. G., & Ellen, J. M. (1996).
Relationship of alcohol use and risky sexual behavior: A review
and analysis of ﬁndings. The Journal of Adolescent Health, 19(5),
331–336.

Alcohol Use A 103

Harrison, P. A., & Narayan, G. (2003). Differences in behavior,
psychological
factors associated
factors, and environmental
with participation in school sports and other activities in
adolescence. The Journal of School Health, 73(3), 113–120.
Hawkins, J. D., Catalano, R. F., & Miller, J. Y. (1992). Risk and
protective factors for alcohol and other drug problems in
adolescence and early adulthood: Implications for substance
abuse prevention. Psychological Bulletin, 112(1), 64–105.

Hawkins, J. D., Graham, J. W., Maguin, E., Abbott, R., Hill, K. G., &
Catalano, R. F. (1997). Exploring the effects of age of alcohol use
initiation and psychosocial risk factors on subsequent alcohol
misuse. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 58(3), 280–290.

comprehensive community programming for drug abuse
prevention with high-risk and low-risk adolescents. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58(4), 447–456.

A

Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Bachman, J. G., & Schulenberg, J. E.
(2005). Monitoring the future national survey results on drug use,
1975–2004. Vol 1: Secondary school students. Bethesda: National
Institute on Drug Abuse.

Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Bachman, J. G., & Schulenberg, J. E.
(2009). Monitoring the Future national survey results on drug use,
1975–2008: Vol I, Secondary school students (NIH Publication
No.09-7402). Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse,
721 pp.

Hearst, M., Fulkerson, J. A., Maldonado, M. M., Komro, K. A., &
Perry, C. L. (2007). Who needs liquor stores when parents will
do? The importance of social sources of alcohol among teens.
Preventive Medicine, 44, 471–476.

Kandel, D. B. (2002). Examining the gateway hypothesis: Stages and
pathways of drug involvement. In D. B. Kandel (Ed.), Stages and
pathways of drug involvement: Examining the gateway hypothesis
(pp. 3–15). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Henriksen, L., Feighery, E. C., Schleicher, N. C., & Fortmann, S. P.
(2008). Receptivity to alcohol marketing predicts initiation of
alcohol use. The Journal of Adolescent Health, 42(1), 28–35.
Hingson, R., Heeren, T., & Zakocs, R. (2001). Age of drinking onset
and involvement in physical ﬁghts after drinking. Pediatrics,
108(4), 872–877.

Hingson, R., Heeren, T., Levenson, S., Jamanka, A., & Voas, R. (2002).
Age of drinking onset, driving after drinking, and involvement in
alcohol related motor-vehicle crashes. Accident Analysis and
Prevention, 34(1), 85–92.

Hingson, R., Heeren, T., Winter, M. R., & Wechsler, H. (2003a). Early
age of ﬁrst drunkenness as a factor in college students’ unplanned
and unprotected sex attributable to drinking. Pediatrics, 111(1),
34–41.

Hingson, R., Heeren, T., Zakocs, R., Winter, M., & Wechsler, H.
(2003b). Age of ﬁrst intoxication, heavy drinking, driving after
drinking and risk of unintentional injury among U.S. college
students. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 64(1), 23–31.

Hingson, R., Heeren, T., & Winter, M. R. (2006). Age at drinking
onset and alcohol dependence: Age at onset, duration, and sever-
ity. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 160(7), 739–746.
Hipwell, A. E., White, H. R., Loeber, R., Southamer-Loeber, M.,
Chung, T., & Sembower, M. A. (2005). Young girls’ expectancies
about the effects of alcohol, future intentions and patterns of use.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 66(5), 630–639.

Hops, H., Davis, B., & Lewin, L. M. (1999). The development of
alcohol and other substance use: A gender study of family and
peer context. Journal of Studies on Alcohol Supplement, 13, 22–31.
Hurtz, S. Q., Henriksen, L., Wang, Y., Feighery, E. C., & Fortmann,
S. P. (2007). The relationship between exposure to alcohol adver-
tising in stores, owning alcohol promotional items, and adoles-
cent alcohol use. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 42(2), 143–149.

Kelly, K. J., Comello, M. L., & Hunn, L. C. (2002). Parent-child
communication, perceived sanctions against drug use, and
youth drug involvement. Adolescence, 37(148), 775–787.

Komro, K. A., Perry, C. L., Williams, C. L., Stigler, M. H., Farbakhsh, K.,
& Veblen-Mortenson, S. (2001). How did Project Northland
reduce alcohol use among young adolescents? Analysis of mediat-
ing variables. Health Education Research, 16(1), 59–70.

Komro, K. A., Perry, C. L., Veblen-Mortenson, S., Bosma, L. M.,
Dudovitz, B. S., Williams, C. L., et al. (2004). Brief report: The
adaptation of Project Northland for urban youth. Journal of
Pediatric Psychology, 29(6), 457–466.

Komro, K. A., Perry, C. L., Veblen-Mortenson, S., Farbakhsh, K.,
Kugler, K. C., Alfano, K. A., et al. (2006). Cross-cultural adapta-
tion and evaluation of a home-based program for alcohol use
prevention among urban youth: The Slick Tracy Home Team
Program. The Journal of Primary Prevention, 27(2), 135–154.
Komro, K. A., Maldonado-Molina, M. M., Tobler, A. L., Bonds, J. R.,
& Muller, K. E. (2007). Effects of home access and availability of
alcohol on young adolescents’ alcohol use. Addiction, 102(10),
1597–1608.

Komro, K. A., Perry, C. L., Veblen-Mortenson, S., Farbakhsh, K.,
Toomey, T. L., Stigler, M. H., et al. (2008). Outcomes from
a randomized controlled trial of a multi-component alcohol
use preventive intervention for urban youth: Project northland
Chicago. Addiction, 103(4), 606–618.

Ledoux, S., Miller, P., Choquet, M., & Plant, M. (2002). Family
structure, parent-child relationships, and alcohol and other
drug use among teenagers in France and the United Kingdom.
Alcohol and Alcoholism, 37(1), 52–60.

Li, X., Stanton, B., & Feigelman, S. (2000). Impact of perceived
parental monitoring on adolescent risk behavior over 4 years.
The Journal of Adolescent Health, 27(1), 49–56.

Jackson, C., Henriksen, L., & Foshee, V. A. (1998). The Authoritative
Parenting Index: Predicting health risk behaviors among children
and adolescents. Health Education & Behavior, 25(3), 319–337.

Masten, A. S., Faden, V. B., Zucker, R. A., & Spear, L. P. (2008).
Underage drinking: A developmental framework. Pediatrics,
121(Suppl 4), S235–S251.

Jackson, K. M., Sher, K. J., Cooper, M. L., & Wood, P. K. (2002).
Adolescent alcohol and tobacco use: Onset, persistence and tra-
jectories of use across two samples. Addiction, 97, 517–531.
Johnson, C. A., Pentz, M. A., Weber, M. D., Dwyer, J. H., Baer, N.,
MacKinnon, D. P., et al. (1990). Relative effectiveness of

McClure, A. C., Stoolmiller, M., Tanski, S. E., Worth, K. A., &
Sargent, J. D. (2009). Alcohol-branded merchandise and its
association with drinking attitudes and outcomes in US
adolescents. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine,
163(3), 211–217.

104 A Alcohol Use

Monitoring the Future Study is the Johnston 2009 reference. The

(2009) after Monitoring the Future can be removed.

Nash, S. G., McQueen, A., & Bray, J. H. (2005). Pathways to adoles-
cent alcohol use: Family environment, peer inﬂuence, and
parental expectations. The Journal of Adolescent Health, 37(1),
19–28.

National Highway Transportation and Safety Administration. (2010).
Teen drivers - Additional resources. Retrieved from http://www.
nhtsa.dot.gov/portal/site/nhtsa/template.MAXIMIZE/menuitem.
cd18639c9dadbabbbf30811060008a0c/?javax.portlet.tpst=4427
b997caacf504a8bdba101891ef9a_ws_MX&javax.portlet.prp_
4427b997caacf504a8bdba101891ef9a_viewID=detail_view&
itemID=d91cd60670268110VgnVCM1000002fd17898RCRD&
viewType=standard

National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. (2004). Reduc-
ing underage drinking: A collective responsibility. Washington: The
National Academies Press.

Perry, C. L., Williams, C. L., Komro, K. A., Veblen-Mortenson, S.,
Stigler, M. H., Munson, K. A., et al. (2002). Project Northland:
action to reduce
Long-term outcomes of
adolescent alcohol use. Health Education Research, 17(1),
117–132.

community

Petridou, E., Zavitsanos, X., Dessypris, N., Frangakis, C., Mandyla, M.,
Doxiadis, S., et al. (1997). Adolescents in high-risk trajectory:
Clustering of risky behavior and the origins of socioeconomic
health differentials. Preventive Medicine, 26(2), 215–219.

Pettit, G. S., Laird, R. D., Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E., & Criss, M. M.
(2001). Antecedents and behavior-problem outcomes of parental
monitoring and psychological control in early adolescence. Child
Development, 72(2), 583–598.

Reifman, A., Barnes, G. M., Dintcheff, B. A., Farrell, M. P., & Uhteg, L.
(1998). Parental and peer inﬂuences on the onset of heavier
drinking among adolescents. Journal of Studies on Alcohol,
59(3), 311–317.

Newcomb, M. D. (1995). Drug use etiology among ethnic minority
adolescents: Risk and protective factors.
J. Botvin,
S. Schinke, & M. A. Orlandi (Eds.), Drug abuse prevention with
multiethnic youth (pp. 105–129). Thousand Oaks: Sage.

In G.

Resnick, M. D., Bearman, P. S., Blum, R. W., Bauman, K. E., Harris,
K. M., Jones, J., et al. (1997). Protecting adolescents from harm.
Findings from the National Longitudinal Study on Adolescent
Health. JAMA, 278(10), 823–832.

Newes-Adeyi, G., Chen, C. M., Williams, G. D., & Faden, V. B. (2005).
Surveillance report #74: Trends in underage drinking in the United
States, 1991–2003. Washington: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism.

O’Malley, P. M., Johnston, L. D., & Bachman, J. G. (1998). Alcohol use
among adolescents. Alcohol Health and Research World, 22,
85–93.

Oxford, M. L., Harachi, T. W., Catalano, R. F., & Abbott, R. (2000).
Preadolescent predictors of substance initiation: A test of both
the direct and mediated effect of family social control factors on
deviant peer associations and substance initiation. American
Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 27(4), 599–616.

Pasch, K. E., Komro, K. A., Perry, C. L., Hearst, M. O., & Farbakhsh, K.
(2007). Outdoor alcohol advertising near schools: What does it
advertise and how is it related to intentions and use of alcohol
among young adolescents? Journal of Studies on Alcohol and
Drugs, 68(4), 587–596.

Pasch, K. E., Perry, C. L., Stigler, M. H., & Komro, K. A. (2009). Sixth
grade students who use alcohol: Do we need primary prevention
programs for “tweens”? Health Education & Behavior, 36(4),
673–695.

Patterson, G. R., Dishion, T. J., & Yoerger, K. (2000). Adolescent
growth in new forms of problem behavior: Macro- and micro-
peer dynamics. Prevention Science, 1(1), 3–13.

Perry, C. L., Williams, C. L., Forster, J. L., Wolfson, M., Wagenaar,
A. C., Finnegan, J. R., et al. (1993). Background, conceptualiza-
tion and design of a community-wide research program on
adolescent alcohol use: Project Northland. Health Education
Research, 8(1), 125–136.

Perry, C. L., Williams, C. L., Veblen-Mortenson, S., Toomey, T. L.,
Komro, K. A., Anstine, P. S., et al. (1996). Project Northland:
Outcomes of a communitywide alcohol use prevention program
during early adolescence. American Journal of Public Health,
86(7), 956–965.

Simantov, E., Schoen, C., & Klein, J. D. (2000). Health-compromising
behaviors: Why do adolescents smoke or drink?: Identifying
underlying risk and protective factors. Archives of Pediatrics &
Adolescent Medicine, 154(10), 1025–1033.

Simons-Morton, B., & Hartos, J. (2002). Application of the author-
itative parenting model to adolescent health behavior. In R. J.
DiClemente, R. A. Crosby, & M. C. Kegler (Eds.), Emerging
theories in health promotion practice and research (pp. 100–125).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Simons-Morton, B., Haynie, D. L., Crump, A. D., Eitel, S. P., & Saylor,
K. E. (2001). Peer and parent inﬂuences on smoking and drink-
ing among early adolescents. Health Education & Behavior, 28(1),
95–107.

Sinha, J. W., Cnaan, R. A., & Gelles, R. J. (2006). Adolescent risk
behaviors and religion: Findings from a national study. Journal of
Adolescence, 30, 231–249.

Smart, R. G., Adlaf, E. M., & Walsh, G. W. (1996). Procurement of
alcohol and underage drinking among adolescents in Ontario.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 57(4), 419–424.

Smith, L. A., & Foxcroft, D. R. (2009). The effect of alcohol advertis-
ing, marketing and portrayal on drinking behaviour in young
people: Systematic review of prospective cohort studies. BMC
Public Health, 9, 51.

Snyder, L. B., Milici, F. F., Slater, M., Sun, H., & Strizhakova, Y. (2006).
Effects of alcohol advertising exposure on drinking among
youth. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 160(1),
18–24.

Spoth, R., Redmond, C., & Lepper, H. (1999). Alcohol initiation
outcomes of universal family-focused preventive interventions:
One- and two-year follow-ups of a controlled study. Journal of
Studies on Alcohol Supplement, 13, 103–111.

Spoth, R. L., Redmond, C., Trudeau, L., & Shin, C. (2002). Longitu-
dinal substance initiation outcomes for a universal preventive
intervention combining family and school programs. Psychology
of Addictive Behaviors, 16(2), 129–134.

Stacy, A. W., Zogg, J. B., Unger, J. B., & Dent, C. W. (2004). Exposure
to televised alcohol ads and subsequent adolescent alcohol use.
American Journal of Health Behavior, 28(6), 498–509.

Stattin, H., & Kerr, M.

(2000).

Parental monitoring:

A reinterpretation. Child Development, 71(4), 1072–1085.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2002).
Substance use and the risk of suicide among youths (The NSDUH
report). http://oas.samhsa.gov/2k4/ageDependence/ageDependence.
cfm.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2004).
Alcohol dependence or abuse and age at ﬁrst use (The NSDUH report).
http://oas.samhsa.gov/2k4/ageDependence/ageDependence.cfm.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2005).
The national survey on drug use and health report: Alcohol use and
delinquent behaviors among youths. Rockville: Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration, Ofﬁce of Applied
Statistics.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2009).
Results from the 2008 National Survey on Drug Use and Health:
National Findings (Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, NSDUH Series
H-36, HHS Publication No. SMA 09-4434). Rockville, MD.
Swahn, M. H., Hammig, B. J., & Ikeda, R. M. (2002). Prevalence of
youth access to alcohol or a gun in the home. Injury Prevention,
8(3), 227–230.

Sweeting, H., West, P., & Richards, M. (1998). Teenage family life,
lifestyles and life chances: Associations with family structure,
conﬂict with parents, and joint family activity. International
Journal of Law, Policy and the Family, 12, 15–46.

The Henry Kaiser Family Foundation. (2002). Substance use and
risky sexual behavior: Attitudes and practices among adolescents
and young adults. American Journal of Health Education, 33(5),
278–281.

van der Vorst, H., Engels, R. C., Meeus, W., Dekovic, M., & Van
Leeuwe, J. (2005). The role of alcohol-speciﬁc socialization in
adolescents’ drinking behaviour. Addiction, 100(10), 1464–1476.
Wagenaar, A. C., Finnegan, J. R., Wolfson, M., Anstine, P. S.,
Williams, C. L., & Perry, C. L. (1993). Where and how adoles-
cents obtain alcoholic beverages. Public Health Reports, 108(4),
459–464.

White, H. R., Johnson, V., & Buyske, S. (2000). Parental modeling and
parenting behavior effects on offspring alcohol and cigarette use. A
growth curve analysis. Journal of Substance Abuse, 12(3), 287–310.
Wills, T. A., Gibbons, F. X., Gerrard, M., Murry, V. M., & Brody, G. H.
(2003). Family communication and religiosity related to sub-
stance use and sexual behavior in early adolescence: A test for
pathways
through self-control and prototype perceptions.
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 17(4), 313–323.

Wilson, N., Battistich, V., Syme, S. L., & Boyce, W. T. (2002). Does
elementary school alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana use increase
middle school risk? The Journal of Adolescent Health, 30(6),
442–447.

Windle, M., & Davies, P. T. (1999). Depression and heavy alcohol use
among adolescents: Concurrent and prospective relations. Devel-
opment and Psychopathology, 11(4), 823–844.

Windle, M., Spear, L. P., Fuligni, A. J., Angold, A., Brown, J. D., Pine, D.,
et al. (2008). Transitions into underage and problem drinking:

Alcohol Use Disorders A 105

Developmental processes and mechanisms between 10 and 15
years of age. Pediatrics, 121(Suppl 4), S273–S289.

A

Zucker, R. A. (2006). Alcohol use and the alcohol use disorders:
A developmental-biopsychosocial systems formulation covering
the life course. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Develop-
mental psychopathology (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.

Zucker, R. A., Donovan, J. E., Masten, A. S., Mattson, M. E., & Moss,
H. B. (2008). Early developmental processes and the continuity
of risk for underage drinking and problem drinking. Pediatrics,
121(Suppl 4), S252–S272.

Zullig, K. J., Valois, R. F., Huebner, E. S., Oeltmann, J. E., & Drane,
J. W. (2001). Relationship between perceived life satisfaction and
adolescents’ substance abuse. The Journal of Adolescent Health,
29(4), 279–288.

Alcohol Use Disorders

FRANCHESKA PEREPLETCHIKOVA
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA

Overview
Early adolescence is replete with signiﬁcant transitions.
The age period between 10 and 15 years is characterized
by changes in self-identity, puberty, greater autonomy,
changes in family and peer relations, and development
of romantic relationships. This period is also notable
for emerging alcohol use. Indeed, alcohol is the most
commonly used substance for adolescents. Alcohol use
disorders in youth are associated with signiﬁcant
morbidity and mortality. The costs to society are
including hospitalizations, disabilities, rapes,
vast,
premature deaths, suicides, assaults, and fetal alcohol
syndrome. Over the past decades, there has been
a burgeoning of research on the adolescent alcohol
use disorders. This review discussed epidemiology
and developmental pathways of the adolescent alcohol
use problems. Further, the risk and protective factors
family, and
are summarized,
environmental inﬂuences, as well as the complex inter-
play between these factors. Assessment, intervention
and prevention strategies are also discussed.

including individual,

Substance misuse is among the most prevalent
causes of adolescent morbidity and mortality, and
alcohol
is the most commonly used substance for
adolescents (Brannigan et al. 2004). From adolescent

106 A Alcohol Use Disorders

prospective, drinking may represent a desire to assume
the adult social identity by early adoption of behaviors
that are characteristic of the “adult” world, may be
a form of a rebellion against rules and parental control,
or may be a part of the fun and exciting activities (e.g.,
Bjarnason et al. 2003). Yet, research suggests that alco-
hol consumption in adolescence is not just limited to
occasional experimentation. About 36% of high school
seniors report consuming ﬁve or more drinks on
a single occasion during the month and 7% of eighth
graders drink to intoxication on a monthly basis
(Grunbaum et al. 2004; Johnston et al. 2004). This
problem is widespread and spans across cultures. In
USA, about 47% of adolescents between 14 and 20
years of age are drinking and at higher rates than adults
(Miller et al. 2006). In England and Wales, about 40%
of youths report binge drinking, while in New Zealand,
half of the 11-year-olds use alcohol and 4% of 15-year-
olds suffer from alcohol abuse (Gilvarry and McArdle
2007). Despite laws on minimum-purchase-age and an
increase in the minimum drinking age to 21, youth
continue to have access to alcohol. The costs to society
are vast, including hospitalizations, disabilities, rapes,
premature deaths, suicides, assaults, and fetal alcohol
syndrome (e.g., Chaloupka et al. 2002). In USA, about
$61.9 billion yearly losses are estimated due to under-
age drinking in medical care, property damage, work
loss, and quality of life (Miller et al. 2006). These
estimates exclude long-term consequences, such as cir-
rhosis, cancers, and reduced educational attainments,
all leading to further costs.

Underage drinking is especially concerning, given
the importance of psychological, cognitive, and neuro-
biological development during adolescence. The ﬁne-
tuning of brain circuitry that occurs during this period
is particularly sensitive to alcohol’s neurotoxic proper-
ties, while the low sensitivity to alcohol’s behavioral
effects allows youths to engage in substance use for
longer periods and in higher doses
than adults
(Lubman et al. 2007). Yet, adolescents are more vulner-
able than adults to the chemical insult of alcohol,
including reduced prefrontal cortex and hippocampal
volumes, which affect executive cognitive functions
and memory, resulting in lower IQ and neurocognitive
deﬁcits in attention and visuospatial functioning (e.g.,
De Bellis et al. 2000, 2005). Drinking is associated with
tobacco and illicit drug use, which cause further alter-
ation in the developing brain. Early onset of alcohol use

has also been related to the escalating progression of
intensity and frequency of drinking and
greater
increased lifetime prevalence of alcohol use disorders
(Eaton et al. 2006). Further, suicide is the third leading
cause of death among adolescents, and alcohol use
increases the risk of suicide up to 17 times for male
adolescents and up to three times for females (Groves
and Sher 2005).

Clinical Features
The classiﬁcation systems of psychiatric diseases,
including the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual -IV
(DSM-IV) and the International Classiﬁcation of
Diseases, tenth edition (ICD-10), list two “axes” of
alcohol use disorders, namely, abuse and dependence
(American Psychiatric Association 1994; World Health
Organization 1992). An individual cannot be diag-
nosed with both disorders, as criteria are hierarchical.
A person who meets criteria for dependence cannot be
diagnosed with abuse and a diagnosis of abuse neces-
sitates that a person has never met criteria for depen-
dence. The DSM-IV rule that dependence precludes
abuse diagnosis implies that abuse is a less severe
disorder with earlier onset as compared to dependence.

Diagnosis
Table 1 provides a list of the required symptoms for
each “axis” and derives from the DSM-IV system as,
presently, most of the diagnostic inventories for sub-
stance use disorders are DSM-based. To meet criteria
for abuse, an individual has to have at least one of the
four symptoms within a 12-month period: a failure to
fulﬁll major role obligations, physically hazardous use,
alcohol-related legal problems, and continued use
despite social or interpersonal problems. To diagnose
alcohol dependence, an individual must have at least
three of the seven symptoms within a 12-month
period: tolerance, withdrawal, drinking more than
expected, failure to engage in important activities due
to alcohol use, continued use despite knowledge of the
associated problems, and unsuccessful efforts to cut
down on drinking.

Limitations in Contemporary
Diagnosis
Multiple concerns have been raised regarding the appli-
cation of the above criteria for adolescents as these
criteria were originally developed from research and

Alcohol Use Disorders A 107

A

Alcohol Use Disorders. Table 1 Major symptoms of
alcohol abuse and dependence (Adapted from DSM IV
[American Psychiatric Association 1994])

Alcohol abuse

One or more of the following symptoms during a
12-month period

1. Recurrent use resulting in failure to fulfill major role
obligations at work, school, or home (skipping classes,
suspensions or expulsions, drunk while at school or
work)

2. Recurrent use in situations that are physically
hazardous (driving or speeding, play dare)

3. Recurrent use–related legal problems (vandalism,
theft, or assault while under the influence)

4. Continued use despite persistent or recurrent social or
interpersonal problems (fights with significant others
about intoxication, loss of friends due to alcohol use)

Alcohol dependence

Three or more of the following symptoms during a
12-month period

1. Tolerance (progressively larger amounts are needed to
achieve effect)

2. Withdrawal (two or more symptoms: sweats, increased
pulse, hand tremor, insomnia, nausea, anxiety,
psychomotor agitation, transient hallucinations,
seizures; drinking to relieve/avoid withdrawal)

3. More drank than intended (drink to the point of
getting sick or passing out)

4. Time consuming (considerable amount of time spent
obtaining and using alcohol or recovering)

5. Important social, occupational, or recreational
activities given up or reduced due to use (drop out of
school, quit extracurricular activities, stop spending time
with significant others)

6. Continued use despite knowledge of persistent or
recurrent physical or psychological problems that are
likely caused or exacerbated by use (recurrent episodes
of getting sick, passing out, depression)

7. Unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control use
(repeated expression of desire to cut down without
behavioral change)

clinical experiences with adults. These issues include
difﬁculty with interpreting some items for adolescents,
instability of alcohol use during this age period,
high rate of endorsement of dependence items (e.g.,
tolerance), and low prevalence of withdrawal and

alcohol-related medical problems (e.g., Harrison et al.
1998; Winters et al. 1993). Further, about 10% of ado-
lescents from the general population and over 30% of
those in clinical settings may report several dependence
symptoms but not meet criteria for abuse (Chung et al.
2002). These individuals have been referred to as “diag-
nostic orphans.” Indeed, “diagnostic orphans” may
have more severe alcohol use problems than those
with abuse diagnosis and those diagnosed with alcohol
abuse may have higher symptom severity than those
with dependence (Gelhorn et al. 2008). Thus, concerns
have been raised about the utility of alcohol abuse
diagnosis for adolescents (e.g., Clark 2004). However,
recent evaluation supports DSM-IV abuse criteria for
youth,
and predictive
validities (Schuckit et al. 2008).

speciﬁcally cross-sectional

Comorbid Disorders
The Center for Substance Abuse Treatment indicates
that about 62% of males and 83% of females entering
treatment for substance abuse, report one or more
emotional or behavioral disorders (U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services 2002). Externalizing
problems, such as oppositional deﬁant and conduct
disorders, attention deﬁcit and hyperactivity, and anti-
social personality, are highly associated with adolescent
alcohol use problems, as well as with the transition
from abuse to dependence (Moss and Lynch 2001;
King and Chassin 2007; Wilens 1997). Younger onset
of alcohol use is also associated with depression,
anxiety, posttraumatic stress, eating problems, other
substance use disorders, as well as with borderline
and passive-aggressive personality features (Abram
et al. 2007; Franken and Hendriks 2000; Hanna and
Grant 1999; McGue et al. 2001; Low et al. 2008).

Epidemiology and Developmental
Pathways
Adolescent alcohol dependence begins around age
11 years, peaks near 18 years of age, and rapidly declines
from 18 to 25 years (Li et al. 2004). Prevalence rates
indicate that 33.9% and 56.7% of eighth and tenth
graders,
in the past
12 months, and 19.5% and 42.1% of eighth and tenth
graders, respectively, reported having been drunk in
their lifetime (Johnston et al. 2006a). Similar rates of
alcohol use have been noted for male and female eighth
and tenth graders and greater prevalence of drinking

respectively, used alcohol

108 A Alcohol Use Disorders

for male 12 graders (Johnston et al. 2003). The preva-
lence of using alcohol at least once in the lifetime jumps
from about twothirds for students in tenth grade to
over three-quarters for students in the 12th grade. The
amount and frequency of drinking escalate further after
the high school. More than 80% of the 18- to 20-year-
olds reported having used alcohol in their lifetime, 59%
indicated using in the past 30 days, and 36.3% stated
binge-drinking behaviors (Johnston et al. 2006b).
Indeed, among all age groups, 18- to 24-year-olds
have the highest rates of alcohol consumption and
dependence. Longitudinal data indicates that the over-
all increase in alcohol use from early adolescence to
young adulthood has marked individual differences in
the change rates (Schulenberg and Maggs 2001). The
most common adolescent drinking patterns include
abstainers or light users and stable moderate users
with occasional heavy drinking. Although more that
50% of adolescents are in these low-risk alcohol use
categories, about 20% are higher-risk early-onset
drinkers and time-limited heavy drinkers, and 20%
are chronic heavy drinkers (see Table 2).

There are two primary pathways to heavy drinking
behaviors: early and late onset. Early-onset heavy
drinking is associated with poorer outcomes than
a later onset. Early onset emerges before or during the
high school years and is associated with high levels of
externalizing behaviors and genetic predisposition
(e.g., Chassin et al. 2002; McGue et al. 2001; Viken
et al. 1999). Later-onset alcohol use occurs after high

Alcohol Use Disorders. Table 2 Alcohol use prevalence as
per alcohol use patterns for adolescents (Adapted from
Brown et al. [2008])

Alcohol use pattern

Prevalence (%)

Abstinence or stable low use

Stable moderate use with occasional
heavy use

~20–65

~30

Heavy use with declining use over time ~10

Early onset of use with declining use
over time

Early onset of use with stable heavy
drinking

Late onset with rapid increase to heavy
drinking

~10

<10

<10

changing

arrangements

school, is less affected by the biological factors, and
more affected by the environmental inﬂuences, such
as entering the “adult” world and the culturally
normative rite of passage, increased risk taking, greater
autonomy,
(e.g.,
living
entering college), greater access to alcohol, and more
options for social activities (e.g., Chassin et al. 2002;
Schulenberg and Maggs 2002). Genetic and environ-
ment factors also inﬂuence gender differences in alco-
hol use patterns. Genetic factors affect heavy drinking
more in males than females, while environmental
factors exert greater inﬂuence over the female alcohol
use (King et al. 2005; Slutske et al. 2004). Men are also
more likely than women to transition to heavy drinking
in young adulthood (Jackson et al. 2001).

Risk Factors
Adolescent alcohol consumption does not necessarily
result in clinically signiﬁcant problems. Some adoles-
cents may quickly adjust their drinking patterns, while
others may have greater difﬁculty with abstaining. The
presence of risk and protective factors may inﬂuence
developmental trajectories and outcomes. Factors asso-
ciated with the propensity for heavy drinking encom-
pass individual, family, and environmental inﬂuences,
as well as the complex interplay between these factors
(see Table 3 for summary). Individual factors include
gender, ethnicity, genetic predisposition, difﬁcult
low constrain,
temperament, personality trait of
maturation deviance, low self-esteem, and comorbid
disorders. Males are at a higher risk for alcohol misuse,
speciﬁcally for younger onset and heavier use (e.g.,
Ohannessian et al. 2004; Young et al. 2002). Caucasian
adolescents are more likely to abuse alcohol, as com-
pared to Black and Hispanic youth (e.g., Blum et al.
2000; Maag and Irvin 2005). The social and economic
advantages are positively associated with risk-taking
attitudes and,
thus, may indirectly contribute to
alcohol misuse in Caucasians (Watt 2004).

There is at least a threefold increase in risk for
alcohol use disorders in the children of parents with
alcohol problems (Schuckit 1998, 2000). Some studies
report between 50% and 60% of phenotypic variations
in alcohol dependence as attributable to genetic con-
tributions, and heritability of alcoholism is estimated
to be 48–73% in men and 51–65% in women (Dick and
Foroud 2003; Tyndale 2004). Genetic factor also under-
lies comorbid psychiatric disorders (Siewert et al. 2004).

Alcohol Use Disorders A 109

Alcohol Use Disorders. Table 3 Factors that place youth at risk of alcohol use problems

A

Individual factors

Gender. Males are at a higher risk than females.

Ethnicity. Caucasian males and females are at a higher risk, speciﬁcally as compared to African-Americans

Genetic Predisposition. Children of parents with alcohol problems have a threefold increase in risk of alcohol use
disorders.

Temperament. Difﬁcult temperament in childhood, as characterized by high levels of activity, low task orientation,
withdrawal orientation, negative mood, inﬂexibility, and less adaptability to change.

Personality. High novelty seeking, high reward dependence, aggression, impulsivity, low harm avoidance, and difﬁculty
in inhibiting responses.

Maturation deviance. Early maturation for both genders, and late maturation for males.

Comorbid Psychiatric Disorders. Depression, anxiety, posttraumatic stress, conduct disorder, ODD, ADHD, and personality
disorders features (antisocial, borderline, passive-aggressive).

Self-Esteem. Emotional distress due to low self-esteem.

Parent and family factors

Psychopathology in the Family. Parental alcoholism, parental depression.

Parental Practices and Nurturance. Coercive parent-child communications, insecure attachment, lack of emotional
warmth and support, parental rejection, and disengagement.

Monitoring of the Child. Poor supervision, lack of monitoring of whereabouts, and few rules about where youth can go
and when they can return, lax attitudes toward drinking.

Quality of the Family Relationships. Unhappy marital relationships, interpersonal conﬂict, and aggression of the parents.

Family Structure. Raised by a single parent, especially father, or lives with neither biological parents. Presence of
a stepparent does not improve outcomes.

Maltreatment. Physical, emotional, and sexual abuse, neglect.

Siblings. Presence of an older sibling with alcohol use problems.

Environmental factors

Peer Group. Peers with drinking and antisocial behavior problems.

Community. Low SES, disorganized neighborhoods, easy availability of substances, norms favorable toward substance
use.

School. Low levels of school adjustment, lenient school policies on drinking, social norms favorable toward substance
use, being in trouble with teachers or excluded from school, school location.

Culture. Societies where alcohol availability is greater and heavy drinking is more widespread.

Externalizing behaviors are speciﬁcally implicated and
may exert their impact through low behavioral control
and contact with deviant peers. Further, emotional
and behavioral problems may help explain the ten-
dency of those with early-onset drinking to report low
self-esteem. Alcohol use in adolescence is negatively
concurrently associated with competence and self-
conﬁdence components of self-esteem, while social
acceptance is positively associated with alcohol use,
indicating some social beneﬁts of drinking (Swaim

and Wayman 2004). Earlier initiation of alcohol use
and alcohol-related problems have been also related to
difﬁcult temperament in childhood (e.g., high levels of
activity, low task orientation, negative mood, inﬂexi-
bility), high novelty seeking, reward dependence,
aggression, impulsivity, low harm avoidance, and difﬁ-
culty inhibiting responses (e.g., Brody et al. 1998;
Brown et al. 1996). The association between alcohol
use and the genetic, personality, and temperamental
factors, as well as emotional and behavioral problems,

110 A Alcohol Use Disorders

points to the underlying dispositions toward drinking
that can alter the developmental trajectories toward the
increased likelihood of negative outcomes.

Some

individuals

also maturing

in
are
nonnormative ways, and this may increase their vul-
nerability. Maturation deviance, especially early matu-
ration, predicts higher rates of delinquent behaviors,
substance use, and early sexual involvement for both
males and females (e.g., Wiesner and Ittel 2002). Early
maturation may affect adolescent behaviors through
the changes in psychosocial functioning, as well as
through a discrepancy between the rates of sexual,
cognitive, and social development. Early maturers
tend to associate with older peers and have more
heterosexual relationships, but may not be yet prepared
to handle complicated social situations and additional
pressures. Early maturing girls associating with older
boys may have difﬁculty in resisting pressures to drink
or engage in sexual activities. Early maturing boys may
try to adopt “adult” behaviors (e.g., alcohol or cigarette
use) as a way to get access to older peers and to cope
with the perceived gap between the biological and
social maturities. There is also some evidence linking
increased risk of drinking to late maturation in boys
(Andersson and Magnusson 1990). Late maturing boys
may be drinking to compensate for their “low status” in
the peer groups, to look more mature, to increase social
acceptance, or to cope with low self-esteem.

Family risk factors encompass parental substance
use and psychopathology, problematic family relation-
ships, nonintact family structures, poor supervision,
and child abuse. As discussed above, genetic predispo-
sition plays a major role in the propensity for alcohol
use disorders. In the sample of male adolescents
recruited from a treatment program for substance
problems, 33% of variance in alcohol abuse and 56%
of the variance in dependence were accounted for by
parental transmission factors (Hartman et al. 2006).
Parental alcohol use increases the risk of use in off-
spring also through the shared environment, including
poverty, high conﬂict, and lax attitudes toward drink-
ing (e.g., Ellis et al. 1997; Sartor et al. 2007). Children
raised by alcoholic parents may observe more negative
interactions and dysfunctional behaviors between fam-
ily members, may suffer from the lack of emotional
warmth and support, and may experience parental
rejection and poor monitoring (e.g., Cohen et al.
1994; Velleman and Orford 1993). These factors are

related to low self-esteem, increased vulnerability to
the negative inﬂuences of deviant peer groups, and
problems with emotional adjustment (e.g., Lewis
2000; Nillsen and Metha 1994). In Power et al. (2005),
longitudinal examination on the patterns of adolescent
alcohol use, lenient paternal attitudes about alcohol
use, and peer involvement in antisocial behaviors
predicted adolescent transition from abstinence to
normative drinking;
in prosocial
activities with peers and the availability of spending
money predicted the transition to high risk drinking;
and the problem drinking was predicted by the
emotional distress, such as low self-esteem.

low involvement

Adolescents living with a single biological parent,
speciﬁcally a single father, or with neither parents,
drink more frequently than adolescents living with
both biological parents, and the presence of a steppar-
ent does not improve outcomes (Bjarnason et al. 2003).
Lack or deﬁciency in parental control associated with
single parenting may contribute to this effect. The level
of parental monitoring and the effectiveness of parental
supervision are inversely related to the levels of alcohol
use in early adolescence, and this relationship is
bidirectional (Clark et al. 2008). While low parental
supervision predicts higher adolescent alcohol use,
adolescents with emotional and behavioral discontrol
and drinking problems also resist parental monitoring.
Parenting children with behavior problems, emotional
is quite
dysregulation, and difﬁcult
challenging. Such children are more likely to be
emotionally neglected by their parents, and parental
disengagement can be manifested in poor monitoring
during adolescence (Dishion et al. 2004). Adolescents
with alcohol use disorders are also 6–12 time more
likely to have a history of physical abuse and 18–20
times more likely to have a history of sexual abuse than
community controls (Clark et al. 1997). The history of
maltreatment is related to the earlier onset of substance
use diagnoses, higher rates of comorbid major depres-
sion and posttraumatic stress disorder, greater disabil-
ity, and higher rates of relapse (Clark et al. 2003).

temperament

Environmental

factors include peer group inﬂu-
ences, community and school factors, and sociocul-
tural aspects. Peer group inﬂuences are strongly
associated with adolescent alcohol use (Henry et al.
2004). Two primary mechanisms may be involved,
namely, selection of
friends and socialization by
friends. That is, adolescents tend to associate with

peers with similar beliefs, attitudes, and behavior pat-
terns, and are inﬂuenced by friends’ drinking behaviors
through imitation, social reinforcement, beliefs, expec-
tation, and shared norms. This process is dynamic,
where changes in the number of alcohol-using friends
are paralleled by changes in the individual’s alcohol
consumption (e.g., Bray et al. 2003; Henry et al.
2004). However, adolescent alcohol use does not simply
match the peer use. This relationship is moderated by
individual’s attitudes and beliefs. The greater the pro-
pensity for risk taking and the lower the level of the
perceived future harm, the stronger is the inﬂuence of
the peer alcohol use. Further, genetic factors play a key
role in the association between individual’s and peers’
drinking patterns as the shared genetic predisposition
to use alcohol may inﬂuence peer selection (Hill et al.
2008).

Adolescents living in communities with low SES,
disorganized neighborhoods, easy availability of sub-
stances, law and community norms favorable toward
substance use, have higher drinking rates (e.g., Duncan
et al. 2002; Song et al. 2009). Several school factors may
also increase risks, including low levels of own and
other students adjustment in the school environment,
lenient school policies on drinking, social norms
favorable toward substance use, being in trouble with
teachers or excluded from school, as well as school
location (by alcohol outlets density) (Henry et al.
2009; Kuntsche and Kuendig 2005). The extent of alco-
hol consumption in youths is also imbedded in the
cultural norms and social context. In societies where
alcohol availability is greater and heavy alcohol use is
more widespread, the frequency of individual alcohol
consumption among adolescents is greater (Bjarnason
et al. 2003). Further, adolescents living in the nonintact
families may be more affected by the adverse effects of
the societal factors than those living with both biolog-
ical parents.

Protective Factors
The complex interplay between individual’s biological
predisposition, personal relationships, and environ-
mental factors inﬂuences the developmental pathways.
Thus, understanding factors that facilitate positive
outcomes is critical. As can be expected from the review
of the risk factors, protective factors include high
self-esteem, emotional regulation, secure attachment,
parental emotional warmth, support, and monitoring,

Alcohol Use Disorders A 111

parental abstinence–based norms, peer security and
peer involvement in prosocial activities, school involve-
ment, and future aspirations, as well as living in com-
munities with higher employment, greater numbers of
married couples, and greater number of grandparents
as caregivers (e.g., Brody et al. 1998; Clark et al. 2008;
Song et al. 2009; Swaim and Wayman 2004).

A

Temperamental

factors, positive older sibling’s
inﬂuences, and religious involvement are also impli-
cated. Youth with temperaments that promote greater
social and emotional support have a decreased risk
of negative alcohol-related outcomes. Cuddly and
affectionate infants and young children are less likely
to develop alcohol use disorders in adolescence and
adulthood (Werner and Smith 1992). Involvement in
religious activities also reduces this risk, but may be
a reﬂection of stronger family relationships, shared
family environmental inﬂuences, and genetic factors
(Koopmans et al. 1999). Alcohol use patterns of the
older siblings may be a protective or a risk factor. In
a study of young adolescents with older siblings, 90%
reported not using alcohol
their older siblings
abstained from alcohol in the past year, while 25%
reported drinking if their siblings used alcohol 20 or
more times (Needle et al. 1986).

if

Assessment
Assessment of alcohol use disorders relies primarily on
(see Table 4 for essentials
the adolescent self-report
on assessment). Self-report measures are critical for
the assessment of this problem because they can elicit
information not apparent to parents, obtainable from
institutional records, or evident through direct obser-
vations. Recent review of the assessment instruments of
the adolescent alcohol use disorders identiﬁed 32
inventories that encompass screening tools, diagnostic
and multiscale inventories, motivation and self-efﬁcacy
instruments and retrospective systematic assessments
(Perepletchikova et al. 2008). Screening tools are used
to evaluate presence of an alcohol use problem and
functioning in related domains. For
the level of
example, Alcohol Use Disorders
Identiﬁcation Test
(Babor et al. 1992) is a ten-item measure used to
identify hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption
before established dependence, and major psychical
and psychosocial consequences. Problems identiﬁed
via screening instruments warrant further evaluation
problem-focused
interviews,
using

diagnostic

112 A Alcohol Use Disorders

Alcohol Use Disorders. Table 4 Essentials on assessing
alcohol use disorders in adolescents

1. Assuring confidentiality is vital for obtaining reliable
data on adolescent substance use.

example of retrospective assessment and provides an
estimate of daily drinking up to 12 months that can be
used for treatment planning, evaluation of treatment
effects, and follow-up assessments.

2. Assessment should involve adolescent self-report, and
just obtaining parental report is inadequate.

3. There are no specific assessment instruments that
have been established to be individually diagnostic for
adolescent substance abuse and dependence.

4. There are no core symptoms associated with making
the diagnosis of alcohol abuse and dependence.

5. When a behavior pattern meets both diagnoses, the
diagnosis of alcohol dependence takes precedence.

6. Risk and protective factors, including parent-child
relationship, parental psychopathology, school and peer
group involvement, history of abuse, and comorbid
problems, should be assessed for treatment, planning,
and delivery.

7. Assessment of biomarker, such as carbohydrate-
deficient transferring and gamma-glutamyltransferase, is
useful for monitoring alcohol use in adolescents.

8. Urinalysis is recommended in monitoring treatment of
adolescents with alcohol use disorders, given the high
comorbidity with other substance use problems in this
population.

interviews, multiscale questionnaires, and retrospective
systematic reviews of drinking behaviors. Diagnostic
interviews provide general psychiatric assessment as
well as substance use evaluation. The Adolescent
Diagnostic Interview (Winters and Henly 1993) is
a comprehensive 213-item measure that assesses symp-
toms associated with substance use as per DSM-IV
criteria, including substance use history, psychosocial
functioning, mental health, and sociodemographic
information. Problem-focused interviews
typically
measure history of substance use and related problems,
including functional difﬁculties and social,
legal,
academic, and vocational consequences, such as the
Adolescent Drug Abuse Diagnosis (Fiedman and Utada
tap into similar
1989). Multiscale questionnaires
domains; however, they are self-administered, usually
include scales for detecting distortion in responding,
and offer normative data. For example, the Adolescent
Self-Assessment Proﬁle (Wanberg 1992) is a 225-item
measure that assesses frequency, beneﬁts, and conse-
quences of substance use and risk factors. The Alcohol
Time-Line Follow-Back (Sobell and Sobell 1992) is an

Treatment
Multiple interventions have been used to address
alcohol use disorders in adolescence, including phar-
macotherapy,
family therapies, cognitive-behavioral
interviewing, and Alco-
interventions, motivational
holics Anonymous (AA). Table 5 presents information
on the treatment approaches, and key points are
elaborated below.

Psychosocial Interventions
A resent review identiﬁed Multidimentional Family
Therapy and group-administered Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy (CBT) as having the strongest empirical
support for treatment of alcohol use disorders in
adolescence (Perepletchikova et al. 2008). The key
assumptions of the Multidimentional Family Therapy
(MDFT) are that the adolescent is involved in multiple
domains (e.g., family, school, peer, legal and welfare
systems), each of these domains is associated with
different risk factors, and, thus, adolescent psychopa-
thology is best managed within a multiple systems
approach (Liddle 1992). Treatment focuses on four
areas: (1) individual characteristics of the adolescent
(e.g., perceptions about alcohol/drug use, using behav-
ior, including coping with urges to use, and emotional
regulation processes); (2) the parent(s) (e.g., parenting
practices, personal issues); (3) family interaction pat-
terns; and (4) extra-familial sources of inﬂuence and
development (e.g., school,
juvenile justice, medical,
and legal systems). The overarching goal of treatment
is to reestablish normal developmental processes. Goals
and foci areas with the adolescent include building
competencies in school, sports, or other domains,
reducing involvement with deviant peers, increasing
involvement in prosocial activities, and problem solv-
ing and affect regulation skills building. For the parent,
goals include reducing psychiatric distress, improving
social support and parenting skills, and addressing
necessary economic issues. At the family level, inter-
ventions focus on attachment, communication, and
increasing family organization.

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) interventions
for adolescent alcohol use involve: (1) self-monitoring;

Alcohol Use Disorders. Table 5 Treatment approaches for adolescent alcohol use disorders

A

Intervention

Key features

Alcoholics anonymous (AA; Winters et al. 2000) AA offers emotional support through self-help groups and a model of

Alcohol Use Disorders A 113

abstinence for people recovering from alcohol dependence, using a
12-step approach. Adolescent treatment programs focus primarily on
the first five steps: (1) admitting to the power of substances to make
one’s life unmanageable; (2) believing there is hope for change if one
allows help; (3) learning from the advice of others as one explores
making different decisions about life; (4) taking an in-depth moral
inventory of one’s life; and (5) discussing one’s past wrongs with a peer,
counselor, or significant other.

MDFT incorporates structural and strategic family therapy approaches,
as well as systems approaches, and targets multiple systems, including
family, school, peer, legal, and welfare. The goals are: (1) to reestablish
normal developmental processes; (2) to build competencies; (3) to
reduce involvement with deviant peers and increase involvement in
prosocial activities; (4) to build problem solving and affect regulation
skills; (5) to reduce parental psychiatric distress, and improve social
support and parenting skills; and (6) to improve family communication
and organization.

MST incorporates CBT strategies, pragmatic, problem-solving models,
parent training, and pharmacological treatments. The goals are: (1) to
enhance caregiver’s capacity to effectively monitor adolescent
behavior; (2) to increase family structure; (3) to identify barriers to
parent’s reinforcement of appropriate behaviors; (4) to decrease
adolescent involvement with delinquent peer group and encourage
association with prosocial peers; and (5) to promote school
performance and/or vocational functioning.

BSFT incorporates structural and strategic family therapies approaches
and focuses specifically on “within-family” interventions. The main
goals are: (1) engagement of treatment-resistant family members;
(2) joining with the family; (3) assessment of family communication
patterns; and (4) restructuring family interactions to improve limit-
setting, monitoring of adolescent behavior, and other parenting
practices linked to problematic behaviors.

CBT focuses on: (1) self-monitoring; (2) identifying cognitive, social, and
emotional triggers of use; (3) developing a repertoire of skills to
manage cravings; and (4) identifying alternative reinforcement
contingencies.

MET targets adolescent’s ambivalence concerning whether or not they
have a problem with alcohol and other drugs, with a goal to increase
their motivation to change.

Multidimensional family therapy (MDFT;
Dennis et al. 2004; Liddle 1992)

Multisystemic therapy (MST; Henggeler et al.
1999)

Brief strategic family therapy (BSFT;
Santisteban et al. 2003)

Cognitive behavior therapy (cBT; Kaminer and
Slesnick 2005)

Motivational enhancement therapy (MET;
Bailey et al. 2004; Dennis et al. 2004)

(2) identifying cognitive, social, and emotional triggers
of use; (3) developing a repertoire of skills to manage
cravings; and (4) identifying alternative reinforcement
contingencies (Kaminer and Slesnick 2005). Commu-
nication, problem solving, and alcohol refusal skills are
taught, together with relaxation training and anger
management. Distorted cognitions are also addressed,

and therapy sessions characteristically include model-
ing, behavior rehearsal, and feedback. Adolescents are
frequently resistant to ‘homework’, and often require in
vivo processing of distorted cognitions and problem-
solving deﬁcits during therapy sessions. The strongest
empirical support to date is for the group-administered
CBT in combination with brief individual motivational

114 A Alcohol Use Disorders

enhancement (Dennis et al. 2004). CBT interventions
tend to produce rapid short-term effects that are not
sustained at
longer-term follow-up assessments.
Combination of CBT with family-based interventions
seems to be promising for longer-term efﬁcacy. Brief
Motivational Enhancement Therapy appears to be an
important adjunct to CBT, speciﬁcally for reducing
negative consequences of drinking.

Pharmacological Interventions
Data on pharmacological interventions for adolescent
alcohol use disorders is very preliminary. Only a few
randomized controlled trials have been performed to
establish the effectiveness of medications to address
this problem. Given the paucity of research in this
area, pharmacological agents will be discussed brieﬂy.
Medications that have been tested for use with adoles-
cents, and have some preliminary support, include
disulﬁram, naltrexone, acamprosate, and serotonergic
agents (e.g., tianeptine, and ondansetron). Disulﬁram
alters the metabolism of alcohol and produces a mildly
toxic acetaldehyde, which causes anxiety, headache,
nausea, and vomiting. The symptoms are noxious
enough that most individuals, who are compliant
with medication, remain abstinent (Niederhofer and
Staffen 2003a). Naltrexone is the opioid antagonist and
is associated with reduced number of days drinking and
lowered reports of craving alcohol in adolescents (Deas
et al. 2005; Niederhofer et al. 2003a). Its mechanism of
action of acamprosate has yet to be established; how-
ever, it has been used for the treatment of alcohol
dependence in adults, and there is some evidence to
its efﬁcacy with adolescent (Niederhofer and Staffen
2003b). Preliminary support
the efﬁcacy of
tianeptine (Niederhofer et al. 2003b), which facilitates
the re-uptake of serotonin, and ondansetron (Dawes
et al. 2005), a 5HT3 antagonist, have also been reported
in adolescents with alcohol use disorders.

for

Prevention
Over the past few decades, much progress has been
made in devising interventions to prevent underage
drinking. Recent review identiﬁed 400 preventive inter-
ventions, of which 127 had some supportive evidence
(Spoth et al. 2008). Preventive interventions for alcohol
use disorders
in adolescent primarily focus on
addressing risk and protective factors originating in
the family, school, community, as well as in multiple

and environmentally

domains. Further, prevention encompasses policy,
focused interventions.
law,
Family-focused preventive interventions, such as the
Nurse–Family Partnership (Olds et al. 1998) and
Strengthening Families Program (Spoth et al. 2001),
address factors such as parental monitoring and super-
vision, parent-child bonding, discipline practices, and
parental involvement in child’s activities. Several inter-
ventions integrate family and school components, such
as Linking the Interests of Families and Teachers (Eddy
et al. 2000). Evaluation of these interventions indicates
reduction in disruptive and behavior problems that are
associated with alcohol use, as well as delay in alcohol
use initiation and reduction in heavy drinking in
adolescence.

School-based interventions, such as Keepin’ it REAL
(Hecht et al. 2003), teach students antidrug norms,
peer resistance, social and coping skills, reinforced
by booster activities (e.g., role-plays) and media cam-
paigns. Such programs have been shown to be effective
in reducing disruptive behaviors problems and early
initiation of substance use. Multidomain programs,
such as Project STAR (Pentz and Valente 1995), inter-
vene in two or more domains (e.g., family, school,
worksite, community, policy), and most often focus
on children and younger adolescents, as they are less
independent and mobile. Policy and law interventions,
on the other hand, focus more on older adolescents,
and include passing out laws raising the minimum
drinking age, reducing sales to minor, and better
identiﬁcation checks by vendors, as well as reducing
tolerance of the underage sales and drinking in the
communities.

Concluding Comments
Early adolescence is replete with signiﬁcant transitions.
The age period between 10 and 15 years is characterized
by dramatic changes such as puberty, emotional dis-
tancing from parents, changes in peer relations, new
parental, teacher and societal expectations, changes in
self-identity, greater autonomy and contact with the
larger environment, development of romantic relation-
ships, and, in some cases, early-onset sexual behaviors.
This period is also notable for emerging alcohol use.
Underage drinking is not limited to adolescent exper-
imentation and may lead to clinically signiﬁcant prob-
lems, as the transition from early adolescence to young
adulthood is characterized by a substantial increase in

Alcohol Use Disorders A 115

A

heavy use. Alcohol use disorders come with signiﬁcant
costs to individual and the society. Understanding
factors that inﬂuence developmental pathways, as well
as
research on the prevention and intervention
strategies are critical. While the past decade has seen
marked advances in the assessment, treatment, and
prevention of underage drinking problems, as well as
in understanding of the associated factors, there is
much left to learn.

Acknowledgments
Completion of this essay was facilitated by support
from the NRSA\NIMH Research Fellowship in Func-
tional Disability Interventions (T-32-MH062994).

Cross-References
▶ Alcohol Use
▶ Alcoholics Anonymous

References
Abram, K. M., Washburn, J. J., Teplin, L. A., Emanuel, K. M., Romero,
E. G., & McClelland, G. M. (2007). Posttraumatic stress disorder
and psychiatric comorbidity among detained youths. Psychiatric
Services, 58, 1311–1316.

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of the mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington: APA.
Andersson, T. A., & Magnusson, D. (1990). Biological maturation in
adolescence and the development of drinking habits and alcohol
abuse among young males: A prospective longitudinal study.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 19, 33–41.

Babor, T., de la Fuente, J., Saunders, J., & Grant, M. (1992). AUDIT:
The Alcohol Use Disorders Identiﬁcation Test: Guidelines for use in
primary health care. Geneva: WHO.

Bailey, K. A., Baker, A. L., Webster, R. A., & Lewin, T. J. (2004). Pilot
randomized controlled trial of a brief alcohol intervention group
for adolescents. Drug and Alcohol Review, 23, 157–166.

Bjarnason, T., Andersson, B., Choquet, M., Elekes, Z., Morgan, M., &
Rapinett, G. (2003). Alcohol culture,
family structure and
adolescent alcohol use: Multilevel modeling of frequency of
heavy drinking among 15–16 year old students in 11 European
countries. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 64, 200–208.

Blum, R. W., Beuhring, T., Shew, M. L., Bearinger, L. H., Sieving,
R. E., & Resnick, M. D. (2000). The effects of race/ethnicity,
income, and family structure on adolescent risk behaviors.
American Journal of Public Health, 90, 1879–1884.

Brannigan, R., Schackman, B. R., Falco, M., & Millman, R. B. (2004).
The quality of highly regarded adolescents substance abuse treat-
ment programs: Results of an in-depth national survey. Archives
of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 158, 904–909.

Bray, J. H., Adams, G. J., Getz, J. G., & McQueen, A. (2003). Individ-
uation, peers, and adolescent alcohol use: A latent growth anal-
ysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 553–564.

Brody, G. H., Flor, D. L., Hollett-Wright, N., & McCoy, J. K. (1998).
Children’s development of alcohol use norms: Contributions of
parent and sibling norms, children’s temperament, and parent-
child discussions. Journal of Family Psychology, 12, 209–219.
Brown, S. A., Gleghorn, A., Schuckit, M. A., Myers, M. G., Mott,
M. A., et al. (1996). Conduct disorder among adolescent alcohol
and drug abusers. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 57, 314–324.
Brown, S. A., McGue, M., Maggs, J., Schulenberg, J., Hingson, R.,
Swartzwelder, S., et al. (2008). A developmental perspective
on alcohol and youths 16 to 20 years of age. Pediatrics, 121
(Suppl. 4), S290–S310.

Chaloupka, F. J., Grossman, M., & Saffer, H. (2002). The effects of
price on alcohol consumption and alcohol-related problems.
Alcohol Research & Health, 26, 22–34.

Chassin, L., Pitts, S. C., & Prost, J. (2002). Binge drinking trajectories
from adolescence to emergent adulthood in a high-risk sample:
Predictors and substance abuse outcomes. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 70, 67–78.

Chung, T., Martin, C., Armstrong, T., & Labouvie, E. (2002). Preva-
lence of DSM-IV alcohol diagnoses and symptoms in adolescent
community and clinical samples. Journal of the American Acad-
emy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 41, 546–554.

Clark, D. B. (2004). The natural history of adolescent alcohol use

disorders. Addiction, 99, 5–22.

Clark, D. B., Lesnick, L., & Hegedus, A. M. (1997). Traumas and other
adverse life events in adolescents with alcohol abuse and depen-
dence. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 36, 1744–1751.

Clark, D. B., De Bellis, M. D., Lynch, K. G., Cornelius, J. R., & Martin,
C. S. (2003). Physical and sexual abuse, depression and alcohol
use disorders in adolescents: Onsets and outcomes. Drug and
Alcohol Dependence, 69, 51–60.

Clark, D. B., Kirisci, L., Mezzich, A., & Chung, T. (2008). Parental
supervision and alcohol use in adolescence: Developmentally
speciﬁc interactions. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral
Pediatrics, 29, 285–292.

Cohen, D. A., Richardon, J., & LaBree, L. (1994). Parenting behaviors
and the onset of smoking and alcohol use: A longitudinal study.
Pediatrics, 94, 368–375.

Dawes, M. A., Johnson, B. A., Ait-Daoud, N., Ma, J. Z., & Cornelius,
J. R. (2005). A prospective, open-label trial of ondansetron in
adolescents with alcohol dependence. Addictive Behaviors, 30,
1077–1085.

Deas D, May M. P., Randall C, Johnson N, Anton R. (2005). Naltrex-
one treatment of adolescent alcoholics: an open-label pilot study.
Journal of Child & Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 15, 723–728.
De Bellis, M. D., Clark, D. B., Beers, S. R., Soloff, P. H., Boring, A. M.,
Hall, J., et al. (2000). Hippocampal volume in adolescent-
onset alcohol use disorders. The American Journal of Psychiatry,
157, 737–744.

De Bellis, M. D., Narasimhan, A., Thatcher, D. L., Keshavan, M. S.,
Soloff, P., & Clark, D. B. (2005). Prefrontal cortex, thalamus
and cerebellar volumes in adolescents and young adults with
adolescent onset alcohol use disorders and co-morbid mental
disorders. Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research, 29,
1590–1600.

116 A Alcohol Use Disorders

Dennis, M., Godley, S. H., Diamond, G., Tims, F. M., Babor, T.,
Donaldson, J., et al. (2004). The Cannabis Youth Treatment
(CYT) study: Main ﬁndings from two randomized trials. Journal
of Substance Abuse Treatment, 27, 197–213.

Dick, D. M., & Foroud, T. (2003). Candidate genes for alcohol
dependence: A review of genetic evidence from human studies.
Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research, 27, 868–879.
Dishion, T. J., Nelson, S. E., & Bullock, B. M. (2004). Premature
adolescent autonomy: Parent disengagement and deviant peer
process in the ampliﬁcation of problem behavior. Journal of
Adolescence, 27, 515–530.

Duncan, S. C., Duncan, T. E., & Strycker, L. A. (2002). A multilevel
analysis of neighborhood context and youth alcohol and drug
problems. Prevention Science, 3, 125–133.

Eaton, D. K., Kann, L., & Kinchen, S. (2006). Youth risk behavior
surveillance: United States, 2005. MMWR: Surveillance Summa-
ries, 55, 1–108.

Eddy, M. J., Reid, J. R., & Fetrow, R. A. (2000). An elementary school-
based prevention program targeting modiﬁable antecedents of
youth delinquency and violence. Linking the Interest of Families
and Teachers (LIFT). Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disor-
ders, 8, 165–176.

Ellis, D. A., Zucker, R. A., & Fitzgerald, H. E. (1997). The role of
family inﬂuences in development and risk. Alcohol Health and
Research World, 21, 218–226.

Fiedman, A. S., & Utada, A. (1989). A method for diagnosing and
planning the treatment of adolescent drug abusers (the Adoles-
cent Drug Abuse Diagnosis [ADAD] instrument). Journal of
Drug Education, 19, 285–312.

Franken, I. H. A., & Hendriks, V. M. (2000). Early-onset of illicit
substance use is associated with greater axis-II comorbidity, not
with axis-I comorbidity. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 59,
305–308.

Gelhorn, H., Hartman, C., Sakai, J., Stallings, M., Young, S., Rhee,
S. H., et al. (2008). Towards DSM-V: An item response theory
analysis of the diagnostic process for DSM-IV alcohol abuse and
dependence in adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 1329–1339.

Gilvarry, E., & McArdle, P. (2007). Alcohol, drugs, and young people:
Clinical Approaches. Clinics in developmental medicine (p. 172).
London: MacKeith.

Groves, S. A., & Sher, L. (2005). Letter to the editor: Gender differ-
ences in suicidal behavior and alcohol abuse in adolescents.
International Journal of Adolescent Medicine and Health, 17,
307–308.

examination based on a statewide school survey. The American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 486–492.

Hartman, C. A., Lessem, J. M., Hopfer, C. J., Crowley, T. J., & Stallings,
M. C. (2006). The family transmission of adolescent alcohol
abuse and dependence. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 67, 657–664.
Hecht, M. L., Marsiglia, F. F., Elek, E., Wagstaff, D., Kulis, S.,
Dustman, P., et al. (2003). Culturally grounded substance use
prevention: An evaluation of the keepin’ it R.E.A.L curriculum.
Prevention Science, 4, 233–248.

Henggeler, S. W., Pickrel, S. G., & Brondino, M.

J. (1999).
Multisystemic treatment of substance-abusing and dependent
delinquents: Outcomes, treatment ﬁdelity, and transportability.
Mental Health Services Research, 1, 171–184.

Henry, K. L., Slater, M. D., & Oetting, E. R. (2004). Alcohol use in
early adolescence: The effect of changes in risk taking, perceived
harm and friends” alcohol use. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 66,
275–283.

Henry, K. L., Stanley, L. R., Edwards, R. W., Harkabus, L. C., &
Chapin, L. A. (2009). Individual and contextual effects of school
adjustment on adolescent alcohol use. Prevention Science, 10,
236–247.

Hill, J., Emery, R. E., Harden, K. P., Mendle, J., & Turkheimer, E.
(2008). Alcohol use in adolescent twins and afﬁliation with
substance using peers. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 36,
81–94.

Jackson, K. M., Sher, K. J., Gotham, H. J., & Wood, P. K. (2001).
Transitioning into and out of large-effect drinking in young
adulthood. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 378–391.
Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., & Bachman, J. G. (2003). Monitoring
the future: National survey results on drug use, 1975–2002: Vo. 1.
Secondary School Students (NIH Pub. No. 03-5375). Bethesda:
National Institute of Drug Abuse.

Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Bachmn, J. G., & Schulenberg, J. E.
(2004). Monitoring the future: National survey results on drug use,
1975–2003 (NIH Publication No. 04-5507). Bethesda: Depart-
ment of Drug Abuse.

Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Bachmn, J. G., & Schulenberg, J. E.
(2006a). Monitoring the Future: National survey results on drug
use, 1975–2005: Vo. 1. Secondary school students (NIH Publication
No. 06-5883). Bethesda: National Institute of Drug Abuse.
Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Bachmn, J. G., & Schulenberg, J. E.
(2006b). Monitoring the future: National survey results on drug
use, 1975–2005: Vo. I1. College students and adults ages 19–45
(NIH Publication No. 06-5884). Bethesda: National Institute of
Drug Abuse.

Grunbaum, J. A., Kass, L., Kinchen, S., Ross, J., Hawkins, J., Lowry, R.,
et al. (2004). Youth risk behavior surveillance – United
States, 2003. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 53(SS-02),
1–96.

Kaminer, Y., & Slesnick, N. (2005). Evidence-based cognitive-
behavioral and family therapies for adolescent alcohol and
other substance use disorders. Recent Developments in Alcohol-
ism, 17, 383–405.

Hanna, E. Z., & Grant, B. F. (1999). Parallels to early onset alcohol use
in the relationship of early onset smoking with drug use and
DSM-IV drug and depressive disorders: Findings from the
National Longitudinal Epidemiologic Survey. Alcoholism,
Clinical and Experimental Research, 23, 513–522.

Harrison, P. A., Fulkerson, J. A., & Beebe, T. J. (1998). DSM-IV
substance use disorder criteria for adolescents: A critical

King, K. M., & Chassin, L. (2007). A prospective study of the effects of
age of initiation of alcohol and drug use on young adults sub-
stance dependence. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 68, 256–265.
King, S. M., Burt, A., Malone, S. M., McGue, M., & Iacono, W. G.
(2005). Etiological contributions to heavy drinking from late
adolescence to young adulthood. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
112, 587–598.

Koopmans, J. R., Slutske, W. S., van Baal, G. C. M., & Bloomsma, D. I.
(1999). The inﬂuence of religion on alcohol use initiation:
Evidence for genotype x environment interaction. Behavior
Genetics, 29, 445–453.

Kuntsche, E. N., & Kuendig, H. (2005). Do school surroundings
matter? Alcohol outlet density, perception of adolescent drinking
in public, and adolescent alcohol use. Addictive Behaviors, 30,
151–158.

Lewis, S. H. (2000). Psychosocial adjustment of adult children of
alcoholics: A review of the recent empirical literature. Clinical
Psychology Review, 20, 311–337.

Li, T. K., Hewitt, B. G., & Grant, B. F. (2004). Alcohol use disorders
and mood disorders: A national institute on alcohol abuse and
alcoholism perspective. Biological Psychiatry, 56, 718–720.
Liddle, H. A. (1992). A multidimensional model for treating the
adolescent drug abuser. In W. Snyder & T. Ooms (Eds.),
Empowering
adolescents: Family-centered
treatment of adolescents with mental health and substance abuse
problems. Washington: US Government Printing Ofﬁce.

families, helping

Low, N. C., Lee, S. S., Johnson, J. G., Williams, J. B., & Harris, E. S.
(2008). The association between anxiety and alcohol versus
cannabis abuse disorders among adolescents in primary care
settings. Family Practice, 25, 321–327.

Lubman, D. I., Bonomo, Y., & Yucel, M. (2007). Drug use in young
people: Short-term effects and long-term harms. In E. Gilvarry,
& P. McArdle (Eds.), Alcohol, drugs, and young people: Clinical
Approaches. Clinics in Developmental Medicine, 172 (pp. 18–50).
London: MacKeith.

Maag, J. W., & Irvin, D. M. (2005). Alcohol use and depression among
African-American and Caucasian adolescents. Adolescence, 40,
87–101.

McGue, M., Iacono, W. G., Legrand, L. N., Malone, S., & Elkins, I.
(2001). The origins of age at ﬁrst drink: I. Associations with
substance-use disorders, disinhibitory behavior and psychopa-
thology, and P3 amplitude. Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental
Research, 25, 1156–1165.

Alcohol Use Disorders A 117

adolescents. Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research,
27, 136.

A

Nillsen, D. M., & Metha, A. (1994). Parental behavior and adolescent
self-esteem in clinical and nonclinical samples. Adolescence, 29,
525–542.

Ohannessian, C. M., Hesselbrock, V. M., Kramer, J., Kuperman, S.,
Bucholz, K. K., Schuckit, M. A., et al. (2004). The relationship
between parental alcoholism and adolescent psychopathology:
A systematic examination of parental comorbid psychopathol-
ogy. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 32, 519–533.

Olds, D., Henderson, C. R., Cole, R., Eckenrode, J., Kitzman, H.,
Luckey, D., et al. (1998). Long-term effects of nurse home
visitation on children’s criminal and antisocial behavior:
A 15-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. Journal of
the American Medical Association, 280, 1238–1244.

Pentz, M. A., & Valente, T. (1995). Project STAR: A substance
abuse prevention campaign in Kansas city. In T. E. Backer &
E. M. Rogers
(Eds.), Successful health communications
campaigns: Organizational dimensions (pp. 37–60). Thousand
Oaks: Sage.

Perepletchikova, F., Kaufman, J., & Krystal, J. H. (2008). Practitioner
review: Assessment and treatment of adolescent alcohol use
disorders.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 49,
1131–1154.

Power, T. G., Steward, C. D., Hughes, S. O., & Arbona, C. (2005).
Predicting patterns of adolescent alcohol use: A longitudinal
study. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 66, 74–81.

Santisteban, D. A., Perez-Vidal, A., Coatsworth, J. D., Kurtines, W. M.,
Schwartz, S. J., LaPerriere, A., et al. (2003). Efﬁcacy of brief
strategic family therapy in modifying Hispanic adolescent behav-
ior problems and substance use. Journal of Family Psychology, 17,
121–133.

Sartor, C. E., Lynskey, M. T., Heath, A. C., Jacob, T., & True, W.
(2007). The role of childhood risk factors in initiation of alcohol
use and progression to alcohol dependence. Addiction, 102,
216–225.

Miller, T. R., Levy, D. T., Spicer, R. S., & Taylor, D. M. (2006). Societal
costs of underage drinking. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 67,
519–528.

Schuckit, M. A. (1998). Biological, psychological and environmental
predictors of the alcoholism risk: A longitudinal study. Journal of
Studies on Alcohol, 59, 485–494.

Moss, H. B., & Lynch, K. G. (2001). Comorbid disruptive behavior
disorder symptoms and their relationship to adolescent alcohol
use disorders. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 64, 75–83.

Needle, R., McCubbin, H., & Reineck, R. (1986). Interpersonal inﬂu-
ences in adolescent drug use: The role of older siblings, parents and
peers. The International Journal of the Addictions, 21, 739–766.

Niederhofer, H., & Staffen, W. (2003a). Comparison of disulﬁram
and placebo in treatment of alcohol dependence of adolescents.
Drug and Alcohol Review, 22, 295–297.

Niederhofer, H., & Staffen, W. (2003b). Acamprosate and its efﬁcacy
in treating alcohol dependent adolescents. European Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry, 12, 144–148.

Niederhofer, H., Staffen, W., & Mair, A. (2003a). Comparison of
naltrexone and placebo in treatment of alcohol dependence of
adolescents. Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly, 21, 87–95.

Niederhofer, H., Staffen, W., & Mair, A. (2003b). Tianeptine may be
a useful adjunct in the treatment of alcohol dependence of

Schuckit, M. A. (2000). Genetics of the risk for alcoholism. American

Journal of Addiction, 9, 103–112.

Schuckit, M. A., Danko, G. P., Smith, T. L., Bierut, L. J., Bucholz,
K. K., Edenberg, H. J., et al. (2008). The prognostic implications
of DSM-IV abuse criteria in drinking adolescents. Drug and
Alcohol Dependence, 97, 94–104.

Schulenberg, J. E., & Maggs, J. L. (2001). Moving targets: Modeling
developmental trajectories of adolescent alcohol misuse, individ-
ual and peer risk factors, and intervention effects. Applied Devel-
opmental Science, 5, 237–253.

Schulenberg, J. E., & Maggs, J. L. (2002). A developmental perspective
on alcohol use and heavy drinking during adolescence and the
transition to young adulthood. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 14,
54–70.

Siewert, E. A., STalling, M. C., & Hewitt, J. K. (2004). Genetic
inﬂuence on vulnerability to, and protective factors for adoles-
cent drinking. Twin Research, 7, 617–625.

118 A Alcoholics Anonymous

Slutske, W. S., Hunt-Carter, E. E., Nabors-Oberg, R. E., Sher, K. J.,
Bucholz, K. K., Madden, P. F., et al. (2004). Do college students
dink more than their non-college-attending peers? Evidence
from a population-based longitudinal female twin study. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 113, 530–540.

Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1992). Timeline follow-back:
A technique for assessing self-reported ethanol consumption.
In J. Allen & R. Z. Litten (Eds.), Measuring alcohol consumption:
Psychological and biological methods. Totowa: Human.

Song, E. U., Reboussin, B. A., Foley, K. L., Kaltenbach, L. A., Wagoner,
K. G., & Wolfson, M. (2009). Selected community characteristics
and underage drinking. Substance Use & Misuse, 44, 179–194.
Spoth, R., Redmond, C., & Shin, C. (2001). Randomized trial of
brief family interventions for general population: Adolescent
substance use outcomes 4 year following baseline. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 627–642.

Spoth, R., Greenberg, M., & Turrisi, R. (2008). Preventive interven-
tions addressing underage drinking: Stae of the evidence and
steps toward public health impact. Pediatrics, 121(Suppl. 4),
S311–S336.

Swaim, R. C., & Wayman, J. C. (2004). Multidimensional self-esteem
and alcohol use among Mexican American and White non-
Latino adolescents: Concurrent and prospective effects. The
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 74, 559–570.

Tyndale, R. F. (2004). Genetics of alcohol and tobacco use in humans.

Annals of Medicine, 35, 94–121.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2002). Report to
congress on the prevention and treatment of co-occurring substance
abuse and mental disorders. Rockville: Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration.

Velleman, R., & Orford, J. (1993). The adult adjustment of offspring
of parents with drinking problems. The British Journal of Psychi-
atry, 162, 503–516.

Viken, R. J., Kaprio, J., Koskenvuo, M., & Rose, R. J. (1999). Longi-
tudinal analyses of the determinants of drinking and of drinking
to intoxication in adolescent
twins. Behavior Genetics, 29,
455–461.

Wanberg, K. W. (1992). Adolescent self-assessment proﬁle. Arvada:
Center for Alcohol/Drug Abuse Research and Evaluation.
Watt, T. T. (2004). Race/ethnic differences in alcohol abuse among
youth: An examination of risk- taking attitudes as a mediating
factor. Journal of Ethnicity in Substance Abuse, 3, 33–47.

Wiesner, M., & Ittel, A. (2002). Relations of pubertal

Werner, E. E., & Smith, R. S. (1992). Overcoming the odds: High risk
children from birth to adulthood. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
timing
and depressive symptoms to substance use in early adolescence.
Journal of Early Adolescence, 22, 5–23.

Wilens, T. E. (1997). AOD use and attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder. Alcohol Health and Research World, 22, 127–130.
Winters, K. C., & Henly, G. A. (1993). Adolescent diagnostic Interview
schedule and manual. Los Angeles: Western Psychological
Services.

Winters, K. C., Stinchﬁeld, R. D., Fulkerson, J., & Henly, G. A.
(1993). Measuring alcohol and cannabis use disorders in an
adolescent clinical samples. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 7,
185–196.

Winters, K. C., Stinchﬁeld, R. D., Opland, E., Weller, C., & Latimer,
W. W. (2000). The effectiveness of
the Minnesota Model
approach in the treatment of adolescent drug abusers. Addiction,
95, 601–612.

World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD 10 classiﬁcation of

mental and behavioral disorders. Geneva: WHO.

Young, S. E., Corley, R. P., Stallings, M. C., Rhee, S. H., Crowley, T. J.,
& Hewitt, J. K. (2002). Substance use, abuse and dependence in
adolescence: Prevalence, symptom proﬁles and correlates. Drug
and Alcohol Dependence, 68, 309–322.

Alcoholics Anonymous

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is an association of alco-
hol-dependent persons devoted to the achievement
and maintenance of sobriety of its members through
self-help and mutual support. AA has been deemed
helpful for many problem drinkers, and referral to it
by treatment providers is common. The program is
widely known for its “12 steps” to recovery; its princi-
ples include a ﬁrm belief in God or higher power, frank
self appraisals, willingness to admit and correct wrongs
done to others, and a dedication to assisting others who
seek to conquer their own alcoholism. Despite its pop-
ularity, little is known about why it leads to abstinence.
In fact, research on the effectiveness of AA is contro-
versial and subject to divergent interpretations (Kelly
et al. 2009). Although treatment providers and juvenile
court systems have recommended AA-type programs
for adolescents, whether it is appropriate to do so and
whether they can be effective, at least in its dominant
form, remains debatable. Controversy surrounds more
than its effectiveness (which, as will be seen below, is
potentially problematic); much controversy centers on
the potentially religious overtones of programs that, for
example, raise important issues when the programs
would be funded by the government or might have
youth participate in them (see Levesque 2002).

Few studies have examined the effects of the age
compositions of AA groups. Existing studies show that
although adolescents may be helped by AA, they tend
not to attend, and if they do they are more likely to

the substance is

discontinue earlier than adults. This lack of success
tends to have been seen as the result of other members’
being older and not necessarily relating well to adoles-
cents (Kelly et al. 2005). These ﬁndings have led to
developing different groups that are more age appro-
priate, which has shown to contribute to increasing
attendance and the likelihood of engaging in the 12
steps of recovery (Kelly et al. 2005). Still, the 12-step
model has been deemed somewhat problematic when
applied for adolescents. This has been seen in AA’s
stance that
the cause of most
presenting problems when, for adolescents, substance
abuse may only be part of a much larger behavioral
pattern or a temporary one that may not be alcoholism.
The program also has been seen as potentially prob-
lematic in that adolescents may be even less likely than
other groups to be open to changing their abuse habits.
Still, some studies have shown that attending a 12-step
program reduces adolescent substance involvement
even after program termination (Kelly et al. 2000).
these positive ﬁndings, when it
Despite some of
comes to adolescents, reviews of existing research reveal
that studies have yet to support the utility and effec-
tiveness of adult-derived 12-step approaches (Kelly
and Myers 2007).

Cross-References
▶ Alcohol Use
▶ Alcohol Use Disorders

References
Kelly, J. F., Magill, J., & Stout, R. L. (2009). How do people recover
from alcohol dependence? A systematic review of the research on
mechanisms of behavior change in Alcoholics Anonymous.
Addiction Research & Theory, 17, 236–259.

Kelly, J., & Myers, M. G. (2007). Adolescents’ participation in
Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous: Review,
implications and future directions.
Journal of Psychoactive
Drugs, 39, 259–269.

Kelly, J. F., Myers, M. G., & Brown, S. A. (2000). A multivariate
process model of adolescent 12-step attendance and substance
use outcome following inpatient treatment. Psychology of Addic-
tive Behaviors, 14, 376–389.

Kelly, J. F., Myers, M. G., & Brown, S. A. (2005). The effects of age
composition of 12-Step groups on adolescent 12-Step participa-
tion and substance use outcome. Journal of Child & Adolescent
Substance Abuse, 15, 63–72.

Levesque, R. J. R. (2002). Not by faith alone: Religion, adolescence and

the law. New York: New York University Press.

Alternative Schools A 119

Alternative Schools

A

2

1, MICHAEL S. KELLY
CYNTHIA FRANKLIN
1School of Social Work, University of Texas, Austin,
TX, USA
2School of Social Work, Loyola University Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA

Overview
Parents of American adolescents who are unsuccessful
in a regular public school environment are often faced
with difﬁcult decisions on where they can best educate
their adolescent. Since the 1960s, alternative schools
have grown as a response to this quandary. Alternative
schools offer smaller classrooms, intensive emotional
and behavioral supports, and at times specialized
curriculum to address the needs of students who have
struggled in their home school. Ideally, alternative
schools represent an often last-ditch effort of parents,
adolescents, and schools to ﬁnd positive and produc-
tive school environments for them to continue their
education. Despite the hopes that many have for alter-
native schools to engage and graduate at-risk adoles-
cents, the evidence that these schools are effective in
carrying out their mission is mixed at best, with mul-
tiple critiques of alternative schools’ failure to provide
adequate
challenging student
to these
populations. This essay will review the history of alter-
native schooling in USA, brief descriptions of types of
alternative schools offered, and a review of the research
on the impacts of alternative schools on at-risk
adolescents.

supports

Populations Generally Studied/
Sources of Data
The most recently available data indicates that there are
more than 10,000 public alternative schools in USA
that offer education to roughly 1.3% of the US K-12
public school population (National Center for Educa-
tion Statistics 2002). Many of those schools focus on
students in the middle school and high school years,
focusing on providing academic, emotional, and
behavioral supports to at-risk adolescents. More than
90% of secondary level districts offered some form of
alternative education program, often housed in
a separate educational building or facility (National

120 A Alternative Schools

Center for Education Statistics 2002). Students can be
enrolled in these schools through a variety of pathways,
but most
typically, students are referred to these
schools by their home school districts due to signiﬁcant
behavioral and emotional problems that have impacted
the student’s learning and have resulted in multiple
suspensions and even expulsion. Indeed, a recent
study showed that 20% of the students in alternative
public schools have individualized education plans
(IEPs) that require special education services (Lehr
and Lange 2003).

Only about 70% of American youth make it
through high school with a regular diploma (Smink
and Reiner 2005). Most policymakers and researchers
agree that it is no longer possible to build a viable adult
life without a high school diploma or at the minimum,
a certiﬁcate of General Educational Development
(GED). Those youth who don’t ﬁnish school are at
risk for a host of negative social, economic, and health
outcomes
in adulthood compared to peers who
graduate high school. They earn less, have poorer job
prospects, have poorer health, and are overrepresented
in the US prison population (National Center for Edu-
cation Statistics 2005). Only about one-half (52%) of
students in the principal school systems of the 50
largest cities complete high school with a diploma.
There is a large gap for ethnic minorities and males,
as well as a 15-point percentage gap between the sub-
urbs and urban areas with urban areas having much
worse dropout rates (Swanson 2008). Other longitudi-
nal analyses of dropout data suggest that the dropout
crisis is more concentrated in lower socioeconomic
areas and mostly exists in about 20% of America’s
high schools (Mishel and Joydeep 2007). Researchers

have found that low socioeconomic status was associ-
ated with dropout status regardless of ethnic group.
Poverty is certainly a risk factor for all youth. Table 1
details research on the diverse factors that cause
students to drop out, and the successful addressing of
these factors will form the basis of this essay’s appraisal
of the literature for alternative school effectiveness
discussed below.

for

disenfranchised

It is important to note that while not all students at
risk of dropping out are served by alternative schools,
a major feature of the initial legislation that created
alternative schools (The Elementary and Secondary
Education Act of 1965) was to create educational
at-risk
opportunities
populations, including students who are for whatever
reason unsuccessful in their home school environment.
The risk factors for this population are more than just
that of special education and/or low-income status:
that just as many of these students have IEPs for aca-
demic or behavioral concerns, they have signiﬁcant
rates of substance abuse problems and have also signif-
icant rates of being victimized by violence and sexual
abuse (Dupper 2006).

and

Controversies
Given these sobering statistics, it is not surprising that
school districts have utilized alternative schools as an
option for engaging at-risk students. However, the
trend toward adopting “zero-tolerance” policies
toward students with signiﬁcant behavior problems in
schools (particularly drug use and violent behavior)
has caused the alternative school to move in dramati-
cally different directions from its initial progressive
education focus of engaging and graduating alienated

Alternative Schools. Table 1 Reasons for dropping out (Franklin and Kelly 2010)

Individual reasons

Family reasons

● Poor daily attendance
● Misbehavior
● Alcohol and drug use
● Feeling alienated from other students
● Mental health issues
● Special education
● High mobility and frequent moves
● Trouble with the law or juvenile justice

involvement

● Parents not engaged in child’s schooling
● Teen pregnancy
● Students getting married
● Financial and work responsibilities
● Permissive parenting style
● Negative emotional reactions and sanctions

for bad grades

● Child abuse and neglect
● Foster care placement

School-related and
academic reasons

● Student/teacher ratio

(too big)

● Failure to be promoted to

the next

● Grade
● Quality of teachers
● Want smaller school size
● School safety concerns
● Not feeling welcomed at

the school

Alternative Schools A 121

A

and at-risk youth. Scholars and policymakers note the
shift, and describe the two major camps of alternative
schools as primarily addressing either “ﬁxing the
school environment” (more progressive, therapeutic
and holistic schools) or “ﬁxing the student” (more
structured, compliance-oriented, and punitive). As
concerns about school violence and adolescent drug
and gang behavior continue to grab headlines, the
tendency for school districts to embrace a more puni-
tive “ﬁx the student” approach appears to be growing,
despite concerns that these schools do little to effect the
students themselves and may result in simply keeping
the at-risk students away from their age-mates by
warehousing them in alternative schools (Dupper
2006).

Measures and Measurement Issues
There are at least three signiﬁcant measurement issues
in the ﬁeld of alternative schools for adolescents: The
ﬁrst involves deﬁning and counting alternative schools,
the second involves assessing whether alternative
schools “work” at their chosen mission of engaging
and successfully educating at-risk youth, and the third
involves the relative paucity of empirical research on
the topic itself. Despite the seeming enduring prefer-
ence school districts have for supporting and creating
alternative schools, the review conducted for this essay
(using an array of educational and academic databases
e.g., ERIC, PSYC INFO, and Social Work Abstracts)
yielded only limited current data on how many alter-
native schools there are in the USA and whether they
are effective in their work with youth. The most current
survey of state-level data on alternative schools dates
from 2003, and the most far-reaching federal data is
even older, dating from 2001 (Lehr and Lange 2003;
National Center for Education Statistics 2002).

The most recent data shows that while alternative
schools can have both progressive and punitive com-
ponents, the strong trend is toward states creating
alternative schools to “ﬁx the student.” Alternative
schools are increasingly deﬁning their mission as
treating students who have been expelled from their
home school, are considered in some way disruptive in
their regular home school environment, and meet
other at-risk criteria for youth (Lehr and Lange 2003).
Whether the school
is in a separate building or
a smaller school-within-a-school in a larger secondary
the emphasis appears to be on
school building,

focusing on student behavior and getting students to
comply with rules that they had failed to comply with
in the regular setting. What is not clear from the
current data is how much time is spent on teaching
basic academic skills and preparing these students for
the transition to work via vocational education and
community-based learning (Lehr and Lange 2003;
National Center for Education Statistics 2002).

Additionally, answering the questions of whether
these schools “work” are elusive, as there is limited
evidence on alternative schools’ effectiveness. Part of
this owes to basic research design issues: The most
recent meta-analysis on alternative schools is 15 years
old, and even that study could ﬁnd scant evidence of
experimental designs testing these schools’ effective-
ness and conducting extended follow-up of program
results (Cox et al. 1995). Additionally, the ﬁndings from
that 1995 meta-analysis indicated that on the key issue
of preventing and reducing adolescent delinquency,
alternative schools had no effect (Cox et al. 1995).
Data from the early 2000s indicates that 99% of home
school districts have some stated policy of allowing
students placed in alternative schools to re-enter their
home school, but no national statistics are being col-
lected at present to indicate how many students in fact
do transition back to their home school (National
Center for Education Statistics 2002). For the purpose
of this essay, the overarching outcome of graduation
rates has been chosen, in part because it is at least
something that is collected at both state and federal
levels with some consistency and rigor. However, even
this measure proves to be elusive here, as research
directly on graduation rates for alternative school stu-
dents isn’t yet being disaggregated from larger school
district data. What is clear is that students in urban,
high-poverty areas are more likely to have alternative
these
schools available to them, and given that
populations have high relative rates of school dropout
to other adolescent populations, further research on
how alternative schools do (or don’t) help students
avoid dropout appears to be needed (Dupper 2006).

Rather than simply wait for this research to be
conducted, this essay’s authors (Franklin and Kelly)
as well as other leading school social work scholars
like Dupper (2006) have begun to examine the com-
ponents of effective alternative education/treatment
programs for at-risk adolescents. Findings from a
prior review of this literature are summarized in Table 2

122 A Alternative Schools

Alternative Schools. Table 2 Dropout prevention and intervention programs: results from the EBP search (Franklin and
Kelly 2009)

Effective programs and interventions

Career academies
Career development/job training; mentoring; other:
alternative program
Project graduation really achieves dreams (project GRAD)

Academic support; case management; family strengthening;
school/classroom environment; other: college preparation
and scholarships
Advancement via individual determination (AVID)

Academic support; family strengthening; structured
extracurricular activities; other: college preparation
Big brothers big sisters
After-school; mentoring

Check and connect
Academic support; behavioral intervention; case
management; family strengthening; mentoring; truancy
prevention

Functional family therapy
Behavioral intervention; family therapy
Multidimensional family therapy
Behavioral intervention; court advocacy/probation/transition;
family strengthening; family therapy; mental health services;
structured extracurricular activities; substance abuse
prevention

Quantum opportunities
Academic support; after-school; life skills development;
mentoring; structured extracurricular activities; other:
planning for future

Talent development high schools
Academic support, after school, behavioral support, mental
health services, school/classroom environment
Talent search

Academic support, career development/job training, family
engagement, life skills development, mental health services,
other: college planning
Twelve together

Academic support, after school, life skills development,
mentoring, structured extra-curricular activities

Rigorous
research
design

Relevant population
studied (adolescent at-risk
youth)

One year
follow-up

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

(see Franklin and Kelly 2009 for more details on the
review process). Effective alternative education pro-
grams targeting at-risk youth appear to mix mentoring,
job training, therapeutic treatment, and family engage-
ment to provide a supportive context for the at-risk
adolescent to succeed. Encouragingly, the components

of a successful program for at-risk youth in an alterna-
tive education setting are already known: What isn’t yet
known is how many alternative schools use these com-
ponents, how many are focused primarily on compli-
ance, and how many have school climate issues that
these key
adversely affect

the implementation of

components. (For one example of a successful alterna-
tive school targeting dropout prevention for at-risk
youth in Austin, Texas, see Franklin et al. 2007 for
more information).

Gaps in Knowledge
As it is likely clear at this point from this review, there
are signiﬁcant and persistent gaps in the knowledge
base for alternative schools. Survey estimates indicate
there are upward of 10,000 alternative public schools
whose content, mission, and effectiveness is little
known; this is concerning, especially as the increased
pressure for test-score accountability via the No Child
likely to put
Left Behind (NCLB) legislation is
increased pressure on school leaders to ﬁnd alternative
school arrangements for students who are viewed as
adversely impacting the educational environment. One
important concern that surfaced periodically in the
literature found for this review was alienation theory,
which in part may explain why so many adolescents feel
disenfranchised from their home school and choose to
act out those feelings through school violence or other
delinquent behavior. Related to alienation theory,
teacher caring and school connectedness appear to be
promising areas of research to help educators, parents,
and school-based mental health professionals under-
stand how best to create school environments that
work for all students (Schussler and Collins 2006).
While not directly addressing issues of alternative
schooling, the work of Bowen, Richman, and Bowen
on the School Success Proﬁle and its related instru-
ments (Bowen et al. 2001) offers some promise in
helping schools asses their student and family needs
and gauge how responsive their schools are to the
very at-risk youth that alternative schools typically
enroll.

Beyond these promising areas of research, some
basic research is needed for alternative schools to fulﬁll
their mission to educate the most at-risk youth in US
public schools. As basic as this sounds, regular census
data on the number, type, and functions of alternative
schools is crucial to tracking the growth and evolution
of these schools. Additionally, rigorous evaluation of
model alternative schools is essential, for while over
90% of secondary school districts have some form of
alternative school program on offer, little is known
about how these schools measure their effectiveness
and even less is known about the effectiveness of these

Alternative Schools A 123

schools. Having a new batch of well-designed experi-
mental studies of alternative schools would facilitate
larger policy and practice discussions about how best to
mix the divergent goals of “ﬁxing the school environ-
ment” and “ﬁxing the student” in the alternative
schools of the twenty-ﬁrst century.

A

References
Bowen, G., Woolley, M. E., Richman, J. M., & Bowen, N. (2001).
Brief intervention in schools: The school success proﬁle. Brief
Treatment and Crisis Intervention, 1(1), 43–54.

Cox, S. M., Davidson, W. S., & Bynum, T. S. (1995). A meta-analytic
assessment of deliquency-related outcomes of alternative educa-
tion programs. Crime & Delinquency, 41(2), 219–234.

Dupper, D. (2006). Guides for designing and establishing alternative
school programs for dropout prevention.
In C. Franklin,
M. B. Harris, & P. Allen-Meares (Eds.), School services sourcebook:
A guide for school-based professionals. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Franklin, C., & Kelly, M. S. (2009). Becoming evidence-informed in
the real world of school social work practice. Children & Schools,
31(1), 46–56.

Franklin, C., & Kelly, M. S. (2010). Dropped out and failing: Helping
with school problems. In C. Franklin & R. Fong (Eds.), The
church leaders resource book for mental health and social problems.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Franklin, C., Streeter, C. L., Kim, J. S., & Tripodi, S. J. (2007). The
effectiveness of brief, solution-focused therapy is a public alter-
native school
for dropout prevention/retrieval. Children &
Schools, 29(3), 133–144.

Lehr, C. A., & Lange, C. M. (2003). Alternative schools and students
they serve: Perceptions of state directors of special education.
Policy Research Brief, 14(1). Minneapolis: University of Minne-
sota, Research and Training Center on Community Living. From
http://ici.umn.edu/products/prb/141/default.html.

Mishel, L., & Joydeep, R. (2007). Where our high school dropout

crisis really is? Education Digest, 72, 12–21.

National Center for Education Statistics. (2002). Public alternative
schools and programs for students at risk of education failure:
2000–2001. Retrieved on February 20, 2010 from http://nces.ed.
gov/surveys/frss/publications/2002004/index.asp.

National Center for Education Statistics. (2005). Youth indicators
2005: Trends in the well-being of American youth. Retrieved
June 28, 2008, from http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?
pubid = 2005050.

Schussler, D. L., & Collins, A. (2006). An empirical exploration of the
who, what, and how of school care. Teachers College Record,
108(7), 1460–1495.

Smink, J., & Reiner, M. S. (2005). Research report: Fifteen effective
strategies for improving student attendance and truancy preven-
tion. Clemson, SC: National Dropout Prevention Center/
Network.

Swanson, C. B. (2008). Cities in crisis: A special analytic report on high
school graduation. Bethesda: Editorial Project in Education
(EPE).

124 A Altruism

Altruism

Piliavin, J. A. (2009). Altruism and helping: The evolution of a ﬁeld:
Social Psychology

2008 Cooley-Mead presentation.

The
Quarterly, 72, 209–225.

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

The term altruism has long been one of the most widely
used by psychologists to refer to studies concerning
adolescents’ positive behaviors. Along with the terms
such as caring, kindness, and prosocial behavior,
“altruism” primarily invokes behaviors intended to
beneﬁt others, as opposed to proving beneﬁcial for
one’s own self and interests (Roker et al. 1999). Some
researchers argue that there is really no real altruism,
that altruism often beneﬁts the self through, for exam-
ple, the power, status, reward, psychological beneﬁts
gained from acting altruistically (Piliavin 2009).

instead,

Although many ﬁelds of study have examined altru-
ism, the ﬁeld of adolescent research has not addressed it
directly but,
through such constructs as
prosocial and helping behavior as well as conceptions
of citizenship and moral development. Researchers
have shown how, as adolescents develop their emerging
sense of self, their behavior will likely vacillate between
actions that serve their own interests and behavior
meant to provide beneﬁts to other people. For example,
research has shown that learning about citizenship and
being exposed to diverse and different cultures,
peoples, and viewpoints can help an adolescent expand
his or her viewpoint (see Flanagan and Gallay 1995). As
this process progresses, adolescents can cultivate social
maturity through these enlarged horizons; in turn, they
can gain a sense of having membership in the goals of
collective society, and simultaneously, develop leader-
ship skills and responsibility toward others. Through
this process, and through appropriate service opportu-
nities, adolescents learn about the intrinsic beneﬁts of
devoting more of their time and efforts to contribu-
tions that will serve other people, and the larger
community (Metz et al. 2003).

References
Flanagan, C., & Gallay, L. S. (1995). Reframing the meaning of
“political” in research with adolescents. Perspectives on Political
Science, 24, 34–41.

Metz, E., McLellan, J., & Youniss, J. (2003). Types of voluntary service
Journal of Adolescent

and adolescents’ civic development.
Research, 18, 188–203.

Roker, D., Player, K., & Coleman, J. (1999). Exploring adolescent
altruism: British young people’s involvement in voluntary work
and campaigning. In M. Yates & J. Youniss (Eds.), Roots of civic
identity: International perspectives on community service and
activism in youth (pp. 56–96). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Amicus Brief

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

An amicus brief, the shortened term used to refer to
amicus curiae (“friend of the court”) brief, is a legal
document ﬁled by someone (typically an organization)
that is not party to a case under appeal but who has an
interest in the case’s development. The content of these
briefs ranges widely, with some commentators viewing
them as too often simply repeating the claims of the
parties before the court (see Walbolt and Lang 2003). In
this regard, effective briefs have been shown to be those
that raise arguments or legal authorities that the actual
parties have not raised, propose intermediate or differ-
ent positions than those provided by the parties, bring
useful technical and scientiﬁc knowledge to the court’s
attention, or suggest practical effects of decisions in
contexts that parties may not be interested or aware
(see Kearney and Merrill 2000). Although originally
meant to be neutral, amicus briefs now almost invari-
ably align themselves with one of the parties. Although
they may bring perspectives and arguments different
from the parties to the case, they really are not acting as
“friends of the court” as much as friends of a party to
the court. Even though they may align themselves with
a party, effective briefs can impact the court’s decision-
making process in the manner they inﬂuence cases’
outcomes or the court’s expressed rationale used for
reaching outcomes (see Kearney and Merrill 2000).

United States Supreme Court cases dealing with
minors’ rights often have drawn considerably from
amicus briefs, including briefs that bring social science
evidence to the Court’s attention. This was the case, for
example, in the landmark 2005 decision abolishing the

juvenile death penalty, Roper v. Simmons (2005), where
the Court cited to the American Psychological Associ-
ation’s (2004) brief providing evidence regarding the
inherent immaturity of adolescents, as compared to
adults. Importantly, the amicus position, on its face,
was the opposite of another brief the association had
ﬁled over a decade earlier in a parental notiﬁcation case
involving minors seeking abortions, Hodgson v. Minnesota
(1990). In that case, the American Psychological Associ-
ation had argued that adolescents had decision-making
skills comparable to those of adults and, as a result,
evidence showed no reason to require teenagers to notify
their parents before terminating a pregnancy (American
Psychological Association 1987, 1989). Thus, in Roper,
the American Psychological Association argued that
science showed that adolescents were not as mature as
adults, whereas, in Hodgson, it earlier had argued that
the science showed that they were not that much dif-
ferent. As the use of amicus briefs in these cases reveals,
providing courts with scientiﬁc research can be chal-
lenging and controversial, even though what appears
contradictory to nonexperts is entirely reasonable to
those who conduct research. This has been shown by
leading researchers who do not view the American
Psychological Association’s briefs as making “ﬂip-
ﬂops” in their understanding of maturity and how the
psychological understanding of maturity could affect
different cases entirely differently (see Steinberg et al.
2009). Even those well-reasoned arguments, however,
are not immune from criticisms, even by researchers
who share a similar expertise (see Fischer et al. 2009).
Given the nature of social science evidence as well as the
law itself, these criticisms are likely to continue. Still,
these developments reﬂect the remarkable extent to
which some jurists are open to types of evidence that
typically had not ﬁgured prominently in jurisprudence.
The developments also point to the potential power
of social science research relating to the adolescent
period.

Cross-References
▶ Appeal
▶ Legal Methods

References
American Psychological Association. (1987, March 16). [Amicus
curiae brief ﬁled in the U.S. Court of appeals for the eighth
circuit in Hodgson v. Minnesota, 497 U.S. 417 (1990)]. Retrieved

Amusement Sites and Adolescents’ Rights A 125

December 31, 2010, from http://www.apa.org/about/ofﬁces/ogc/
amicus/index-chron.aspx

A

American Psychological Association. (1989, September 1). [Amicus
curiae brief ﬁled in U.S. Supreme court in Ohio v. Akron center
for reproductive health, Inc., 497 U.S. 502 (1990) and Hodgson v.
Minnesota, 497 U.S. 417 (1990)]. Retrieved December 31, 2010,
from http://www.apa.org/about/ofﬁces/ogc/amicus/index-chron.
aspx

American Psychological Association. (2004, July 19). [Amicus curiae
brief ﬁled in U.S. Supreme court in Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S.
551 (2005)]. Retrieved December 31, 2010, from http://www.apa.
org/about/ofﬁces/ogc/amicus/index-chron.aspx

Fischer, K., Stein, Z., & Heikkinen, K. (2009). Narrow assessments
misrepresent development and misguide policy: Comment on
Steinberg, Steinberg, Cauffman, Woolard, Graham, and Banich
(2009). The American Psychologist, 64, 595–600.

Hodgson v. Minnesota, 497 U.S. 417 (1990).
Kearney, J. D., & Merrill, T. (2000). The inﬂuence of Amicus Curiae
briefs on the Supreme Court. University of Pennsylvania Law
Review, 148, 743–855.

Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005).
Steinberg, L., Cauffman, E., Woolard, J., Graham, S., & Banich, M.
(2009). Are adolescents less mature than adults? Minors’ access
to abortion, the juvenile death penalty, and the alleged APA “ﬂip-
ﬂop”. American Psychologist, 64, 583–594.

Walbolt, S. H., & Lang, J. H. (2003). Amicus briefs: Friend or foe of

Florida courts? Stetson Law Review, 32, 269–308.

Amusement Sites and
Adolescents’ Rights

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

One of the most important aspects of adolescent
development involves leisure activities and the ability
to associate with others. These activities typically
involve meeting in public places which, as such, can
be regulated in many ways. Most notably, they can be
regulated to prevent adolescents from entering them or
to prevent others from entering them to interact with
adolescents. The major issue that arises involves the
freedom given to states seeking to regulate those activ-
ities. In the United States, the Supreme Court directly
addressed the issue in City of Dallas v. Stanglin (1989).
In that case, the Court gave states considerable power
to regulate adolescents’ meeting places by ﬁnding that

126 A Amusement Sites and Adolescents’ Rights

social gatherings intended for leisure and diversion do
not qualify for extra constitutional protection and, as
a result, may be regulated by the government for any
rational purpose. This rule is of considerable signiﬁ-
cance in that it demonstrates the power states have in
determining when and with whom adolescents can
associate. By doing so, it highlights the limited rights
of adolescents, as well as the limited rights of their
parents when dealing with matters outside of their
homes.

The Stanglin case involved an ordinance regulating
access to dance halls. The city of Dallas had enacted an
ordinance that restricted the ages of admission to
a certain class of dance halls to persons between the
ages of 14 and 18, except for parents and guardians of
persons inside such a hall, law enforcement, and dance
hall personnel. The ordinance also limited the dance
hall’s hours of operation. The purpose of the ordinance
was to provide a place where teenagers could socialize
with each other without being subject to the potentially
detrimental inﬂuences of older teenagers and young
adults.

The operator of a roller-skating rink in Dallas
created a dance hall that followed regulations. He did
so by dividing the ﬂoor of the rink. On the skating side,
no age or hour restrictions were applicable. On the
dance hall side, the ordinance’s age and hour restric-
tions were enforced, but admission was otherwise
granted to anyone who paid an admission fee. Most
of the dance hall patrons were strangers to each other,
and the hall served as many as 1,000 customers
per night. There was no evidence of any particular
among the youth who frequented the
trouble
establishment.

The operator of the dance hall argued, among other
points, that the ordinance unconstitutionally infringed
on the right of dance hall patrons to associate with
persons outside their age bracket. He argued that
a minor’s right of association should not be abridged
simply on the premise that he “might” associate with
those who would persuade him into bad habits. A trial
court ruled against the operator on the grounds that
the ordinance was rationally related to the city’s legit-
imate interest in insuring the safety and welfare of
children. An appeals court, however, ruled in its favor
by striking down the age restriction on the ground that
it unduly intruded on the dance hall patrons’ right of

“social association” under the Constitution’s First
Amendment freedom of association clause. It also
reasoned that the age restriction inhibited the parental
role in child rearing, that it was parents’ primary
responsibility, not the City, to tell a minor how old
his dance partner may be, with the exception that
the city could do so to protect them from criminal
inﬂuence (which in this case it did not).

The City appealed to the Supreme Court, which
rejected the dance hall operator’s claim. The Court
held that the ordinance’s age restriction did not violate
the First Amendment associational rights of the dance
hall patrons. It did so on the rationale that coming
together to engage in recreational dancing is not
a form of intimate association protected by the First
Amendment. It further found that the First Amend-
ment did not recognize a generalized right of “social
association” that includes chance encounters in dance
halls. The majority also ruled on Equal Protection
grounds noting that the age restriction was valid. The
Court did so on the grounds that dance hall patrons are
not a suspect classiﬁcation (e.g., they are not a group in
need of special protection that typically is based on
nationality, race, and so forth). It also found that the
age restriction did not infringe on any right protected
by the Federal Constitution. Lastly,
it ruled that
a rational relationship existed between the age restric-
tion and the city’s interest in promoting the welfare of
teenagers.

The Supreme Court’s position and reasoning are of
considerable signiﬁcance to understanding adolescents’
rights. The case highlights how the government has
considerable freedom to regulate environments that
would involve adolescents. Adolescents, as a group, do
not have a special status that would require a court to
protect it from a state’s rational effort to protect them.
In this case, the facts show that the state could limit the
freedoms of youth (and those who would argue for
their freedoms) even in situations where there is no
particular evidence that there is just cause for the
limitations or there is no evidence brought forth to
show that the state could not reach its goals without
those limitations.

References
City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989).

Anger A 127

A

Anger

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

The study of adolescence reveals much about external-
izing and aggressive problems, but it has yet to pay
comparable attention to adolescents’ experiences and
expressions of anger. Yet, it is known that anger can sour
relationships, contribute to considerable distress, and
even play a critical role in the development of psycho-
pathology. It is known, for example, that elevated anger
during adolescence links with physical responses (such
as higher blood pressure and heart rate) that set
adolescents on a path toward elevated health risks (see
Hauber et al. 1998). Anger eventually places individuals
at risk for long-term health problems that range from
hypertension and cardiovascular disease to asthma and
headaches to cancer (Rice and Powell 2006). Levels of
anger even predict mortality rates (Harburg et al.
2003). Still, research has only begun to examine the
origins of anger and its expression, the effects of anger
on interpersonal relationships, and anger’s relationship
to adolescents’ mental health outcomes.

Although one might think that anger is easy to
deﬁne and recognize, it appears far from it. Researcher
and commentaries often focus on aggression, which
can be an expression of anger but need not be equated
to it (Averill 1982). Even the outward expression of
anger may not be aggressive. Anger can take non-
aggressive forms, such as displaying an angry facial
expression or making physical gestures. Anger does
not necessarily lead to aggression. Still, aggression,
deﬁned as verbal or physical acts aimed at hurting or
upsetting others (either directly or indirectly), may be
predicted by anger (e.g., Clay et al. 1996). By compar-
ing aggression to anger, one learns that anger consists
of two components. Anger has an emotional compo-
nent, which is a state of arousal resulting from threats
or frustrations, and is often described by researchers as
state anger. Anger also has a component that involves
behaviors and thoughts relating to the state anger that
emerges from the speciﬁc circumstances felt to be
threats or frustrations. This latter component consists
of attitudes and thoughts used to assess and interpret

the situations that are inducing the state anger. The
thoughts and attitudes, what the ﬁeld now calls social
cognitions, are thought to be stable over time and are
termed trait anger (see Rice and Powell 2006). Thus,
how one responds to situations depends on one’s trait
anger. That expression may be inward or outward; it
can be suppressed or expressed.

Research that details the experience of anger and its
expression has been developed by borrowing from
research using samples and theories relating to adults.
Those theories and constructs have been validated quite
well with adolescent populations (e.g., del Barrio et al.
2004; Hagglund et al. 1994). Some of that research has
examined, for example, the links between high levels of
experienced anger and its expression. That research
ﬁnds that adolescents who report high levels of anger
are more likely to endorse an outward way of experienc-
ing anger; and boys (not girls) with high levels of anger
are less able to suppress inward expressions of it either
(Clay et al. 1996). High trait anger, which is the dispo-
sition to be more angry than not, also links to high levels
of outward anger, and that link appears strong for both
genders (Rice and Powell 2006). That research also
reveals that, for older children, high levels of anger-
suppression correlate with low levels of trait anger.

How adolescents express anger (inwardly or out-
wardly) or even experience it at all has been a subject of
study that has focused on parenting. Although these
studies focus on interactions between parents and their
children, it is important to highlight that one’s temper-
ament may well be a factor. That is, the tendency has
been to focus on parents’ actions when, in fact, there is
likely to be interactive effects. Regrettably, research in
this area has not been as strong as would have been
expected given the signiﬁcance of the research. The
bulk of studies are correlational. Equally limiting, the
bulk of research focuses on children. Still, existing
ﬁndings point us toward important conclusions.

Despite a focus on children and not using longitu-
dinal studies, this area of research does reveal interest-
ing ﬁndings relevant to adolescents. Research does
conﬁrm a strong link between children’s anger and
parenting; for example, Snyder et al. (2003) found
that young children (average age of 5) were more likely
to exhibit anger when parents used insensitive and
negative responses; Zhou et al. (2004) found that
authoritarian parenting, marked by coercive control

128 A Anger

and low responsiveness, positively associated with
anger/frustration among a large group of ﬁrst and
second graders. In addition, studies have shown that
family conﬂict and violence also may serve as a model
for anger control; maltreatment has been associated
with poorer anger control and coping among 6–12
year olds (Shipman and Zeman 2001; Ortiz and del
Barrio Gandara 2006) and anger-based marital conﬂict
associates with ratings of anger and anger expressions
among 4–8 year olds (Jenkins 2000). As might be
expected, parents’ negative behaviors (such as anger
and threats) directed toward their children elicit their
children’s anger (Snyder et al. 2003). When studying
young adolescents (ages 11–13), research focuses more
on personality dispositions and temperament, and
those, such as perfectionism, relate to the outward
expression of anger (Hewitt et al. 2002).

Research also has investigated the expression of
anger. Several ﬁndings have emerged. In terms of
outward expressions of anger, a general rule is that it
is expressed less as children age (Shipman and Zeman
2003; Underwood et al. 1999; Zeman and Garber
1996). A reason that anger is more suppressed as
children age is that they feel that it is less acceptable,
the peer group
especially with those outside of
(Shipman and Zeman 2003).
Importantly, older
children are signiﬁcantly more likely to express anger
with peers than with teachers (Underwood et al. 1999),
but little difference seems to exist between peers and
parents (Zeman and Shipman 1996). Adolescents use
negotiation more frequently than children to cope with
anger (von Salisch and Vogelgesang 2005).

One of the most important areas of research exam-
ines associations between the negative effects of anger
and adolescents’ physical and mental health. Although
links have long been found for adults, this research has
now been extended to examine the effects of anger on
adolescents’ poor health and maladjustment. Links
have now been shown between anger and depression
among adolescents, not only young children. For
example, inpatient youth’s levels of hopelessness have
been linked with high levels of outward anger and low
levels of anger control (Kashani et al. 1997); and anger
control reliably differentiates between depressed and
non-depressed inpatient youth (Kashani et al. 1995).
Anger also links with suicide attempts (Goldston et al.
1996; Boergers et al. 1998). Research that has examined
links between anger and externalizing behaviors

ﬁnds outward expressions of anger predictive of exter-
nalizing problem behaviors at school and at home; and
they report that the ability to regulate anger predicts
lower levels of externalizing problems (Rydell et al.
2003). Higher levels of anger in adolescents associate
with elevated blood pressure and heart rate, which are
associated with poor health outcomes (Hauber et al.
1998; Mueller et al. 2001). Adolescents’ levels of anger
also link concurrently with psychosomatic symptoms
and poor self-perceived health (Piko et al. 2006). The
links between forms of anger and negative outcomes
appear well established. Despite these ﬁndings, it is
important to note that one has yet to understand the
role that these links will play as adolescents develop and
transition into adulthood.

Importantly, research examining the effects of anger
has moved toward distinguishing among its potential
forms. Outward expression (often referred to as “Anger-
Out”) links to externalizing disorders in adolescents
(Gjerde et al. 1988) as well as internalizing problems
such as sadness (Clay et al. 1996) and hopelessness
(Kashani et al. 1997). But, the suppression of anger
(often referred to as “Anger-In”) also links to negative
responses. Suppressed anger has been deemed common
among schoolchildren who exhibit social withdrawal
(Jacobs et al. 1989) and has been linked to depressive
symptoms (Renouf and Harter 1990). Children who
are able to express their anger constructively appear to
be better adjusted, as revealed by studies that compare
various types of anger expression with their links to
depressive affect and adjustment problems (Kashani
et al. 1995; Cole et al. 1996). Importantly, although
the vast majority of the anger-health literature uses
a dichotomous approach to distinguish anger coping
styles, research now reveals that anger is more likely to
be a multidimensional construct than a simple split
between anger-in and anger-out; and that more com-
plex view recently has been conﬁrmed by efforts that
have found a variety of responses to anger relating
differently to higher levels of self-reported somatic
complaints among adolescents (Miers et al. 2007).

Research on adolescents’ anger, although some-
times focusing on older children and early adolescents,
provides important information. One now realizes that
anger is an important area of study. But, one has just
started to understand when it is felt, the circumstances
that lead it to be expressed, and its short- and long-
close
term effects. Given the

signiﬁcance of

to mental health,

relationships
and given the
established links between adults’ anger and negative
outcomes, it would be difﬁcult to play down the impor-
tance of this area of study.

References
Averill, J. R. (1982). Anger and aggression: An essay on emotion.

New York: Springer.

Boergers, J., Spirito, A., & Donaldson, D. (1998). Reasons for adoles-
cent suicide attempts: Associations with psychological function-
ing. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 37, 1287–1293.

Clay, D. L., Hagglund, K. J., Kashani, J. H., & Frank, R. G. (1996). Sex
differences in anger expression, depressed mood, and aggression
in children and adolescents. Journal of Clinical Psychology in
Medical Settings, 3, 79–92.

Cole, P. M., Zahn-Waxler, C., Fox, N. A., Usher, B. A., & Welsh, J. D.
(1996). Individual differences in emotion regulation and behav-
ior problems in preschool children.
Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 105, 518–529.

del Barrio, V., Aluja, A., & Spielberger, C. (2004). Anger assessment
with the STAXI-CA: Psychometric properties of a new instru-
ment for children and adolescents. Personality and Individual
Differences, 37, 227–244.

Gjerde, P. F., Block, J., & Block, J. H. (1988). Depressive symptoms
and personality during late adolescence: Gender differences in
the externalization–internalization of
symptom expression.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 97, 475–486.

Goldston, D. B., Daniel, S., Reboussin, D. M., Kelly, A., Ievers, C., &
Brunstetter, R. (1996). First-time suicide attempters, repeat
attempters, and previous attempters on an adolescent inpatient
psychiatry unit. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 631–639.

Harburg, E., Julius, M., Kaciroti, N., Gleiberman, L., & Schork, M. A.
(2003). Expressive/suppressive anger-coping responses, gender,
and types of mortality: A 17-year follow-up (Tecumseh,
Michigan, 1971–1988). Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 588–597.
Hauber, R. P., Rice, M. H., Howell, C. C., & Carmon, M. (1998).
Anger and blood pressure readings in children. Applied Nursing
Research, 11, 2–11.

Hagglund, K. J., Clay, D. L., Frank, R. G., Beck, N. C., Kashani, J. H., &
Hewett, J. (1994). Assessing anger expression in children and
adolescents. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 19, 291–304.

Hewitt, P. L., Caelian, C. F., Flett, G. L., Sherry, S. B., Collins, L., &
Flynn, C. A. (2002). Perfectionism in children: Associations with
depression, anxiety, and anger. Personality and Individual
Differences, 32, 1049–1061.

Jacobs, G. A., Phelps, M., & Rohrs, B. (1989). Assessment of anger
expression in children: The pediatric anger expression scale.
Personality and Individual Differences, 10, 59–65.

Jenkins, J. M. (2000). Marital conﬂicts and children’s emotions: The
development of an anger organization. Journal of Marriage and
the Family, 62, 723–736.

Kashani, J. H., Dahlmeier, J. M., Borduin, C. M., Soltys, S., &
Reid, J. C. (1995). Characteristics of anger expression in

Anger A 129

depressed children. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 34, 322–326.

A

Kashani, J. H., Suarez, L., Allan, W., & Reid, J. C. (1997). Hopelessness
in inpatient youths: A closer look at behavior, emotional expres-
sion, and social support. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 1625–1631.

Miers, A. C., Rieffe, C., Meerum, T. M., Cowan, R., & Linden, W.
(2007). The relation between anger coping strategies, anger
mood and somatic complaints in children and adolescents.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 35, 653–664.

Mueller, W. H., Grunbaum, J., & Labarthe, D. R. (2001). Anger
expression, body fat, and blood pressure in adolescents: Project
heartbeat! American Journal of Human Biology, 13, 531–538.
Ortiz, M. A. C., & del Barrio Gandara, V. (2006). Study on the
relations between temperament, aggression, and anger in
children. Aggressive Behavior, 32, 207–215.

Piko, B. F., Keresztes, N., & Pluhar, Z. F. (2006). Aggressive behavior
and psychosocial health among children. Personality and
Individual Differences, 40, 885–895.

Renouf, A. G., & Harter, S. (1990). Low self-worth and anger as
components of the depressive experience in young adolescents.
Development and Psychopathology, 2, 293–310.

Rice, M., & Powell, C. (2006). Differences in trait anger among
children with varying levels of anger expression patterns. Journal
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Nursing, 19, 51–61.

Rydell, A., Berlin, L., & Bohlin, G. (2003). Emotionality, emotion
regulation, and adaptation among 5- to 8-year-old children.
Emotion, 3, 30–47.

Shipman, K. L., & Zeman, J. (2001). Socialization of children’s
emotion regulation in mother–child dyads: A developmental
psychopathology perspective. Development and Psychopathology,
13, 317–336.

Shipman, K. L., & Zeman, A. E. (2003). Children’s strategies for
displaying anger and sadness: What works with whom? Merrill-
Palmer Quarterly, 49, 100–122.

Snyder, J., Stoolmiller, M., Wilson, M., & Yamamoto, M. (2003).
Child anger regulation, parental responses to children’s anger
displays, and early child antisocial behavior. Social Development,
12, 335–360.

Underwood, M. K., Hurley, J. C., Johanson, C. A., & Mosley, J. E.
(1999). An experimental, observational investigation of children’s
responses to peer provocation: Developmental and gender differ-
ences in middle childhood. Child Development, 70, 1428–1446.

von Salisch, M., & Vogelgesang, J. (2005). Anger regulation among
friends: Assessment and development from childhood to adoles-
cence. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 22, 837–855.
Zeman, J., & Garber, J. (1996). Display rules for anger, sadness, and
pain: It depends on who is watching. Child Development, 67,
957–973.

Zeman, J., & Shipman, K. (1996). Children’s expression of negative
affect: Reasons and methods. Developmental Psychology, 32,
842–849.

Zhou, Q., Eisenberg, N., Wang, Y., & Resier, M. (2004). Chinese
children’s effortful control and dispositional anger/frustration:
Relations to parenting styles and children’s social functioning.
Developmental Psychology, 40, 352–366.

130 A Animal Cruelty by Juveniles

Animal Cruelty by Juveniles

1

2,

1, SUZANNE E. TALLICHET

CHRISTOPHER HENSLEY
SUSAN THOMAS
1Department of Criminal Justice, University of
Tennessee at Chattanooga, Chattanooga, TN, USA
2Department of Sociology, Social Work, and
Criminology, Morehead State University, Morehead,
KY, USA

The most frequently used deﬁnition of animal cruelty
by social scientists is “socially unacceptable behavior
that intentionally causes pain, suffering, or distress to,
and/or death of, an animal” (Ascione 1993, p. 228).
This deﬁnition omits behaviors that may be socially
and culturally acceptable or condoned in other
contexts. Such behavior may include, but is not limited
to, laboratory research, hunting, and agricultural and
veterinary practices. While there is general consensus
over the deﬁnition of animal cruelty, there remains
little to no consensus as to the relationship between
childhood acts of animal cruelty and later acts of
interpersonal violence. Attempts to show the possible
relationship between animal cruelty and violence
toward humans have produced contradictory results,
especially given the numerous methodologies under-
taken to examine various aspects of this phenomenon.
Thus, the association proposed by academic literature
between childhood acts of violence against animals
and later acts of violence against humans remains
controversial among scholars, animal rights activists,
and policy makers.

For nearly 5 decades, researchers have sought to
unravel the link between juvenile animal cruelty and
later interpersonal violence. In 1961, McDonald intro-
duced a triad of characteristics (enuresis, ﬁre setting,
and cruelty toward animals), which he believed to be
predictive of a child’s propensity to commit later acts of
violence toward humans (Macdonald 1961). Three
years later, Mead suggested that childhood cruelty to
animals may indicate the formation of a spontaneous,
assaultive character disorder. She argued that juvenile
animal cruelty “could prove a diagnostic sign, and that
such children, diagnosed early, could be helped instead
of being allowed to embark on a long career of episodic

violence and murder” (p. 22). The impact of Mead’s
recommendation was evident over 20 years later when
the American Psychiatric Association took note.

In 1987, animal cruelty was added to the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-III R (DSM-
III R) as a symptom of childhood conduct disorders
and was later kept in the 1994 DSM-IV and the 2000
DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association 1987;
American Psychiatric Association 1994; American Psy-
chiatric Association 2000). According to the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual-IV, a conduct disorder is “a
repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which
the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate
societal norms or rules are violated” (American Psy-
chiatric Association 1994, p. 90). To be diagnosed with
a conduct disorder, an individual must have demon-
strated a minimum of 3 of the 15 identiﬁed symptoms
in the past year. The 15 recognized symptoms of con-
duct disorder include cruelty to animals; frequent bul-
lying or threatening; frequently starting ﬁghts; use of
a weapon that could potentially cause serious harm;
cruelty to people; theft with confrontation; forcing sex
upon someone; intentionally setting ﬁres to cause sig-
niﬁcant damage; intentional destruction of property;
breaking into the property of others; frequently using
deception for personal gain; stealing; deliberately
disobeying parents’ rules; running away; and frequent
truancy. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-IV also
explains that “a substantial proportion [of children
diagnosed with conduct disorder] continue to show
behaviors in adulthood that meet criteria for antisocial
personality disorder” (American Psychiatric Associa-
tion 1994, p. 89). Thus, animal cruelty is recognized as
an important indicator of a serious psychological
problem.

Deﬁning animal cruelty as a symptom of conduct
disorder lends further validity to the research examin-
ing the link between animal cruelty and later violence
against humans. For law enforcement ofﬁcials, cruelty to
animals has long served as a red ﬂag for identifying
the
extremely violent offenders. Correspondingly,
expansive literature about serial killers has often cited
juvenile cruelty to animals as a precursor to subsequent
violence against humans (Ressler et al. 1998; Wright and
Hensley 2003). Moreover, other studies using inmate
samples have supported the link between animal abuse
and later interpersonal violence (Hensley et al. 2009;

Animal Cruelty by Juveniles A 131

A

Merz-Perez and Heide 2004; Merz-Perez et al. 2001;
Tallichet and Hensley 2004).

Research on Juvenile Animal Cruelty
Numerous studies have been conducted in the last 15
years to examine the association between childhood
acts of cruelty toward animals and adult acts of
violence against humans. In an attempt to discover
a relationship between these behaviors, various
methodological techniques and different sample par-
ticipants have been studied with less than satisfactory
results. The results of these studies have been inconsis-
tent and oftentimes contradictory in their attempt to
show a link between childhood animal cruelty and
adult acts of violence perpetrated against humans. In
fact, some studies reveal no association at all or no
apparent time order between the behaviors (Arluke
et al. 1999; Miller and Knutson 1997), while still others
support both the association and the temporal
sequencing of the acts (Flynn 1999; Hensley et al.
2009; Merz-Perez and Heide 2004; Merz-Perez et al.
2001; Ressler et al. 1998; Tallichet and Hensley 2004;
Verlinden 2000; Wright and Hensley 2003).

A 1987 review by Felthous and Kellert of 15 studies,
which explored the association between juvenile ani-
mal cruelty and human violence revealed that many of
the studies comparing violent and nonviolent prisoners
and psychiatric patients throughout the 1970s and
1980s were unable to establish a clear link or that the
data supporting the association were “soft and of dubi-
ous reliability” (p. 69). The focus of the review was to
examine whether the previous studies had supported
a relationship between recurring acts of childhood
animal cruelty and serious and persistent acts of later
violence against humans. Felthous and Kellert (1987)
excluded studies of aggressive behavior that were not
clearly “dangerous or injurious” or reports of single
cases involving cruelty toward animals (p. 69).

Ten of the 15 studies did not ﬁnd a relationship
between childhood animal cruelty and subsequent
violence against humans. Felthous and Kellert (1987)
contended that many of these studies had signiﬁcant
limitations. First, most were unsuccessful in clearly
deﬁning the behaviors being studied (i.e., animal cru-
elty and interpersonal violence). Second, all but one of
the studies that did not ﬁnd a relationship between
childhood animal cruelty and later violence examined

only single acts of violence toward humans. However,
investigators who found an association between animal
cruelty and interpersonal violence had examined recur-
rent interpersonal violence. Third, over half of the
studies that were unable to discover a relationship
between animal cruelty and later human violence relied
on the chart method of data gathering rather than
direct interviews with respondents. In contrast, all of
the studies that found a relationship relied entirely on
direct interviews with subjects. Felthous and Kellert
(1987) argued that investigators should not exclusively
rely on clinical records because they may not con-
tain sufﬁcient historical
information. Furthermore,
researchers should not focus on interviews that exam-
ine only singular acts of animal cruelty or violence
toward humans.

In 1997, Miller and Knutson found no association
between the types of crimes that had been committed
by 314 male and female inmates and a composite
measure of their passive and active experiences with
childhood animal cruelty. Moreover, their inmate sam-
ple data revealed only a modest connection between
exposure to animal cruelty and “the aversive childhood
histories of the subjects,” as well as their physical or
sexually coercive behavior in dating or intimate rela-
tionships (p. 59). Within the same study, Miller and
Knutson performed a follow-up study with 308 under-
graduate students to examine whether high exposure to
animal cruelty was distinctive only to the incarcerated
sample. Again, modest associations were
found
between animal cruelty and undergraduates’ “punitive
and acrimonious” childhood histories (p. 59). They
also found that 16.4% of the inmates had hurt an
animal compared to only 9.7% of the students, 32.8%
of the inmates had killed a stray compared to only
14.3% of the students, and 12% of the inmates had
killed a pet compared to only 3.2% of the students.
The reported methods used by subjects to kill animals
were poisoning (n = 17), drowning (n = 5), hitting,
beating, or kicking (n = 43), shooting (n = 77), stran-
gling/smothering (n = 6), stabbing (n = 6), burning
(n = 5), throwing against an object (n = 9), exploding
(n = 7), accidental (n = 16), and other methods (n = 6).
These ﬁgures only included childhood animal abuse in
which the subject was the prime perpetrator and
excluded abuse that did not result in the death of the
animal. Unfortunately, the authors did not discuss

132 A Animal Cruelty by Juveniles

their ﬁndings concerning animal cruelty methods
within their control sample of college students. The
authors did note two limitations of their study. First,
they found fairly high base rates of exposure to animal
cruelty in both the incarcerated sample and the under-
graduate student sample. Second, the distribution of
scores on the combined measure of exposure to animal
cruelty was positively skewed and leptokurtic, severely
compromising correlational analysis (i.e., making it
more difﬁcult to yield signiﬁcant ﬁndings).

A later study by Arluke et al. (1999) examined the
criminal records of 153 animal abusers and 153 control
participants. They found that the childhood animal
abusers were more likely than the control participants
to be interpersonally violent. However, they were also
more likely to commit property, drug, and public
disorder offenses later in life. Consequently, the data
indicated that animal abuse was associated with
a variety of antisocial behaviors inclusive of, but not
limited to, violence. The authors also noted that the
abuse of animals was not more likely to precede anti-
social behavior than to follow it, casting doubt on the
allegation that individuals who are cruel to animals
eventually move on or “graduate” to committing acts
of violence against humans (known as the “graduation
hypothesis”). Signiﬁcant limitations of this study per-
tain to the time order relationship between childhood
cruelty and subsequent acts of violence. First, while
Arluke et al. (1999) analyzed ofﬁcial criminal records
to determine the relationship between cruelty toward
animals and violence toward humans, they were unsuc-
cessful in obtaining criminal records for participants
under the age of 17, which is likely to have contributed
to the ﬁnding that there was no signiﬁcant time order
relationship between childhood cruelty and later inter-
personal violence. In addition, they analyzed data only
in cases of single acts of animal cruelty rather than
those involving repeated acts.

Other studies speciﬁcally examined the graduation
hypothesis, proposing that those who commit child-
hood acts of animal cruelty are more likely to engage in
interpersonal violence as adults. Ressler et al. (1998)
conducted a study exploring the link between animal
cruelty and sexual homicide. They examined various
behavioral characteristics of 36 sexual murderers, all
but seven of whom were serial murderers. Of the 36
men, 28 were tested for certain childhood characteris-
tics. The authors discovered that many of the 28

convicted sexual murderers had engaged in animal
these offenders had
cruelty. Thirty-six percent of
perpetrated animal cruelty as children, 46% had been
cruel to animals as adolescents, and 36% continued to
abuse animals as adults.

Wright and Hensley (2003) examined 354 cases of
serial murder and discovered that childhood animal
cruelty was present in 75 cases. Moreover, the authors
developed case studies examining the childhood histo-
ries of ﬁve speciﬁc serial murderers (Carroll Edward
Cole, Jeffery Dahmer, Edmund Kemper, Henry Lee
Lucas, and Arthur Shawcross). During childhood,
each of the ﬁve serial killers had turned to animals to
displace their anger. Using the framework of the grad-
uation hypothesis, Wright and Hensley (2003) found
that the serial murderers who engaged in animal cruelty
as youths graduated to aggressive behavior toward
humans. After a series of aggressive acts toward ani-
mals, the serial killers gradually increased the extent of
their abuse as a way of gaining further satisfaction from
the venting of their repressed frustration and humilia-
tion. This ultimately resulted in violent acts against
humans, allowing them to gain some type of satisfac-
tion. Therefore, abusing and torturing animals as
a child was a precursor for future violence against
humans. The authors also found that the methods
used to kill animals during childhood were then later
used by the serial murderers on their adult victims.

In 2000, Verlinden examined the link between
childhood animal abuse and school shootings. She
found that 5 of the 11 offenders (in nine separate
incidents) had histories of childhood animal abuse.
Evan Ramsey (Bethel, Alaska) often amused himself
by throwing rocks at dogs. Eric Harris and Dylan
Klebold (Littleton, Colorado) frequently discussed
their mutilation of animals with friends. Additionally,
Kipland “Kip” Kinkel (Springﬁeld, Oregon) bragged to
his peers about beheading cats and blowing up a cow
with explosives. One particularly well-documented
case linking animal cruelty and a school shooting
involved Luke Woodham (Pearl, Mississippi). Prior to
killing his mother and two schoolmates, Woodham
tortured and killed his pet dog.

Flynn (1999) distributed questionnaires to 267
undergraduate psychology and sociology students to
test whether committing animal cruelty as a child was
associated with the endorsement of
interpersonal
violence, particularly against women and children.

Animal Cruelty by Juveniles A 133

A

He identiﬁed animal abuse as killing a pet, stray or wild
animal, hurting or torturing an animal, touching
sexually, or having sex with an animal. The possible
responses for animal type were cats, dogs, small ani-
mals such as rodents, reptiles, birds, or poultry, or large
animals (livestock). At least one act of animal abuse was
reported by 17.6 % of all the respondents. More than
one in six respondents reported hurting or killing an
animal during childhood. Moreover, men were four
times more likely to have done so than women. Nearly
all animal abusers had abused animals more than once.
Small animals and dogs were most often abused;
however, small animals were killed most often. Small
animals (50%) were also more likely to be hurt or
tortured, followed by dogs (44.4%). The most common
type of animal killed was a stray (13.1%) compared
with killing a pet (2.6%). Around 35% reported killing
a stray or wild animal in one circumstance, nearly 40%
had twice, and 25% had in three or more circum-
stances. For these individuals, 70.6% reported the
occurrence during adolescence. For 29.4%, killing an
animal occurred between the age of 6 and 12. Fifty
percent of those who hurt or tortured animals also
occurred between age 6 and 12.

Flynn gave two explanations for the ﬁnding that
respondents were more likely to have actually killed
a wild or stray than to have hurt or tortured any type
of animal. Since small animals (77.1%) were likely to be
killed, socially accepted behaviors (i.e., killing a rodent
or snake) were probably reported more often. Never-
theless, to hurt or torture an animal with the intent to
inﬂict pain may be considered more deviant than actu-
ally taking an animal’s life because torturing an animal
is never a socially accepted behavior. According to
Flynn, to torture an animal for a thrill should be
more alarming than actually killing an animal, which
explains why it was reported less often.

Merz-Perez and Heide (2004) and Merz-Perez et al.
(2001) interviewed 45 violent and 45 nonviolent
offenders incarcerated in a Florida maximum-security
prison. Participants were coded as violent or nonvio-
lent based on the offense for which each individual
was convicted. The information was veriﬁed by
institutional record and through the interview itself.
Fifty-six percent of the violent offenders reported com-
mitting acts of childhood animal cruelty as compared
to only 20% of the nonviolent offenders. They also
discovered that the ways in which the violent offenders

abused animals were quite similar to the methods that
they later used to perpetrate crimes against their
human victims.

Both violent and nonviolent inmates committed
animal cruelty more often toward wild animals
followed by farm animals and pets. However, the
respective proportions were quite different. Violent
offenders committed acts of cruelty on wild animals
(29%), pets (26%), and farm animals (14%), while
nonviolent offenders were also particularly cruel to
wild animals (13%) followed by pets (7%) and farm
animals (2%). Only violent offenders reported abusing
stray animals (11%). Violent offenders were signiﬁ-
cantly more likely than nonviolent offenders to have
been cruel to pet and stray animals. Merz-Perez et al.
(2001) also found that many of the nonviolent inmates
committed animal cruelty against wild animals in the
company of their peers, but all violent offenders
reported abusing animals alone. Finally, nonviolent
offenders more often expressed remorse over their ani-
mal cruelty acts than violent offenders in the study.

The qualitative data indicated that nonviolent
offenders were more likely to be involved in methods
of abuse that could be categorized as less severe or
distanced acts of cruelty. For example, nonviolent
offenders reported having committed childhood ani-
mal cruelty by methods of “articulated fear” (n = 1),
shooting (n = 6), and forced ﬁghting (n = 3). These acts
could be committed without close physical contact
with the animal. Violent offenders, however, reported
having committed acts of cruelty that required actual
physical abuse at the hands of the offender. For exam-
ple, these offenders committed direct acts of violence
by engaging in sexual activity with the animal (n = 3),
beating, kicking, or stomping (n = 5), stabbing (n = 1),
pouring chemical irritants on (n = 2), burning (n = 1),
and dismembering (n = 2). Nonviolent offenders did
not report committing any of these severe acts of
animal cruelty that included physical contact.

In a 2004 study, Tallichet and Hensley explored the
relationship between recurrent childhood animal cru-
elty and subsequent violence toward humans. They
surveyed 261 inmates in a Southern state to determine
if male inmates convicted of repeated violent crimes
against humans had also committed repeated acts of
childhood animal cruelty. Although multiple demo-
graphic characteristics (race, education, residence,
parents’ marital status, and number of siblings) were

134 A Animal Cruelty by Juveniles

analyzed, Tallichet and Hensley (2004) found that only
repeated acts of childhood animal cruelty and number
of siblings predicted later violence against humans.
Additionally, all the reported acts of childhood animal
cruelty occurred prior to conviction, emphasizing the
time order relationship between animal cruelty and
later interpersonal violence. These results were also
found in a study by Hensley et al. (2009). Using
a sample of 180 inmates from a different Southern
state, they found that only repeated acts of childhood
animal cruelty were predictive of later recurrent acts of
violence toward humans, again showing a relationship
between the two.

Using the ﬁrst sample of 261 inmates, Tallichet et al.
(2005a) assessed the impact of demographic character-
istics (race, education, and childhood residence) and
situational factors (if they hurt or killed the animal
alone, if they tried to conceal the cruelty, and if they
felt upset after abusing the animal, the frequency of
youthful acts of animal cruelty, and the age of onset) on
the type of animal abused. They found that inmates
who had abused animals as youths were more likely to
hurt or kill dogs, cats, and wild animals and tended to
target them exclusively. Respondents who had hurt or
killed dogs were more likely to have done so alone.
Those inmates who had hurt or killed cats were more
likely to have started at a younger age.

Similarly, Tallichet and Hensley (2005) investigated
how demographic, familial differences and species type
had contributed to the frequency of acts of childhood
animal cruelty. In general, the early exposure to animal
abuse was a strong predictor of the subsequent behav-
ior. Rural inmates learned to be cruel toward animals
by watching family members exclusively, while urban
inmates learned from family members and friends.
Moreover, urban inmates chose dogs, cats, and wild
animals as their target animals, but rural inmates chose
only cats.

Hensley and Tallichet (2005b) also addressed how
demographic characteristics and childhood experi-
ences with animal abuse may have affected the recur-
rence and onset of childhood and adolescent cruelty as
a learned behavior. Findings revealed that inmates who
experienced animal cruelty at a younger age were more
likely to demonstrate recurrent animal cruelty them-
selves. In addition, respondents who observed a friend
abuse animals were more likely to hurt or kill animals
more frequently. Finally, inmates who were younger

when they ﬁrst witnessed animal cruelty also hurt or
killed animals at a younger age.

Tallichet et al. (2005b) also examined the inﬂuence
of demographic attributes (race, education, and resi-
dence while growing up) and situational factors (if the
abuse was committed alone, if the abuser attempted to
conceal the act, if the abuser was upset by the abuse, the
perpetrators’s age of initial animal cruelty, and the
frequency of animal abuse) on a range of speciﬁc
methods of animal cruelty (shooting, drowning, hit-
ting/kicking, choking, burning, and having sex). They
found that White inmates tended to shoot animals
more frequently and were less likely to be upset or
cover up their actions than non-Whites. Inmates who
had sex with animals were more likely to have acted
alone and to conceal their cruelty toward animals than
non-bestialics. Hensley and Tallichet (2009) then
same
examined the
methods of animal cruelty and their commission of
interpersonal violence. They found that drowning and
having sex with an animal during childhood were
predictive of later violence toward humans.

relationship between these

Hensley and Tallichet (2005a) also examined the
impact of demographic attributes and situational
factors relating speciﬁcally to a range of animal cruelty
motivations (for fun, out of anger, dislike for the
animal, to shock people, fear of the animal, to impress
someone, for revenge against someone else, to control
the animal, for sex, and imitation). Respondents who
reported hurting or killing animals alone were more
likely to commit the acts out of anger, but less likely to
have committed them to impress others, for sex, or to
imitate others. Using the sample of 261 inmates,
Hensley and Tallichet (2008) then used these same
motives for committing animal cruelty to examine
their power to predict interpersonal violence. They
found that abusing an animal for fun was the only
salient motive for predicting later
interpersonal
violence.

Finally, Tallichet and Hensley (2009) examined the
effects of age of onset and frequency of animal cruelty,
the covertness of animal cruelty, the commission of
animal cruelty within a group or in isolation, and
empathy for the abused animals. They found that
inmates who had covered up their childhood animal
cruelty were more likely to have been convicted of
repeated acts of interpersonal violence, demonstrating
that the role of empathy and individuals present during

acts of animal cruelty were less important
concealing those acts.

than

As most of these studies have shown, although not
all violent individuals have been previously cruel to
animals, the majority have been cruel to animals.
this potential relationship demands
Consequently,
further analysis as researchers and policy makers search
to identify potential warning signs to curb violent
crime. As Ascione (2001) noted, “taken together,
these studies suggest that animal abuse may be charac-
teristic of the developmental histories of between one
in four and nearly two in three violent adult offenders”
(p. 4). In light of these ﬁndings, it may be especially
to further explore and understand the
important
relationship between these two types of aggression
beyond that which was previously suspected. In other
words, as one of several red ﬂags or warning signs of
interpersonal violence, childhood animal cruelty is one
malevolent behavior that demands further study.

Cross-References
▶ Delinquency

References
American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (3rd rev. ed.). Washington: American
Psychiatric Association.

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington: American
Psychiatric Association.

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed., Text revision). Washington:
American Psychiatric Association.

Arluke, A., Levin, J., Luke, C., & Ascione, F. R. (1999). The relation-
ship of animal abuse to violence and other forms of antisocial
behavior. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 14, 963–976.

Ascione, F. R. (1993). Children who are cruel to animals: A review of
research and implications for developmental psychopathology.
Anthrozoos, 6(4), 226–247.

Ascione, F. R. (2001, September). Animal abuse and youth violence.

Juvenile Justice Bulletin, 1–15.

Felthous, A. R., & Kellert, S. R. (1987). Childhood cruelty to animals
and later aggression against people: A review. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 144, 710–717.

Flynn, C. P. (1999). Animal abuse in childhood and later support for
interpersonal violence in families. Society & Animals, 7(2),
161–171.

Hensley, C., & Tallichet, S. E. (2005a). Animal cruelty motivations:
Assessing demographic and situational inﬂuences. Journal of
Interpersonal Violence, 20(11), 1429–1443.

Hensley, C., & Tallichet, S. E. (2005b). Learning to be cruel?: Explor-
ing the onset and frequency of animal cruelty. International

Animal Cruelty by Juveniles A 135

Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology,
49(1), 37–47.

A

Hensley, C., & Tallichet, S. E. (2008). The effect of inmates’ self-
reported childhood and adolescent animal cruelty motivations
on the number of convictions for adult violent interpersonal
crimes. International Journal of Offender Therapy and Compara-
tive Criminology, 52(2), 175–184.

Hensley, C., & Tallichet, S. E. (2009). Childhood and adolescent
animal cruelty methods and their possible link to adult violent
crimes. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 24(1), 147–158.

Hensley, C., Tallichet, S. E., & Dutkiewicz, E. L. (2009). Recurrent
childhood animal cruelty: Is there a relationship to adult
recurrent interpersonal violence? Criminal Justice Review, 34(2),
248–257.

Macdonald, J. M. (1961). The murderer and his victim. Springﬁeld:

Charles C. Thomas.

Merz-Perez, L., & Heide, K. M. (2004). Animal cruelty: Pathway to

violence against people. Lanham: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.

Merz-Perez, L., Heide, K. M., & Silverman, I. J. (2001). Childhood
cruelty to animals and subsequent violence against humans.
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative
Criminology, 45, 556–573.

Miller, K. S., & Knutson, J. F. (1997). Reports of severe physical
punishment and exposure to animal cruelty by inmates
convicted of felonies and by university students. Child Abuse
and Neglect, 21, 59–82.

Ressler, R. K., Burgess, A. W., Hartman, C. R., Douglas, J. E., &
McCormack, A. (1998). Murderers who rape and mutilate. In
R. Lockwood & F. A. Ascione (Eds.), Cruelty to animals and
interpersonal violence (pp. 179–193). West Lafayette: Purdue
University Press.

Tallichet, S. E., & Hensley, C. (2004). Exploring the link between
recurrent acts of childhood and adolescent animal cruelty and
subsequent violent crime. Criminal
Justice Review, 29(2),
304–316.

Tallichet, S. E., & Hensley, C. (2005). Rural and urban differences in
the commission of animal cruelty. International Journal of
Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 49(6), 711–726.
Tallichet, S. E., & Hensley, C. (2009). The social and emotional
context of childhood and adolescent animal cruelty: Is there
a link to adult
interpersonal crimes? International Journal
of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 53(5),
596–606.

Tallichet, S. E., Hensley, C., O’Bryan, A., & Hassel, H. (2005a). Targets
for cruelty: Demographic and situational
factors affecting
the type of animal abused. Criminal Justice Studies, 18(2),
173–182.

Tallichet, S. E., Hensley, C., & Singer, S. D. (2005b). Unraveling the
methods of childhood and adolescent cruelty to nonhuman
animals. Society & Animals, 13(2), 91–107.

Verlinden, S. (2000). Risk factors in school shootings. Unpublished

doctoral dissertation. Paciﬁc University, Forest Grove.

Wright, J., & Hensley, C. (2003). From animal cruelty to serial
murder: Applying the graduation hypothesis.
International
Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology,
47(1), 72–89.

136 A Antisocial Personality Disorder

Antisocial Personality Disorder

MEGAN WAMPLER, AMY MIKOLAJEWSKI, JEANETTE TAYLOR
Department of Psychology, Florida State University,
Tallahassee, FL, USA

Overview
Antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) is a maladap-
tive personality style marked by the violation of the
rights of others. It has a long history as a clinical
phenomenon but, unlike other personality disorders,
ASPD has an age onset criterion that precludes its
application to individuals younger than 18. However,
new research suggests that the ASPD criteria are useful
in identifying severely antisocial adolescents who differ
from those with conduct disorder (CD). Although
more research is needed on the construct validity of
ASPD in adolescents, clinicians could begin using the
ASPD criteria to identify adolescents who are most in
need of intervention.

(ASPD)

Introduction
reﬂects
Antisocial personality disorder
a pervasive pattern of disregard for and violation of
the rights of others (American Psychiatric Association
2000). This disorder affects 2–3% of
the general
population and upward of 60% of prison samples and
is associated with a multitude of medical and social
problems making this disorder a serious public health
concern (Moran 1999). Symptoms of the diagnosis
include failure to conform to social norms, deceitful-
ness, impulsivity, aggressiveness, disregard for safety,
irresponsibility, and lack of remorse shown since the
age of 15 (APA 2000). Prior to age 15, the person must
show “evidence” of conduct disorder (CD), which
includes symptoms of lying, ﬁghting, stealing, ﬁre set-
ting, and other indicators of antisociality. Personality
disorders are more broadly conceptualized as maladap-
tive personality styles in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders-IV-TR (APA 2000). There
is an explicitly stated expectation that personality dis-
orders can be evident though perhaps not fully realized
in adolescence (APA 2000, p. 685). Despite this expec-
tation, ASPD maintains a criterion such that individ-
uals less than 18 years of age cannot be considered for
the diagnosis (APA 2000). The utility and validity of

this age limit is the focus of this essay as new research
is beginning to demonstrate that the ASPD diagnosis
can help identify a subset of adolescents with a more
serious clinical proﬁle than those with just a CD
diagnosis.

The conceptualization of the ASPD diagnosis was
informed by early descriptions of psychopathy,
a personality style identiﬁed by Hervey Cleckley
(1941). Psychopathy is a multifactorial construct, and
researchers have developed measures to assess various
facets of this personality style (e.g., Frick and Hare
2001; Hare 1991; Levenson et al. 1995; Lilienfeld
and Andrews 1996; Patrick et al. 2009). Cleckley’s
(1941) initial description of psychopathy included a
constellation of affective and interpersonal features
along with symptoms of antisocial behavior. Hare
(1991) later operationalized Cleckley’s description of
psychopathy by creating a checklist to assess for these
symptoms, which included measurement of
two
components: one that reﬂected the incapacity to expe-
rience empathy and guilt (referred to as Factor 1) and
another (Factor 2) that reﬂected the antisocial lifestyle
characteristic of ASPD (Cleckley 1976; Walsh and
Kosson 2008).

Early in the history of the DSM, the diagnostic
criteria for “antisocial personality” were parallel to
Cleckley’s (1941) initial description of psychopathy,
which included symptoms such as an incapacity for
loyalty, callousness, irresponsibility, impulsivity, and
an inability to feel guilt (APA 1968). Over time, the
criteria for “antisocial personality” in the DSM drifted
away from the core personality symptoms of psychop-
athy in an attempt to form a more reliable diagnosis. As
such, the current conceptualization of ASPD focuses on
behavioral indicators that can be assessed more reliably
than features such as callousness or incapacity for
in the original descriptions of
loyalty inherent
psychopathy (Patrick 2007). Even so, ASPD and
psychopathy continue to have overlapping features,
especially concerning chronic behavioral deviance and
lack of remorse. In fact, the ASPD criteria when
measured dimensionally as a symptom count are
highly correlated with scores on the Psychopathy
Checklist – Revised, which is a widely used measure
of psychopathy in experimental research (Hare 2003).
Despite similarities between ASPD and psychopa-
thy, one important difference involves the age restric-
tion for diagnosis. Unlike ASPD, psychopathy is not

Antisocial Personality Disorder A 137

A

a DSM-based diagnosis and is not restricted to adults.
this
A large literature supports the extension of
diagnosis to children and adolescents (Salekin 2006).
Research has shown that psychopathic traits can be
reliably assessed in children and are parallel to those
found in adult psychopathy (Frick et al. 1994). None-
theless, the downward extension of the adult psychop-
athy construct has been criticized and there continues
to be debate about whether juvenile psychopathy
should be assessed given the potential dangers of
assigning such a label to a child (Frick et al. 1994).
This debate is about whether severe antisocial person-
ality should be diagnosed in adolescents and even
younger individuals. The bulk of the evidence suggests
that psychopathy can be assessed in children and
adolescents and the construct has validity and utility.
Similar evidence is being compiled to suggest that
ASPD can be assessed in adolescents and is valid and
potentially useful.

Predictors of ASPD
A developmental perspective of antisocial behavior is
useful in evaluation of the age criterion for the diagno-
sis of ASPD. While CD is a good predictor of the
development of ASPD, most youth with CD do not
develop ASPD (Robbins 1966). However, most adults
diagnosed with ASPD begin their antisocial behavior in
childhood (Robbins 1966). In other words, there is
a process of multiﬁnality among children who are
demonstrating antisocial behaviors resulting either in
the continuation of
their antisocial behavior or
desistence. Which trajectory a child follows can depend
on any number of factors, including both biological
and environmental risk factors (Mofﬁtt 2003).

One key predictor that has emerged in the literature
regarding the persistence of antisocial behavior is age
at onset, or the age at which an individual begins
displaying antisocial behavior (DiLalla and Gottesman
1989; Mofﬁtt 1993, 2003). Age at onset has been shown
to differentiate two distinct trajectories of antisocial
behavior, depending on whether the onset is early
(e.g., childhood) or late (e.g., adolescence). The early
onset group, labeled life-course persistent, has been
postulated to be more likely to demonstrate an increase
in severity and rate of antisocial behavior over time and
more likely to persist into adulthood (Mofﬁtt 2003).
Indeed, a large-scale US epidemiological study showed
that the average number of adult antisocial symptoms

increased as the number of childhood conduct prob-
lems before age 15 increased (Robins et al. 1991). The
adolescent-onset group, labeled adolescence-limited, is
thought to be the outcome of an exaggerated process of
adolescent rebellion and these individuals cease their
antisocial behavior by the time they reach adulthood
(Mofﬁtt 2003). The majority of children diagnosed
with CD fall into the adolescent-onset category and
do not go on to develop ASPD (Mofﬁtt 2003).

Several studies have examined the degree of genetic
and environmental inﬂuences on antisocial behavior
subtypes deﬁned by age at onset as a means of validat-
ing them. Mofﬁtt’s (1993) theory suggests that genes
play a larger role in the etiology of early onset, life-
course-persistent antisocial behavior, whereas late onset,
adolescence-limited antisocial behavior is predomi-
nantly inﬂuenced by environmental factors like peers.
Using twin study methodology, Taylor et al. (2000)
found that adolescent boys who began exhibiting
antisocial behavior at an early age (before 12) had
substantial genetic effects on their antisocial behavior.
However, genetic effects were smaller (and environ-
mental effects were larger) on antisocial behavior that
began in adolescence (after age 12). Further, Silberg
et al. (2007) examined longitudinal prospective twin
data and identiﬁed a single genetic factor contribut-
ing to antisocial behavior that began at an early age
and continued through adulthood. On the other
hand, a shared environmental effect contributed to
antisocial behavior that began later in adolescence.
Thus,
the literature suggests that more persistent
forms of antisocial behavior that can be identiﬁed in
adolescence have a greater level of genetic inﬂuence that
likely contributes to the continuity of the behavior.
This literature also supports the idea that there are
different developmental
antisocial
behavior with some adolescents showing a more per-
sistent form that could be likened to a personality style.
Even though there is a clearly identiﬁable form of
antisocial behavior among adolescents that begins early
and is persistent, the onset restriction for the ASPD
diagnosis can be useful in that it avoids putting a lasting
label on a child who may desist in their antisocial
behavior. However, the study of Taylor et al. (2000)
indicates a strong genetic component associated with
an early age at onset of antisocial behavior. Other
research has shown that this group is most likely to
evince an increase in severity and rate of antisocial

trajectories of

138 A Antisocial Personality Disorder

behavior, and may eventually meet criteria for ASPD
(Mofﬁtt 2003). Therefore, it could be that the early age
of onset is biologically driven to some extent, and
the trajectory that these children follow is more likely
to be one that extends
into adulthood. Strictly
enforcing the age limit on ASPD could cause clinicians
and researchers to overlook this qualitatively different
group of antisocial adolescents who may meet criteria
for ASPD before age 18. The symptoms of ASPD may
be developmentally appropriate for some older adoles-
cents, such as youth 16 and 17 years of age. Individuals
at this age are old enough to begin engaging in the more
severe symptoms of ASPD and are also old enough
to have established a pattern of chronic antisocial
behavior as a child. This group may be important to
assess from a clinical standpoint as adolescents who
meet criteria for ASPD before the age of 18 would by
deﬁnition be a more severe group of individuals com-
pared to adolescents who only meet criteria for CD.

In addition, as an extension of Mofﬁt’s (1993) the-
ory about the taxonomy of delinquency, research has
indicated that earlier onset of CD and other types of
conduct problems is associated with poorer academic
performance and poorer prognosis in terms of trajec-
tory of antisocial behavior (Mofﬁtt and Caspi 2001).
A similar pattern may emerge if adolescents meet
criteria for ASPD before the age of 18, as this early
demonstration of severe symptoms may place them at
a higher risk of poor prognosis and related comorbid
conditions, such as substance abuse. If the above obser-
vation is correct, then the speculation would be that the
ASPD criteria could form the basis of assessing just the
sort of severe antisocial phenotype that is predictive of
these negative outcomes. The classiﬁcation of these
youth would be valuable for guiding research on causal
variables as well as early and speciﬁc strategies for
intervention. However, two areas need to be addressed
before establishing the utility of ASPD as a diagnosis in
adolescents. First, it would be important to investigate
whether there is stable continuity of antisocial person-
ality from adolescence into adulthood in order to reli-
ably assess for this personality disorder in adolescence.
Second, it would be important to investigate whether
ASPD in adolescence is similar in manifestation
compared to adult ASPD by researching the symptom-
atology, prognosis, and comorbid conditions in this
subset of youth. Research has been conducted in both
areas as outlined below.

Personality Stability in Adolescents
The literature indicates that personality traits can be
reliability measured in early adolescence and certain
personality proﬁles are associated with delinquency
and externalizing psychopathology at that age (John
et al. 1994). Despite this apparent continuity of
personality, pathological antisociality in adolescents is
diagnostically captured by the CD diagnosis until age
18, yet CD is not conceptualized in the DSM as a
this
maladaptive personality style.
diagnostic distinction, an exploratory factor analysis
using data from 1,253 adolescent twins shows that the
CD and ASPD criteria sets are largely reproduced as
separate factors (see Table 1), suggesting that the anti-
social behaviors tapped by each set of criteria are
related (r = 0.42 between factors) but distinct. Despite
the distinction between the CD and ASPD criteria sets,
CD is a good predictor of ASPD in adulthood (Gelhom
et al. 2007). However, CD is not necessarily superior to
ASPD as an indicator of antisocial behavior problems
during adolescence.

In support of

There is an important, ongoing debate about the
future of the classiﬁcation of personality disorders in
the DSM framework and whether personality disorders
should be viewed as discrete categories or as dimen-
sions with underpinnings in broad personality trait
constructs (e.g., Widiger and Trull 2007). Though
that debate is beyond the scope of this essay, it is an
instructive reminder of the nature of personality disor-
ders as maladaptive personality styles and the large
body of literature showing associations of personality
disorders with normal range personality traits (e.g.,
Saulsman and Page 2004). If ASPD is a valid diagnostic
construct in adolescents, then its associated personality
trait proﬁles should differ from CD in quality and/or
severity and this is what the data are beginning to show.
The Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire
yields three higher-order personality factors: constraint
(low scorers tend to be impulsive and thrill seeking and
lack adherence to social norms), negative emotionality
(high scorers tend to be aggressive and prone to nega-
tive emotional states), and positive emotionality (high
scorers are achievement oriented and connected to
their social network). Each of these factors is comprised
of at least three lower-order personality factors (e.g.,
constraint is derived from harm avoidance, tradition-
alism, and control). Low constraint and high negative
emotionality is a pattern of personality traits that has

Antisocial Personality Disorder A 139

Antisocial Personality Disorder. Table 1 Exploratory
factor analysis using promax rotation of conduct disorder
and antisocial personality disorder symptoms in a sample
of 1,253 17-year-old twins

Antisocial Personality Disorder. Table 2 Correlates
showing a significant difference between conduct disorder
only and antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) diagnosed
in adolescence

A

Factor 1
loading

0.619

Factor 2
loading

0.596

0.588

0.585

0.573

0.530

0.497

0.444

0.404

0.394

0.368

0.357

0.489

Symptom

Stolen without
confrontation

Cruel to people

Destroyed someone’s
property

Used a weapon in a fight

Broken into a home or car

Set fires deliberately

Often initiates physical fights

Ran away overnight

Often lies

Cruel to animals

Often truant

Stolen with confrontation

Failure to conform to social
norms

No regard for the truth

Inconsistent work behavior

Failure to plan/impulsivity

Reckless regard for safety of
self/others

Irritable and aggressive

0.403

Lacks remorse

Failure to honor financial
obligations

0.327

0.329

0.655

0.637

0.574

0.561

0.488

0.475

0.380

0.376

been associated with antisocial behavior (e.g., Mofﬁtt
et al. 1996). Taylor and Iacono (2007) examined these
personality traits in three groups of adolescents: one
group that had no CD or ASPD through young adult-
hood, a second group that had CD that did not progress
to ASPD, and a ﬁnal group with CD that progressed to
ASPD by young adulthood. Personality was measured at
age 17 and groups differed signiﬁcantly on constraint
and all
factors and on negative
emotionality and its lower-order factors of alienation
and aggression (see Table 2). Adolescents who had

lower-order

its

Correlate

Constraint (personality
trait)

Aggression (personality
trait)

Depression

Alcohol abuse and
dependence

Cannabis abuse and
dependence

Other illicit drug abuse
and dependence
Performance IQ >
verbal IQ discrepancy

Pattern of Significant
Difference
Conduct disorder only > ASPD

Conduct disorder only < ASPD

Conduct disorder only < ASPD
Conduct disorder only < ASPD

Conduct disorder only < ASPD

Conduct disorder only < ASPD

Conduct disorder only < ASPD

Antisocial peers

Science achievement

Conduct disorder only < ASPD
Conduct disorder only > ASPD

Note: Table summarizes findings from Taylor et al. (2007) and
Taylor and Iacono (2007)

progressed to ASPD had signiﬁcantly more pathologi-
cal scores on the constraint personality trait and its
lower-order factors as compared to adolescents with
CD only and controls who did not differ signiﬁcantly
from each other. Adolescents with CD only were inter-
mediate on the negative emotionality scale and its
component scales of alienation and aggression. Thus,
the personality traits associated with ASPD are similar
in type to those associated with CD only but the proﬁle
associated with ASPD is more extreme and this is
evidenced before age 18 when ASPD can be diagnosed.

Manifestation of ASPD in Adolescents
A ﬁnal piece of evidence for the validity of the ASPD
diagnosis in adolescents comes from a direct examina-
tion of the issue using a large epidemiological sample of
twins. Taylor et al. (2007) identiﬁed adolescent boys
and girls who had CD by age 17 but no progression to
ASPD by age 20, another group that met criteria for
ASPD in adolescence before age 18, another group that
met criteria for ASPD between ages 18 and 20, and
a control group of adolescent boys and girls with no

140 A Antisocial Personality Disorder

CD or ASPD through age 20. Groups were compared
on the rates of CD and ASPD symptoms to assess
differences in the clinical presentations as well as on
several domains of functioning including IQ, achieve-
ment, peer afﬁliations, family history of ASPD, and
comorbid psychopathology (see Table 2).

The CD only, adolescent ASPD, and ASPD groups
had similar presentations of CD symptoms, suggesting
that the clinical presentation of CD is similar in those
who persist to ASPD and those who desist (Taylor et al.
2007). The presentation of ASPD symptoms was
similar across the two ASPD groups, suggesting that
adolescents who do not yet meet DSM criteria for
ASPD because of the age onset criterion nonetheless
have a clinical presentation of pathological antisocial
personality that is similar to those who do meet the age
onset criterion. In terms of comorbid psychopathology,
the adolescent ASPD group had signiﬁcantly higher
rates of depression and substance use disorders than
adolescents with CD only and controls who did not
differ signiﬁcantly from each other (Taylor et al. 2007).
Moreover, the adolescents with ASPD and the ASPD
group that met the age onset criterion did not differ in
their rates of depression or substance use disorders at
age 20, but the adolescents with ASPD had signiﬁcantly
more alcohol abuse, nicotine dependence, and canna-
bis use disorder at age 17 than the ASPD group that
onset after age 17 (Taylor et al. 2007). These results
suggest that ASPD is an important clinical diagnosis in
adolescence as it signals depression and substance use
disorder rates that are well above those found in
adolescents with CD only.

The validity of the ASPD diagnosis in adolescence
was further demonstrated by the differences found
across cognitive and social functioning. Taylor et al.
(2007) found that adolescents with ASPD and those
with ASPD after age 17 had signiﬁcantly higher discrep-
ancies between their performance and verbal IQ scores
than those with CD only and controls (which were
similarly low in their IQ discrepancies). A similar
pattern was found for antisocial peers and academic
achievement. Thus, across multiple domains, adoles-
cents diagnosed with ASPD looked similar to young
adult men and women with ASPD. This inference sug-
gests that the ASPD criteria signal a group of adolescents
whose clinical, cognitive, academic, and social presenta-
tion is worse than when only the CD criteria are used to
identify psychopathology related to antisocial behavior.

Clinical Implications
The ﬁndings of Taylor et al. (2007) suggest that the
ASPD diagnosis can provide a means to identify ado-
lescents with a serious clinical proﬁle of psychopathol-
ogy that goes beyond persistent antisocial behavior.
These ﬁndings further indicate that clinicians and
researchers should assess the criteria for ASPD in
their adolescent samples even if they would only give
out a provisional diagnosis until a person reached the
age of 18. Taylor et al. (2007) found that CD presenta-
tions did not differ among those with CD only and
those with the ASPD. Therefore, if only the CD criteria
are used with adolescent samples, then a severely
antisocial group will be overlooked. It is important
for researchers to continue to investigate the observable
and testable clusters of symptoms and impairments
associated with ASPD in adolescents, as this informa-
tion is likely to provide direction in deliberate and
precise targets
rehabilitation and treatment.
Current research supports the use of cognitive behav-
ioral therapy (CBT) for the treatment of ASPD among
adults as it reduces verbal and physical aggression and
alcohol use, and increases social functioning (Davidson
et al. 2009). It is possible that adolescents with ASPD
would respond similarly to CBT, though this remains
an empirical question.

for

Caveats
It is important not to overstate the implications from
the study conducted by Taylor et al. (2007). Given that
it appears to be the only study that has directly exam-
ined the construct validity of the ASPD diagnosis in
adolescence, the ﬁndings would need to be replicated
before changes to the ASPD diagnostic criteria could
even be considered. Also, despite the promise of this
research and the potential utility of assessing for ASPD
among adolescents, clinicians should be cautioned in
assessing for this disorder in younger adolescents given
that prior studies on the issue have only been
conducted on older adolescents (i.e., 16 and 17 years
of age). Children certainly are not appropriate for
assessment of ASPD given the symptom quality and
severity inherent in this diagnosis, and the applicability
of the research regarding continuity of this disorder
and associated prognoses may not be relevant to chil-
dren or younger adolescents. Finally, there is a need
for balance in the upward extension of CD and the

downward extension of ASPD as there may be ages at
which these diagnoses overlap. For instance, adoles-
cents aged 15–17 years old may have symptoms
of CD and ASPD at the same time. In these cases,
clinical discretion should be used in determining
which disorder best characterizes the adolescent’s
clinical presentation.

Conclusions
In summary, the research presented in this essay indi-
cates that adolescents diagnosed with ASPD are simi-
lar to adults diagnosed with ASPD in terms of clinical,
cognitive, academic, and social presentations. The
existing literature is compelling but it should be
replicated to ensure the reliability of these results.
Nonetheless, clinicians and researchers could begin
to assess the criteria for ASPD in their adolescent
samples as a means to provide more information
regarding clinical presentation as well as likely prog-
nosis. From a clinical perspective, assessing for ASPD
in adolescents could prove to be an efﬁcient means of
identifying persistent antisocial behavior that could
help accelerate the timeline for and perhaps even the
success of intervention.

References
American Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (2nd ed.). Washington: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington: Author. text
revision.

Cleckley, H. (1941). The mask of sanity. St. Louis: Mosby.
Cleckley, H. (1976). The mask of sanity (5th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.
Davidson, K., Tyrer, P., Tata, P., Cooke, D., Gumley, A., Ford, I.,
et al. (2009). Cognitive behavior therapy for violent men with
antisocial personality disorder in the community: an exploratory
randomized controlled trial. Psychological Medicine, 39, 569–577.
DiLalla, L. F., & Gottesman, I. I. (1989). Heterogeneity of causes for
delinquency and criminality: Lifespan perspectives. Development
and Psychopathology, 1, 339–349.

Frick, P. J., & Hare, R. D. (2001). Antisocial process screening device.

Toronto: Multi-Health Systems.

Frick, P. J., O’Brien, B. S., Wootton, J. M., & McBurnett, K. (1994).
Psychopathy and conduct problems in children. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 103(4), 700–707.

Gelhom, H. L., Sakai, J. T., Price, R. K., & Crowley, T. J. (2007).
DSM-IV conduct disorder criteria as predictors of antisocial
personality disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 48, 529–538.
Hare, R. D. (1991). The Hare psychopathy checklist-revised (PCL-R).

Toronto: Multi-Health Systems.

Antisocial Personality Disorder A 141

Hare, R. D. (2003). The Hare psychopathy checklist – revised (2nd ed.).

Toronto: Multi-Health Systems.

A

John, O. P., Caspi, A., Robins, R. W., Mofﬁtt, T. E., & Stouthamer-
Loeber, M. (1994). The “Little Five”: Exploring the nomological
network of the ﬁve-factor model of personality in adolescent
boys. Child Development, 65, 160–178.

Levenson, M. R., Kiehl, K. A., & Fitzpatrick, C. M. (1995). Assessing
psychopathic attributes in a non-institutionalized population.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 151–158.

Lilienfeld, S. O., & Andrews, B. P. (1996). Development and prelim-
inary validation of a self-report measure of psychopathic
personality. Journal of Personality Assessment, 66, 488–524.
Mofﬁtt, T. E. (1993). Adolescence-limited and life-course-persistent
antisocial behavior: A developmental taxonomy. Psychological
Review, 100(4), 674–701.

Mofﬁtt, T. E. (2003). Life-course persistent and adolescence-limited
antisocial behavior: A 10 year research review and research
agenda. In B. B. Lahey, T. E. Mofﬁtt, & A. Caspi (Eds.), Causes
of conduct disorder and juvenile delinquency (pp. 49–75).
New York: Guilford.

Mofﬁtt, T. E., & Caspi, A. (2001). Childhood predictors differentiate
life-course persistent and adolescence-limited antisocial path-
ways in males and females. Development and Psychopathology,
13, 399–424.

Mofﬁtt, T. E., Caspi, A., Dickson, N., Silva, P., & Stanton, W. (1996).
Childhood-onset versus adolescent-onset antisocial conduct
problems in males: Natural history from ages 3 to 18 years.
Development and Psychopathology, 8, 399–424.

Moran, P. (1999). The epidemiology of antisocial personality
disorder. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 34,
231–242.

Patrick, C. J. (2007). Antisocial personality disorder and psychopathy.
In W. O’Donohue, K. A. Fowler, & S. O. Lilienfeld (Eds.),
Personality disorders: Toward the DSM-V (pp. 109–166).
Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Patrick, C. J., Fowles, D. C., & Krueger, R. F. (2009). Triarchic
conceptualization of psychopathy: Developmental origins of
disinhibition, boldness, and meanness. Development and Psycho-
pathology, 21, 913–938.

Robbins, L. N. (1966). Deviant children grow up. Baltimore: Williams

& Wilkins.

Robbins, L. N., Tipp, J., & Pryzbeck, T. (1991). Antisocial personality.
In L. N. Robbins & D. A. Regier (Eds.), Psychiatric disorders in
America: The epidemiological catchment area study (pp. 258–290).
New York: The Free Press.

Salekin, R. T. (2006). Psychopathy in children and adolescents.
In C. J. Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 156–171).
New York: Guilford.

Saulsman, L. M., & Page, A. C. (2004). The ﬁve-factor model and
personality disorder empirical literature: A meta-analytic review.
Clinical Psychology Review, 23, 1055–1085.

Silberg, J. L., Rutter, M., Tracy, K., Maes, H. H., & Eaves, L. (2007).
Etiological heterogeneity in the development of antisocial
behavior: The Virginia twin study of adolescent behavioral devel-
opment and the young adult follow-up. Psychological Medicine,
37, 1193–1202.

142 A Anxiety Disorders

Taylor, J., Elkins, I. J., Legrand, L., Peuschold, D., & Iacono, W. G.
(2007). Construct validity of adolescent antisocial personality
disorder. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 36, 1048–1057.
Taylor, J., & Iacono, W. G. (2007). Personality trait differences in boys
and girls with clinical or sub-clinical diagnoses of conduct
disorder versus antisocial personality disorder. Journal of Adoles-
cence, 30, 537–547.

Taylor, J., Iacono, W. G., & McGue, M. (2000). Evidence for a genetic
etiology of early-onset delinquency. Journal of Abnormal Psychol-
ogy, 109(4), 634–643.

Walsh, Z., & Kosson, D. S. (2008). Psychopathy and violence: The
importance of factor level interactions. Psychological Assessment,
20, 114–120.

Widiger, T. A., & Trull, T. J. (2007). Plate techtonics in the classiﬁca-
tion of personality disorder: Shifting to a dimensional model.
The American Psychologist, 62, 71–83.

Anxiety Disorders

2,

1, CARA A. SETTIPANI
SARAH A. CRAWLEY
2
PHILIP C. KENDALL
1Department of Psychology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA
2Child and Adolescent Anxiety Disorders Clinic,
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA

Overview
Anxiety disorders are common among adolescents,
often causing distress and impairment in their daily
lives. Adolescents with anxiety disorders suffer peer
difﬁculties, underperform in school, have difﬁculty get-
ting along with their families, and are at risk for other
emotional problems. For example, youth with anxiety
disorders are more likely to develop depression and have
problems with substance use. Anxiety disorders run
a chronic course and tend to persist without treatment.
Two treatment approaches, cognitive behavior therapy
and medication, have been found to effectively treat
anxiety disorders in adolescents. More research is needed
to further adapt these treatments for adolescents, as
research studies have tended to focus on a younger
population. Additionally, efforts are needed to make
treatments more widely available to anxious youth.

Anxiety disorders are among the most prevalent
forms of psychopathology in youth, occurring in
approximately 10% of all youth and are associated

impairment

with signiﬁcant
in daily functioning
(Costello et al. 2003). Socially, youth with anxiety dis-
orders experience peer rejection more frequently than
youth without anxiety disorders. Educationally, youth
with anxiety disorders struggle in school, often with-
drawing prematurely from school compared to their
same age peers. Youth with anxiety disorders also expe-
rience problematic family relationships and tend to
have parents who are more controlling and rejecting
than those of comparison youth without anxiety. In
addition to the impairment that adolescents experience
in family, social, and academic functioning, anxious
youth are also at high risk for developing additional
psychological disorders including adult anxiety disor-
ders, depression, and substance use problems – and
these disorders can cause further impairment in func-
tioning. The impairment that anxious adolescents
experience is not temporary, as untreated anxiety dis-
orders generally run a chronic course extending into
adulthood. The high prevalence and negative conse-
quences of untreated anxiety disorders in youth suggest
that anxiety disorders are a signiﬁcant public health
concern that requires continued research and clinical
attention. Unfortunately, many, if not most youth with
clinically signiﬁcant anxiety disorders have not received
an appropriate empirically supported treatment.

The Importance of Adolescence
tremendous biological,
Adolescence is a time of
cognitive, and social change. During adolescence, sec-
ondary sex characteristics emerge, growth spurts occur,
and reproductive systems mature. Social awareness
develops, independence and autonomy become impor-
tant, and concerns about academic matters, dating, and
interpersonal relationships become prominent. The
capacity for higher order thought and systematic
problem solving also develops in adolescence, enabling
adolescents
thought processes,
discover patterns within their thinking, and identify
how their thoughts have evolved over time.

to recognize their

The developmental changes of adolescence do not
occur in isolation; these changes impact the nature
of the anxiety experienced by adolescents. Anxiety
disorders are typically diagnosed when a youth is
experiencing fears and distress that are interfering and
that persist over time. Teenagers commonly experience
increased anxiety related to biological changes, peer

social

relationships,

perceptions,
and academic
matters. Youth with anxiety disorders also experience
though they experience them more
these fears,
intensely and with greater
interference. Anxiety-
disordered youth also frequently struggle with devel-
oping autonomy and independence. These youth often
require assistance to manage their emotions, yet at the
same time, they may be afraid and resistant to receive
this assistance. Although these youth are likely very
cognitively aware of their thoughts and worries, they
lack the skills to manage their anxiety. In addition,
adolescents with anxiety disorders are at higher risk
for depression and substance use.

Although adolescence is a unique developmental
time period, the majority of research on anxiety disor-
ders has been conducted on adults or on children.
Although many studies include both children and
adolescents, Foa et al. (2005) note that it is critical
that research begins to look at risk and protective
factors that are speciﬁc to adolescence. Identifying
these factors may lead to improvements in the preven-
tion and treatment of adolescent anxiety disorders.

Anxiety Disorders in Adolescence
Although anxiety is common in adolescence, anxiety
disorders only occur in a subset of adolescents. Specif-
ically, anxiety disorders are diagnosed when anxiety
causes distress, persists, and contributes to meaningful
interference in daily functioning. The American
Psychiatric Association (APA 1994) provides speciﬁc
deﬁnitions of discrete anxiety disorders; however,
many teenagers with anxiety disorders will likely meet
criteria for more than one psychological disorder.
A brief overview of the examples of anxiety disorders
is included below.

Two commonly observed anxiety disorders in
adolescent populations are social phobia (SP) and gen-
eralized anxiety disorder (GAD). GAD is characterized
by the presence of uncontrollable, excessive worry. For
adolescents, these worries may include concerns about
their appearance, and
school, health,
personal harm. Although most teenagers worry at
times, youth with GAD worry more days than not
over an extended time period (at least 6 months) and
these worries cause interference in their lives. Adoles-
cents with GAD also experience at least one physical
symptom of anxiety; common symptoms include

friendships,

Anxiety Disorders A 143

A

restlessness and difﬁculty sleeping. Rather
than
experiencing general worries, adolescents with social
phobia experience excessive fear in social or evaluative
situations in which the youth may experience possible
negative evaluation by others. As noted previously,
social concerns become increasingly salient in adoles-
cence, given the heightened importance of social status
and peer relationships.

Anxiety disorders in adolescents may take other
forms. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a
disorder characterized by obsessions (recurrent, persis-
tent, and intrusive thoughts, images, or impulses) and/
or compulsions (repetitive behaviors or mental acts)
that are distressing, time-consuming, or cause signiﬁ-
cant
interference in daily functioning. Obsessions
among adolescents with OCD often relate to fears of
harm or other negative outcomes to self and others.
Commonly observed compulsions among adolescents
include ritualized and/or excessive hand washing,
cleaning, and checking (e.g., Rettew et al. 1992).

Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is another
form of anxiety seen in adolescents. Youth with PTSD
display a collection of symptoms that develop in
response to a trauma in which the youth either person-
ally experienced or witnessed an event involving serious
injury or death. The PTSD event(s) are experienced as
terrifying and horrifying and the youth feels helpless.
Youth often express disorganized or agitated behavior
in response to these events. In addition to feeling hor-
riﬁed, youth with PTSD persistently reexperience the
event through recurrent and intrusive distressing recol-
lections of the event, recurrent distressing dreams of the
event, or acting or feeling as if the event were actually
recurring. Youth with PTSD experience severe psycho-
logical and/or physiological distress upon exposure to
internal or external cues that symbolize or are similar to
a feature of the event. Youth with PTSD also avoid
stimuli associated with the trauma; this avoidance
may present as numbing of general responsiveness.

Although panic disorder and agoraphobia are less
commonly observed among adolescents in comparison
to adults, these disorders begin to emerge around this
period of development. Adolescents with panic disorder
experience recurrent panic attacks, which are discrete
episodes of intense fear and emotional distress that have
a sudden onset and brief duration. During these attacks,
the individual experiences the physical and cognitive

144 A Anxiety Disorders

symptoms of anxiety and is afraid of these symptoms.
In panic disorder, these attacks appear to happen with-
out an obvious trigger and the youth experiencing these
attacks must exhibit at least 1 month of concern about
the recurrence of these attacks and their consequences.
Youth with agoraphobia are fearful and tend to avoid
situations that they believe would be difﬁcult to escape
from were they to experience panic symptoms. Not all
youth who have panic attacks develop agoraphobia.
Indeed, given that adolescents are often not fully
independent, there may be less room for avoidance of
feared situations.

Although the frequency of

Other anxiety disorders in adolescents include
speciﬁc phobias and separation anxiety disorder.
Speciﬁc phobias are common and often include fears
of animals, heights, and needles. Separation anxiety
disorder, a disorder characterized by a fear of being
away from family members or from home, is less com-
mon in adolescents. However, when present, it may be
particularly distressing as it can interfere with the ado-
lescent’s ability to develop autonomy and independence.
separation anxiety
disorder decreases from childhood to adolescence, the
prevalence of other disorders increases over time. For
example, there are higher prevalence rates of social
phobia in adolescents than in younger children and
the prevalence of this disorder continues to increase
throughout adolescence (Essau et al. 1999). A modest
increase in GAD in middle adolescence has also been
found (Costello et al. 2003). Indeed, prevalence esti-
mates continue to increase with age among children
and adolescents for GAD, social phobia, panic disorder,
and agoraphobia; however, an increase of the same
magnitude is not seen for speciﬁc phobia or separation
anxiety disorder (Beesdo et al. 2009).

Assessment of Anxiety Disorders
A thorough diagnostic assessment, conducted by
a trained and reliable mental health professional, is
necessary to accurately diagnose an anxiety disorder.
Anxiety disorders in adolescents are best assessed using
information from (a) the adolescents themselves,
(b) their parents or primary caregivers, (c) teacher
reports, (d) semi-structured clinical interviews, and
(e) behavioral observations, as each of these sources
of
information.
Assessments of anxiety disorders evaluate the onset of

information

provides

valuable

symptoms, determine the context in which the symp-
toms occur, and review a child’s medical, familial,
social, and academic history. Consideration need be
given to comorbid psychological disorders, as comor-
bid psychological disorders are common in youth
diagnosed with anxiety disorders.

Accurate assessments use reliable, valid, and
developmentally appropriate symptom measures that
examine symptoms over time, discriminate between
include multiple
disorders, assess anxiety severity,
observers (e.g., parent and child report), and are
sensitive to therapeutic change. Structured clinical
interviews, such as the Anxiety Disorders Interview
Schedule for Children/Parents (ADIS-C/P; Albano
and Silverman 1996), are ideal clinician-administered
measures that capture changes in anxiety disorder
severity occurring over the course of treatment. Self-
report measures of anxiety (e.g., the Multidimensional
Anxiety Scale for Children; MASC-C; March et al.
1997) provide information about
the adolescent’s
subjective experience of anxiety. Self-report measures
are quick to administer and are generally less expensive
than structured interviews; however, they do not always
yield enough information about the adolescent’s spe-
ciﬁc anxiety concerns to reach a diagnostic decision.
Parent and teacher reports are useful, especially with
younger adolescents, as they may provide information
about the adolescent’s functioning in different environ-
ments and from different perspectives. Finally, behav-
ioral observations provide clinicians with valuable
information (e.g., avoidance of eye contact, quiet
speech, reassurance seeking) that is wise to consider.
Of course, one needs to be aware that the adolescent
may behave differently while in the presence of the
professional relative to their daily environment.

Gathering information from a variety of sources is
important, yet total agreement among informants is
not to be expected. Parents and teachers may not be
aware of the adolescent’s internal experiences of anxi-
ety, and adolescents may be unable or unwilling to
report their own experiences of anxiety. For example,
a socially phobic 13-year-old may not be comfortable
divulging his or her fears to a stranger. Alternately,
a parent of a 17-year-old may be unaware of their
child’s functioning in social situations. A proper
evaluation of anxiety disorders in adolescents takes
these factors into account.

Anxiety Disorders A 145

A

Treating Anxiety in Adolescents:
Efficacy of Cognitive-Behavioral
Therapy
Although there are several theories and approaches for
the treatment of anxiety in adolescents, one approach,
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT), has received the
most empirical support for the treatment of youth with
anxiety disorders (Kazdin and Weisz 1998; Silverman
et al. 2008). The American Psychological Association
(APA) Task Force on Promotion and Dissemination of
Psychological Procedures (1995) has provided guide-
lines for determining whether treatments should be
considered “well-established,” “probably efﬁcacious,”
or simply “experimental.” Clearly, the preferred desig-
nation is that which is supported by the most data. For
a treatment to be deemed an empirically supported
treatment (EST), it is necessary for the treatment to
demonstrate efﬁcacy across several randomized clinical
trials
research investigators
(Chambless and Hollon 1998). Behavioral techniques
and contingency management strategies have been
labeled “probably efﬁcacious” or “well-established”
for the treatment of phobias. CBT has been deemed
“probably efﬁcacious” for treating other anxiety disor-
ders and, given recent reports (Kendall et al. 2008;
Walkup et al. 2008),
is said to now qualify as
“efﬁcacious.”

(RCTs) by multiple

To illustrate, consider the results of RCTs that eval-
uated CBT for the treatment of youth with anxiety
disorders (e.g., Barrett et al. 1996; Kendall et al. 1997).
For example, the trial conducted by Kendall and
colleagues investigated the efﬁcacy of CBT for 9–13-
year-olds who met diagnostic criteria for anxiety
disorders. The youth were highly comorbid and typical
of those seen in anxiety clinics. Following treatment,
approximately two-thirds of youth did not meet
their principal anxiety disorder and
criteria for
maintained their treatment gains at 1-year follow-up.
A majority of these participants also maintained signif-
icant improvements in anxiety at long-term follow-up
and positive responders to treatment had a reduced
degree of substance use involvement and related prob-
lems 7.4 years later (Kendall et al. 2004). In Australia,
Barrett et al. (1996) evaluated a CBT intervention based
on Kendall’s Coping Cat program (Kendall and Hedtke
2006) to an intervention that provided a family inter-
vention along with CBT for youth ages 7–14 with

a primary diagnosis of overanxious disorder (now
GAD), SAD, or SP. The results were favorable: 60% of
youth in both treatment
achieved
a nondiagnosis status posttreatment and gains were
largely maintained at 1-year follow-up.

conditions

Accumulating evidence from other RCTs of CBT is
consistent, and continue to demonstrate that the treat-
ment of youth anxiety disorders can be efﬁcacious.
Results of two recent studies conﬁrm that about two-
thirds of treated youth no longer meet criteria for their
principal anxiety disorder or are rated by independent
evaluators as “treatment responders” (very much
improved, or much improved) following 12–16 ses-
sions of the Coping cat program (Kendall et al. 2008;
Walkup et al. 2008). In one study, the beneﬁcial effects
of CBT for youth ages 7–17 were augmented by the
addition of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
(SSRI; Walkup et al. 2008).

Specifics of CBT
CBT for anxious youth is premised on several core
strategies and beliefs. A core assumption of CBT is
that not all anxiety is maladaptive, and that anxiety
can be an evolutionarily adaptive response to stressors
that helps individuals in danger. This anxiety, though
generally adaptive, is interfering and maladaptive in
individuals with anxiety disorders – the amount of
anxiety experienced is in excess of what is appropriate.
The goal of CBT for anxiety is not to completely elim-
inate anxiety, but to help youth recognize anxious
arousal, manage and reduce it, and cope with their
anxiety such that they no longer experience anxiety as
distressing and interfering.

Anxiety has three core components: physiological,
cognitive, and behavioral. Physiologically, anxiety is
the “ﬂight or ﬂight” response that occurs when an
individual is in a provocative situation. Evolutionarily,
this response enables individuals to leave situations
that could cause bodily harm by physiologically pre-
paring the body to either ﬁght or ﬂee. Speciﬁcally,
system,
anxiety activates
which increases functions required for ﬁghting or ﬂee-
ing such as heart rate, respiration, and perspiration and
decreases functions that are not necessary for immedi-
ate survival such as digestion and sexual arousal.
In anxiety disorders, this response is activated too
frequently and thereby interferes with daily function.

the autonomic nervous

146 A Anxiety Disorders

The cognitive component of anxiety refers to the
thoughts (self-talk) that accompany anxious arousal
and distress. A broad range of thoughts are included
in this component. Often these thoughts catastrophize
the situation, making it
seem more harmful or
than it actually is. For example, an
dangerous
anxiety-disordered adolescent with social phobia may
misinterpret a social situation and think a peer’s silence
reﬂects dislike and total rejection, even when this is
unlikely. These thoughts are distressing and often lead
to avoidance of feared situations.

The choice to stay away from or leave an anxiety-
provoking situation is avoidance. Behaviorally, anxious
youth avoid situations that they see as distressing or
potentially distressing. This avoidance provides the
youth with a sense of an immediate anxiety relief. In
the case of youth with anxiety disorders, avoidance
prevents the youth from fully engaging in their
environment and results in social isolation, academic
difﬁculties, and strained familial relations. Addition-
ally, avoidance prevents youth from learning when
a situation is not harmful or dangerous, and thereby
creates a cycle in which the youth continues to avoid
situations that could be mastered. Avoidance may seem
to work in the short term, but it maintains anxiety in
the long term.

cognitive

(problem solving,

CBT for anxious youth combines physiological
(relaxation),
threat
appraisal), and behavioral strategies (modeling, expo-
sure, contingency management) to help youth learn to
cope with excessive anxiety. Most CBT protocols for
anxious youth include a combination of all of these
components in addition to psychoeducation, cognitive
restructuring, and relapse prevention plans.

Psychoeducation and affective education provide
information about emotions and anxiety disorders.
Emotional identiﬁcation strategies help youth identify
emotions in themselves and others. Anxious youth
often misidentify emotions, leading to negative feed-
back from their environment and increased anxiety
levels. Properly recognizing emotions, especially anxi-
ety, enables youth to determine what strategies to use to
help themselves feel better. For example, a youth would
learn to appropriately discriminate when physical
symptoms they experience may be due to anxiety as
opposed to physical illness by taking into account
the context in which the symptom occurs. When
youth identify their anxiety and differentiate it from

other feeling states, they are better able to cope with
their anxiety.

Once youth have mastered emotional identiﬁcation
and have developed an increased awareness of their
somatic reactions to anxiety, relaxation training may
be used to help youth develop awareness and control
over their own physiological and muscular reactions to
anxiety. Relaxation training enables the youth to take
the aroused physical state as a signal to begin relaxation
procedures, and awareness of one’s unique response to
distress enables the youth to target speciﬁc muscle
groups that tense when he or she becomes anxious.
Progressive muscle relaxation and relaxation scripts
are commonly employed in the treatment of anxious
youth.

Cognitive restructuring within CBT for anxious
youth focuses on identifying and challenging youth’s
distorted cognitions. Cognitive restructuring high-
lights the role of maladaptive thinking in dysfunctional
behavior and seeks
to adjust distorted cognitive
processing in order to develop more constructive
ways of thinking. Cognitive strategies include teaching
the youth to test out and reduce negative self-talk,
challenging unrealistic or dysfunctional negative self-
statements, generating positive self-statements and
coping thoughts, and devising a plan to cope with
feared situations. The goal is to build a new cognitive
structure that is based on coping. It is important to
note that this new cognitive template is not intended to
get rid of all the youth’s anxiety, but rather to “turn
down the volume” on anxiety by enabling the youth to
use coping strategies in the face of formerly distressing
misperceptions and arousal.

Problem solving is another cognitive component of
CBT. Problem solving helps youth develop conﬁdence
in their own ability to help themselves deal with
challenges that arise in their lives. The therapist and
youth identify problems and collaboratively brain-
storm possible solutions without judgment as to their
viability. The youth learns to evaluate each alternative
and select the most appropriate solution. By learning
how to problem solve, the youth acquires the skills to
generate solutions in situations that initially appeared
hopeless.

Reinforcement, a behavioral component of CBT, is
based on operant conditioning principles. Reinforcement
procedures focus on facilitating approach responses
through appropriate reward and reinforcement rather

Anxiety Disorders A 147

A

than focusing exclusively on the reduction of anxiety.
Anxious youth are reminded that when initially
attempting to accomplish a daunting task, perfect
performance is not expected. Reinforcement delivered
in a timely manner as well as graduated practice help
youth develop conﬁdence and lead to a growing sense
of competence.

Exposure is an essential component of CBT for
anxiety disorders. Exposure tasks help the youth habit-
uate to a distressing situation and provide the youth
with opportunities
to practice coping skills by
experiencing either real-life or simulated anxiety-
provoking situations. Exposures can be approached in
graduated measures or by ﬂooding. In gradual expo-
sure, the child approaches feared situations sequen-
tially in a hierarchy of feared situations that range
from least to most-anxiety provoking. In ﬂooding,
a youth is exposed to a feared stimulus or situation
and remains in its presence until his or her self-
reported anxiety level decreases. Flooding is usually
accompanied by response prevention, where the child
is prevented from engaging in avoidance behavior
(or compulsions) during the exposure.

Integrated CBT programs speciﬁcally for the treat-
ment of anxiety disorders in adolescents have been
developed. One example, is the CAT Project (Kendall
et al. 2002), a program that facilitates learning by
presenting the main principles of anxiety management
using the FEAR acronym: The “F” (Feeling Fright-
ened?) step focuses on recognizing somatic symptoms
of anxiety, the “E” (Expecting Bad Things to Happen?)
step helps youth identify anxious cognitions, the “A”
(Attitudes and Actions that Can Help) step helps the
youth develop coping skills to implement in anxiety-
provoking situations (e.g., coping thoughts, problem
solving, relaxation), and the “R” (Results and Rewards)
step allows youth to rate their effort and earn rewards
for facing feared situations. The structured treatment
program consists of 16 sessions, with the ﬁrst 8 sessions
focused on skills training and the second 8 sessions
consisting of skills practice. This treatment program,
like most CBT programs,
includes assignment of
weekly take-home tasks that provide youth with oppor-
tunities to practice the skills learned in session in their
everyday lives. However, more research is needed to
examine the efﬁcacy of treatment protocols for adoles-
cents, as most of the treatment outcome literature
examines children ages 13 and under.

level,

Unique Issues in Application of CBT
for Adolescents
When implementing CBT, attention to the youth’s
unique needs and developmental
including
social, emotional, and cognitive functioning is essen-
tial. Treatment for adolescents with anxiety disorders
requires some adaptations to address their different
needs. Conﬁdentiality issues are especially important
for adolescents, as they are becoming more indepen-
dent and may not want their parents to know about
their emotions and behaviors. Thus, it is important to
make clear what information will be shared with par-
ents, so that the therapeutic alliance is not disrupted if
such a disclosure needs to be made, and to help foster
an environment where the adolescent can feel comfort-
able sharing his or her experiences with the therapist.
Additionally, youth may often be reluctant to share
their thoughts and feelings with a therapist. Adoles-
cents may not believe they need treatment and may feel
that they are being forced by their parents. If they are
reluctant, youth should be given the choice to attend
a few trial sessions before they commit to treatment. It
may also be helpful
to provide adolescents with
journals for recording the exercises, as journaling can
facilitate open communication about thoughts and
feelings. This technique can also help illuminate the
adolescents’ personal treatment goals, which helps
them to gain self-efﬁcacy.

Finally, treatment should encourage adolescents to
develop appropriate social relationships with peers and
to develop autonomy and independence from their
parents. To do so, adolescents may need encourage-
ment to make decisions rather than deferring to adults.
Encouragement to spend time with peers or interact
with peers from different peer groups may be needed.
Unlike in childhood, forming relationships with peers
may be more challenging for adolescents, especially
when an adolescent is unsure of what type of peer
group he or she will best ﬁt in with. As a result, it is
important to help adolescents explore their own per-
sonal identity and to help them become more willing to
have a variety of experiences with peers.

Medication
Medications have also been used to treat anxiety
disorders in youth. SSRIs are the most frequently used
medications in youth as they are generally well toler-
ated. With the exception of sertraline, which has been

148 A Anxiety Disorders

approved for the treatment of OCD in youth, psychi-
atric medications have generally not been approved for
use in adolescents. However, research suggests that
sertraline is associated with meaningful reductions in
anxiety symptoms. Walkup et al. (2008) compared
medication (sertraline) to CBT alone or a combination
of CBT and medication with a pill placebo. This study
found that all active treatments led to signiﬁcant reduc-
tions in anxiety symptoms. Youth treated with CBTand
sertraline had the greatest reductions in symptoms,
suggesting that combining these treatments may lead
to the greatest reductions in anxiety.

Future Directions
Although there are effective treatments of anxiety dis-
orders, more research is needed to reﬁne these treat-
ments, especially given that approximately 30% of
youth do not respond to CBT or medication alone. It
may be that adaptations of the treatments to help
adolescents cope with sadness or social isolation may
bolster the outcomes produced by these treatments.
Also, the effective treatments need to be more widely
available for youth. One possible method to dissemi-
nate the treatments is through the development of
Internet-based treatments for adolescents.

Cross-References
▶ Anxiety Sensitivity

References
Albano, A. M., Silverman, W. K. (1996). The Anxiety Disorders Inter-
view Schedule for Children for DSM-IV: Clinician Manual (Child
and Parent Versions).
San Antonio, TX: Psychological
Corporation.

American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1994). Diagnostic and sta-
tistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington: Amer-
ican Psychiatric Association (APA).

Amercian Psychological Association Task Force on Promotion and
Dissemination of Psychological Procedures (1995). Training in
and dissemination of empirically-validated psychological treat-
ments: Report and recommendations. Clinical Psychologist, 48,
3–24.

Barrett, P., Dadds, M., & Rapee, R. (1996). Family treatment of child
anxiety: A controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 64, 333–342.

Beesdo, K., Knappe, S., & Pine, D. S. (2009). Anxiety and anxiety
disorders in children and adolescents: Developmental issues and
implications for DSM-V. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 32,
483–524.

Chambless, D., & Hollon, S. (1998). Deﬁning empirically supported
therapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 7–18.
Costello, E. J., Mustillo, S., Erkanli, A., Keeler, G., & Angold, A.
(2003). Prevalence and development of psychiatric disorders in
childhood and adolescence. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(8),
837–844.

Essau, C. A., Conradt, J., & Petermann, F. (1999). Frequency and
comorbidity of social phobia and social fears in adolescents.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, 831–843.

Foa, E., Costello, E., Franklin, M., Kagan, J., Kendall, P. C., Klein, R.
et al. (Commission on anxiety disorders in adolescents). (2005).
In
Research agenda for anxiety disorders (pp. 247–253).
D. L. Evans, E. Foa, R. Gur, H. Hendin, C. O’Brien, M. Seligman,
& B. Walsh (Eds.), Treating and preventing adolescent mental
health disorders: What we know and what we don’t know. New
York: Oxford University Press/The Annenberg Foundation Trust
at Sunnylands/the Annenberg Public Policy Center of
the
University of Pennsylvania.

Kazdin, A., & Weisz, J. (1998). Identifying and developing empirically
supported child and adolescent treatments. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 66, 100–110.

Kendall, P. C., & Hedtke, K. (2006). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
anxious children: Therapist manual (3rd ed.). Ardmore: Work-
book Publishing.

Kendall, P. C., Flannery-Schroeder, E., Panichelli-Mindel, S. M.,
Southam-Gerow, M., Henin, A., & Warman, M. (1997). Therapy
for youths with anxiety disorders: A second randomized clinical
trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 366–380.
Kendall, P., Choudhury, M., Hudson, J., & Webb, A. (2002). The

C.A.T. project manual. Ardmore: Workbook Publishing.

Kendall, P. C., Safford, S., Flannery-Schroeder, E., & Webb, A. (2004).
Child anxiety treatment: Outcomes in adolescence and impact
on substance use and depression at 7.4-year follow-up. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 276–287.

Kendall, P. C., Hudson, J. L., Gosch, E., Flannery-Schroeder, E., &
Suveg, C. (2008). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for anxiety dis-
ordered youth: A randomized clinical trial evaluating child and
family modalities. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
76, 282–297.

March, J., Parker, J. D. A., Sullivan, K., Stallings, P., & Conners, C. K.
(1997). The Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for Children (MASC):
Factor structure, reliability, and validity. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 554–565.

Rettew, D., Swedo, S. E., Leonard, H. L., Lenane, M. C., & Rapport,
J. L. (1992). Obsessions and compulsions across time in 79
children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive disorders.
Journal American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 31,
1050–1056.

Silverman, W. K., Pina, A. A., & Viswesvarana, C. (2008). Evidenced
based psychosocial treatment for phobic and anxiety disorders in
children and adolescents. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent
Psychology, 37, 105–130.

Walkup, J., Albano, A. M., Piacentini, J., Birmaher, B., Compton, S.,
Sherrill, J., et al. (2008). Cognitive behavioral therapy, sertraline,
or a combination in childhood anxiety. New England Journal of
Medicine, 359, 2753–2766.

Anxiety Sensitivity

2,

1, SHERRY H. STEWART

4
1,3, MARGO C. WATT

JANINE V. OLTHUIS
ELIZABETH N. MCLAUGHLIN
1Department of Psychology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
2Departments of Psychology, Psychiatry, and
Community Health and Epidemiology, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
3Pediatric Health Psychology, IWK Health Centre,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
4Department of Psychology, Saint Francis Xavier
University, Antigonish, Nova Scotia, Canada

Overview
Anxiety sensitivity (AS) is a cognitive individual differ-
ence factor involving an enduring fear of anxiety-
related arousal sensations (e.g., increased heart rate)
that arises from the tendency to catastrophize about
these sensations, believing they will have serious psy-
chological, physiological, and/or social consequences.
AS may have particular relevance for adolescents as the
onset of puberty heralds the arrival of a wide range of
new and unexpected bodily sensations, as well as
changes in cognitive and social development. Research
has implicated AS in the development and mainte-
nance of a number of mental health disorders in ado-
lescents
social phobia,
posttraumatic stress disorder, chronic pain, substance
misuse, and depression. Furthermore, AS has been
shown to be composed of several lower-order factors
(e.g., Physical, Social, and Psychological Concerns),
which may have unique associations with psychopa-
thology. Understanding AS will help in the identiﬁ-
cation of youth at risk for mental health problems
and might have implications for prevention and
intervention.

including panic disorder,

Anxiety Sensitivity: The Concept, Its
Link to Psychopathology, and Its
Relevance in Adolescence
Anxiety sensitivity (AS) is a cognitive individual
difference factor involving an enduring fear of anxi-
ety-related arousal sensations (e.g.,
increased heart
rate, dizziness). This fear arises from the tendency to

Anxiety Sensitivity A 149

A

interpret these sensations catastrophically, believing
that they will have serious physical, psychological,
and/or social consequences (Reiss 1991; Reiss and
McNally 1985). For instance, an individual with high
AS might fear experiencing heart palpitations because
he or she believes they are a warning sign of an
impending heart attack. Similarly, an individual with
high AS might interpret an inability to think clearly as
a sign that he or she is “going crazy.” In contrast,
individuals with low AS regard these sensations as
unpleasant but harmless (McNally 1999). The impor-
tance of AS is reﬂected in its implication in the devel-
opment and maintenance of anxiety and related
disorders (McNally 2002).

Reiss and McNally’s (1985; Reiss, 1991) expectancy
theory of anxiety explains the link between AS and
anxiety disorders. This theory posits that when an
individual with high AS experiences otherwise benign
physiological anxiety symptoms (e.g., breathlessness),
he or she is likely to fear that these symptoms will have
harmful consequences. Such catastrophic misinterpre-
tations lead to increased levels of anxiety, which serve
to further exacerbate physiological anxiety symptoms.
This results in a vicious positive feedback cycle and
ultimately leads to a panic attack or maladaptive behav-
iors for dealing with anxiety such as avoidance or
escape. This conceptualization of AS has led to a line
of research (e.g., Schmidt et al. 2006) suggesting that
AS is a predisposing cognitive risk factor for anxiety
disorders.

Research has proposed a number of pathways
through which AS may be acquired. Heritability studies
(e.g., Stein et al. 1999) have identiﬁed a strong corre-
spondence between AS levels in identical, as compared
to fraternal, twins. This research suggests that genetics
may play an important role in the development of AS as
approximately half of the variance in AS could be
accounted for by genetics. Environmental
factors,
including learning experiences,
likely also make an
important contribution. Retrospective research with
nonclinical university students (mean age approxi-
mately 20 years; Watt et al. 1998; Watt and Stewart
2000) has suggested a role for learning history factors
in the development of AS. Both instrumental learning
for exhibiting anxiety
(i.e., positive reinforcement
symptoms) and observational learning (i.e., modeling
of fear reactions by parents or verbal transmission of

150 A Anxiety Sensitivity

beliefs about the harmful nature of anxiety symptoms)
mechanisms have been implicated. Partial replication
of these ﬁndings comes from a youth self-report study
by Muris et al. (2001a), who found that parents’ verbal
transmission of their beliefs about
the danger of
somatic symptoms, but not parental reinforcement of
somatic symptoms or observational
learning, was
signiﬁcantly related to AS in nonclinical adolescents
(12–14 years old). As such, questions remain about
the relevance of speciﬁc types of early learning experi-
ences to the development of AS. For instance, these
discrepant results may reﬂect
the possibility that
different types of learning experiences (e.g., verbal
learning) manifest
transmission and observational
as elevated AS at different developmental stages.
Moreover, further research is needed to elucidate the
importance of the interaction between genetic factors
and environmental factors in developing AS. A recent
large-scale behavioral-genetic analysis suggests that
genetic and environmental factors are relevant for
women, while only environmental factors contribute
to variance in men’s AS (Taylor et al. 2008).

Anxiety sensitivity has been widely explored in
adult populations; it has been implicated in the devel-
opment and maintenance of a number of anxiety
disorders (e.g., panic disorder, posttraumatic stress
disorder, social phobia) and has been linked to other
related conditions including depression, substance use
disorders, hypochondriacal concerns, and chronic pain
(for reviews, see Olatunji and Wolitzky-Taylor 2009
and Watt and Stewart 2008). Taken together, research
with adults has convincingly shown that AS should be
considered a vulnerability factor for anxiety and related
disorders. Studies investigating AS among adolescents
have largely drawn from this body of research. Research
into AS among adolescents, however, only began in
earnest following the development of the Childhood
Anxiety Sensitivity Index (CASI; Silverman et al. 1991)
and, as such, is still growing.

The CASI, a measure of AS among children
and adolescents, is a developmentally sensitive modiﬁ-
cation of the Anxiety Sensitivity Index (ASI; Peterson
and Reiss 1992), the most widely used measure of AS
among adults. The CASI is a self-report questionnaire
consisting of 18 items (16 items directly mirroring the
adult ASI items but in developmentally appropriate
language, plus two additional child-speciﬁc items).
CASI items ask youth to report how aversively they

view anxiety symptoms (i.e., “It scares me when I feel
like I am going to throw up” or “When I am afraid,
I worry that I might be crazy”) on a three-point scale
(1 = none, 2 = some, 3 = a lot). Total scores range from
18 to 54 by summing across all items, with higher
scores representing higher levels of AS. Findings from
a representative sample of socioeconomically and
ethnically diverse adolescents suggest that the mean
CASI score among nonclinical adolescents (12–17
years) is 27.19 (SD = 6.4; Weems et al. 2007). Studies
consistently show girls to have signiﬁcantly higher
mean CASI scores than boys (e.g., Calamari et al.
2001; Ginsburg and Drake 2002; Silverman et al.
1991; van Widenfelt et al. 2002; Weems et al. 2007).

The psychometric properties of the CASI were
originally explored in a nonclinical sample of 76
youth (11–15 years of age) and a clinic-referred sample
of 33 youth (8–15 years of age) with a range of mental
health disorders (Silverman et al. 1991). The CASI was
found to possess good internal consistency estimates
(a = .87) for both samples and test–retest reliability
of .76 (2 weeks) and .79 (1 week) for the nonclinical
and clinical samples, respectively (Silverman et al.
1991). Similar estimates of internal consistency have
been found in other studies of both clinical and
nonclinical adolescents (e.g., a = .89, Bernstein et al.
2006; a = .92, Chorpita and Daleiden 2000; a = .87,
McLaughlin et al. 2007; a = .84, Muris et al. 2001b).
Estimates of test–retest reliability vary as a function of
the test–retest time interval. For instance, research with
nonclinical adolescents (African-American and Dutch
samples) has yielded 2-week test–retest reliabilities
between .70 and .80 (e.g., Lambert et al. 2004a; van
Widenfelt et al. 2002). In contrast, research among
nonclinical African-American adolescents over a
6-month period has
reliability
estimates of .48 and .51 (Ginsburg and Drake 2002;
Ginsburg et al. 2004).

shown test–retest

With respect to convergent validity, CASI scores
correlate well, and in a theoretically meaningful way,
with other self-report measures of child anxiety and
fear (e.g., Silverman et al. 1991). For instance, van
Widenfelt et al. (2002) found that scores on the CASI
were signiﬁcantly associated with scores on the Fear
Survey Schedule for Children – Revised (FSSC-R;
Ollendick 1983; r = .64) and the State Trait Anxiety
Inventory for Children – Trait Subscale (STAIC-T;
Spielberger et al. 1973; r = .58) among a sample of

nonclinical adolescents. Similarly, other studies with
nonclinical adolescents have found signiﬁcant correla-
tions between CASI scores and self-report measures
of anxiety symptoms including the Revised Child
Manifest Anxiety Scale (RCMAS; Reynolds and Rich-
mond 1979), the Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for
Children (MASC; March et al. 1997; r = .74 and r = .47,
respectively; Lambert et al. 2004a), and the Spence
Children’s Anxiety Scale (SCAS; Spence 1997; r = .57;
Essau et al. 2010).

from other

construct distinct

Given the sizable correlations between AS and
measures of adolescents’ fear and anxiety, researchers
initially expressed concern that AS did not represent
anxiety-related
a
variables. In particular, there was concern that while
trait anxiety (the general tendency to respond fearfully
to potentially anxiety-provoking stimuli; McNally
2002) and AS (a speciﬁc fearful response to one’s own
anxiety symptoms) appeared conceptually different,
this distinction would not hold up to empirical scru-
tiny. Since then, empirical research with adolescents has
clearly demonstrated that, while related to trait and
manifest anxiety, AS is indeed a unique construct.
Studies investigating the incremental validity of the
CASI in nonclinical populations have shown that AS
accounts for signiﬁcant additional variance on scales of
fear (e.g., FSSC-R; Silverman et al. 1991; van Widenfelt
et al. 2002) and on anxiety symptom measures (e.g.,
RCMAS; Muris et al. 2001b) beyond that accounted for
by trait anxiety or anxiety frequency. In clinical
samples, studies have revealed similar ﬁndings. For
instance, one study (Weems et al. 1998) with adoles-
cents with anxiety disorders revealed that adolescents’
CASI scores predicted signiﬁcant unique variance on
a measure of fear beyond that accounted for by both
trait anxiety and anxiety frequency. Another study with
adolescent psychiatric inpatients showed AS to account
for signiﬁcant variance in anxiety symptoms after
accounting for trait anxiety and depressive symptoms
(Joiner et al. 2002). As such, it is generally accepted that
AS and trait anxiety are conceptually and empirically
distinct constructs that account for unique variance in
anxiety symptomatology.

As a distinct construct, research with adolescents
has also shown an association between AS and anxiety
symptoms and disorders. Early cross-sectional research
demonstrated that youth with anxiety disorders had
signiﬁcantly higher CASI scores than those with no

Anxiety Sensitivity A 151

A

diagnosis (e.g., Rabian et al. 1993). Furthermore, AS
has been associated with panic symptoms and panic
disorder in clinical and nonclinical adolescent samples.
For instance, cross-sectional research has shown signif-
icant associations between elevated AS and panic attack
symptoms among adolescents (Ginsburg and Drake
2002; Hayward et al. 1997; Lau et al. 1996). Kearney
et al. (1997) found that adolescents diagnosed with
panic disorder had higher levels of AS than adolescents
with other (non-panic) anxiety disorders. Moreover,
longitudinal research with a large sample of nonclinical
adolescents has shown AS to prospectively predict the
onset of panic attacks, as deﬁned by endorsement of
experiencing a panic attack with at least 4 of 13 associ-
ated symptoms (Hayward et al. 1997). It should be
noted, however, that some research has challenged the
AS-panic association. In one study, Ginsburg and
Drake (2002) found that, cross-sectionally, adolescents
with high AS were more likely to experience panic
attacks than those with lower AS; however, longitudi-
nally, AS failed to predict levels of panic 6 months later
after controlling for initial levels of panic.

Calamari et al. (2001) examined the incremental
validity of the CASI in predicting panic disorder symp-
toms while controlling for general measures of anxiety
and depression (i.e., RCMAS; STAIC; Children’s
Depression Inventory, Kovacs 1992). In two studies
with nonclinical populations, they found that the
CASI predicted additional variance in panic disorder
symptoms and on the SCAS after controlling for gen-
eral anxiety and depression symptoms. Further
research by Leen-Feldner et al. (2005) provides addi-
tional empirical evidence for the incremental validity of
AS in predicting anxious responding. In their study,
151 adolescents completed a 3-min voluntary hyper-
ventilation challenge, after which they rated their
anxiety (using a Subjective Units of Distress rating)
and panic symptoms. Results showed that adolescents’
baseline AS predicted additional variance in post-
challenge anxiety (ΔR2 = .03) and panic symptoms
(ΔR2 = .06) after controlling for negative affect
(as measured by the Positive and Negative Affect
Scale) and pre-challenge state anxiety levels. Taken
together, these studies suggest that AS is an important
cognitive vulnerability factor for panic.

Anxiety sensitivity has also been implicated in
a number of other anxiety disorders in adolescents
instance,
in theoretically meaningful ways. For

152 A Anxiety Sensitivity

physiological theories of social phobia posit that indi-
viduals with social phobia experience elevated arousal
sensations in social situations, which they interpret as
a warning of impending danger (Gerlach et al. 2004).
Individuals might also fear that their physiological
arousal will become embarrassingly visible to others,
another important aspect of AS. In accordance, one
study found signiﬁcantly higher levels of AS, as mea-
sured by the CASI, in adolescents with social phobia as
compared to non-anxious adolescents (Anderson and
Hope 2009). Other research has identiﬁed a relation
between AS and posttraumatic stress symptoms. Kilic¸
et al. (2008) investigated this relation among children
and adolescents who had experienced a traumatic
earthquake in Turkey 5 years previously. These youth
had similar AS levels as a matched control sample who
had not experienced any trauma. Multiple regression
analyses among the youth who had experienced the
earthquake revealed that posttraumatic stress symp-
toms were predicted by CASI scores above and beyond
the effect of trait anxiety. Similarly, Hensley and Varela
(2008) found that CASI scores explained an additional
6% of the variance in posttraumatic stress symptoms
after accounting for gender,
level of exposure to
trauma, and trait anxiety among adolescents who had
experienced Hurricane Katrina. Kilic¸ et al. (2008)
hypothesized that those high in AS would be more
sensitive to arousal-related sensations experienced at
the time of trauma exposure and would struggle to
overcome these effects. Moreover, these youth might
be more vulnerable to trauma reminders, as they would
elicit greater physiological distress and catastrophizing
than they would for those with low AS (Kilic¸ et al.
2008).

Adult AS researchers have also proposed that AS is
an important consideration in the development and
maintenance of chronic pain and pain-related anxiety.
Fear-avoidance theories posit that AS exacerbates one’s
fear of pain and leads to pain-related avoidance behav-
iors, which serve to maintain and enhance fear and
pain-related disability (Asmundson 1999; Stewart and
Asmundson 2006). Muris et al. (2001c) found that AS
was a signiﬁcant predictor of pain-related anxiety
symptoms, as measured by the Pain Anxiety Symptoms
Scale (McCracken et al. 1992), with 200 healthy ado-
lescents, even after controlling for trait anxiety, panic
symptoms, somatization symptoms, and the experi-
ence of pain. Similarly, AS has been shown to account

for unique variance in fear of pain among youth with
chronic pain after accounting for general anxiety and
depressive symptoms and pain intensity (Martin et al.
2007). Furthermore, Tsao et al. (2006) used structural
equation modeling to illustrate the relation between AS
and pain intensity in response to three laboratory pain
tasks (cold pressor task, pressure task, and thermal
task) with nonclinical adolescents. Their model did
not show a direct association between AS and pain
intensity. Rather, CASI scores predicted anticipatory
anxiety, which in turn predicted pain intensity. These
ﬁndings support the conceptualization of AS as a cog-
nitive vulnerability factor in the subjective experience
of pain among adolescents through its association with
anxiety/fear related to the pain experience.

AS has also been linked to substance use behaviors
in adolescents. Researchers have shown that high levels
of AS among high school students are associated
with risky reasons for using alcohol, cigarettes, and
marijuana, such as coping motives (to avoid/reduce
negative emotions) or conformity motives (to avoid/
reduce social censure; Comeau et al. 2001). More spe-
ciﬁcally, high AS was a signiﬁcant predictor of drinking
and using marijuana for conformity reasons. It may be
that individuals high in AS use alcohol and marijuana
for their anxiolytic properties in order to cope with
anxiety experienced in social contexts and to avoid
negative evaluation by their peers (Comeau et al.
2001). This study also showed that high AS moderated
the association between trait anxiety and coping-
motivated alcohol and cigarette use. Adolescents who
experience anxiety frequently and who fear anxiety
sensations may be more likely to turn to substances
to control their anxiety (Comeau et al. 2001). Coping-
motivated and conformity-motivated drinking are
concerning, because previous research has demon-
strated an association between these negative-
reinforcement motives and substance-related problems
(e.g., Carey and Correia 1997). As
such, recent
interventions for substance misuse among high school
students have been targeted at individuals with high
AS. For instance, high school students who received
a brief
intervention, which teaches cognitive and
behavioral coping skills training for AS, reported
signiﬁcantly less alcohol-related problems and signiﬁ-
cantly greater abstinence rates 4 months later than
students with high AS who had not received the inter-
vention (Conrod et al. 2006). A similar intervention

Anxiety Sensitivity A 153

A

with older adolescent and young adult women with
high AS has also resulted in a reduction in hazardous
alcohol use (Watt et al. 2006).

Research has also found a link among substance
use, AS, and panic symptoms. In accordance with an
regulation model (Zvolensky et al. 2003),
affect
smoking produces a number of affective bodily sensa-
tions including increased heart rate (Benowitz 1996),
which, when combined with high AS, might create
a unique vulnerability to panic. Leen-Feldner et al.
(2006) assessed smoking status, panic symptoms, and
AS levels among a sample of nonclinical adolescents
and found that AS moderated the association between
smoking status and panic symptoms such that panic
symptoms were the highest among those with the
highest AS who also reported being current smokers.

Along with anxious symptoms, pain, and substance
investigators have looked for an association
use,
between AS and depression. It is possible that depres-
sive symptoms such as difﬁculty concentrating and
making decisions could be ampliﬁed among individ-
uals with AS who fear such sensations (i.e., may
interpret them catastrophically), consequently exacer-
bating their depressive symptoms (Taylor et al. 1996).
Empirical support for this supposition, however, is
conﬂicting. Some research has highlighted a signiﬁcant
association between AS and depressive symptoms
among adolescents, even after controlling for manifest
and trait anxiety (Muris 2002; Weems et al. 1997).
However, Joiner et al. (2002) as well as Lambert et al.
(2004b) showed that AS was not signiﬁcantly related to
depressive symptoms after controlling for anxious
symptomatology.

Despite conﬂicting ﬁndings with respect to its asso-
ciation with depressive symptoms, there is an accumu-
lation of evidence for the association of AS with
a number of anxiety disorders and other mental health
problems. As such, the next stride taken by researchers
has been to look more closely at the factor structure of
AS and consider the manner in which its component
parts might be uniquely associated with different
aspects of psychopathology. The factor structure of
AS remains a contentious issue. Nonetheless, research
largely supports a hierarchical multidimensional factor
structure, similar to that identiﬁed in factor analytic
studies of the ASI. In this conceptualization, AS con-
stitutes a single construct at a higher-order level that is
split into a number of lower-order factors detailing fear

of speciﬁc types of anxiety symptoms and associated
catastrophic consequences. The identiﬁcation of these
distinct lower-order factors is important, as the rela-
tions between individual factors and psychopathology
may reﬂect unique mechanisms through which AS acts
as a vulnerability factor for speciﬁc disorders. Uncer-
tainty remains, however, about the exact number and
nature of lower-order factors.

Models with two (e.g., Chorpita and Daleiden
2000), three (e.g., van Widenfelt et al. 2002), and four
(e.g., Silverman et al. 2003) lower-order factors have
each been proposed, of which the latter two are the
most widely supported. In the ﬁrst factor analytic study
on the CASI, Silverman et al. (1999) used both a clinical
sample of youth with anxiety disorders and a
nonclinical sample and found evidence to support
that
the CASI could best be conceptualized as
consisting of one higher-order factor and either three
or four lower-order factors. The four-factor solution
(Physical Concerns, Mental Incapacitation Concerns,
Social Concerns, and Control) provided the best ﬁt for
the data; however, the Social Concerns factor consisted
of only two items and the correlation between these
two items was less than .30. As such, the authors
favored the three-factor solution (Physical Concerns,
Concerns about Publicly Observable Symptoms, and
Mental
Incapacitation Concerns; Silverman et al.
1999). Subsequent research among Dutch adolescents
also suggested that the CASI was best modeled with
either three or four lower-order factors (Muris et al.
2001b). Van Widenfelt et al. (2002) also found that
three lower-order factors accounting for Physical Con-
cerns, Mental Incapacitation Concerns, and Publicly
Observable Concerns best ﬁt the data among a similar
sample of nonclinical Dutch adolescents. They did,
however, ﬁnd relatively low reliability for the mental
concerns (a = .49) and social concerns (a = .52)
subscales.

In 2003, Silverman and colleagues conducted a
large cross-cultural conﬁrmatory factor analytic study
in which they tested the ﬁt of a number of previously
proposed AS factor structures. Results revealed strong
support for a hierarchical structure with one higher-
order factor and four lower-order factors, which they
labeled Disease Concerns, Unsteady Concerns, Mental
Incapacitation Concerns, and Social Concerns. This
factor structure held across a non-referred sample and
a referred sample (Silverman et al. 2003), as well as

154 A Anxiety Sensitivity

a German sample of typically developing adolescents
(Adornetto et al. 2008). Silverman and colleagues
found that scores on the Disease Concerns factor were
higher among youth with anxiety disorders as com-
pared to nonclinical youth, youth with speciﬁc phobia,
and youth with other mental health diagnoses. Further-
more, results showed adolescents with social phobia
scored signiﬁcantly higher on the Social Concerns fac-
tor than nonclinical adolescents.

several

studies

The results of

(Chorpita and
Daleiden 2000; McLaughlin et al. 2007; Silverman
et al. 1999; van Widenfelt et al. 2002) suggest that the
AS factor(s) representing concerns related to the
physical sensations of anxiety (differentially labeled
as “Physical Concerns,” “Disease Concerns,” and
“Unsteady Concerns,” or “Fear of Respiratory Symp-
toms,” and “Fear of Cardiovascular Symptoms”) is the
most robust of the lower-order factors. The remaining
factors are somewhat less reliable (e.g., Muris et al.
2001b; van Widenfelt et al. 2002). Muris (2002) stipu-
lated that the 18-item CASI has too few items to permit
examination of the lower-order factors of AS and
proposed including additional items to better identify
these lower-order factors. As such, in accordance with
a similar revision of the ASI among adults (Taylor and
Cox 1998), Muris developed the 31-item Children’s
Anxiety Sensitivity Index – Revised (CASI-R; Muris
2002). CASI-R scores were reliable (a = .93) and
correlated well with CASI scores in a sample of 518
nonclinical adolescents. Conﬁrmatory factor analyses
found the data best ﬁt a hierarchical factor structure
with four
factors: Fear of Publicly
Observable Anxiety Reactions, Fear of Cognitive
Dyscontrol, and physical concerns reﬂected in two
distinct factors – Fear of Cardiovascular Symptoms
and Fear of Respiratory Symptoms (a’s ranged from
.81 to .88).

lower-order

Taken together, these factor analytic studies support
the existence of three or four lower-order factors
reﬂecting Physical concerns (i.e., fear of arousal-related
physiological sensations due to the belief that these
sensations will have catastrophic health consequences),
Psychological concerns (i.e.,
fear of anxiety-related
mental sensations, such as difﬁculty concentrating,
they are indicative of
that
because of
impending mental
Social/Control
illness),
concerns (i.e., fear that anxiety-related arousal sensa-
tions will be publicly visible and lead to social censure

the belief

and

of

these

unique

associations

or embarrassment). Several studies have highlighted
lower-order
the
factors with psychopathological traits (e.g., Dia and
Bradshaw 2008). For instance, a longitudinal study
conducted with a large sample of nonclinical adoles-
cents (N = 2,246) showed the psychological and phys-
ical subscales of AS, but not the social subscale, to
prospectively predict behavioral avoidance, suggesting
that AS might precede and exacerbate this important
maintenance factor for anxiety disorders (Wilson and
Hayward 2006).

factors

lower-order

McLaughlin et al. (2007) investigated the incremen-
tal and construct validity of the Physical, Social, and
in
Psychological Concerns
a nonclinical sample of 349 children and adolescents.
They examined whether these factors predicted unique
variance in anxiety disorder symptoms (as measured
by the Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale; SCAS) while
controlling for trait anxiety. They found CASI total
scores accounted for unique variance on each of the
SCAS symptom scales (panic/agoraphobia, separation
anxiety disorder, social phobia, generalized anxiety dis-
order/overanxious disorder, physical injury fears, and
obsessive-compulsive disorder), even after controlling
for trait anxiety. With respect to the three lower-order
factors,
the Physical Concerns factor emerged as
a global predictor of anxiety symptoms, accounting
for signiﬁcant additional variance over trait anxiety
on all SCAS symptom scales. The relationship between
the Social and Psychological Concerns factors and
anxiety symptoms were more conceptually speciﬁc.
The Social Concerns factor accounted for signiﬁcant
additional variance on social phobia, generalized anx-
iety, and physical injury fears subscales, reﬂecting the
importance of social evaluation concerns among youth
with these symptom patterns (i.e., youth with social
phobia may be embarrassed to show anxiety symptoms
such as sweating or shaking in front of others). The
Psychological Concerns factor accounted for signiﬁ-
cant additional variance on panic/agoraphobia, separa-
tion anxiety disorder, and obsessive-compulsive scales,
reﬂecting fears about loss of mental control char-
acteristic of youth with these disorders (i.e., youth
with obsessive-compulsive disorder may fear uncon-
trollable intrusive thoughts as indicative of impending
mental catastrophe). These ﬁndings support the clini-
cal importance of distinguishing among the unique
lower-order factors of AS.

The factor structure of AS has also been shown to be
invariant across gender (Dehon et al. 2005). Conclu-
sions about gender differences across subscales, how-
ever, are less deﬁnitive. Van Widenfelt et al. (2002)
found that girls had signiﬁcantly higher scores across
subscales while Walsh et al. (2004), using factor scores,
found that girls scored signiﬁcantly higher on Physical
and Social/Control Concerns but not on Psychological
Concerns. While gender differences with respect to the
Physical Concerns subscale are in line with research
among adults, gender differences on the Social/Control
Concerns subscale among adolescents are not. Within
gender, comparisons have shown that girls score higher
on the Physical Concerns factor than the Social/
Control or Psychological Concerns factors (Walsh
et al. 2004). In contrast, boys have signiﬁcantly higher
scores on the Psychological
and Social/Control
Concerns factors than on the Physical Concerns factor,
and signiﬁcantly higher scores on the Psychological
than Social/Control Concerns factor (Walsh et al.
2004). Observed gender differences with respect to AS
subscales may be the result of gender-speciﬁc learning
histories and sex-role socialization as youth mature
(Stewart et al. 1997). For instance, Walsh et al.
(2004) proposed that girls might be rewarded for
expressing somatic complaints while boys might learn
that it is less acceptable for them to outwardly display
anxiety symptoms or loss of control.

It should be noted that additional work examining
the structure of AS among adolescents has explored its
taxonicity (i.e., categorical nature). The basic question
that this type of research addresses is whether AS is
better conceptualized as a categorical variable (where
one either has high AS or does not; a qualitative dis-
tinction) or a dimensional construct (where AS levels
vary along a continuum; a quantitative distinction).
this work has
Similar to research among adults,
suggested that AS is taxonic in youth (Bernstein et al.
2006, 2007). In other words, there is evidence that AS is
discontinuous in nature such that it can be dichoto-
mized into adaptive and maladaptive latent forms.
Similar to the presence of a psychological disorder
such as panic disorder, one either has or does not
have the maladaptive form of AS (i.e., the high AS
taxon). Bernstein et al. (2007) have suggested that the
high AS taxon might result from emotional learning or
gene–environment interactions that change the nature
of AS to become maladaptive. Research has also shown

Anxiety Sensitivity A 155

A

that the base rate of the high AS taxon differs across
gender (.12 among girls and .07 among boys; Bernstein
et al. 2006), which might help to explain the gender
differences in mean AS levels observed in other studies,
as discussed previously. This ﬁnding also suggests that
it might be clinically useful to use gender-speciﬁc AS
norms for identifying those belonging to the high
AS taxon.

It may also be useful to explore cultural differences
in AS. Several studies have found elevated levels of AS
in African-American (Lambert et al. 2004a), Asian
(Weems et al. 2002), and Latin American (Varela et al.
2007) youth. However, this ﬁnding has not been
replicated in all studies (e.g., Ginsburg and Drake
2002) and more research is needed to conﬁrm any
robust cultural differences in AS. Interestingly, despite
Latin American youth showing elevated AS, research
has shown that heightened AS was not associated with
panic symptoms for Latino youth as strongly as it was
for Caucasian youth (Weems et al. 2002). As theorized
by Varela et al. (2007), this may be because fear of
anxiety-related sensations and the somatic experience
of emotions are more normative in Latino culture.
Hence, exposure to these ideas might weaken the
link between AS and anxiety symptoms among this
population.

Increasingly,

recent work has

Taken together, the research examining AS among
adolescents has highlighted the clinical importance of
this individual difference factor. Research suggests that
there are both genetic and environmental inﬂuences on
the development of AS. However, further research is
needed to elucidate the interaction between these inﬂu-
ences and their relative importance. Numerous studies
have shown that AS, as measured by the CASI, is
signiﬁcantly associated with a range of mental health
disorders.
been
supporting the conceptualization of AS as a cognitive
vulnerability factor in the development of panic disor-
der. The importance of AS in the development of other
disorders, including social phobia, posttraumatic stress
disorder, pain, substance use disorders, and depression
has also been highlighted. Much of this research has
been cross-sectional
in nature and as such, more
prospective and longitudinal studies are needed to
better understand the role of AS in the development
and maintenance of these disorders. Moreover, further
research into the lower-order factors of AS and their
unique associations with psychopathology will help

156 A Anxiety Sensitivity

us to better understand the clinical relevance of AS
physical, social, and psychological concerns to a range
of anxiety and related disorders.

Finally, the study of AS may have unique impor-
tance for adolescents. Adolescence is heralded by the
onset of puberty and its accompanying biopsychosocial
changes. Many of these changes are characterized by the
experience of a range of new and unexpected bodily
sensations (Patton and Viner 2007). Leen-Feldner et al.
(2006) proposed that adolescents with high AS, as
compared to those with low AS, may perceive the
body sensations experienced during puberty as threat-
ening and anxiety provoking. They posited that the
repeated experiencing of these sensations and accom-
panying anxiety may result in a learned association
between bodily sensations and anxiety states, leading
those with high AS to fear body sensations. Indeed,
they found a signiﬁcant interaction between pubertal
status and AS in predicting adolescents’ anxious
responding to a voluntary hyperventilation task. In
other words, among adolescents with higher AS, those
at a more advanced pubertal stage reported the greatest
post-challenge anxiety with respect to body sensations,
while among those with low AS, pubertal status had less
of an effect.

for adolescents. For

In addition to these physiological changes, adoles-
cence is also a time of important cognitive, social, and
emotional development. These changes,
including
identity formation and the development of executive
functioning, among others, might interact with AS
with implications
instance,
adolescence involves the development of metacogni-
tion (Arnett 2004). However, at its early stages of for-
mation, adolescents struggle to distinguish their own
and others’ perspectives. As
they develop
a distinctive egocentrism, one aspect of which is the
feeling that an imaginary audience is watching and
thinking about their every move (Arnett 2004). This
cognitive and social experience might be particularly
salient for those adolescents high in AS who experience
a pronounced fear that others are aware of any outward
signs of anxiety they might display. It is certainly
possible to speculate about how these and other
complex developmental changes might interact with
AS during adolescence.

such,

When considered in the context of the physical,
cognitive, and social development of adolescence, the
relevance of AS during adolescence might also have

implications for psychopathology. Research shows
that this important developmental period witnesses
an increased emergence of
symptoms of panic
(Hayward et al. 1992), social phobia (Wittchen et al.
1999), and substance use and abuse (Patton et al. 2004).
The concordance of these timelines suggests a possible
link between adolescent development, anxiety sensitiv-
ity, and psychopathology. It may be that the particular
changes adolescents experience interact with high AS
increasing the likelihood of the development of mental
health problems. For example, when an adolescent with
high AS enters puberty and begins to experience unex-
pected and undesired body sensations, as well as a new
awareness of their peers’ perspective, their likelihood of
developing panic attacks or social phobia might
increase. Given this possibility, longitudinal research
examining changes in AS from childhood to adulthood
is needed. A comprehensive understanding of AS will
help in the identiﬁcation of adolescents at risk for
psychopathology during this particularly vulnerable
life stage. Furthermore, targeting AS through early
intervention might have implications for the treatment
and prevention of a range of mental health problems.
For example, providing adolescents high in AS with
psychoeducation about normal bodily sensations and
with cognitive strategies useful in challenging cata-
strophic thoughts about bodily sensations might allay
the development of more severe psychopathology in
the long term. Ultimately, these possibilities suggest
that adolescence may be a pivotal time period for the
study of AS.

Cross-References
▶ Anxiety Disorders

References
Adornetto, C., Hensdiek, M., Meyer, A., In-Albon, T., Federer, M., &
Schneider, S. (2008). The factor structure of the Childhood
Anxiety Sensitivity Index in German children. Journal of Behav-
ior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 39, 404–416.

Anderson, E. R., & Hope, D. A. (2009). The relationship among social
phobia, objective and perceived physiological reactivity, and
anxiety sensitivity in an adolescent population. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 23, 18–26.

Arnett, J. J. (2004). Adolescence and emerging adulthood: A cultural

approach. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education.

Asmundson, G. J. G. (1999). Anxiety sensitivity and chronic pain:
Empirical ﬁndings, clinical implications, and future directions.
In S. Taylor (Ed.), Anxiety sensitivity: Theory, research, and

Anxiety Sensitivity A 157

A

treatment of the fear of anxiety (pp. 269–285). Mahwah: Lawrence
Erlbaum.

Benowitz, N. L. (1996). Pharmacology of nicotine: Addiction and
therapeutics. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 36,
597–613.

Bernstein, A., Zvolensky, M. J., Stewart, S. H., Comeau, M. N., &
Leen-Feldner, E. W. (2006). Anxiety sensitivity taxonicity across
gender among youth. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44,
679–698.

Bernstein, A., Zvolensky, M. J., Stewart, S. H., & Comeau, N. (2007).
Taxometric and factor analytic models of anxiety sensitivity
among youth: Exploring the latent structure of anxiety psycho-
pathology vulnerability. Behavior Therapy, 38, 269–283.

Calamari, J. E., Hale, L. R., Heffelﬁnger, S. K., Janeck, A. S., Lau, J. J.,
Weerts, M. A., et al. (2001). Relations between anxiety sensitivity
and panic symptoms in nonreferred children and adolescents.
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 32,
117–136.

Carey, K. B., & Correia, D. J. (1997). Drinking motives predict
alcohol-related problems in college students. Journal of Studies
on Alcohol, 58, 100–105.

Chorpita, B. E., & Daleiden, E. L. (2000). Properties of the Childhood
Anxiety Sensitivity Index in children with anxiety disorders:
Autonomic and nonautonomic factors. Behavior Therapy, 31,
327–349.

Comeau, N., Stewart, S. H., & Loba, P. (2001). The relations of trait
anxiety, anxiety sensitivity, and sensation seeking to adolescents’
motivations for alcohol, cigarette, and marijuana use. Addictive
Behaviors, 26, 803–825.

Conrod, P. J., Stewart, S. H., Comeau, N., & Maclean, A. M. (2006).
Efﬁcacy of cognitive-behavioral interventions targeting person-
ality risk factors for youth alcohol misuse. Journal of Clinical
Child and Adolescent Psychology, 35, 550–563.

Dehon, C., Weems, C. F., Stickle, T. R., Costa, N. M., & Berman, S. L.
(2005). A cross-sectional evaluation of the factorial invariance of
anxiety sensitivity in adolescents and young adults. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 43, 799–810.

Dia, D. A., & Bradshaw, W. (2008). Cognitive risk factors to the
development of anxiety and depressive disorders in adolescents.
Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal, 25, 469–481.

Essau, C. A., Sasagawa, S., & Ollendick, T. H. (2010). The facets of
anxiety sensitivity in adolescents. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24,
23–29.

Gerlach, A. L., Mourlane, D., & Rist, F. (2004). Public and private
heart rate feedback in social phobia: A manipulation of anxiety
visibility. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 33, 36–45.

Ginsburg, G. S., & Drake, K. L. (2002). Anxiety sensitivity and panic
attack symptomatology among low-income African-Americans.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 83–96.

Ginsburg, G. S., Lambert, S. F., & Drake, K. L. (2004). Attributions of
control, anxiety sensitivity, and panic symptoms among adoles-
cents. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 28, 745–763.

Hayward, C., Killen, J. D., Hammer, L. D., Litt, I. F., Wilson, D. M.,
Simmonds, B., et al. (1992). Pubertal stage and panic attack
history in sixth- and seventh-grade girls. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 149, 1239–1243.

Hayward, C., Killen, J. D., Kraemer, H. C., Blair-Greiner, A.,
Strachowski, D., Cunning, D., et al. (1997). Assessment and
phenomenology of nonclinical panic attacks in adolescent girls.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11, 17–32.

Hensley, L., & Varela, R. E. (2008). PTSD symptoms and somatic
complaints following Hurricane Katrina: The roles of trait
anxiety and anxiety sensitivity. Journal of Clinical Child and
Adolescent Psychology, 37, 542–552.

Joiner, T. E., Jr., Schmidt, N. B., Schmidt, K. L., Laurent, J., Catanzaro,
S. J., Perez, M., et al. (2002). Anxiety sensitivity as a speciﬁc
and unique marker of anxious symptoms in youth psychiatric
inpatients. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 30, 167–175.
Kearney, C. A., Albano, A. M., Eisen, A. R., Allan, W. D., & Barlow,
D. H. (1997). The phenomenology of panic disorders in young-
sters: An empirical study of a clinical sample. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 11, 49–62.

Kilic¸, E. Z., Kilic¸, C., & Yilmaz, S. (2008). Is anxiety sensitivity
a predictor of PTSD in children and adolescents? Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 65, 81–86.

Kovacs, M. (1992). Children’s depression inventory manual. North

Tonawanda: Multi-Health Systems.

Lambert, S. F., Cooley, M. R., Campbell, K. D. M., Benoit, M. Z., &
Stansbury, R. (2004a). Assessing anxiety sensitivity in inner-city
African American children: Psychometric properties of the
Childhood Anxiety Sensitivity Index. Journal of Clinical Child
and Adolescent Psychology, 33, 248–259.

Lambert, S. F., McCreary, B. T., Preston, J. L., Schmidt, N. B., Joiner,
T. E., & Ialongo, N. S. (2004b). Anxiety sensitivity in African-
American adolescents: Evidence of symptoms speciﬁcity of
anxiety sensitivity components. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 887–895.

Lau, J. J., Calamari, J. E., & Waraczynski, M. (1996). Panic attack
symptomatology and anxiety sensitivity in adolescents. Journal
of Anxiety Disorders, 10, 355–364.

Leen-Feldner, E. W., Feldner, M. T., Bernstein, A., McCormick, J. T., &
Zvolensky, M.
J. (2005). Anxiety sensitivity and anxious
responding to bodily sensations: A test among adolescents
using a voluntary hyperventilation challenge. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 29, 593–609.

Leen-Feldner, E. W., Reardon, L. E., McKee, L. G., Feldner, M. T.,
Babson, K. A., & Zvolensky, M. J. (2006). The interactive role of
anxiety sensitivity and pubertal status in predicting anxious
responding to bodily sensations among adolescents. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 34, 799–812.

March, J. S., Parker, J. D., Sullivan, K., Stallings, P., & Conners, C. K.
(1997). The Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for Children
(MASC): Factor structure, reliability, and validity. Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36,
554–565.

Martin, A. L., McGrath, P. A., Brown, S. C., & Katz, J. (2007). Anxiety
sensitivity, fear of pain and pain-related disability in children and
adolescents with chronic pain. Pain Research & Management: The
Journal of the Canadian Pain Society, 12, 267–272.

McCracken, L. M., Zayfert, C., & Gross, R. T. (1992). The pain anxiety
symptoms scale: Development and validation of a scale to
measure fear of pain. Pain, 50, 67–73.

158 A Anxiety Sensitivity

McLaughlin, E. N., Stewart, S. H., & Taylor, S. (2007). Childhood
Anxiety Sensitivity Index factors predict unique variance in
symptoms. Cognitive Behaviour
DSM-IV anxiety disorder
Therapy, 36, 210–219.

McNally, R. J. (1999). Theoretical approaches to the fear of anxiety.
In S. Taylor (Ed.), Anxiety sensitivity: Theory, research, and treat-
ment of the fear of anxiety (pp. 3–16). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
McNally, R. J. (2002). Anxiety sensitivity and panic disorder. Biolog-

ical Psychiatry, 52, 938–946.

Muris, P. (2002). An expanded childhood anxiety sensitivity index:
Its factor structure, reliability, and validity in a non-clinical
sample. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40,
adolescent
299–311.

Muris, P., Merckelbach, H., & Meesters, C. (2001a). Learning experi-
ences and anxiety sensitivity in normal adolescents. Journal of
Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 23, 279–283.

Muris, P., Schmidt, H., Merckelbach, H., & Schouten, E. (2001b).
Anxiety sensitivity in adolescents: Factor structure and relation-
ships to trait anxiety and symptoms of anxiety disorders and
depression. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 89–100.

Silverman, W. K., Goedhart, A. W., Barrett, P., & Turner, C. (2003).
The facets of anxiety sensitivity represented in the childhood
factor
anxiety sensitivity index: Conﬁrmatory analyses of
models from past studies. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112,
364–374.

Spence, S. H. (1997). Structure of anxiety symptoms among children:
Journal of Abnormal

A conﬁrmatory factor-analytic study.
Psychology, 106, 280–295.

Spielberger, C. D., Edwards, C. D., Lushene, R. E., Montuori, J., &
Platzek, D. (1973). The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children
(preliminary manual). Palo Alto: Consulting Psychologists.
Stein, M. B., Jang, K. L., & Livesley, W. J. (1999). Heritability of
anxiety sensitivity: A twin study. American Journal of Psychiatry,
156, 246–251.

Stewart, S. H., & Asmundson, G. J. G. (2006). Anxiety sensitivity and
its impact on pain experiences and conditions: A state of the art.
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy, 35, 185–188.

Stewart, S. H., Taylor, S., & Baker, J. M. (1997). Gender differences in
dimensions of anxiety sensitivity. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11,
179–200.

Muris, P., Vlaeyen, J., & Meesters, C. (2001c). The relationship
between anxiety sensitivity and fear of pain in healthy adoles-
cents. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 1357–1368.

Taylor, S., & Cox, B. J. (1998). Anxiety sensitivity: Multiple dimen-
sions and hierarchic structure. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
36, 37–51.

Olatunji, B. O., & Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B. (2009). Anxiety sensitivity
and the anxiety disorders: A meta-analytic review and synthesis.
Psychological Bulletin, 135, 974–999.

Taylor, S., Koch, W. J., Woody, S., & McLean, P. (1996). Anxiety
sensitivity and depression: How are they related? Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 105, 474–479.

Ollendick, T. H. (1983). Reliability and validity of the revised Fear
Survey Schedule for Children (FSSC-R). Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 21, 685–692.

Taylor, S., Jang, K. L., Stewart, S. H., & Stein, M. B. (2008). Etiology of
the dimensions of anxiety sensitivity: A behavioral-genetic anal-
ysis. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 899–914.

Patton, G. C., & Viner, R. (2007). Pubertal transitions in health. The

Lancet, 369, 1130–1139.

Patton, G. C., McMorris, B. J., Toumbourou, J. W., Hemphill, S. A.,
Donath, S., & Catalano, R. F. (2004). Puberty and the onset of
substance use and abuse. Pediatrics, 114, 300–306.

Peterson, R. A., & Reiss, S. (1992). Anxiety sensitivity index manual
(2nd ed.). Worthington: International Diagnostic Services.
Rabian, B., Peterson, R. A., Richters, J., & Jensen, P. S. (1993). Anxiety
sensitivity among anxious children. Journal of Clinical Child
Psychology, 22, 441–446.

Reiss, S. (1991). Expectancy model of fear, anxiety, and panic. Clinical

Psychology Review, 11, 141–153.

Reiss, S., & McNally, R. J. (1985). The expectancy model of fear. In
S. Reiss & R. R. Bootzin (Eds.), Theoretical issues in behavior
therapy (pp. 107–122). New York: Academic.

Reynolds, C. R., & Richmond, O. B. (1979). What I think and feel:
A revised measure of children’s manifest anxiety. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 43, 281–283.

Schmidt, N. B., Zvolensky, M. J., & Maner, J. K. (2006). Anxiety
sensitivity: Prospective prediction of panic attacks and axis
I pathology. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 40, 691–699.

Silverman, W. K., Fleisig, W., Rabian, B., & Peterson, R. A. (1991).
Childhood Anxiety Sensitivity Index. Journal of Clinical Child
Psychology, 20, 162–168.

Silverman, W. K., Ginsburg, G. S., & Goedhart, A. W. (1999). Factor
structure of the childhood anxiety sensitivity index. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 37, 903–917.

Tsao, J. C. I., Lu, Q., Kim, S. C., & Zeltzer, L. K. (2006). Relationships
among anxiety symptomatology, anxiety sensitivity and labora-
tory pain responsivity in children. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
35, 207–215.

van Widenfelt, B. M., Siebelink, B. M., Goedhart, A. W., & Treffers,
P. D. A. (2002). The Dutch Childhood Anxiety Sensitivity Index:
Psychometric properties and factor structure. Journal of Clinical
Child and Adolescent Psychology, 31, 90–100.

Varela, R. E., Weems, C. F., Berman, S. L., Hensley, L., & Rodriguez de
Bernal, M. C. (2007). Internalizing symptoms in Latinos: The
role of anxiety sensitivity. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 36,
429–440.

Walsh, T. M., Stewart, S. H., McLaughlin, E., & Comeau, N. (2004).
Gender differences in Childhood Anxiety Sensitivity Index
(CASI) dimensions. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 18, 695–706.
Watt, M. C., & Stewart, S. H. (2000). Anxiety sensitivity mediates the
relationships between childhood learning experiences and ele-
vated hypochondriacal concerns in young adulthood. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 49, 107–118.

Watt, M. C., & Stewart, S. H. (2008). Overcoming the fear of fear:
How to reduce anxiety sensitivity. Oakland: New Harbinger
Publications.

Watt, M. C., Stewart, S., Birch, C., & Bernier, D. (2006). Brief CBT for
high anxiety sensitivity decreases drinking problems, relief alco-
hol outcome expectancies, and conformity drinking motives:
Evidence from a randomized controlled trial. Journal of Mental
Health, 15, 683–695.

Appeal A 159

A

Watt, M. C., Stewart, S. H., & Cox, B. J. (1998). A retrospective study
of the learning history origins of anxiety sensitivity. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 36, 505–525.

Weems, C. F., Hammond-Laurence, K., Silverman, W. K., &
Ferguson, C. (1997). The relation between anxiety sensitivity
and depression in children and adolescents referred for anxiety.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 961–966.

Weems, C. F., Hammond-Laurence, K., Silverman, W. K., &
Ginsburg, G. S. (1998). Testing the utility of
the anxiety
sensitivity construct in children and adolescents referred for
anxiety disorders. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 27, 69–77.
Weems, C. F., Hayward, C., Killen, J., & Taylor, C. B. (2002).
A longitudinal investigation of anxiety sensitivity in adolescence.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 471–477.

Weems, C. F., Costa, N. M., Watts, S. E., Taylor, L. K., & Cannon, M. F.
(2007). Cognitive errors, anxiety sensitivity, and anxiety control
beliefs: Their unique and speciﬁc associations with childhood
anxiety symptoms. Behavior Modiﬁcation, 31, 174–201.

Wilson, K. A., & Hayward, C. (2006). Unique contributions of anxiety
sensitivity to avoidance: A prospective study in adolescents.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 601–609.

Wittchen, H.-U., Stein, M. B., & Kessler, R. C. (1999). Social fears and
social phobia in a community sample of adolescents and young
adults: Prevalence, risk factors and co-morbidity. Psychological
Medicine, 29, 309–323.

Zvolensky, M. J., Schmidt, N. B., & Stewart, S. H. (2003). Panic
disorder and smoking. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice,
10, 29–51.

Appeal

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

An appeal refers to a legal proceeding by which a lower
court decision is reviewed by a higher court. Appeals
are relevant to youth to the extent that both the child
welfare system and the juvenile justice system permit
appeals, as do criminal courts if juveniles are trans-
ferred to them and civil courts when youth are, for
example, subjects in family courts (e.g., in custody
disputes). When involved in the child welfare or family
court systems, parents typically bring appeals; when in
the juvenile justice or criminal justice system, appeals
typically are brought by minors themselves. The party
appealing is known as either the petitioner or appellant;
the one responding to the appeal is the respondent or
appellee. Appeals are argued through written briefs and
oral arguments. There are different types of appeals,

such as direct appeals to higher courts or post-
conviction appeals. Typically, appeals are based on
legal issues; not on matters of fact. Thus, courts that
hear appeals do not rule on newly introduced testi-
mony or evidence. If reversible errors are found, then
the court may vacate, modify, or reverse a lower court
rule; if no reversible errors are found, then it will afﬁrm
the lower court’s discussion.

Appeals have been determined to be part of impor-
tant due process rights, but their recognitions are
limited. Appeals are, for example, offered as critical
ways to remedy actual errors that occur during legal
processes as well as perceived errors to maintain trust in
the system of justice (see Cavallaro 2002). Despite its
potential signiﬁcance, the Supreme Court long ago
ruled that there is no constitutional right to appeal
even a criminal conviction in the ﬁrst
instance
(McKane v. Durston 1894). Neither now nor at
common law has an appeal of the ﬁnal judgment in
a criminal case been seen as a necessary element of due
process of law, which means that the right to appeal is
purely a statutory right (Uhrig 2008). This means that
states determine for themselves whether an appeal
should be allowed and, if so, under what circumstances
or on what conditions. Importantly, the Supreme
Court,
in the leading case granting juveniles due
process rights in juvenile justice systems, declined to
address whether juveniles have a right to appeal (see In
re Gault 1967). Still, although appellate rights generally
are found in statutes, it does not mean that they lack
importance (see Arkin 1992). In fact, once they are
recognized in statutes, the Constitution protects how
they are implemented (such as through rights to trial
transcripts and, in some cases, representation of coun-
sel depending on the nature of the court; see M. L. B. v.
S. L. J. (1996)).

The importance of appeals, however,

is not
reﬂected well in research in that appeals tend to not
be the subject of studies, especially as they relate to
youth. Part of that gap in research in the understand-
ing of the nature and implementation of the appellate
rights of juveniles likely has to do with the nature of
proceedings. Given that child welfare and juvenile
justice proceedings are meant to be rehabilitative,
cases in them have tended to not be challenged as
much as would have been expected. When dealing
with juvenile dispositions, for example, practical mat-
ters lead to avoiding appeals, such as rehabilitation

160 A Apprenticeships

appeals

run the

that have

programs that center on the admission of guilt as
a vital step in rehabilitation, which leads some defense
counsel to opt out of appeals to protect the long-term
developmental needs of their clients. In a real sense,
the very nature of the juvenile justice system creates
risk of
situations
undermining the juvenile courts’ efforts to rehabilitate
youth (see Cooper et al. 1998; Fedders 2010). The
same could be said of child welfare proceedings that,
as it turns out, actually rarely do go through formal
court proceedings simply because families tend to be
involved voluntarily and are not under court supervi-
sion (see Levesque 2008). In delinquency proceedings,
however, juveniles likely have fewer appellate rights
in that post-disposition (convictions) appeals
in
juvenile courts are a statutory right, and not every
state affords juveniles full appellate rights. This means,
for example, that juveniles may not have a right to
counsel to make appeals (Kinkeade 1999; Fedders
2010). Not surprisingly, reviews ﬁnd that appeals of
juvenile dispositions are strikingly rare (see Drizin
and Luloff 2007).

Cross-References
▶ Amicus Brief
▶ Legal Methods

References
Arkin, M. M. (1992). Rethinking the constitutional right to a criminal

appeal. UCLA Law Review, 39, 503–579.

Cavallaro, R. (2002). Better off dead: Abatement, innocence, and the
evolving right of appeal. University of Colorado Law Review, 73,
943–986.

Cooper, N. L., Puritz, P., & Shang, W. (1998). Fulﬁlling the promise of
In re Gault: Advancing the role of lawyers for children. Wake
Forest Law Review, 33, 651–679.

Drizin, S. A., & Luloff, G. (2007). Are juvenile courts a breeding
ground for wrongful convictions? Northern Kentucky Law
Review, 34, 257–322.

Fedders, B. (2010). Losing hold of the guiding hand: Ineffective
assistance of counsel in juvenile delinquency representation.
Lewis & Clark Law Review, 14, 771–819.

In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1 (1967).
Kinkeade, E. (1999). Appellate juvenile justice in Texas-It’s a crime!

Or should be. Baylor Law Review, 51, 17–61.

Levesque, R. J. R. (2008). Rethinking child maltreatment

law:

Returning to ﬁrst principles. New York: Springer.

M. L. B. v S. L. J., 519 U.S. 102 (1996).
McKane v. Durston, 153 U.S. 684 (1894).
Uhrig, E. G. (2008). A case for a constitutional right to counsel in

habeas corpus. Hastings Law Journal, 60, 541–604.

Apprenticeships

ROBERT HALPERN
Erikson Institute, Chicago, IL, USA

Overview
This essay discusses the renewal of apprenticeship for
high school-aged youth. The author enumerates and
illustrates the attributes of this distinctive institution
and explores its developmental beneﬁts that comple-
ment the period of adolescence. Beneﬁts gained by
participants are included.

In a recent commentary entitled “Let Teenagers Try
Adulthood,” Bard College president Leon Botstein
(1999) argues that most high schools in the United
failing
States serve most of their students poorly,
equally to engage their minds and hearts and to help
them begin to prepare for adult
life. Although
Botstein’s (1999) commentary is focused on the lack
ﬁt between high school as an institution and young
people’s developmental needs, it applies equally to the
culture at large. Too many young people in American
society lack access to the kinds of vital, productive
learning experiences that would enrich their present
lives and provide a foundation for adulthood (Eccles
2004). Adults worry that young people are growing up
too fast and yet those same adolescents remain isolated
from the fullness and complexity of the adult world –
its places and endeavors, occupations and disciplines,
problems and dilemmas (Larson 2000). Young people
“something is missing,”
themselves
although they are not sure what it is nor how to ﬁnd it.
One approach to structuring learning that addresses
what seems to be missing for young people is appren-
ticeship. In many corners of society there has been a
kind of reinvention – and a reconceptualization – of
the institution that for hundreds of years practically
deﬁned this period of life for young people. Appren-
ticeship can be broadly deﬁned as an experience in
which a young person has opportunity (1) to work in
a sustained and gradually deepening way on tasks/
projects in a speciﬁc discipline, ﬁeld of work, or service;
(2) under the tutelage of, and sometimes alongside, an
adult skilled in that discipline; (3) through that work
begins to master the attendant knowledge, skills, prac-
tices, and habits; and (4) perhaps also begins to acquire

report

that

the social identity of one who works in that discipline or
ﬁeld (Halpern 2009; Lerman 2010).

Not

surprisingly,

learning/producing domains
reﬂect
the full richness and diversity of cultural
endeavor. Halpern (2009) elaborated on the broad
nature of apprenticeships; the visual, performing and
literary arts, hand-crafts, media and design, basic or
applied sciences, community development, environ-
mental stewardship, entrepreneurship, culinary arts,
and sustainable agriculture are all possibilities. And
there are many more domains, he suggests, including
some explicitly vocational. As implied by the breadth
of ﬁelds, apprenticeships are rooted in an enormous
variety of settings.

Participating youth are diverse in background,
educational status, and life experience. Sponsors are
diverse as well (United States Department of Labor
2010). They include youth serving agencies, arts,
cultural and civic organizations, high schools, univer-
sities, and businesses (Halpern 2009). Sponsors may
provide an apprenticeship experience themselves – that
is, they may be or create a workplace of sorts – or they
may place youth with other public or private organiza-
tions. Individual mentors may be paid to do this work
or volunteer (Halpern 2009). Youth likewise are some-
times paid for their work, at other times not (Lerman
et al. 2009). An individual youth may work with one
adult or be part of the staff of a department (Collins
et al. 1989). In some settings apprentices learn primar-
ily from adult teachers; in others they may learn a good
deal from more experienced peers (Halpern 2009).

Why Call It Apprenticeship?
Although the experiences described here are appren-
ticeship-like in spirit and dynamics, they are not formal
Department of Labor-registered apprenticeships, nor
could they be (Halpern 2009). Such apprenticeships
require 4,000 or more hours of work, take from 3 to 6
years to complete, and serve adults almost exclusively
(United States Department of Labor 2010). The term is
apt because, even separated from its traditional conno-
tations, it captures what is most essential about this
particular set of experiences.

These experiences provide youth a sense of joining
and contributing to a tradition, as embodied in
a speciﬁc discipline or civic sphere (Halpern 2009).
Apprentices are, typically, working and learning in the
setting in which a craft, trade, or discipline is practiced

Apprenticeships A 161

A

(Borham 2004; Steedman et al. 1998). Both adult and
youth are active and share responsibility for the work to
be done and the products to be created, although each
has a different role (Halpern 2009). The adult mentor
is responsible for sharing his or her disciplinary
knowledge and skills with youth (Collins et al. 1989).
Youth are responsible for working hard to begin to
become proﬁcient at something speciﬁc, and for
contributing to the community which they have joined
(Rauner 2007).

Tasks and projects have real meaning and use –
making a documentary about housing conditions,
designing a logo for a business, surveying a ﬁsh habitat,
growing organic produce to be sold and donated to
low-income families. Greg Gale, associate director of
The Food Project, notes “If we do not farm well and
productively, people go hungry, land lies wasted, and
families do not have access to the life-giving produce
we grow” (Gale 2006, p. 11). Learning and work are
structured to lead young people through complete
production cycles with results judged by the established
standards of a discipline (Halpern 2009).

According to Halpern (2009), constraints are
characteristic of those found in professional work in
the ﬁelds involved. Young people work with deadlines,
have demanding clients who sometimes change their
minds, answers and solutions are not known ahead of
time, and unexpected difﬁculties are commonplace.
Young people learn through observation, imitation,
trial and error, and reiteration – in other words through
force of experience. Though professionalism and care
are expected, perfection is not.

Adult mentors hold the discipline for the appren-
tice, sequencing and controlling task demands to keep
them on the constructive side of difﬁculty notes
Halpern (2009). They direct apprentices’ attention,
demonstrate and sometimes collaborate, act as the
embodiment of a discipline, and also model skilled
practice and the general behavior of one with that
particular identity (Hamilton 1990). Apprentices may
to watch their mentors at work, addressing
get
a problem, running a meeting, or simply interacting
with others.

The Experience of Apprenticeship and
Its Effects: A Growing Experience
Apprenticeship seems to leave an “indelible impres-
sion” on many who experience it (Sigaut 1993,

162 A Apprenticeships

p. 105). To start with, it is a powerful teaching and
learning model (Hamilton 1990). From a develop-
mental perspective, apprenticeship experiences provide
opportunity for the real accomplishment that Erik
Erikson (1968) noted as so important during adoles-
cence (Halpern 2009). They create that transitional
space where young people can be both playing and
working, pretending to be and practicing at being
what they might become and yet genuinely participat-
ing in a particular adult community (Winnicott 1971;
Csikszentmihalyi and Schneider 2000).

Yet, Halpern (2009) adds, apprenticeships are often
genuinely unprecedented contexts for youth – about
learning but not at all like school; serious and demand-
ing, but accepting of struggles and mistakes. It takes
time for some youth to learn to trust the apprenticeship
framework, including the very different relationship
with adults. It is a challenge for some to be active, to
work hard, to learn to work with care, to work deeply
and to persist, whether to accept the idea that the
quality of produce grown is critical or to not stop
working on a design with the ﬁrst idea that comes to
mind. He notes that some youth struggle with the
realization that there is little room in apprenticeship
for either bravado or self-abnegation; these attitudes
are brushed aside by the demands and standards of the
work (Halpern 2009; Hamilton 1990).

With time young peoples’ sense of difﬁculty,
disorganization, or just tentativeness is increasingly
balanced by more complex feelings (Collins et al.
1989). What begin as external demands become inter-
nalized (Collins et al. 1989). Young people adjust to
what they once thought they could not (Halpern 2009).
They get better at the work and begin to believe they
can do it – and have a right to be doing it (Hamilton
1990). Young people note being glad to be able to be
themselves, to not have to pose or front or try to ﬁt in
(Halpern 2009). An apprentice in Chicago’s Marwen
Arts notes that “nobody is telling you to be any way.
You do what you need to do” (Yenawine 2004, p. 6).

Not least, Halpern (2009) states that young people
like being around adults who enjoy their work, are
passionate about a particular ﬁeld, and draw their iden-
tity from it. Identiﬁcation with mentors provides both
a spur for mastery and a model for identity work. Who
mentors are, what they have done, the path they have
taken, and even how they behave is instructive, inter-
esting, and often novel to apprentices (Halpern 2009).

What Apprentices Learn, How and
Why They Grow
Apprenticeship provides a powerful spur for many
kinds of growth, and this growth derives both from
the demands of the work itself and from the context for
those demands. Skills and dispositions develop in
apprenticeship because they have to – one is faced
with a new or persistent problem, constraints of time,
resources, or materials (Rose 2004) – and because the
young person is motivated to cope with the difﬁculties
faced (Halpern 2009). The intricacy or complexity of
tasks and the genuine need for resulting products
demand care and teach the apprentice to work more
carefully (Hamilton 1990). Working through complete
production cycles gives the experience coherence and
deepens its meaning (Halpern 2009). The sense of
realness and genuineness of contributions made rein-
force the experience: Rocking the Boat apprentices
working with other organizations to restore the Bronx
River saw the return of beavers to the river for the ﬁrst
time in 200 years (Halpern 2009).

Some growth in apprenticeship is discipline
speciﬁc. Apprentices exert gradually greater control
over their own efforts, a kind of discipline-speciﬁc
self-regulation; they are better able to steer those
efforts (Halpern 2009). Apprentices working with
a professional muralist on one project learn to work
large, to keep the elements connected (Larson and
Walker 2006). A ﬁlm-making apprentice uses a ﬁlm-
editing program in an innovative way (Halpern 2009).
With time the apprentice begins to learn how to look at
things in a particular ﬁeld to understand them, to
recognize patterns, to know what is important, to
sense when a work at hand feels right (Polanyi 1966).
For instance, the cabinet-making apprentice develops
what Mike Rose (2004, p.92) calls “cabinet sense.”

Halpern (2009) notes some more general growth
which is also to a degree generalizable. Young people
acquire skills in approaching and engaging tasks as
such. They learn, for instance, to prepare before plung-
ing in, learn to get started or move ahead without
waiting for instructions or guidance, learn to attend
to detail, to edit, and to revise. They also learn to seek
out needed information and to draw on others’ expe-
rience, and grow more adept at working with a measure
of uncertainty. They do not freeze when faced with
problems and obstacles, and become able to view
them as just part of the work (Halpern 2009).

Apprenticeships A 163

A

Apprentices gain knowledge and skill in design and
production processes Hamilton (1990). According to
Halpern (2009), they learn to compress ideas to ﬁt
constraints – of time, materials, human resources,
their own experience, or the marketplace. Apprentices
learn to cope with things out of their control. Young
people learn, as one boat-building teacher puts it, to
work with as well as work through mistakes – they learn
that mistakes go along with the imperfections of crafts-
manship. In learning how to work as part of a team,
apprentices learn what it means to be responsible to
a team or ensemble, and what it means to make
a contribution to a larger effort (Halpern 2009).

Some of the most powerful, if subtle, effects of
apprenticeship experience can be described as self
effects: how young people view and understand them-
selves, including what they think they are capable of,
what they enjoy and are good at (Hamilton 1990). It is
also visible in how they approach the opportunities and
difﬁculties in different settings, including willingness to
take risks, work hard, and be active (Halpern 2009).
Young people’s public behavior begin to change in
a variety of ways – they began to use language and
share their thoughts more carefully, to take more
responsibility for themselves, their public behavior
became more serious and appropriately assertive, they
become more patient with themselves and with others.
For some youth, an apprenticeship experience seems
to have a self organizing effect, pulling them together,
waking them up, mobilizing their energies, providing
a sense of direction (Halpern 2009). Young people may
try to carry the skills and dispositions acquired in
apprenticeship to other settings in their lives.

More globally, apprenticeship experiences lead
some youth to reevaluate how they are approaching
high school (Halpern 2009). They may come to think
more closely about what it might take to pursue
particular disciplines or careers, and how much time
and effort it takes to get good at a chosen endeavor
(Lerman et al. 2009). In some instances, apprenticeship
experiences open up paths to college (Halpern 2009).
Youth make new adult relationships, enter into new
networks, and are connected to new institutions, all
of which may be located outside of their existing social
world (Halpern 2009). The acquisition of this new
capital comes at a crucial time, as apprentices are
beginning the transition from high school to either
further schooling or work or both (Hamilton 1990).

Some Implications
The societal context for youth apprenticeship is both
challenging and potentially receptive (Hamilton 1990).
On the challenging side, work has been noted to have
become more ﬂuid – a series of personal encounters,
more abstract – involving manipulation of symbols and
information, more focused on process and less reliant
on speciﬁc (or ﬁxed) content (Halpern 2009). Breadth
of skills seems as or more important than depth
(Halpern 2009). It can be argued nonetheless that
substantive, discipline-speciﬁc knowledge and skills
are not becoming irrelevant and in fact are gaining
renewed appreciation as a foundation for entrance
into many critical professions.

Paralleling the changing narrative of work is
a narrative describing a less well-deﬁned and less
straightforward transition from high school to work
or post-secondary education for the majority of
American youth (Halpern 2009). Both the transition
itself and the labor market as a whole lack transparency,
and it is difﬁcult for youth to make sense of the context
in which they have to make decisions (Lehmann 2005).
Again, apprenticeship experiences offer potential to
help with this difﬁcult process in a number of ways,
and in some instances they can nurture the beginnings
of a career (Hamilton 1990).

For the many youth not ready to begin a career
process, apprenticeship still provides experiences that
help clarify educational and work-related decision-
making processes, and introduce young people to the
variety of adult work and disciplinary knowledge
(Hamilton 1990). And becoming a nascent photogra-
pher or engineer or journalist even for a year or two
enriches an adolescent’s self and provides a bridge or
interim identity for her as she strives to ﬁgure out who
she is, who and what she wants to be (Halpern 2009).
The learning model embodied in apprenticeship
holds a number of implications for high school reform,
ﬁrst and foremost as a conceptual model of good learn-
ing design for youth (Eccles 2004). Only a handful of
reform efforts have emphasized how fundamentally the
assumptions and practices of high school would have to
change to better meet young people’s developmental
needs, as Botstein (1999) puts it, to engage their hearts
and minds and prepare them for the future. To do so
high schools would have to rethink almost every prac-
tice, including: the nature of core learning resources and
tasks; where, when, and under what conditions learning

164 A Apprenticeships

takes place; the meaning of making mistakes; what the
products of learning consist of; how growth is concep-
tualized and how learning is assessed; who teaches and
how teaching is done; how time is organized (every day
and over the years); and what other institutions should
be involved (Eccles 2004). As far as I can tell, appren-
ticeship addresses each of these points of practice.

Second, apprenticeship is relevant as an actual
learning experience as part of the high school curricu-
lum: this is already happening, in some themed high
schools, in unique high school models like Big Picture,
and most signiﬁcantly in career/technical education
programs and centers (Lerman 2009). Third, it is rele-
vant in the sense that high schools cannot meet young
people’s developmental needs alone:
this requires
working across the boundaries of service systems and
sectors of society (Crockett and Petersen 1993).

That in turn means shared responsibility and mutual
learning between schools and the community –
organizations, cultural institutions, single-cause organi-
zations, the business community, higher education
and workforce development agencies, among others
(Hamilton 1990). Apprenticeship-like settings can
help schools with their tasks but also offer potential
to change schools’ understanding of those tasks. The
attributes of apprenticeship are not only developmen-
tally compelling to youth but seem to address many
of the goals that school reformers have for their
own work.

that

In Halpern’s (2009) eyes, few leaders are crying out
for “more youth apprenticeship” for the nation’s high
school age youth. He notes
in Wisconsin,
a superlative statewide youth apprenticeship program
had to ﬁght for years to stay alive. Still, Halpern (2009)
notices the need for apprenticeship; an urgent sense at
every level of society that the United States must address
the puzzle of adolescence, of young people going
through the motions, barely hanging on in school with-
out exactly knowing why, fantasizing about becoming
rock stars or professional athletes, looking at the adult
world with puzzlement and sometimes cynicism, and,
most critically, having little speciﬁc idea of what they
might actually strive to become.

Conclusion
Youth apprenticeships offer many opportunities for
youth to develop career skills, as well as their sense of

identity and maturity. While youth apprenticeship
program differ from Department of Labor-registered
apprenticeships, the set of experiences that the program
embodies is similar: academic education, skill develop-
ment, and mentorship. Although many researchers
have advocated for programs that ﬁt the developmental
abilities present in adolescence (Hamilton 1990; Eccles
2004; Halpern 2009), many schools have not yet
recognized the opportunity of youth apprenticeships.

Acknowledgments
This essay is drawn from the author’s book The Means
to Grow Up: Reinventing Apprenticeship as a Develop-
mental Support in Adolescence (Routledge 2009).

References
Borham, N. (2004). Oriented the work-based curriculum toward
work process knowledge: A rationale and German case study.
Studies in Continuing Education, 26, 209–227.

Botstein, L. (1999). Let teen-agers try adulthood. The New York
Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/1999/05/17/
opinion/let-teen-agers-try-adulthood.html

Botstein, L. (2008). Let teenagers try adulthood. NSSE, 107(2),

118–121.

Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive appren-
ticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing, and mathemat-
ics. In L. B. Resnic (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction
(pp. 453–494). Hillsdale: Lawernce Erlbaum.

Crockett, L. J., & Petersen, A. C. (1993). Adolescent development:
Health risks and opportunities for health promotion. In S. G.
Millstein, A. C. Petersen, & E. O. Nightingale (Eds.), Promoting
the health of adolescents: New directions for the twenty-ﬁrst century
(pp. 13–37). New York: Oxford University Press.

Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Schneider, B. (2000). Becoming adult.

New York: Basic Books.

Eccles, J. S. (2004). Schools, academic motivation, and stage-
environment ﬁt. In R. M. Lerner & L. Steinberg (Eds.), Handbook
of adolescent psychology (2nd ed., pp. 125–153). Hoboken:
Wiley.

Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth in crisis. New York: WW

Norton.

Gale, G. (2006). Growing together. Boston: The Food Project.
Halpern, R. (2009). The means to grow up: Reinventing apprenticeship
as a developmental support in adolescence. New York/London:
Routledge.

Hamilton, S. F. (1990). Apprenticeship for adulthood: Preparing youth

for the future. New York: The Free Press.

Larson, R. W. (2000). Toward a psychology of positive youth devel-

opment. The American Psychologist, 55(1), 170–183.

Larson, R., & Walker, C. (2006). Learning about the real world in an
urban arts youth program. Journal of Adolescent Research, 21,
244–268.

Arranged Marriage A 165

A

Lehmann, W. (2005). I’m still scrubbing the ﬂoors: Experiencing
youth apprenticeships in Canada and Germany. Work Empower-
ment Society, 19, 107–129.

Lerman, R. I. (2010). Expanding apprenticeship: A way to enhance skills

and careers. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

Lerman, R. I., Eyster, L., & Chambers, K. (2009). The beneﬁts and
challenges of registered apprenticeship: The sponsors’ perspective.
Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

Lerman R. (2008a). ‘Are skills the problem? Reforming the education
and training system in the United States’, Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research.

Lerman, R. (2008b). ‘Widening the scope of standards through work-
based learning’, Presentation at the Thirtieth Annual APPAM
Research Conference November 6, 2008 Los Angeles, California.

Polanyi, M. (1966). The tacit dimension. New York: Doubleday.
Rauner, F. (2007). Vocational education and training: A European
perspective. In A. Brown, S. Kirpal, & F. Rauner (Eds.), Identities
at work. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Rose, M. (2004). The mind at work. New York: Viking.
Sigaut, F. (1993). Learning, teaching, and apprenticeship. New Liter-

ary History, 24, 105–114.

Steedman, H., Gospel, H., & Ryan, P. (1998). Apprenticeship:
A strategy for growth. London: London School of Economics.
United States Department of Labor. (2010). Registered Apprenticeship.

Retrieved from http://www.doleta.gov/oa/

Winnicott, D. (1971). Playing and reality. London: Tavistock.
Yenawine, P. (2004). Addressing the needs of youth in fuel: Giving youth

the power to succeed. Chicago: Marwen Arts.

Arranged Marriage

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

An arranged marriage refers to a marriage in which at
least one member of the couple had little to no inﬂuence
on the selection of their partner. Arranged marriages
curtail courtship in that, in some instances, the couple
may have never met. While arranged marriage is
thought to be a part of Western civilization’s past, it
continues to be a part of the present in some subcul-
tures within Western society and others across the
world. This method of family formation is important
to a cross-cultural understanding of adolescent devel-
opment, although how it relates to adolescents generally
has not been the subject of empirical studies focusing
on adolescents, with the notable exception of child

marriages (which relates to but certainly is not synon-
ymous with arranged marriages; see Hampton 2010).

Cultures that do practice arranged marriage vary
greatly (see Ghimire et al. 2006; Tek’ce 2004). Different
groups have a range of ways of determining who is
eligible for marriage. For example, some allow cousins
to marry one another while others may allow children
to marry either another child or even an adult. Some-
times, gifts from the bride or groom’s families are given
in exchange for the marriage. Social status and wealth
often factor in these types of marriages because, in
many of these cultures, marriage is viewed as more
than just a union of two individuals but as a merging
of families. The individuals who are actually involved
in the arranging also differ greatly by group. Parents
generally have the most control while the bride and
groom may have varying degrees of decision making
power. Some families may even seek advice from reli-
gious leaders. Importantly, in some societies, girls are
married to gods and live in temples, a practice that has
been linked to child prostitution (see Levesque 1999).
This wide range of practices continues to change, espe-
cially when they are inﬂuenced by Western ideologies of
family formation and child development.

Research has sought to compare arranged mar-
riages with other types of marriages, but such differ-
ences are difﬁcult to evaluate given how other cultural
forces likely inﬂuence a society’s views of marriage as
well as supports for marriage as an institution. For
example, some research reports that arranged mar-
riages have equal or somewhat lower divorce rates
and equivalent levels of marital satisfaction as couples
who chose their partners based on love or other factors.
As expected, these ﬁndings can be deceiving. Several
cultural differences likely inﬂuence those who engage
in arranged marriages versus those who adopt love-
based marriages. The way these cultures view divorce
may be very different; for example, in arranged mar-
riage cultures, divorce carries much more shame than it
does in most societies that base their marriages on love
or other bases for commitment. It is also important to
note that, while in arranged marriages, families choose
spouses based on wealth, religion, and social status,
both types of marriages often result in spouses who
are very similar to one another. This similarity has been
linked to marital satisfaction in younger couples.
However, what one culture may view as satisfactory in

166 A Art Therapy

a marriage another may not. Researchers have yet to
study how satisfaction within these types of marriages
may change over time. Although existing research may
be subjected to important criticisms, the search never-
theless shows the importance of recognizing the wide
variety of ways individuals can marry and the need to
proceed cautiously before pronouncing judgment on
the variety of ways martial relationships form.

Despite being practiced in countries around the
globe and the acknowledged need to respect sociocul-
tural differences, arranged marriages continue to be the
subject of concern. Due to couples having little say in
who they marry, there is concern that partners may not
acquire the ability to make decisions on their own. An
additional concern centers on the manner marriage
traditions will be impacted by the ever-impeding bor-
ders of different societies and their cultural customs.
Also concerning is the practice’s relationship to the
status of women, with its being linked to women’s
lower status and to their being viewed as property. In
societies that practice arranged marriages, women
often are subjugated and mistreated. Despite those
ﬁndings, it also is true that many women also suffer
considerable violence in relationships that are not
arranged and the status of women continues to not be
as equal to that of men in societies that do not embrace
arranged marriages. Again, differences in practice as
well as other forms of marriage create complexities
that challenge efforts to understand them, and these
complexities are exacerbated by the constant change
in the nature of marriage, close relationships, as well
as broader social, religious, economic, and legal
changes.

Cross-References
▶ Marital Rights
▶ Marriage

Art Therapy

DAVE GUSSAK
Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA

Teen violence and delinquency is one of the most vex-
ing and enduring trends faced in contemporary society.
The pervasiveness of the problems delinquency creates
has been answered through institutionalizing an
increasingly large number of alienated and rebellious
teenagers. Understanding how adolescents experience
institutional life is a matter of importance to the ado-
lescents, their care, and to society. Those who work
with institutionalized adolescents have much to learn
about how they inﬂuence the behavior of teenagers in
their care. As well, society has not quite grasped how
adolescents who are given negative labels such as
“delinquent” or “deviant” continues to maintain these
identities through their interactions in society. While
certain interactions may perpetuate these behaviors,
they can also help reverse these tendencies. This essay
will ﬁrst introduce a summary of how an interactionist
perspective can be applied to understanding the
notions of deviance and delinquency. It will then
address
the disaffected
youth, present self-appraisal and labeling theories
within this context, and ultimately use these theories
and vignettes to explore and illustrate how the act of
creating art and art therapy can be used to help reverse
this trend. Please note that this essay has been modiﬁed
from the book chapter, “The deviant adolescent: Cre-
ating healthy interactions and relabeling through art
therapy,” published in Doris Arrington’s Art, Angst and
Trauma: Right Brain Interventions with Developmental
Issues, with permission from Charles C. Thomas,
Publishers.

the institutionalization of

References
Ghimire, D., Axinn, W., Yabiku, S. T., & Thornton, A. (2006). Social
change, premarital nonfamily experience, and spouse choice in
an arranged marriage society. American Journal of Sociology, 111,
1181–1218.

Hampton, T. (2010). Child marriage threatens girls’ health. JAMA:
Journal of the American Medical Association, 304, 509–510.
Levesque, R. J. R. (1999). Child sexual abuse: A human rights perspec-

tive. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Tek’ce, B. (2004). Paths of marriage in Istanbul: Arranging choices

and choice in arrangements. Ethnography, 5, 173–201.

Social and Symbolic Interactionism
interactionism emerged from the
The theories of
philosophies of James, Cooley, Dewey, Mead, and
Blumer. William James claimed that the social self is
developed through the interaction of the individual
and social groups (James 1890/1918). Cooley saw “. . .
interactionism as a framework through which social
reality was to be interpreted” (1964, p. 9) and that
there is a joint interdependence between the social

Art Therapy A 167

A

environment and individuals. People interpret what
others see in them by noting the actions of those with
whom they interact; “. . . the self emerges in a process of
communication and interaction as the individual
responds to and internalizes aspects of ways others
have of acting toward the person” (Hall 1979, p. 50).
Dewey (1930) maintained that people, their environ-
ments, and their thoughts are interconnected, forming
a larger whole.

Mead claimed that it was the self ’s interactions with
others through social experiences that deﬁned situa-
tions (Mead 1964). He believed that the self developed
from such experiences and activities “. . . as a result of
his relations to that process as a whole and to other
individuals within that process” (p. 199). However, the
self not only interacts with others, but also with his or
her own thoughts and ideas (Mead 1964), through self-
reﬂection.

This notion that the self is created and deﬁned
through interactions with non-corporeal objects was
similar to Blumer’s (1969) theoretical perspective of
interactionism. Blumer (1969) claimed that a person
will interpret others’ gestures and will then act on what
they perceive the meaning to be from this translation
(Blumer 1969). However, he also stressed the interaction
between people and objects. Objects have meaning for
people “. . . not intrinsic to the object but arises from
how the person is initially prepared to act toward it”
(Blumer 1969, pp. 68–69). Objects can include ideas
and thoughts as well as something tangible. It is the
sharing of
these objects, and the interpretations
thereof, that deﬁne the action and interaction. Those
who subscribe to interactionism claim that meaning
emerges from the interaction between people (and
objects). Thus, meanings and interpretations are social
products. Ideas lead to action and the construction of
a practice and/or product.

It is through these interpretations that a societal
context and the roles of the people that make up this
society – including teenagers – are deﬁned. In simple
terms, through interactions, people are deﬁned. There-
fore, meanings and interpretations are social products.
Such actions are also maintained through self-appraisals,
and societal categorical deﬁnitions, or labeling.

Self-appraisal and Labeling
Role taking is an important aspect of interactionism
(Blumer 1969); this consists of “projecting oneself into

the role of others, and appraising from their standpoint
the situation, oneself in the situation, and possible lines
of action” (Bartusch and Matsueda 1996, p. 147). This
aspect inﬂuences how a person views oneself and can
ultimately sway the person’s self-concept and identity.
Once this identity is acted upon, and if negative behav-
ior ensues, the labeling that occurs perpetuates this
identity, and creates a cycle that is difﬁcult to break
(Becker 1963). For example, Zimbardo et al. (1973)
recognized that people may develop aggressive and
dominating characteristics after roles and labels are
assigned and accepted. In their study, a Stanford
University class was divided into two groups – one
group role-played prison guards and one group played
the inmates – to:

" . . . understand more about the process by which peo-
ple called “prisoners” lose their liberty, civil rights, inde-
pendence, and privacy, while those called “guards”
gain social power by accepting the responsibility for
controlling and managing the lives of their dependent
charges. (p. 38)

The guards locked up and watched over the inmates
in the basement of the psychology building. The study
had to be terminated earlier than originally planned
because both groups inhabited their roles more seri-
ously than anticipated. The original identities of the
students were quickly transformed. The guards became
aggressive toward their “wards,” and the “inmates”
became docile and cunningly resistive. Through self-
appraisals and perpetuation of these identities by those
around them, the participants became their roles, and
that their aggressive actions or reactions emerged from
their labeled identities (Zimbardo 2007).

Some have contended that labeling a child as delin-
quent or simply “bad” may be a result of the child’s
economic background, and may include those who are
socioeconomically disadvantaged or of a minority
(Bartusch and Matsueda 1996). Although it is not
clear if such labeling inﬂuences the self-image more if
it is a “formal” label (i.e., through the courts, schools,
psychiatric or detention facilities), or an informal label
(i.e., by peers and family), Paternoster and Iovanni
(1989) stressed that it is more important to focus on
than ofﬁcial descriptors. Thus,
informal
although a court may deem that an adolescent requires
institutionalization for his or her behavior, it is the
perpetuation of that label through his or her peers

rather

168 A Art Therapy

that may create the sustained identity. However,
regardless of the type of label, one thing was made
clear: labeling informs self-appraisals, and in turn, can
perpetuate delinquent and deviant tendencies.

Deviance and Delinquency
Rules and sanctions against those that violate rules
established by society (and in a smaller sense, an insti-
tution), and thus the norms, are created through
a social act (Lauer and Handel 1977). Deviants, or
those that belong to a deviant group, are those who have
been sanctioned. Social problems are deﬁned by normative
groups, or the “normals.” “Social norms are two-sided.
A prescription implies the existence of a prohibition and
. . . norms that
vice-versa (italics are the authors).
deﬁne legitimate practices also implicitly deﬁne illegit-
imate practices” (Cloward and Ohlin 2001, p. 359). By
simply creating a standard of acceptance, society is
indicating that anyone who engages in behavior out
of bounds of the given standard is a deviant.

Spector and Kitsuse (1973) believed that social prob-
lems emerged through grievances from members of
groups or societies. “[B]ehaviors are not recognized as
deviant, or criminal, unless others, as members of cultural
groups, react to them as such” (Hagan 2001, p. 6).
Merton explained deviance through what he labeled
the “strain theory”; if people are unable to meet their
goals, through acceptable means, they may try to
achieve these goals through deviant means. “[W]hen
individuals (or groups) discover, for example, that no
matter how hard they work/try, they cannot achieve the
levels of satisfaction or material wealth to which they
have been taught to aspire, deviant behavior may be the
result” (Merton, as cited in Rounceﬁeld 2003, para 8).
Becker (1963/1991) claimed that many theoretical
perspectives and deﬁnitions exist for deviance. Yet,
what they all seem to have in common is their belief
that any member in a society who tends to reduce
stability is considered a deviant. Ultimately, deviants
belong to the groups within the society that do not ﬁt
in – the “outsiders.”

Much like Spector and Kitsuse, Becker believed that
the society is responsible for creating, or deﬁning,
deviance. Sagarin (1975) believed that people and
behavior that provoke hostile reactions are considered
deviant. Nevertheless, Sagarin also made a clear dis-
tinction between deviance and criminality, indicating
that deviance and crime overlap but not entirely – there

are some that are both criminal and deviant, another
that is deviant but not criminal, and another that is
criminal and not deviant. For the sake of this essay, the
notion of deviance corresponds with that of delinquent
or offending tendencies.

The problem with relying on labeling theory to
explain the genesis of deviant behavior is that it puts
the entire responsibility for such anomies on society
and disregards biological and psychological impulses
(Hagen 2001). While this may be true in some cases, in
others it is not. As Hagen conceded, one can assume
that a more proper explanation for the cause of
deviance and delinquent tendencies is a combination
of the two – natural impulses may be present, but
societal interactions perpetuate and maintain deviant
tendencies. Dryfoos (1996) outlined six signiﬁcant risk
factors for deviant behavior: (1) poor parenting,
(2) interactions in school and response to the schooling
process, (3) peer inﬂuences, (4) psychological difﬁcul-
ties such as depression or bipolar tendencies, (5) living
in an impoverished and crime-ridden neighborhood,
and (6) race and ethnicity. Four of the six risk factors
involve societal and environmental interactions and all
factors inﬂuence interaction and labeling to instigate
and perpetuate deviant tendencies.

Adolescents may act out and express their anger and
frustration in dangerous and unacceptable ways, that is,
unacceptable by society’s standards. This, in turn, can
cause retribution or punishment and sanctions by
societal members, including the institutionalization of
these disaffected youths in detention facilities. Such
invalidation of these feelings may cause the adolescent
to form further self-perceptions as a deviant, perpetu-
ating a cycle.

As well, according to the interactionist perspective,
such deviant behaviors may be learned through obser-
vation and through interaction with other deviants,
either within institutions or on the streets. This is
similar to the process by which gang members operate,
or the phenomena that happens in juvenile and adult
correctional facilities where newer inhabitants learn
continual deviant behavior, in some cases necessary
for survival, from those who are more institutionalized.
Such behaviors are not only accepted within that
subculture but are expected (Gussak 1997). Such inter-
actions also create an identity within the adolescent,
one that would be difﬁcult to replace with one more
acceptable.

Thus, simply “locking someone up” may not only
be insufﬁcient, but may very well continue the cycle
through strengthening the deviant self-appraisal. As
Rubington and Weinberg (2002) indicated, the deviant
identity is maintained through an interactive process
between those that break the rules and those that
enforce them. The punishment does not deter the
behavior but does in fact conﬁrm for the perpetrator
that they are indeed a deviant; “how others respond is
therefore crucial to the process of acquiring a deviant
identity” (Brownﬁeld and Thompson 2005, p. 23).

Reinforcing or Reversing Labels:
The Interaction of Art Therapy
As social interaction creates, deﬁnes, and maintains
deviant behavior, so it can also help remove the deviant
label and interrupt the cycle of unacceptable behavior.
It is through positive social interaction that new behav-
iors and identities can be developed and validated, and
redeﬁning the actions of those considered deviant or
delinquent that such tendencies can be halted and even
reversed. The art therapist can help facilitate this
through the art-making process to aid in developing
appropriate
aggressive
interactions
tendencies (Gussak 2006).

and decrease

are

they

in that

Blumer (1969) indicated that symbolic interaction
can occur between people and objects as well as
between two people: “. . . objects—all objects—are
formed and
social products
transformed by the deﬁning process that takes place
in social interaction” (pp. 68–69). Actions and interac-
tions are initiated and reinforced through active inter-
pretation of corporeal and non-corporeal objects.
What is more, societal norms can be deﬁned through
the shared meanings of objects, and connections and
interactions can be secured through the shared use of
such objects.

Art has been used to create and deﬁne interactive
relationships through their visual cues. For example,
art is a prevalent form of communication and deﬁni-
tion between members of adolescent street gangs.
These gang members communicate through several
different visual cues including hand gestures, color
codes, and grafﬁti (Jackson and McBride 1986). Grafﬁti
images are used to create an identity, a sense of belong-
ing, a means of communication within the gang, and
are designed to separate the gang set from rival gangs or
outsiders (Huff 1990; Padilla 1992). Different gangs

Art Therapy A 169

A

have different lettering styles and the images can be
quite stylized and intricate, serving as a means of self-
labeling within the gang. “Taggers” (grafﬁti artists) are
well respected within their own group. To “strike out”
a gang sign or gang member’s logo is considered a high
insult and challenge to the turf, and is grounds for
serious retaliation. Gang members are even willing to
die to protect the integrity of their own visual identity
(Decker and van Winkle 1996).

The images demand respect; honoring the visual
cues, in essence, values the members. By using images
to communicate, reciprocation is more likely. Padilla
(1992) indicated that some gang members want to
become legitimate, accepted into the society, but they
have been embroiled into a subculture for so long they
may not know how to separate themselves for accep-
tance into the conventional society.

Experience with gang members

and “gang
wannabes” in a therapeutic context proved compli-
cated. (The gang wannabes wanted to be gang mem-
bers, and took on the attributes but were not yet gang
members – it was a commonly held belief by staff
members who work with wannabes in therapeutic
settings that they are worse than actual gang members,
as they may have had more to prove.) They chose to
interact primarily with those in their own group.
They tend to believe that those outside their group
clearly did neither understand, nor accept
them.
Sometimes, a new form of communication and self-
expression can develop and emerge when art materials
are introduced.

The art therapist can take advantage of these natu-
ral tendencies for identity and acceptance through
visual imagery. Introducing art materials to clients
considered delinquent creates a new interaction,
a new social pattern. Interacting with the materials
and the art product, clients will begin to redeﬁne their
images, and eventually will be more acceptable to
others. Where previously the deviant individual had
difﬁculty connecting with others, by using the art
the individual’s previous label
materials together,
becomes blurry. It is at this time that a new sense of
self can be created; this can occur through the art
process, speciﬁcally, the deviant person may now be
“an artist” as well. Likewise, a different relationship is
established between the artist and the therapist. Both
currently belong to the same socially acceptable
context, the art world, constructed and maintained

170 A Art Therapy

through the shared conventions of the collective media
(Becker 1982). Teaching a client how to use art mate-
rials for self-expression creates a new mode of interac-
tion. Mastery of the materials promotes a new sense of
self-worth apart from previously established hostile
and deviant identities.

Rick (ﬁrst introduced in Gussak 2006) was an
11-year-old boy who was in a facility for “acting out”
and for aggressive behavior. He was proud that he
belonged to a gang. His deviant behavior was initiated
and maintained through continual support from his
gang peers, and through the strong reaction and
sanctioned labels provided by the staff at the facility.
He was seen as a deviant, as a delinquent, and he did
little to convince the facility otherwise. It was not until
new labels were created for Rick that he was able to
eventually construct a new identity. Through art, Rick
was able to create a new label, with a more appropriate
and healthy self-appraisal.

Rick constantly “tagged” his gang moniker on the
unit walls in which he was housed. As there was a rule
against displaying gang insignias, let alone writing on
the walls, he frequently got in trouble with the facility’s
staff. He became angry when the grafﬁti was washed off
the walls; he at times attacked those who did so.
Rick perceived this as a disrespectful act, reﬂecting
that the staff did not accept who he was.

After several other similar interactions, a deal was
made with Rick after receiving permission from the
unit administrator. He was ﬁrst reminded of the insti-
tution’s regulations. However, he was then told that he
could do the gang tags on separate paper but he had to
keep them in his desk drawer. He also had to promise
that he would not hang the drawings up. He agreed to
this, and he spent several afternoons drawing quietly
with pencils on white paper. Each drawing was metic-
ulously completed. After completing several of these
drawings, it was then suggested that instead of illus-
trating his gang’s name, he was asked to do a drawing of
the name his gang called him. Eventually, the drawing
evolved into an embellishment of his real name. These
he would show proudly, and they would be hung on the
wall in his room. By the time he left the unit, he was
more compliant with staff directives and less aggressive
than before. Through this process, Rick was validated,
forming a self-label that was deemed “acceptable.”
Concurrently, his behavior was altered to conform to
social norms. Simultaneously, his own concept of self

was
strengthened, he developed a healthier self-
appraisal, and he saw himself as an individual within
a different societal context.

The art therapy process provides a means to inter-
rupt
the cycles of deviance and delinquency by
strengthening a sense of self; providing an avenue to
express negative emotions in an acceptable and appro-
priate manner; creating new meanings; and tapping
into empathic responses (Gussak 1997, 2004; Gussak
et al. 2003). While it is common to believe that the
client creates an art piece with little thought to the
viewer, all artists take into account what the viewer
may think of the result:

" . . . [I]t is crucial that, by and large, people act with the
anticipated reactions of others in mind. This implies
that artists create their work, at least in part, by antic-
ipating how other people will respond, emotionally
and cognitively, to what they do. (Becker 1982, p. 200)

Even when the artist creates an image with hostile
content, he or she may be doing it as a means to
“attack” the viewer. However, art is an acceptable way
to express hostility and the therapist can use the pic-
tures to promote acceptance and success. As sessions
continue, the client understands that these images, and
by extension the client himself, are accepted. Once
a client feels validated, the images may begin to evolve
into more complex and thought-inducing products.
For example, Kevin (a pseudonym) was a 17-year-old
biracial
resident of a juvenile detention facility
(his mother was white and his father was African-
American). Kevin had sporadic contact with his father
who was addicted to drugs; he saw his mother often,
but she was considered “nice – a pushover” by her son.
This split was one of the initial difﬁculties Kevin had in
gaining a damaged self-appraisal; he was often made
fun of by the peers on his unit for his lack of racial
identity, and he constantly talked about being confused
with his own sense of self; “I feel like I don’t belong.”
In a sense, he seemed to be missing a label.

His initial arrest was for drug-related activities, that
is, possession, consumption, and distribution. Kevin’s
drug history was quite extensive while on the streets;
even when in the facility, Kevin would use illicit drugs,
or would ﬁnd unique methods to take his medication
inappropriately such as “snorting his aspirin.” He was
recognized by the staff of the facility as being difﬁcult,
and was subsequently labeled a deviant. Kevin, for his

part, seemed to reinforce this label through displaying
inappropriate attention-seeking behavior; he told his
peers on the unit that his sister was kidnapped. He also
told them that his family lived in New Orleans and was
unreachable after the hurricane that affected the region
in the fall of 2005. When staff and peers voiced sympa-
thy and pity, he laughed, letting them know that he was
only kidding. He seemed to be trying to develop a new
label.

Kevin became angry if he thought he was being
wronged or disrespected; generally, his anger just
resulted in him grinding his teeth and clenching his
jaw. If his anger persisted, it developed into “acting
out” behavior, most commonly through verbal abuse
and threats”; several times his angry outbursts and
threats resulted in days added to his sentence.

He enjoyed doing art, but initially drew images that
were inappropriate and against the facility rules, such
as gang symbols. He did enjoy working with the art
therapists of the facility, using the opportunity to artic-
ulate personal issues. However, initially he had some
difﬁculties expressing himself such as when asked to
write and draw an advertisement about whom he was,
focusing on self-identity. He was unable to complete
it, and became quite frustrated, demonstrating the
difﬁculty of not having a clear label for oneself. Never-
theless, he was able to build a strong rapport with an art
therapist.

After approximately 7 months in the facility, Kevin
completed Fig. 1, a black-and-white painting of a large
dragon attacking a tiny person; the stick-person is
ineffectively shooting the dragon with a bow and arrow.

Art Therapy. Fig. 1 A large dragon, by Kevin

Art Therapy A 171

A

After he completed it, he told the art therapist –
intern from the Florida State University Graduate Art
Therapy Program – that he was the dragon, speciﬁcally
representing what he is like when he gets angry. He
indicated, “When I get angry, it’s like I grow horns.”
He pointed out what the individual components of the
drawing represent – the white on the tips of the horn is
hate, as is the white part of the stomach. The white part
(hate) in his stomach comes out his mouth past his
tongue, and gets vomited out, which he pointed out
manifests into cursing and acting out. Yet, the art piece
is hopeful – he said the gray area in his head is new, it is
where he is working out his anger, and that the round
shape around his head is the shield he puts up to
protect him from the projectiles that the stick ﬁgure is
shooting at him. Although he was somewhat unclear
on whom the stick ﬁgure was, it was most likely “a peer
who was kissing up with the staff.” He did not provide
any more information, but seemed satisﬁed with how
the image expressed how he felt.

Kevin was able to process this piece with the art
therapist, who accepted what Kevin said and conse-
quently accepted him. This piece seemed to represent
a turning point for Kevin, one where he began to use
the art process to express himself, where he saw his
work validated by someone else; as a result, he demon-
strated an authentic representation of himself without
fear of rejection.

Kevin of course did not demonstrate a complete
reformation, and he still at times made inappropriate
decisions. For example, after he discovered that he
would be leaving the facility soon, he wrote up a “hit
list” of all the people he was going to kill, complete
with dates and location. However, it became clear that
he did this as a means to extend his sentence; he told
the art therapist that he was afraid to leave, as his
parents were not effective in providing for him and
that he was reluctant to go back to the streets, back to
his gang. The art therapist was able to work on Kevin’s
ability to work through these feelings through the art,
and develop options rather than extending his stay at
the facility. In short, Kevin felt validated by the art
therapist and by the art-making process, and was
subsequently able to begin altering his own self-
appraisal.

In Rick’s and Kevin’s cases, the art process was used
to initiate the reversal of negative labeling and poor
self-appraisal. What became evident is that not only

172 A Art Therapy

can the art process facilitate change in an individual,
but it can also facilitate change of a group label.

Changing a Group Label
Art therapy sessions were conducted in a special need,
behaviorally focused school in a poor, rural section of
the Florida panhandle. The school provided education
to approximately 60 students, ranging in age from 12 to
18. The students were primarily African-American;
they were placed in this institution after they were
removed from their previous schools for severe deviant
behavior, including assault, drug violations, and lar-
ceny; many of the students either belonged to street
gangs, or were gang wannabes. Many of the students
were territorial and were strongly aligned with their
school district, even when they denigrated the school
and the teachers from which they came. Although the
students were placed in this school to avoid juvenile jail
time, many of the students were still in the court sys-
tem, awaiting sentences for various violations. Because
these students were from different schools within this
particular county, there were often conﬂicts based on
these territorial issues. The teachers and behavioral
specialists were taught conﬂict management, and
there was a security guard and often a county sheriff
on campus. Since the majority of the all of the students
were seen in art therapy sessions, the students attended
the groups in the class groups they were already put in;
thus, the participants saw the session as “just another
class.” The group members were seen throughout the
school year, unless the student was removed from the
school to do some time in a juvenile correctional facil-
ity, or were deemed appropriate enough to return to
the public school.

Throughout the year, the art activities generally
focused on individual tasks, addressing anger manage-
ment, problem solving, and socialization skills. Rarely
could the students work together to produce a group
project; some of the older students were able to con-
struct simple group paper sculptures, or take part in
a pass-around drawing, but these activities were infre-
quently attempted. It took a long time for a rapport to
be built with the students, and even then, it was tenta-
tive at best. However, 10 weeks before the end of the
school year, it was announced to all the students that
they would all participate in a mural that would be
painted directly on the activities room wall. All of the
students became excited about the idea of painting on

a wall and they agreed to the established rules of the
group. These rules generally focused on appropriate
behavior, decrease in aggression toward others in the
group, follow directions, respect each others’ space
while painting, and respect the materials; and of course,
the most important one – respect the art therapist, and
listen to what he had to say. They understood that if
these rules were broken the offender could not return
to the mural. They readily agreed.

rather

respective collectives,

Because there were approximately 60 students in
various groups, a system was established in which
they would all plan, organize, and work on the mural
while in their
than
together all at once. Although this approach would
have some drawbacks, including the possibility that
something they were working on in one session may
be altered prior to the next, it was believed that the
drawbacks were far outweighed by the need for safety.
They were all told about the possibility of something
they worked on would be painted over, but were told
that as it was a group mural, it belonged to all the
students at the school, and they all had the right to
make changes. Again, they surprisingly, if not begrudg-
ingly, agreed to this, and proceeded.

The ﬁrst step was to design the mural that would go
on the selected walls. Each group of six to ten students
was provided butcher-block paper, and was told to
draw a scene of their choice using oil pastels, colored
pencils, and markers. From these drawings, the art
therapists and faculty would look for consistencies
and discuss with all of the group members what the
ﬁnal theme would be on the wall. Surprisingly, all ﬁve
groups drew a beach scene without knowing what the
other groups drew; there were differences, such as one
had a palm tree, one had an overlarge sun with sun-
glasses (Fig. 2), or one had a hut with a man ﬁshing off
a pier.

However, the consistency made planning the mural

theme easy.

During the course of the year, the participants
singled out several students as artistic. The drawings
were roughly outlined on the walls by the art therapist,
his art therapy student intern from the Florida State
University Graduate Art Therapy Program, and two of
these students. The initial drawing was kept a simple
outline with few details to provide ﬂexibility for the
participants. For the next 6 weeks, all of the students
painted the mural, making many changes, painting and

Art Therapy A 173

A

Art Therapy. Fig. 2 Mural ideas

Art Therapy. Fig. 4 Student working on beach scene
mural

Art Therapy. Fig. 3 Students working on beach scene
mural

repainting various details, and ultimately covering the
walls with a large extended beach scene (Figs. 3–6).

Creating the mural was not entirely free of difﬁcul-
ties. Three of the participants were asked to leave the
groups, and there were times, despite previous discus-
sions and warnings, when several of them became upset
at what they had completed previously were changed.
There were days where there was much cajoling to get
them to focus on the task, and overall, redirection
became the norm. However, these difﬁculties were
eclipsed by the successes.

Most of the participants, regardless of their territo-
rial afﬁliations or prior difﬁculties were able to work
together. One student, who up until the creation of this
mural was obstinate, aggressive, and hostile, became
a leader, offering to help some of the younger students,

Art Therapy. Fig. 5 A beach scene mural

and would stick around and help the art therapists
clean up after. If others became belligerent, he would
often talk with them to get them to calm down.

Many of the students claimed ownership, even
when their contribution was as simple as painting the
beige tones for the sand; this ownership was encour-
aged. At one point, one of the participants began paint-
ing his name and a stylized lettering of the town in
which he came, possibly evident of gang relations; his
peer, one that he was close to, told him to stop it, and

174 A Art Therapy

in relabeling people, validating and reinforcing new
behaviors and identities, and can assist in reversing
the labels associated with deviance and delinquency.
In turn, a positive self-appraisal can be established
and can ultimately end the cycle of the deviant identity.

References
Bartusch, D. J., & Matsueda, R. L. (1996). Gender, reﬂected
appraisals, and labeling: A cross-group test of an interactionist
theory of delinquency. Social Forces, 75(1), 145–176.

Becker, H. S. (1963/1991). Outsiders: Studies in the sociology of devi-

ance. New York: Free Press.

Becker, H. S. (1982). Art worlds. Berkeley: University of California

Press.

Blumer, H. (1969). Symbolic interactionism: Perspective and method.

Art Therapy. Fig. 6 A beach scene mural

Berkeley: University of California Press.

brought it to the attention of the art therapist. With
only a little resistance, the offender repainted the sec-
tion. He was also reassured when told that all the names
of the participants would be on the mural. The students
proudly showed their work to the faculty and staff, who
in turn greatly complimented their efforts and the
ﬁnished product.

Overall, the mural activity proved successful in
creating a new interaction that provided some initial
steps in reversing the labeling. Those who participated
developed a sense of pride and identity in an activity
that was not only acceptable, but also encouraged, by
the
self-
faculty and parents. The participants’
appraisals were more positive, as seen by their pride
in displaying their work, and their eagerness to have
their name included on the mural. Granted, this one
project did not reverse what years of societal, familial,
and institutional interactions have instilled, but it did
provide a glimpse of the power that the art may have in
helping reverse the deviant label by increasing self-
esteem and a sense of acceptance within societal norms.

Conclusion
interactions, people are labeled.
Through social
Through these labels, the roles of social participants
are deﬁned, including adolescents who are branded
deviant or delinquent. Such labels are accordingly
maintained through self-appraisals, making it difﬁcult
to break the cycle that can eventually be reinforced
through institutionalization. The art
therapist has
unique tools that can design new interactions and aid

Brownﬁeld, D., & Thompson, K. (2005). Self-concept and delin-
quency: The effects of reﬂected appraisals by parents and peers.
Western Criminology Review, 6(1), 22–29.

Cloward, R. A., & Ohlin, L. E. (2001). Illegitimate means and delin-
quent subcultures. In B. R. E. Wright & R. B. McNeal Jr. (Eds.),
Boundaries: Readings in deviance, crime and criminal
justice
(pp. 359–380). Boston: Pearson Custom Publishing.

Cooley, C. H. (1964). Human nature and the social order. New York:

Schocken Books.

Decker, S. H., & Van Winkle, B. (1996). Life in the gang: Family,
friends, and violence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dewey, J. (1930). Human nature and conduct: An introduction to social

psychology. New York: The Modern Library.

Dryfoos, J. G. (1996). Adolescents at risk: Shaping programs to ﬁt the

need. The Journal of Negro Education, 65(1), 5–18.

Gussak, D. (1997). Breaking through barriers: Art therapy in prisons.
In D. Gussak & E. Virshup (Eds.), Drawing time: Art therapy in
prisons and other correctional settings (pp. 1–11). Chicago: Mag-
nolia Street Publishers.

Gussak, D. (2004). A pilot research study on the efﬁcacy of art therapy
with prison inmates. The Arts in Psychotherapy, 31(4), 245–259.
Gussak, D. (2006). Symbolic Interactionism, aggression and art ther-
In F. Kaplan (Ed.), Art Therapy and Social Action

apy.
(pp. 142–156). London: Jessica Kingsley.

Gussak, D., Chapman, L., Van Duinan, T., & Rosal, M. (2003).
Plenary session: Witnessing aggression and violence – responding
creatively. Paper presented at the annual conference of The
American Art Therapy Association, Chicago.

Hagan, J. (2001). Seven approaches to the deﬁnition of crime and
deviance. In B. R. E. Wright & R. B. McNeal Jr. (Eds.), Bound-
aries: Readings in deviance, crime and criminal justice (pp. 1–12).
Boston: Pearson Custom Publishing.

Hall, P. (1979). Structuring symbolic interaction: Communication

and power. Communication Yearbook, 4, 49–60.

Huff, C. R. (Ed.). (1990). Gangs in America. Newbury: Sage.
Jackson, R. K., & McBride, W. D. (1986). Understanding street gangs.

Placerville: Custom Publishing.

James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology (Vols. 1 and 2).

New York: Henry Holt and Company.

Asperger Syndrome A 175

A

Lauer, R. H., & Handel, W. H. (1977). The theory and application of

symbolic interactionism. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.

Mead, G. H. (1964). On social psychology. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press.

Padilla, F. M.

(1992). The gang as an American enterprise.

New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

Paternoster, R., & Iovanni, L. (1989). The labeling perspective and
delinquency: An elaboration of the theory and assessment of the
evidence. Justice Quarterly, 6, 359–394.

Rounceﬁeld, P. (2003). Robert Merton-Strain theory. (http://www.
homestead.com/rounceﬁeld/ﬁles/a_soc_dev_14.htm) Retrieved
August 28, 2010.

Rubington, E., & Weinberg, M. (2002). Deviance: The interactionist

perspective. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Sagarin, E. (1975). Deviants and deviance: An introduction to the study
of disvalued people and behavior. New York: Praeger Publishers.
Spector, M., & Kitsuse, J. I. (1973). Social problems: A re-formula-

tion. Social Problems, 21(3), 145–159.

Zimbardo, P. (2007). The Lucifer effect: Understanding how good

people turn evil. New York: Random House.

Zimbardo, P. G., Haney, C., Banks, W. C., & Jaffe, D. (1973, April 8).
The mind is a formidable jailer: A Pirandellian prison.
The New York Times Magazine, Section 6, pp. 38, ff.

Asperger Syndrome

MARC WOODBURY-SMITH
Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Neuroscience and Pediatrics, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada

Overview
Asperger Syndrome (AS) is the term used to describe
individuals who have qualitative impairments of recip-
rocal social interaction in association with rigid and
ritualistic patterns of behavior, including a tendency to
circumscribed patterns of interest, of developmental
onset. The term “Asperger Syndrome” was coined by
Lorna Wing in 1981 (Wing 1981) in recognition of the
similarities in presentation between a group of children
and young adults that she had clinically characterized
and those children who had been described by Hans
Asperger in 1944 (Asperger 1944) as having “autistic
psychopathy” (or in translation, “autistic personality
disorder,” Asperger 1944 translated in Frith 1991).
Since Wing’s paper, interest in Asperger Syndrome
has increased enormously, as attested by the fact that
over 1,000 publications have been devoted to it,

and following its
inclusion in both
subsequent
ICD-10 (International Classiﬁcation of Diseases,
Volume 10, WHO 1992) and DSM-IV (Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Volume
IV, APA 1994, where it is referred to as Asperger’s
Disorder) it is used increasingly as a diagnostic label.

In Wing’s (1981) and subsequent publications, the
similarities to another developmental disorder, “infan-
tile autism,” ﬁrst described by Leo Kanner in 1943
(Kanner 1943), have been highlighted. At the time of
publication of Wing’s paper, infantile autism was already
an established diagnosis, and, while Asperger believed
that there were some essential differences between
Kanner’s autism and his “autistic psychopathy,” any
such differences have since been de-emphasized such
that Asperger Syndrome and autism are now conceptu-
alized as forming a spectrum of disorders, the “autism
spectrum disorders” (ASDs). This relationship is far
from universally accepted, and a signiﬁcant number of
articles continue to be published attempting to under-
stand the relationship between these two disorders.
The discussion of Asperger Syndrome begins with
a consideration of this literature, before describing its
clinical features and the wider considerations such as its
epidemiology, etiology, management, and prognosis.

Conceptual Issues
In 1944, Hans Asperger, a pediatrician working in
Vienna, described four boys aged between 6 and 11
years who all presented with a similar pattern of
strengths and vulnerabilities (Asperger 1944 translated
in Frith 1991). Most notably, although they were cog-
nitively and verbally reasonably high functioning, they
all exhibited severe difﬁculties interacting socially with
others. Their interactions tended to be one sided, and
they would give long-winded accounts on topics that
represented areas of special interest to them, without
appreciating the nonverbal cues given by their interloc-
utor. The interests that they would talk about tended to
be precocious, the pursuit of which would occupy
much of their time to the detriment of social interac-
tion and everyday functional adaptive skills. Asperger
coined the term “autistic psychopathy” after Bleuler
(for a discussion of Bleuler’s concept of “autism” see
Kuhn and Cahn 2004), who used this term to describe
the severe egocentrism seen in schizophrenia.

Over the next 4 decades, the wider English-speaking
scientiﬁc community failed to recognize this syndrome,

176 A Asperger Syndrome

until, in 1981, Lorna Wing described 34 children and
adults who presented in a similar way to those
described by Asperger (Wing 1981). She coined the
term Asperger Syndrome, and, although many of the
features she described were the same, she did make
a number of modiﬁcations. Notably, while Asperger
did not feel that the condition could be recognized
prior to the age of 3 years, Wing suggested a number
of socio-communicative impairments might be evident
as early as the ﬁrst 24 months of life. In doing so, she
drew parallels with another developmental syndrome,
namely infantile autism. This developmental syndrome
had been described 1 year prior to Asperger’s by Leo
Kanner. In his paper on “autistic disturbances of
affective contact,” he described 11 mostly preschool
children with poor or absent social relatedness associ-
ated with profound communication impairments and
resistance to changes in their environments. However,
unlike Asperger’s cases, Kanner’s children were cogni-
tively less able and either mute or profoundly limited in
the
even basic communication skills. Nonetheless,
marked similarities between the two, as highlighted by
Wing (1981), has subsequently resulted in the two
being conceptualized as forming an “autism spectrum
of disorders” (ASDs).

While Kanner’s autism was ﬁrst operationalized
and included in third edition of the DSM and the
ninth volume of the ICD, it was not until the subse-
quent edition of both of these diagnostic manuals that
the syndrome described by Asperger was fully recog-
nized. Nonetheless, following Wing’s 1981 paper, clini-
cians, eager to diagnose the syndrome and study it
further, made attempts to provide formal criteria by
which it could be diagnosed. However, the more widely
recognized of these, most notably those of Gillberg
(Gillberg and Gillberg 1989) and Tantam (Tantam
1988), appeared to be based primarily on characteris-
tics described by Wing rather than Asperger. Moreover,
yet other clinicians tended to use the term “Asperger
Syndrome” to describe “milder” cases of autism
(Szatmari et al. 1989), or use to term synonymously
with Pervasive Developmental Disorder Not Otherwise
Speciﬁed (PDDNOS, Towbin 2005). This DSM-IV
term, similar to ICD-10’s “atypical autism,” refers to
subthreshold cases of autism spectrum disorders.

With the

inclusion of Asperger
subsequent
Syndrome in the ICD-10 and DSM-IV,
the core
criteria were operationalized, alleviating some of the

inconsistencies and at last allowing clinicians and
to have a benchmark for diagnosis.
researchers
Purposefully avoiding nosologic heterogeneity,
the
ICD-10 and later DSM-IV both adopted the same set
of criteria. In particular, drawing on Wing’s conceptu-
alization, the core diagnostic impairments included
qualitative impairments of social interaction (as for
autism) and restricted and repetitive stereotyped
patterns of behavior (as for autism). Also included in
the deﬁnition was the requirement for no history of
signiﬁcant delay in spoken language, and self-help and
adaptive behavior at a level consistent with normal
development. In addition to this “onset rule” was the
“hierarchy rule,” whereby if an individual met the diag-
nosis for autism, that should take precedence. Of note,
both systems did not include the need for any speciﬁc
communication disorder, even though Asperger, and
later Wing and others, all identiﬁed a characteristic
pattern of communication impairments.

Since achieving nosological status, the concept of
Asperger Syndrome has continued to be plagued by
some of the old confusions and controversies. Perhaps
most strikingly, a huge body of scientiﬁc literature
has been devoted to understanding the relationship
between Kanner’s autism vis-a`-vis Asperger Syndrome,
but the similar diagnostic criteria used for both con-
founds any investigation to establish external validity,
and therefore most research to date is difﬁcult to inter-
pret because of the tautological issues that undermine
its conclusions (Klin et al. 2005). Nonetheless, some
signiﬁcant group differences have been found, notably
with AS subjects having relatively higher Verbal IQ
(VIQ) scores than Performance IQ (PIQ), with the
reverse pattern among those with High Functioning
Autism (HFA) (see Klin et al. 2005 for a detailed
discussion).

Other studies examining the external validity of AS
vis-a`-vis HFA have been published, but the results are
far from conclusive (discussed in Klin et al. 2005). It is
likely that these differences between research studies
may be, in part at least, a result of the methodologies
used, with broad criteria failing to identify differences,
whereas more narrow criteria being more successful at
identifying differences. Until more robust data are
available, which can measure differences independent
on the criteria used to assign group membership, it is
difﬁcult to draw any conclusions. For example, it may
be that the impairments of communication and/or

Asperger Syndrome A 177

A

motor control represent a core deﬁning feature of AS,
and may form the basis of distinguishing it as a unique
orthogonal dimension of social disability. Their de-
emphasis is unfortunate, and it is anticipated that in
subsequent revisions of the ICD and DSM manuals
its validity
they may either be reintroduced or,
remaining doubtful, Asperger Syndrome may be
dropped altogether.

Another controversy has focused on whether it is
possible to make a diagnosis of AS given the onset and
precedence rules. Some have argued that as a result of
these rules making a diagnosis is a near impossibility,
although research has not consistently supported
this view (Woodbury-Smith et al. 2005). Indeed, a
reanalysis of the cases originally seen by Asperger also
demonstrated that the majority would remain in the AS
category (Hippler and Klicpera 2003).

These issues notwithstanding, another area of con-
fusion has been with the relationship between Asperger
Syndrome and a number of other labels that have
emerged from different clinical specialisms to describe
individuals with a primary disturbance of social inter-
action, such as Nonverbal Learning Disability (NLD)
from neuropsychology, semantic–pragmatic disorder
from psycholinguistics, and schizoid disorder of child-
hood from psychiatry. A full discussion of this is
beyond the scope of this essay, but certain points of
similarity and difference between each of these and
Asperger Syndrome can be made. First, schizoid
personality of childhood, as described by Wolff and
colleagues, is also characterized by a primary social
impairment and marked abnormalities of empathy,
is
but the outcome for individuals with this label
signiﬁcantly better than among those with AS (Wolff
2000). Moreover, the relationship between schizoid
personality of childhood and schizophrenia, discussed
below, is stronger than it is for AS (Wolff 2000). It may
be that schizoid disorder of childhood forms part of the
“schizophrenia spectrum of disorders,” in which case
ASDs and schizophrenias are likely to have overlapping
genetic risk, due to single genes of major effect
(Kilpinen et al. 2008), or perhaps at the level of some
shared common genetic variants.

Secondly, NLD, which refers to a pattern of neuro-
psychological strengths in the verbal domains relative
to vulnerabilities in the nonverbal domains, is also
associated with difﬁculties in social interaction as well
as a number of other cognitive difﬁculties (Rourke and

Tsatsanis 2000). Strikingly, research has identiﬁed that
many cases with AS will show a proﬁle of “NLD” on
standardized tests of general
intelligence, but such
a relationship is far from universal (Klin et al. 2005).
And ﬁnally, in semantic–pragmatic disorder, individ-
uals have preserved formal language skills, but their
everyday use, in terms of semantics and pragmatics, is
impaired (Bishop 1989). The focus in this disorder is
on pragmatics of communication impairment as the
primary impairment, and again its relationship to AS
remains unclear. Until the relationship between these
two disorders and AS is more fully understood, and
while they remain absent from the ICD-10 or DSM-IV,
a diagnosis of autism or Asperger Syndrome should
always be given if an individual meets the diagnostic
criteria for either of these disorders. One important
reason for this is that accessing services is dependent
on diagnostic category, and so recognized labels should
be used where possible.

Assessment
The clinical assessment for Asperger’s, as with any of
the other ASDs, requires both an informant-based his-
tory as well as direct observation and interaction with
the child. The informant needs to be a person who
knew the individual during their formative years and
can thereby provide a detailed developmental history.
The semi-structured Autism Diagnostic Interview-
Revised (ADI-R, Lord et al. 1994) can facilitate the
gathering of information, but in itself merely approxi-
mates good clinical judgment. The ADI-R does not
have an algorithm for AS speciﬁcally, and so therefore
some interpretation of the scores obtained is required.
Conversely, another semi-structured interview,
the
Diagnostic Interview for Social and Communication
Disorder (DISCO) (Wing et al. 2002), does contain an
algorithm, but in other respects is very similar to the
ADI-R. There are no pathognomonic signs or symp-
toms and no laboratory investigations that facilitate the
diagnostic process. Being a syndrome, it is diagnosed
according to a threshold number of symptoms in the
key diagnostic domains, and in accordance also with
speciﬁc exclusion criteria. As discussed previously,
diagnosis is based on demonstration of impairments
in the domains of social interaction and communica-
tion, and ritualistic and repetitive patterns of behavior.
It should be noted that the symptoms are the same
as those for autism, yet there is no requirement for any

178 A Asperger Syndrome

impairments in the communication domain, and,
unlike autistic disorder, there should be no develop-
mental abnormality during the ﬁrst 3 years. Indeed,
diagnosis should be deferred until it is certain that
language has developed normally (in simple terms,
the acquisition of phrase speech before 36 months).
IQ also needs to be in the normal range (IQ > 70).
Although there are no communication items in the
diagnostic criteria, abnormalities are often seen in the
volume, rate, and prosody of speech. Individuals with
AS may speak in a loud, monotone voice, or in staccato
like explosive bursts that are difﬁcult to follow.

The diagnostic assessment should also include
a screen to rule out medical, genetic, and psychiatric
illness. As will become apparent later in this essay, the
prevalence of mental health problems among individ-
uals with Asperger Syndrome is signiﬁcant, and not
always straightforward to diagnose. There are no
recommended laboratory or routine genetic tests,
unless the history indicates a speciﬁc reason for doing
so. For example, a history of seizure-like episodes
would be an indication for sleep deprived video telem-
etry, and dysmorphology or associated medical prob-
lems would prompt a referral to medical genetics.
Neuropsychological assessments may be indicated to
identify particular cognitive strengths and vulnerabil-
ities to aid in management planning. In addition, it is
usual to obtain a measure of adaptive function to
in everyday
determine strengths and weaknesses
functioning.

In addition to the informant interview, it is also
important to observe the children directly, and interact
with them to assess their social and communication
skills, including their use of eye-to-eye contact, con-
ventional gestures, play preferences, and joint attention
skills as well as their speech, socio-emotional reciproc-
ity, and information regarding their interests and
friendships. This can be facilitated using the Autism
Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS-G, Lord et al.
2000), which structures the interaction and consists of
four modules, the choice of which is guided by the child
(or adults) level of language and intellectual function-
ing. The diagnostic algorithm is not speciﬁc for
Asperger’s, but again, it should only be used to com-
plement the clinical assessment rather than diagnosti-
cally in an absolute sense.

Much attention has been focused on early screening
for ASDs, as evidence points toward early intervention

improving outcome (Rogers and Vismara 2008).
Certain early signs, such as failure to use eye contact
or to share positive emotion, reduced or atypical play,
and repetitive motor movements at 12–18 months,
have been described as predicting the subsequent devel-
opment of autism (Zwaigenbaum et al. 2009), although
most of these early abnormalities are likely to be absent
in children who go on to develop Asperger Syndrome
(simply by deﬁnition, according to the “onset rule”).
Notwithstanding this inference, parents of children
with AS will often retrospectively identify some early
“clues,” although these are unlikely to be of the severity
seen in autism, and, therefore, early screening initia-
tives may be less likely to pick up AS cases. It is certainly
true that AS is not diagnosed until later than autism
(Howlin and Asgharian 1999), and this is likely to
reﬂect the subtlety of presentation in the early years.
However, it is also unclear whether the early interven-
tion programs, generally Applied Behavior Analysis
(ABA) in nature, will beneﬁt those who are higher
functioning.

There are a number of screening instruments that
can be used among children for whom a diagnosis is
suspected (see Woodbury-Smith and Volkmar 2009),
including the Autism Screening Questionnaire (ASQ),
and the Autism Quotient (AQ). There are also other
relatively brief measures purported to be more useful
in the diagnostic process,
including the Asperger
Syndrome Diagnostic Scale (ASDS), Gilliam Asperger
Diagnostic Scale (GADS), and Asperger Syndrome
Diagnostic Interview (ASDI). Most of these have data
on validity and reliability and are commercially
available.

Epidemiology
The exact prevalence of Asperger Syndrome is unclear.
Many studies have measured the prevalence of ASDs,
but failed to speciﬁcally look at the prevalence of
Asperger Syndrome. A meta-analysis of epidemiologic
studies of the prevalence of all autism spectrum disor-
ders (Fombonne 2009) has provided an estimate of
60/10,000, making ASD one of the most frequent child-
hood neurodevelopmental disorders. Median preva-
lence for autistic disorder is 20/10,000 and for AS is
6/10,000. It should also be noted that approximately
25% of individuals with ASDs function intellectually in
the normal range, from which it can be estimated that
the median prevalence for all higher-functioning

Asperger Syndrome A 179

A

autism spectrum disorders is approximately 14/10,000,
thereby indicating that the prevalence of HFA and AS
are roughly equal.

In terms of gender ratio, males are affected four
times more commonly than females when all ASDs
are considered, but this ratio changes across the spec-
trum of
intelligence. Among those who are most
impaired, the ratio approximates unity, while among
the higher-functioning individuals the ratio increases
to as many as 9:1, favoring males.

It is important to point out that much of the epi-
demiological data are from Western countries, and so
little is known about the prevalence of AS worldwide.

Etiology
Much of the research literature has focused on investi-
gating the etiology of autism as a spectrum of disorders,
and, as such, research on the etiology of Asperger
syndrome as an entity in its own right is relatively
scant. Considered as part of the autism spectrum, how-
ever, there is now a vast knowledgebase concerning its
genetic basis and the pathophysiological factors medi-
ating the clinical syndrome.

Genetics
The twin and family studies from the 1970s and the
1980s provided the ﬁrst clues to the strongly genetic
basis for ASDs, with twin studies leading to heritability
estimates in the region of 90% (for a discussion see
Rutter 2005). In support of overlap between AS and
other autistic disorders, family studies of AS probands
have found a higher incidence of AS and autism in ﬁrst-
degree relatives, and families of autism probands have
similarly found higher rates of both AS and autism in
ﬁrst-degree relatives (Ghaziuddin 2005; Volkmar et al.
1998). At a genetic level at least, therefore, there seems
to be evidence of overlapping genes responsible for the
ASDs. Subsequent efforts have been focused on linkage
methods to identify regions harboring susceptibility,
and association studies to test for candidacy of key
genes. Although no candidate genes have been identi-
ﬁed, linkage to a number of regions has been demon-
strated (for review see Abrahams and Geschwind
2008).

Only one study has performed a genomewide scan
on AS probands (Ylisaukko-oja et al. 2004). Seventeen
Finnish families ascertained for Asperger Syndrome
with a strictly deﬁned phenotype were examined for

evidence of genetic linkage. Evidence for linkage was
highest on chromosome 1q21-q22 (maximum 2-point
lod score of 3.58), followed by chromosome 3p24-p14
(maximum 2-point lod score of 2.50), and chromo-
some 13q31-q33 (maximum 2-point lod score of 1.59).
This same group also identiﬁed association between AS
and DISC1 (Kilpinen et al. 2008). The DISC1 gene is of
particular interest as it is also associated with schizo-
phrenia, which perhaps might explain the increased
rates of schizophrenia seen in Wolff ’s series of cases
discussed above.

More recent studies have focused on identifying
Copy Number Variants (CNVs) among ASD samples,
and many de novo and rare inherited CNVs have been
demonstrated (Marshall et al. 2008). However, the pat-
tern of genetics seems to support the possibility that
these CNVs are more common among “syndromal”
cases of autism (i.e., those cases with associated medical
problems and congenital birth defects), many of whom
will have comorbid intellectual impairment and there-
fore will not meet the diagnostic criteria for Asperger
Syndrome (Marshall et al. 2008). A theory is emerging,
in which simplex nonfamilial cases of ASD are the
result of de novo or rare inherited CNVs, and tend to
be “syndromal” in presentation, whereas multiplex
cases are associated with higher familiality, and are
due to common variants (Virkud et al. 2009).

Environmental
Much has been written on the alleged association
between MMR and Thimerosal and autism. The
research has consistently found an absence of any rela-
tionship, and therefore it seems reasonable to conclude
that there is no relationship between either of these
disorders and the development of an ASD, including
Asperger’s (DeStefano 2007). There is no currently
evidence of a role for any other environmental risk
factor and the subsequent development of an ASD.

Pathophysiology
The mechanism by which the genetic and environmen-
tal risk factors mediate the clinical presentation in
ASDs is not well understood. Nonetheless, there has
been a number of consistent neuropsychological and
neuroimaging ﬁndings that help to explain some of
AS’s clinical manifestations.
The neuropsychological

literature has identiﬁed
a consistent pattern of weakness in certain cognitive

180 A Asperger Syndrome

domains across the autism spectrum, although with
some evidence of group differences when high
functioning cases of autism are compared with AS.
Summarizing the major ﬁndings (see Klin et al. 2005
for a detailed discussion), while individuals with
autism of all abilities seem to have metalizing difﬁcul-
ties, this ﬁnding is less consistent among those with AS
independent of intellectual ability. Similarly, verbal
memory appears to differentiate between autism and
AS cases. In contrast, executive function appears to be
impaired across the spectrum. Finally, as discussed
some evidence of VIQ/PIQ
previously,
differences between autism and AS. However,
it
remains unclear how these neuropsychological ﬁndings
translate into the everyday clinical vulnerabilities.

there is

A number of studies have also examined the autism
spectrum using MRI or CT (Schultz et al. 2000;
Williams and Minshew 2007). Unfortunately, most of
these studies have collapsed samples into “ASDs,” and
so the extent to which those who meet criteria for
Asperger Syndrome perform similar to their peers
with autism is uncertain. Nonetheless, several case
studies or small case series have revealed temporal
lobe pathology, occipital hypoperfusion, and abnor-
malities in other cortical areas. More recent ﬁndings
include subcortical abnormalities (Hardan et al. 2008),
and evidence that children with HFA had smaller gray
matter volumes
in predominantly fronto-pallidal
regions, while children with Asperger’s had less gray
matter in mainly bilateral caudate and left thalamus,
again suggesting evidence for HFA/AS distinction
(McAlonan et al. 2008).

Functional neuroimaging has also been conducted
among individuals with ASDs, in which brain function
is measured during the performance of social experi-
mental paradigms (Schultz et al. 2000; Williams and
Minshew 2007). The studies that included people with
AS demonstrated, along with their autism counter-
parts, abnormal patterns of “activation” in the inferior
temporal sulcus (the fusiform face area), areas of
frontal dysactivation during the performance of
neuropsychological tests, and functional integration
abnormalities in the amygdala and parahippocampal
gyrus.

Finally, while there are no postmortem studies of
individuals speciﬁcally with AS, a small number have
examined more impaired individuals with ASDs and
demonstrated hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, and

reduced numbers in the cerebellar Purkinje cell layer,
although the signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings is far from
clear (Kemper and Bauman 2002).

Several challenges remain before a better under-
standing of brain-behavior mechanisms is achieved.
First, studies of just AS probands need to be conducted
and replicated rather than simply assuming that the
ﬁndings among individuals with ASDs are directly
applicable to those with AS. Secondly, experimental
paradigms that are more ecologically valid need to be
devised and included in studies. And ﬁnally, larger
sample sizes need to be studied through multisite
collaboration.

Theoretical Perspectives on Asperger
Syndrome
Theoretical models concerning the ASDs have been put
forward over the years, but no one model has been able
to explain the complete clinical phenotype in terms of
an overriding theory. For example, following the early
theory of mind studies, a fundamental biological
disorder of the “theory of mind mechanism” was
suggested (Baron-Cohen et al. 1985). Unfortunately,
neither did this theory explain all the clinical features,
nor was it applicable to those higher-functioning indi-
viduals, many of whom had AS and most of whom were
not impaired on the domain of theory of mind.
Another early theory was that of “absent central coher-
ence,” in which it was argued that people with ASDs
lacked a biologically based ability to perceive a gestalt,
instead viewing the world in terms of its parts rather
than its “whole” (Happe 2005). This theory, too, failed
to make sense of the complete phenotype.

A more recent set of papers has considered ASDs as
resulting from a disturbance of neural connectivity,
either as a surfeit or as a deﬁcit (Belmonte et al.
2004). The idea of connectivity refers to the “signal to
noise” ratio of incoming sensory stimuli. It is too soon
to draw any conclusions regarding the applicability of
this theory, not least because of the ongoing confusion
with terminology (including differentiating local from
global connectivity), but this may prove to be a useful
theoretical basis on which to draw together the diverse
autism literature (Belmonte et al. 2004).

One ﬁnal theory warrants special attention due to
its particular relevance to those who are higher func-
tioning, and this is the “extreme male brain” theory
of autism (Baron-Cohen 2005, 2009). This theory

postulates that autism represents an extreme of the
male brain, whereby traits more common among
males, such as relatively poor socio-empathic reciproc-
ity associated with relative strengths in the domain of
systemizing, are exaggerated among those with ASDs.
This idea is certainly supported by the neuropsycho-
logical
literature (Baron-Cohen 2009), but further
research is required.

Finally, an intriguing body of work has used eye-
tracking technology to attempt to see and measure
what a person with autism focuses on in their environ-
ment. In a sophisticated set of studies, the focus of gaze
among infants and adults with autism was measured
while they were watching socially loaded stimuli (Klin
et al. 2005). Strikingly, while normal controls focused
on the emotionally laden eye region among the pro-
tagonists in the scene, the ASD individuals instead
looked at mouths and other environmental stimuli.
An “enactive mind” theory is postulated, which takes
into consideration the motivational process of attend-
ing to social stimuli, and, crucially, the interaction
between an individual and his or her environment.
Moreover, it is suggested that, as a consequence, brain
development and its “specialization” is inﬂuenced by
these experiences.

Comorbidity
The comorbidity among those with ASDs is extremely
high for both other developmental disorders, such as
tic disorders (Ringman and Jankovic 2000) and Atten-
tion Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) (Sturm
et al. 2004), and also more speciﬁc mental health prob-
lems, such as depression and anxiety (Woodbury-
Smith and Volkmar 2009). Among those who are
higher functioning, many of whom will meet the
criteria for AS, the prevalence of depression and anxiety
disorders appears to be signiﬁcantly higher than in the
general population, with the highest rates of depression
and anxiety in adolescents and young adults. This is
presumably due to the increased social demands asso-
ciated with these ages. The prevalence of psychotic and
bipolar disorders appears to be low, and similar ﬁnd-
ings have been shown across the autism spectrum.
Interestingly, however, one study found a signiﬁcant
number of people with ASDs, both higher and lower
functioning, exhibiting catatonia, although the signiﬁ-
cance of this is uncertain (Wing and Shah 2000).
Another study has suggested a genetic relationship

Asperger Syndrome A 181

between ASDs and bipolar disorder, although there is
not strong evidence in favor of this from the most
recent clinical and genetic studies.

A

emotions,

verbalizing

Diagnosing anxiety and depressive disorders is
relatively straightforward among those who are higher
functioning, and standard criteria as set out in ICD and
DSM should be adhered to as
far as possible.
Some verbal higher-functioning individuals may have
difﬁculty
and such
their
“alexithymia” has been demonstrated to be a possible
endophenotype for ASDs (Szatmari et al. 2008). There-
fore, the clinician must pay close attention to other
symptomatology in such individuals that may indicate
possible mental disorder. For example, any change in
behavior in association with life events might raise the
suspicion. Moreover, relatively minor life events may
be of particular signiﬁcance to people with ASDs and so
changes in behavior following, for example, disruption
of routines or changes in the environment, must be
given particular attention.

A particular challenge is with the diagnosis of
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), even among
those who are higher functioning and verbal. Ritualis-
tic and repetitive patterns of behavior and resistance to
change in routine and environment form an integral
part of the autism spectrum, and so differentiating
these from OCD symptomatology needs a special
degree of expertise. The differentiation is ultimately
based upon whether the symptoms observed are
“egosyntonic” (as would be seen in ASDs), or
“egodystonic” (as would be seen in OCDs), but such
a differentiation is almost never possible in younger
children and those of any age who are nonverbal. In
such cases, diagnosis will be based on a combination of
“index of suspicion” combined with response to appro-
priate psychopharmacological management (discussed
below).

Management
Although there is no treatment that will “cure” AS,
there are a number of behavioral and other psycholog-
ical techniques that are likely to have a positive impact
on the developmental trajectory of the disorder, and
certain psychopharmacological options for the man-
agement of behavioral disorders and mental health
problems. Among individuals who are higher function-
ing, the aim should be to engender social inclusion,
living
facilitate the developmental of

independent

182 A Asperger Syndrome

skills, and manage behavior and mental health comor-
bidity. Unfortunately, there has been little research
focusing on the effectiveness of treatment programs
for higher-functioning individuals with ASDs, but
a number of recommendations can be made (for
a detailed discussion of treatment see, e.g., Klin and
Volkmar 2000; Woodbury-Smith and Volkmar 2009).

Psychological Interventions
Ideally, children with AS should be integrated with
their peers, from whom they will be able to learn social
and communicative skills, and with whom they can
practice these skills. Such a process can be facilitated
by developing a peer support system, either through
“buddying,” or developing a “circle of
friends”
(Woodbury-Smith and Volkmar 2009). Additional
explicit social training can also be useful, particularly
in the form of social skills groups, whereby skills can be
taught in a group setting. Such a group may involve
peer modeling and role-play, including the use of social
stories (Quirmbach et al. 2009). There is emerging
evidence of the effectiveness of such groups (Tse et al.
2007). In addition, there are commercially available
computer packages, such as Mind Reading: An Interac-
tive Guide to Human Emotions (Golan and Baron-
Cohen 2006),
that some children may be more
responsive too. One issue with training such as this,
though, is ensuring that the skills taught are generalized
and put into practice. Ongoing support and supervi-
sion is often required for several months after the group
has ﬁnished to achieve this.

Consideration also needs to be given to the educa-
tional context. Children with AS, although cognitively
able, often have a scatter of scores, such that although
general intelligence may be in the normal range, other
skills, such as processing speed or working memory,
may be disproportionately impaired and impact on
performance. Because of this, it is often necessary for
children with AS to be allowed extra time to complete
tasks. Similarly, some individuals with AS may have
a pattern of nonverbal learning disability, with rela-
tively preserved language and rote verbal memory skills
masking underlying deﬁcits in visuospatial perception,
attention, and memory. Such children are likely to
beneﬁt from explicit verbal-based information taught
in a “parts to whole” manner, whereby instructions are
presented in a concrete and sequenced manner. It is
therefore often necessary for children with a diagnosis

of AS to undergo detailed psychoeducational assess-
ment to identify their pattern of strengths and vulner-
abilities to inform strategies that will form part of an
Individualized Education Plan (IEP).

Individuals with AS will often show a relative
impairment of their adaptive skills, such that attending
to their daily living and self care requirements is only
completed as a result of prompting by a parental ﬁgure,
or as part of highly structured routine. An absence of
skills in this area is therefore often most noticeable
when the person transitions to independent living,
and therefore anticipating such difﬁculties and provid-
ing the necessary intervention and support to practice
these skills in a different setting is important.

Psychological interventions may also be necessary
for those individuals who present with challenging
behaviors or mental health problems. The principles
of applied behavior analysis, which is based on operant
conditioning, can be useful in such situations, whereby
positive reinforcement contingencies are associated
thereby allowing behavior
with certain behaviors,
to be molded in a positive fashion. Alternatively, if
problematic behaviors occur in particular contexts,
mutually agreed problem-solving strategies can be
explicitly taught as a “social script.” Finally, cognitive-
behavior strategies may also be useful for individuals
with anxiety and mood disorders (Wood et al. 2009).
It is particularly important not to assume that the
individual will be able to learn cognitive strategies in
a similar way to their neurotypical peers, and therefore
special attention will need to be given to their neuro-
psychological proﬁle.

Psychopharmacological Interventions
There is no medication that modiﬁes the core pheno-
typic features or the course of the disorder. However,
medication is indicated for the treatment of (i) irrita-
bility that may arise as a direct consequence of the
disorder, (ii) ritualistic patterns of behavior, or (iii)
comorbid mental health problems. In general, studies
examining the efﬁcacy and safety proﬁle of medication
use among individuals with AS is rather limited, but it
seems reasonable to assume that the response may be
similar to their general population peers. Importantly,
however, individuals with ASDs may be more sensitive
to medication and it is therefore sensible to start with
low doses and titrate slowly, carefully monitoring both
desired effects and for the emergence of unwanted

effects. Unless indicated, the research discussed in the
following sections includes subjects with ASDs, and
none has speciﬁcally focused on effectiveness among
those with AS.

Symptomatology Arising from the
Core Phenotype
Irritability: The atypical antipsychotic, risperidone, is
licensed for the management of “irritability” in autism,
with support for its effectiveness and safety derived
from large double-blind placebo-controlled studies
(Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology
[RUPP] 2002). Although “irritability” is a nonspeciﬁc
term, it is derived from the Aberrant Behavior Check-
list (ABC), and, as a symptom, is often seen among
children and adults with ASDs. It is important that
before initiating any treatment, an understanding of
the environmental triggers is sought and modiﬁed
where possible. Medication should only be used
where such modiﬁcation has not had any positive
impact, or, alternatively, where its use will facilitate
the use of psychological interventions. Certain stimuli,
such as social overstimulation, boredom, disruption to
routine, and communication breakdown are common
causes of irritability. However, the possibility of mental
illness
should also be considered for a person
presenting with irritability, and so detailed psychiatric
evaluation is indicated in a person with an ASD
presenting with irritability.

In

one

controlled

Ritualistic behavior: Rigidity and ritualistic patterns
of behavior are often seen in AS and form an integral
feature of the disorder. While the SSRIs are effective for
the management of ritualistic behavior that forms part
of a diagnosis of OCD, their efﬁcacy for such symptoms
in ASDs is less clear (Woodbury-Smith and Volkmar
2009).
study,
randomized
ﬂuvoxamine was shown to be superior to placebo in
reducing repetitive behaviors among adults (McDougle
et al. 1996). However,
trial of
ﬂuvoxamine among children, several experienced seri-
ous side effects, including hyperactivity and irritability
(Martin et al. 2003). It was shown that such symptoms
could be avoided with a lower starting dose and slower
titration. Another randomized controlled study showed
ﬂuoxetine had superior efﬁcacy compared with placebo
in treating repetitive behaviors among children with
ASDs, with no signiﬁcant
reported
(Hollander et al. 2005). Noteworthy also is the fact

in an open-label

effects

side

Asperger Syndrome A 183

A

that the tricyclic antidepressant clomipramine has also
been shown to be effective in two randomized controlled
studies (Gordon et al. 1993; McDougle et al. 1992).

Inattention/motor restlessness: Symptoms of inat-
tention and motor restlessness and/or hyperactivity
are also seen among children and adults with ASDs.
There is now emerging evidence for the effectiveness
and safety of the psychostimulant methylphenidate
(Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology
2005; Jahromi et al. 2009), but the risk of side effects,
including stereotypies, tics, and social withdrawal,
appears to be relatively high in this group (Handen
et al. 2000).

Comorbid Mental Illness
There are no clinical trials at the time of writing that
speciﬁcally evaluate the effectiveness of standard anti-
depressant and anxiolytic psychopharmacology among
those with Asperger Syndrome. There is no reason to
believe that the efﬁcacy of these agents would be any
less than in the general population, and so until speciﬁc
guidelines are available, cautious prescribing is appro-
priate. There is some evidence, albeit from small open-
label studies, for the effectiveness of sertraline and
citalopram for symptoms of anxiety among adolescents
with ASDs, and for clomipramine for the treatment of
“obsessive-compulsive symptoms” (Woodbury-Smith
and Volkmar 2009).

Outcome
There is now evidence that as many as 20% “grow out”
of their disorder, failing to meet the diagnostic criteria
in adulthood, with many others showing signiﬁcant
improvement of their symptoms (Seltzer et al. 2003).
In contrast, however,
investigating social
adjustment, in terms of employment, opportunities,
and friendship, have indicated that signiﬁcant social
exclusion and poor quality of life are prevalent among
adults with Asperger Syndrome (Tantam 2003). The
challenge now is to identify the factors that predict
outcome among individuals with AS, and to develop
strategies to facilitate better social inclusion.

studies

Asperger Syndrome and the Criminal
Justice System
Since the widespread recognition of Asperger’s in the
1980s, a small yet signiﬁcant number of publications
have been concerned with the apparent association

184 A Asperger Syndrome

between AS and problematic behaviors,
including
behavior of an unlawful and/or antisocial nature (Dein
and Woodbury-Smith 2010). Indeed, Asperger himself
had described antisocial behavior and “autistic acts of
malice” among his cases, but this feature was discarded
from subsequent descriptions of the core features.
Nonetheless, Wing too described “bizarre antisocial
acts” (Wing 1981, p. 116), and since then case studies
have continued to be published that describe individ-
uals with AS who have engaged in unlawful behaviors.
Although the exact prevalence of such behavior is
unknown, it is certainly rare in community samples,
and there appears to be no pattern to the type of offense
(Dein and Woodbury-Smith 2010). It is possible that
among some, the risk is the consequence of comorbid-
ity for antisocial personality disorder, although in some
cases
the pursuit of
a circumscribed interest (Dein and Woodbury-Smith
2010). It is important not to overinﬂate this potential
risk, but, on the other hand, it is vital to recognize this
as a potential complication to ensure that individuals
with AS are given the necessary support as they nego-
tiate the criminal justice system (Dein and Woodbury-
Smith 2010).

it may be the result of

Future Directions
At this stage, the future of Asperger Syndrome as
a clinical entity is under close scrutiny as revisions of
the DSM are considered. Research is crucially needed,
therefore, that establishes its external validity without
limitations that have characterized
the tautological
much of
facilitate
the research so far. This will
a growing understanding of its core features and rela-
tionships to other disorders, including pervasive devel-
opmental disorders and the schizophrenia spectrum.
Finally, further expertise is required in the diagnosis
and management of complications of AS, including
mental health comorbidity, and more wider strategies
are required to facilitate better
inclusion
throughout the life span.

social

Cross-References
▶ Autism Spectrum Disorders

References
Abrahams, B. S., & Geschwind, D. H. (2008). Advances in autism
genetics: On the threshold of a new neurobiology. Nature
Reviews. Genetics, 9(5), 341–355.

American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1994). DSM-IV diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington:
American Psychiatric Association.

Asperger, H. (1944). Die “autistichen Psychopathen” im Kindersalter.
Archive fur psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten, 117, 76–136.
Baron-Cohen, S. (2005). Testing the extreme male brain (EMB)
theory of autism: Let the data speak for themselves. Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry, 10(1), 77–81.

Baron-Cohen, S. (2009). Autism: The empathizing–systemizing (E–S)
theory. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1156, 68–80.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the autistic

child have a “theory of mind”? Cognition, 21(1), 37–46.

Belmonte, M. K., Cook, E. H., Jr., Anderson, G. M., Rubenstein, J. L. R.,
Greenough, W. T., Beckel-Mitchener, A., et al. (2004). Autism as a
disorder of neural information processing: Directions for research
and targets for therapy. Molecular Psychiatry, 9(7), 646–663.
Bishop, D. V. (1989). Autism, Asperger’s syndrome and semantic-
pragmatic disorder: Where are the boundaries? Special Issue:
Autism. The British Journal of Disorders of Communication,
24(2), 107–121.

Dein, K., & Woodbury-Smith, M. (2010). Asperger syndrome and
criminal behaviour. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 16, 37–43.
DeStefano, F. (2007). Vaccines and autism: Evidence does not support
a causal association. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
82(6), 756–759.

Fombonne, E. (2009). Epidemiology of pervasive developmental

disorders. Pediatric Research, 65(6), 591–598.

Frith, U. (1991). Autism and Asperger’s

syndrome. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Ghaziuddin, M. (2005). A family history study of Asperger syndrome.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 35, 177–182.
Gillberg, I. C., & Gillberg, C. (1989). Asperger syndrome – some
epidemiological considerations: A research note. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 30(4), 631–638.

Golan, O., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2006). Systemizing empathy: Teaching
adults with Asperger syndrome or high-functioning autism to
recognize complex emotions using interactive multimedia.
Developmental Psychopathology, 18(2), 591–617.

Gordon, C. T., State, R. C., Nelson, J. E., Hamburger, S. D., et al.
(1993). A double-blind comparison of clomipramine, desipra-
mine, and placebo in the treatment of autistic disorder. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 50(6), 441–447.

Handen, B., Johnson, C., & Lubetsky, M. (2000). Efﬁcacy of methyl-
phenidate among children with autism and symptoms of
attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 30(3), 245–255.

Happe, F. (2005). The weak central coherence account of autism.
In F. Volkmar, R. Paul, A. Klin, & D. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook
of autism and pervasive developmental disorders (pp. 640–649).
Hoboken: Wiley.

Hardan, A. Y., Girgis, R. R., Adams, J., Gilbert, A. R., Melhem, N. M.,
Keshavan, M. S., et al. (2008). Brief report: Abnormal association
between the thalamus and brain size in Asperger’s disorder.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 38(2), 390–394.
Hippler, K., & Klicpera, C. (2003). A retrospective analysis of the
‘autistic psychopaths’ diagnosed by

clinical case records of

Asperger Syndrome A 185

A

Hans Asperger and his team at the University Children’s Hospi-
tal, Vienna. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London – Series B: Biological Sciences, 358(1430), 291–301.
Hollander, E., Phillips, A., Chaplin, W., Zagursky, K., Novotny, S.,
Wasserman, S., et al. (2005). A placebo controlled crossover trial
of liquid ﬂuoxetine on repetitive behaviors in childhood and
adolescent autism. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30(3), 582–589.
Howlin, P., & Asgharian, A. (1999). The diagnosis of autism and
Asperger syndrome: Findings from a survey of 770 families.
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 41(12), 834–839.
Jahromi, L. B., Kasari, C. L., McCracken, J. T., Lee, L. S., Aman, M. G.,
McDougle, C. J., et al. (2009). Positive effects of methylphenidate
on social communication and self-regulation in children with
pervasive developmental disorders and hyperactivity. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 39(3), 395–404.

Kanner, L. (1943). Autistic disturbances of affective contact. The

Nervous Child, 2, 217–250.

Kemper, T. L., & Bauman, M. L. (2002). Neuropathology of infantile

autism. Molecular Psychiatry, 7(Suppl 2), S12–S13.

Kilpinen, H., Ylisaukko-Oja, T., Hennah, W., Palo, O. M., Varilo, T.,
Vanhala, R., et al. (2008). Association of DISC1 with autism and
Asperger syndrome. Molecular Psychiatry, 13(2), 187–196.
Klin, A., Jones, W., Schultz, R. T., & Volkmar, F. R. (2005). The
enactive mind from actions to cognition: Lessons from autism.
In F. R. Volkmar, A. Klin, R. Paul, & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook
of autism and pervasive developmental disorders (3rd ed., Vol. 1,
pp. 682–703). Hoboken: Wiley.

Klin, A., McPartland, J., & Volkmar, F. R. (2005). Asperger syndrome.
In F. R. Volkmar, A. Klin, R. Paul, & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook
of autism and pervasive developmental disorders (3rd ed., Vol. 1,
pp. 88–125). Hoboken: Wiley.

Klin, A., & Volkmar, F. R. (2000). Treatment and intervention guide-
lines for individuals with Asperger syndrome. In A. Klin &
F. R. Volkmar
syndrome (pp. 340–366).
New York: Guilford Press.

(Eds.), Asperger

Kuhn, R., & Cahn, C. H. (2004). Eugen Bleuler’s concepts of psycho-

pathology. History of Psychiatry, 15(59,Pt3), 361.

Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Leventhal, B. L.,
DiLavore, P. C., et al. (2000). The autism diagnostic observation
schedule – generic: A standard measure of social and communi-
cation deﬁcits associated with the spectrum of autism. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30(3), 205–223.

Lord, C., Rutter, M., & Le Couteur, A. (1994). Autism diagnostic
interview – revised: A revised version of a diagnostic interview
for caregivers of individuals with possible pervasive developmen-
tal disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
24(5), 659–685.

Marshall, C. R., Noor, A., Vincent, J. B., Lionel, A. C., Feuk, L.,
Skaug, J., et al. (2008). Structural variation of chromosomes in
autism spectrum disorder. American Journal of Human Genetics,
82(2), 477–488.

Martin, A., Koenig, K., Anderson, G. M., & Scahill, L. (2003). Low-
dose ﬂuvoxamine treatment of children and adolescents with
pervasive developmental disorders: A prospective, open-label
study. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 33(1),
77–85.

McAlonan, G. M.,

Suckling,

J., Wong, N., Cheung, V.,
Lienenkaemper, N., Cheung, C., et al. (2008). Distinct patterns
of grey matter abnormality in high-functioning autism and
Asperger’s syndrome. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
49(12), 1287–1295.

McDougle, C. J., Naylor, S. T., Cohen, D. J., Volkmar, F. R., Heninger,
G. R., & Price, L. H. (1996). A double-blind, placebo-controlled
study of ﬂuvoxamine in adults with autistic disorder (comment).
Archives of General Psychiatry, 53(11), 1001–1008.

McDougle, C. J., Price, L. H., Volkmar, F. R., Goodman, W. K., Ward-
O’Brien, D., Nielsen, J., et al. (1992). Clomipramine in autism:
Preliminary evidence of efﬁcacy (comment). Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 31(4),
746–750.

Quirmbach, L. M., Lincoln, A. J., Feinberg-Gizzo, M. J., Ingersoll, B. R.,
& Andrews, S. M. (2009). Social stories: Mechanisms of effective-
ness in increasing game play skills in children diagnosed with
autism spectrum disorder using a pretest posttest repeated
measures randomized control group design. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 39(2), 299–321.

Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism, N. (2002).
Risperidone in children with autism and serious behavioral
problems. The New England Journal of Medicine, 347, 314–321.
Research Units on pediatric Psychopharmacology. (2005). Random-
ized, controlled, crossover trial of methylphenidate in pervasive
developmental disorders with hyperactivity. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 62(11), 1266–1274.

Ringman, J. M., & Jankovic, J. (2000). Occurrence of tics in Asperger’s
syndrome and autistic disorder. Journal of Child Neurology,
15(6), 394–400.

Rogers, S. J., & Vismara, L. A. (2008). Evidence-based comprehensive
treatments for early autism. Journal of Clinical Child and Adoles-
cent Psychology, 37(1), 8–38.

Rourke, B. P., & Tsatsanis, K. D. (2000). Nonverbal learning disabil-
ities and Asperger syndrome. In A. Klin & F. R. Volkmar (Eds.),
Asperger syndrome (pp. 231–253). New York: Guilford Press.
Rutter, M. (2005). Genetic inﬂuences and autism. In F. R. Volkmar, A.
Klin, R. Paul, & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook of autism and
pervasive developmental disorders (3rd ed., Vol. 1, pp. 425–452).
Hoboken: Wiley.

Schultz, R. T., Romanski, L. M., & Tsatsanis, K. D. (2000).
Neurofunctional models of autistic disorder and Asperger
syndrome: Clues from neuroimaging. In A. Klin & F. R. Volkmar
(Eds.), Asperger syndrome (pp. 172–209). New York: Guilford
Press.

Seltzer, M. M., Krauss, M. W., Shattuck, P. T., Orsmond, G., Swe, A., &
Lord, C. (2003). The symptoms of autism spectrum disorders in
adolescence and adulthood. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 33(6), 565–581.

Sturm, H., Fernell, E., & Gillberg, C. (2004). Autism spectrum
disorders in children with normal intellectual levels: Associated
impairments and subgroups (see comment). Developmental
Medicine and Child Neurology, 46(7), 444–447.

Szatmari, P., Bartolucci, G., & Bremner, R. (1989). Asperger’s syn-
drome and autism: Comparison of early history and outcome.
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 31(6), 709–720.

186 A Assault

Szatmari, P., Georgiades, S., Duku, E., Zwaigenbaum, L., Goldberg, J.,
& Bennett, T. (2008). Alexithymia in parents of children with
autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 38(10), 1859–1865.

Tantam, D. (1988). Annotation: Asperger’s syndrome. Journal of

Zwaigenbaum, L., Bryson, S., Lord, C., Rogers, S., Carter, A.,
Carver, L., et al. (2009). Clinical assessment and management
toddlers with suspected autism spectrum disorder:
of
Insights from studies of high-risk infants. Pediatrics, 123(5),
1383–1391.

Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 29(3), 245–255.

Tantam, D. (2003). The challenge of adolescents and adults with
Asperger syndrome. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 12(1), 143–163. vii–viii.

Towbin, K. E. (2005). Pervasive developmental disorder not other-
wise speciﬁed. In F. R. Volkmar, A. Klin, R. Paul, & D. J. Cohen
(Eds.), Handbook of autism and pervasive developmental disorders
(3rd ed., Vol. 1, pp. 165–200). Hoboken: Wiley.

Tse, J., Strulovitch, J., Tagalakis, V., Meng, L., & Fombonne, E. (2007).
Social skills training for adolescents with Asperger syndrome and
high-functioning autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 37(10), 1960–1968.

Virkud, Y. V., Todd, R. D., Abbacchi, A. M., Zhang, Y., & Constantino,
J. N. (2009). Familial aggregation of quantitative autistic traits in
multiplex versus simplex autism. American Journal of Medical
Genetics. Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 150B(3), 328–334.
Volkmar, F. R., Klin, A., & Pauls, D. (1998). Nosological and genetic
aspects of Asperger syndrome. Journal of Autism and Develop-
mental Disorders, 28(5), 457–463.

Williams, D. L., & Minshew, N. J. (2007). Understanding autism and
related disorders: What has imaging taught us? Neuroimaging
Clinics of North America, 17(4), 495–509. ix.

Wing, L. (1981). Asperger’s syndrome: A clinical account. Psycholog-

ical Medicine, 11(1), 115–129.

Wing, L., Leekam, S. R., Libby, S. J., Gould, J., & Larcombe, M. (2002).
The diagnostic interview for social and communication disor-
ders: Background, inter-rater reliability and clinical use. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 43(3),
307–325.

Wing, L., & Shah, A. (2000). Catatonia in autistic spectrum disorders.

The British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 357–362.

Wolff, S. (2000). Schizoid personality in childhood and Asperger
syndrome. In A. Klin & F. R. Volkmar (Eds.), Asperger syndrome
(pp. 278–305). New York: Guilford Press.

Wood, J. J., Drahota, A., Sze, K., Har, K., Chiu, A., & Langer, D. A.
(2009). Cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety in children with
autism spectrum disorders: A randomized, controlled trial.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 50(3), 224–234.
Woodbury-Smith, M., Klin, A., & Volkmar, F. (2005). Asperger’s
syndrome: A comparison of clinical diagnoses and those made
according to the ICD-10 and DSM-IV. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 35(2), 235–240.

Woodbury-Smith, M. R., & Volkmar, F. R. (2009). Asperger
syndrome. European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 18(1),
2–11.

World Health Organization (WHO). (1992). ICD-10 international
statistical classiﬁcation of diseases and related health problems
(10th ed.). Geneva: WHO.

Ylisaukko-oja, T., Wendt, T-v., Kempas, E., Sarenius, S., Varilo, T.,
von Wendt, L., et al. (2004). Genome-wide scan for loci of
Asperger syndrome. Molecular Psychiatry, 9(2), 161–168.

Assault

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Assault can be either a crime against a person (a crim-
inal offense) or a tort (a civil offense). Popular discus-
sions as well as legal actions relating to assault, however,
typically refer to the criminal form. Although deﬁni-
tions can vary considerably, including the penalties
associated with it, assault typically involves a “simple
assault” (attempting to cause or purposely, knowingly,
or recklessly causing bodily injury to another) or an
aggravated assault (negligently causing bodily injury to
another with a deadly weapon). Particularly when
relating to adolescents, the category of sexual assault
is of signiﬁcance, as it can encompass forcible rape,
forcible sodomy, sexual assault with an object, and
forcible fondling.

In the United States, ofﬁcial crime reports reveal
simple assault to be the most common of all crimes
against persons and to be the most common crime
against adolescents (see, e.g., Rand 2009). Simple
assault constitutes 41% of all offenses against juveniles,
is the crime with the highest
and sexual assault
percentage of
juvenile victims (see Finkelhor and
Ormod 2000). Importantly, nearly half of all assaults
are committed by offenders having a domestic relation-
ship with the victim (i.e., the victim and offender are
connected by a family or romantic relationship)
(Snyder and McCurley 2008). Although ofﬁcial reports
have been criticized for having important limitations
(e.g., they rely on reports to law enforcement), they do
highlight the important point that available evidence
supports the conclusion that juveniles are more likely
to be victimized than any other age group and that
much of juveniles’ victimization involves a wide variety
of assaults.

Assimilation A 187

A

References
Finkelhor, D., & Ormod, R. (2000). Characteristics of crimes against
juveniles. U.S. Department of Justice, Ofﬁce of Justice programs,
ofﬁce of
juvenile justice and delinquency prevention. U.S.
Department of Justice, Washington, DC. Retrieved December
29, 2010, from http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdfﬁles1/ojjdp/179034.pdf
Rand, M. R. (2009). Criminal victimization, 2008. Bureau of Justice
Statistics. Washington, DC, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Retrieved
December 29, 2010, from http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/
pdf/cv08.pdf

Snyder, H. N., & McCurley, C. (2008). Domestic assaults by juvenile
offenders. U.S. Department of
Justice
Programs, Ofﬁce of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
U.S. Department of
Justice, Washington, DC. Retrieved
December 29, 2010, from http://www.ncvc.org/tvp/main.aspx?
dbID=DB_Assault120#N_4

Justice, Ofﬁce of

Assimilation

2
1, MARTICA BACALLAO
PAUL R. SMOKOWSKI
1School of Social Work, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
2Department of Social Work, University of North
Carolina – Greensboro, Greensboro, NC, USA

Overview
Assimilation can be deﬁned as the changes in values and
behaviors that individuals make as they gradually
adopt the cultural values of the dominant society.
Assimilation theorists suggest that cultural change
results
from interactions between dominant and
nondominant groups, and such change is commonly
characterized by nondominant groups taking on the
language, laws, religions, norms, and behaviors of the
dominant group. The assimilation process has func-
tioned throughout the history of the United States,
inﬂuencing public policy, interpersonal relationships,
and intergenerational
science
researchers have found that, as assimilation progresses
from low assimilation levels to high assimilation levels,
youth violence and alcohol use increases, especially
binge drinking and alcohol use by females; psychiatric
problems proliferate; and family cohesion decreases.
Important mental health differences between foreign-
born immigrants and US-born Latinos and Asians have
been identiﬁed, suggesting that assimilation is a signif-
icant risk factor for health and mental health problems.

interactions. Social

Background and Definitions
Assimilation can be deﬁned as the changes in values and
behaviors that individuals make as they gradually
adopt the cultural values of the dominant society
(Smith and Guerra 2006). These unidirectional assim-
ilation trends suggest that cultural change results from
interactions between dominant and nondominant
groups, and such change is commonly characterized
by nondominant groups taking on the language, laws,
religions, norms, and behaviors of the dominant group
(Berry 1998; Castro et al. 1996). The common notion
of assimilation entails persons losing their culture-of-
origin identity to identify with the dominant cultural
group. That is, a movement from culture-of-origin
involvement to assimilation, which a person completes
by swapping the positive relationship with his or her
culture-of-origin for a positive afﬁliation with the
dominant culture. The assimilation model assumes
that an individual sheds his or her culture-of-origin
in an attempt to take on the values, beliefs, behaviors,
and perceptions of the target culture (Chun et al. 2003).
The individual perceives the dominant culture as more
desirable whereas the culture-of-origin is seen as infe-
rior. In this model, change is “directional, unilinear,
nonreversible, and continuous” (Suarez-Orozco and
Suarez-Orozco 2001, p. 8).

The central issue after different cultures come into
close contact becomes who has power and control, and
how will the dominant group use that power? Usually,
the nondominant group is strongly inﬂuenced to take
on norms, values, and behaviors espoused by the dom-
inant group. The intensity and negativity associated
with this process is largely contingent upon the recep-
tivity of the dominant group in welcoming, respecting,
or stigmatizing the nondominant group (Berry 1998).
Further, the attitudes held by the dominant group
inﬂuence the adoption of policies for relating to the
nondominant group. For example, dominant group
attitudes toward immigrants that inﬂuence policy are
reﬂected in the debate in the United States regarding
whether English should be declared the country’s
ofﬁcial language.

The experience of European immigrants appeared
to ﬁt the unidirectional assimilation framework that
has been the dominant way of conceptualizing accul-
turation change (de Anda 1984; Feliciano 2001). In the
earliest days of the United States, colonists saw the new
republic as the beginning of a utopian society where

188 A Assimilation

immigrants from different nationalities, cultures, and
races blended into an idealized American “new man.”

" . . .whence came all these people? They are a mixture of
English, Scotch,
Irish, French, Dutch, Germans, and
Swedes. . . What, then, is the American, this new man?
He is neither a European nor the descendant of
a European; hence that strange mixture of blood,
which you will find in no other country. I could point
out to you a family whose grandfather was an English-
man, whose wife was Dutch, whose son married
a French woman, and whose present four sons have
now four wives of different nations. He is an American,
who, leaving behind him all his ancient prejudices and
manners, receives new ones from the new mode of life
he has embraced, the new government he obeys, and
the new rank he holds. . . . The Americans were once
scattered all over Europe; here they are incorporated
into one of the finest systems of population which has
ever appeared. (St. John de Crevecoeur 1782).

The concept of the great American “melting pot”
was popularized in the era spanning from 1890 to 1910,
which was the height of a large wave of European
immigrants that ﬂooded into the United States. After
the premiere of the play The Melting Pot by Israel
Zangwill in 1908, the term “melting pot” came into
general use. In the play, Zangwill’s immigrant protag-
onist declared,

" Understand that America is God’s Crucible, the great
Melting-Pot where all the races of Europe are melting
and reforming! A fig for your feuds and vendettas!
Germans and Frenchmen, Irishmen and Englishmen,
Jews and Russians—into the Crucible with you all!
God is making the American.

The melting pot theory of ethnic relations focused
on American identity created by the assimilation and
intermarriage of White immigrant groups. In the play,
the Jewish Russian protagonist
falls in love with
a Christian Russian woman. The couple is able to
overcome their differences and celebrate assimilation
to new identities within their adopted homeland. The
play captured a drama common during this historical
period. During the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, large numbers of non-Protestant, Southern,
and Eastern European immigrants immigrated to the
United States, causing concern over how these new
groups of Irish, Polish, Italian, and Jewish settlers

would mix with the Northern European, often Anglo-
Saxon, Protestant majority who no longer thought of
themselves as newcomers. These new White settlers
were eligible for naturalization under the racially
restrictive Naturalization Act of 1790 and had to be
integrated in some way. Non-Protestant European
immigrant groups such as the Catholic Irish, Italians,
and Jews suffered from forms of discrimination but
were gradually accepted as “White” American citizens,
enjoyed political freedom, and eventually assimilated
through intermarriage into the White majority.

There has always been unequal access to the great
American melting pot for non-White ethnic and racial
minorities. Non-White ethnic and racial minorities,
both immigrants and natives, have been barred from
full participation in US society as citizens, banned from
immigrating, and subjected to oppressive assimilation
policies and practices. Assimilation fervor has a long
history, dating back to the earliest days of contact
between the English settlers and the Native Americans.
In 1651, John Eliot, a Puritan minister, started the ﬁrst
“praying town” in Natick, Massachusetts to convert
American Indians (primarily the Wampanoag tribe)
to Christianity. Those who agreed to forsake their
native religion, beliefs, and traditional ways of being
in the world to live by Puritan moral codes were
promised both eternal life and physical safety.

By 1671, when Wampanoag Chief Massassoit’s son
Phillip began to ﬁght back against English assimilation
pressure; there were only a thousand members of the
tribe remaining, and nearly half were dispersed across
14 different praying towns. However, assimilation
adaptations and painful conversion experiences were
often not enough to allow these cultural groups to
peacefully coexist. During the subsequent Indian upris-
ing led by Phillip, Native Americans who were living
a Christian life in praying towns were banished, taken
to Deer Island in Boston Harbor, and left in the middle
of winter without blankets or food. Native Americans
were enrolled in tribes and, because they did not have
US citizenship until the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924,
they were subjected to government policies of enforced
cultural assimilation, also termed Americanization.
Native American children were taken from their
families and placed in boarding schools to teach them
how to interact in civilized society. African-Americans
were also excluded for not being White. Slave owners
deliberately broke up families of African slaves so that

Assimilation A 189

A

they would be easier to control. Even after the Eman-
cipation Proclamation banished slavery and made
granted citizenship to African-Americans, intermar-
riage between Whites and African-Americans was
illegal in many US states under anti-miscegenation
laws, which continued from 1883 until 1967. Asian
immigrants such as Chinese, Japanese, Koreans, and
Filipinos were ruled to be non-White and banned
from marrying Whites in several states where existing
anti-miscegenation laws were expanded to include
them. After a number of conﬂicting rulings in Ameri-
can courts, Punjabis and others from British India were
also deemed as non-White. In the late nineteenth and
laws such as the Chinese
early twentieth centuries,
Exclusion Act severely limited or banned immigration
of Asians. The Immigration Act of 1924 severely
restricted immigration from areas outside Northern
and Western Europe.

Assimilation fervor peaks during times of national
distress. There was a backlash against German immi-
grants during World War I. Many Japanese American
adults who were imprisoned during World War II tried
to discard their ethnic identity and assimilate after the
end of the war, attempting to avoid any association,
that came from being
shame, or embarrassment
imprisoned. Attitudes toward non-White immigrants
and natives gradually improved after World War II in
the second half of the twentieth century. After the
successes of the American Civil Rights Movement and
the enactment of the Immigration and Nationality Act
of 1965, which allowed for a large increase in immigra-
tion from Latin America and Asia,
intermarriage
between White and non-White Americans has been
increasing. However, after the terrorist attacks on the
World Trade Center on September 11, 2001, assimila-
tionist rhetoric enjoyed a resurgence and remains
central to the immigrants’ drama of adjusting to life
in the United States.

Assimilation theory has been applied in a range of
policies and practice situations. For example, English as
a Second Language (ESL) programs in which instruc-
tors speak only English and policy proposals that
declare English to be a state’s or country’s “ofﬁcial”
language have deep roots in assimilationist ideology.
In 1998, California voters passed Proposition 227
by a wide margin (61% vs. 39%); now encoded as EC
300–340 of the California Education Code, it requires
instruction be conducted in
that all public school

English. Similarly, Arizona’s voters passed Proposition
instruction
203 in 2000, which mandates school
must be in English and severely limits opportunity for
bilingual instruction. Both propositions are examples
of the assimilationist Structured English Immersion
approach to educating immigrants who are not proﬁ-
cient in English.

Assimilation and Adolescent Health
Over 5 decades of both qualitative and quantitative
empirical research have demonstrated the association
of assimilation with physical health and mental health
status (Organista et al. 2003; Rogler et al. 1991). Many
authors hypothesize a link between assimilation and
social maladjustment, psychopathology, and substance
use (e.g., see Al-Issa and Tousignant 1997; Delgado
1998; Gil et al. 1994; Szapocznik and Kurtines 1980).
Examination of the research on adolescent assimilation
and health has prompted researchers to conclude that
as assimilation progresses from low to high levels, alco-
hol use increases, especially binge drinking and alcohol
use by females; psychiatric problems proliferate; and
familism (by deﬁnition, familism is an especially strong
sense of family cohesion and the cultural emphasis on
family life being at the center of a person’s world)
decreases. Researchers have found important mental
health differences between foreign-born Latino immi-
grants and US-born Latinos. Each of these points is
explained in more detail in the sections that follow.

Adolescent Substance Use
Research on the links between assimilation and
substance use for Latino adolescents has provided
inconsistent results. Some studies have reported that
high levels of assimilation were predictive of substance
use (Dinh et al. 2002) whereas other research has found
the reverse (Carvajal et al. 1997; for reviews see, De La
Rosa 2002; Gonzales et al. 2002). Findings of path
analyses conducted using longitudinal data from 286
Latino adolescents living in either North Carolina or
Arizona (65% foreign born) showed that acculturation
stress negatively inﬂuenced relationships with family
and friends, which in turn, affected adolescent mental
health problems and substance use (Buchanan and
Smokowski 2009). Acculturation stress was deﬁned by
Berry (2006, p. 43) as “a response by people to life
events that are rooted in intercultural contact” that is
the strain placed on people due to the challenges

190 A Assimilation

inherent in the assimilation process. The key mediators
in the pathway from acculturation stress to substance
use were parent–adolescent conﬂict, internalizing, and
externalizing problems.

Assimilation is commonly related to markers such
as place of birth (termed nativity), length of time in the
host country, and language facility and use. Research
has found that US-born Latino adolescents display
levels of alcohol and substance use that are consistently
higher than foreign-born Latino adolescents (Gil and
Vega 1996; Gil et al. 2000; Vega and Gil 1998). The
longer foreign-born adolescents live in the United
States, the higher their rates of alcohol or substance
use (Gil et al. 2000). Consistent with this ﬁnding, other
research has shown Latino adolescents who primarily
speak Spanish are less likely to use alcohol and drugs
than are English-speaking Latino adolescents (Welte
and Barnes 1995; Zapata and Katims 1994).

Youth Violence
Most research on assimilation and adolescent health
behavior has focused on youth violence and aggressive
behavior. Violence is the “intentional use of physical
force or power, threatened or actual, against oneself,
against another person, or against a group or commu-
nity, that either results in or has a high likelihood of
resulting
in injury, death, psychological harm,
maldevelopment, or deprivation” (Dahlberg and Krug
2002, p. 5). Adolescent interpersonal violence includes
violence between unrelated youth who have a romantic
or intimate relationship (i.e., dating violence) as well as
violence between unrelated youth who may or may not
know each other in other contexts and environments
(i.e., youth violence). Similar to acculturation, adoles-
cent interpersonal violence has been assessed in multi-
ple ways across studies. Dating violence has also been
assessed in a variety of ways including verbal, emotional,
physical abuse, and sexual assault. Researchers investi-
gating youth violence assess violence involvement using
measures such as gang membership, bullying, physical
ﬁghting, carrying weapons, verbal threats, aggressive
behavior, externalizing symptoms, and serious criminal
activity, including homicide or assaults. Self-directed
violence is a subcategory of violence that includes
a person’s tendency to intentionally inﬂict self-harm
that may or may not shorten or end life. Measures of
suicidal ideation, plans, attempts, and suicide-related
deaths are regularly used in this area of inquiry.

In their literature review on acculturation and
mental health in Latino youth, Gonzales et al. (2002)
identiﬁed ten studies that examined the link between
acculturation and youth violence. Of those studies, six
showed that higher assimilation levels were associated
with increased delinquency and stronger relationships
with antisocial peers (Buriel et al. 1982; Fridrich and
Flannery 1995; Samaniego and Gonzales 1999; Vega
et al. 1993, 1995; Wall et al. 1993). This association
between assimilation and aggressive behavior surfaced
across studies even when simple proxy measures of
acculturation (e.g., generational status, language use,
or nativity) were used as markers for more complex
acculturation processes (Gonzales et al. 2002). In
contrast, two other studies did not ﬁnd a link between
assimilation and aggression problems (Dumka et al.
1997; Knight et al. 1994); however, these investigations
examined the variables of parent assimilation and ado-
lescent externalizing behavior, and found no signiﬁcant
relationship between those variables.

Recently, Smokowski et al. (2009a) conducted
a comprehensive review of studies examining the rela-
tionship of Latino adolescent acculturation and youth
violence. Among the studies reviewed, the association
between acculturation and youth violence outcomes
was examined in 16 studies, of which 13 examined
the perpetration of violence as the outcome, and
3 examined fear of being a victim of violence as the
outcome. The results favored a signiﬁcant positive
association between assimilation and youth violence.
Nine of the 13 studies reported that higher adolescent
assimilation (deﬁned in different ways by time in the
language use, or
United States, generational status,
with multidimensional measures) was associated with
increased youth violence (Brook et al. 1998; Bui and
Thongniramol 2005; Buriel et al. 1982; Dinh et al. 2002;
Samaniego and Gonzales 1999; Schwartz et al. 2007;
Sommers et al. 1993; Smokowski and Bacallao 2006;
Vega et al. 1993, 1995).

Alongside studies on the deleterious effects of
assimilation, research efforts have focused on stress
precipitated by adapting to a new cultural system.
Acculturation stress has been linked to several negative
outcomes for Latino youth, including mental health
difﬁculties (Gil et al. 1994), suicidal ideation (Hovey
and King 1996), delinquent behavior (Samaniego and
Gonzales 1999), and behavior problems (Vega et al.
1995). Researchers have consistently demonstrated

Assimilation A 191

A

links among acculturation stressors such as language
conﬂicts, perceived discrimination, parent–adolescent
culture conﬂicts, parent–child acculturation gaps, and
negative health behavior in youth.

to also report

Studying the link between acculturation and delin-
quent behavior in a sample of 1,843 Cuban boys and
girls, Vega et al. (1993) found a signiﬁcant positive
correlation of .35 between acculturation conﬂicts and
self-derogation. Correlations range from (cid:3)1 to 1 with
signaling
higher positive or negative numbers
a stronger relationship.
there was
In this study,
a moderately strong tendency for children who experi-
enced acculturation conﬂicts
self-
derogation. These researchers showed that conﬂicts
inherent in the acculturation process were associated
with a child’s increased negative feelings about himself
or herself. Perceived discrimination displayed a statis-
tically signiﬁcant interaction with peer approval of
drugs and with self-derogation. Language conﬂicts
also had a signiﬁcant interaction with teacher deroga-
tion and peer drug use. Moreover, this study found that
acculturation factors, such as perceptions of discrimi-
nation and language conﬂicts, had a direct positive
association with delinquent behavior. This association
between acculturation factors and delinquent behavior
was stronger than the impact family variables had on
delinquent behavior.

In an investigation of acculturation stressors with
a predominantly Cuban sample of 2,360 adolescents
living in Miami, Vega et al. (1995) found that only
language conﬂicts were associated with adolescents’
total behavior problems as reported by the parents
immigrant adolescents. However,
and teachers of
among the US-born Cuban youth, language conﬂicts,
perceived discrimination, and perceptions of a closed
society were associated with behavior problems
reported by teachers. Further, Dinh et al. (2002),
whose assessment of 330 Latino youth represents one
of the few longitudinal studies in this area, found
higher levels of assimilation predicted statistically sig-
niﬁcant higher levels of problem-behavior proneness
(i.e., gang involvement, peer delinquency, conduct
problems) in youth reports collected 1 year after base-
line measures were established. Similarly, Ebin et al.
(2001) reported that high assimilation levels had
a positive association with problem behaviors and
a negative association with health-promoting behav-
iors. Foreign-born Latino adolescents exhibited fewer

problem behaviors than US-born Latino adolescents.
Likewise, Coatsworth et al. (2005) studied the accul-
turation patterns of 315 Latino youth, and found
that when compared to less-assimilated participants
high-assimilated youth reported signiﬁcantly greater
numbers of problem behaviors and less parental
monitoring.

Recently, the coauthors of this essay and their
colleague Roderick Rose conducted one of the most
exhaustive analyses of acculturation and Latino adoles-
cent aggressive behavior (Smokowski et al. 2009b). In
this study, reports of youths’ aggressive behavior were
obtained from both the adolescents and their parents.
This multiple reporter approach provides more conﬁ-
dence in the study results because the results are more
objective than relying on the accuracy of adolescents’
reports alone. Further, the research project followed the
sample of 256 adolescents for 2 years, collecting data
every 6 months. This approach provided four data
points to use in examining the longitudinal trajectory
improving upon the cross-
of aggressive behavior,
sectional snapshot that many studies have considered
in the past.

The overall trajectory of Latino adolescent aggres-
sion displayed a statistically signiﬁcant negative trend
best characterized by a quadratic curve. Over time,
adolescent aggressive behavior decreased and leveled
out near the end of the study period. These analyses
delineated signiﬁcant risk factors related to aggression
levels, showing that gender, age, parent-reported accul-
turation conﬂicts, and adolescent-reported parent–
adolescent conﬂicts were associated with higher levels
of adolescent aggression. Latino adolescents whose par-
ents reported high levels of acculturation conﬂict
displayed higher levels of aggressive behavior at every
time point, and although their aggression decreased
over time, the levels did not decline as much as those
of youth with low levels of acculturation conﬂict. Par-
ent reports of acculturation conﬂicts were a signiﬁcant
risk factor associated with more aggressive behavior for
foreign-born youth, but not for US-born youth.

Based on 286 foreign-born and US-born adoles-
cents participating in the Latino Acculturation and
Health Project (Smokowski et al. in press), perceived
discrimination and acculturation conﬂicts were
signiﬁcantly related to aggressive behavior at baseline.
This heightened aggressive behavior led to lower levels
of adolescent self-esteem and familism, and higher

192 A Assimilation

internalizing problems (e.g., anxiety and depression),
parent–adolescent conﬂict, and more relationships
with delinquent peers 6 months later. The baseline
aggression associated with acculturation stressors was
also directly connected to increased levels of aggressive
behavior 1 year later. In addition to promoting baseline
aggression, experiences of perceived discrimination
and acculturation conﬂicts positively predicted
parent–adolescent conﬂict and adolescent substance
use 6 months later.

Four

to ﬁnd
research reports were unable
a signiﬁcant direct association between assimilation
variables and youth violence perpetration (Bird et al.
2006a, b; Carvajal et al. 2002; Gonzales et al. 2006;
Schwartz et al. 2007). In a sample of 175 Mexican
youth and their mothers living in the Southwestern
United States, researchers found the direct relationship
between family linguistic acculturation and adolescent
conduct problems was not signiﬁcant. However, the
ﬁndings showed an indirect relationship was mediated
through family conﬂict (Gonzales et al. 2006). Simi-
larly, self-esteem was found to mediate the relationship
between acculturative stress and externalizing symp-
toms in Latino youth from Michigan (Schwartz et al.
2007). Overall, 85% of existing studies, that is, 12 of 14
studies, on Latino adolescents have shown assimilation
or acculturation stress to directly or indirectly predict
aggressive behavior.

Nine articles have focused on acculturation and
youth violence of Asian/Paciﬁc Islander youth. Four
studies included large multiethnic group investigations
(Bui and Thongniramol 2005; Shrake and Rhee 2004;
Willgerodt and Thompson 2006; Yu et al. 2003). The
other ﬁve articles (Go and Le 2005; Le and Stockdale
2005, 2008; Le and Wallen 2007; Ngo and Le 2007)
analyzed the same sample of 329 Chinese and Southeast
Asian youth recruited from two public schools and ﬁve
community-based organizations in Oakland, Califor-
nia. The majority of the youth in this sample were
second-generation status (i.e., US-born), except for
Vietnamese youth who were nearly equally divided
between ﬁrst and second generations. In acculturation
research, ﬁrst-generation immigrants are those who
were born in a foreign country. Adolescents who were
born in the United States and have foreign-born
parents are considered second-generation immigrants.
Much of what is known about Asian/Paciﬁc Islander
youth violence comes from one moderate-sized sample

from one city in California. Although it remains
important to synthesize this knowledge, caution is
clearly warranted in generalizing these ﬁndings to the
general Asian/Paciﬁc Islander population.

Several themes in the Asian/Paciﬁc Islander youth
literature parallel those already described for Latino
adolescents. Assimilation, individualism, acculturation
stress, and experiencing perceived discrimination
remain important risk factors for aggression and
violence. Among Filipino youth, second-generation
adolescents had signiﬁcantly higher delinquency than
ﬁrst-generation youth (Willgerodt and Thompson
2006), but there were no differences relative to third-
generation age peers. After examining data from 217
Korean American students in Los Angeles, Shrake and
Rhee (2004) reported that Korean American adoles-
cents’ experience of perceived discrimination showed
a strong positive effect on both internalizing (anxiety
and depression) and externalizing aggressive problem
behaviors. In the sample of 329 Southeast Asian youth
from Oakland, Le and Stockdale (2005) found that
individualism (used as a measure of assimilation) was
positively related to self-reported delinquency, with
partial mediation through peer delinquency. Similarly,
Ngo and Le (2007) reported that increased levels of
assimilation,
intergenerational/intercultural conﬂict,
and individualism placed youth at increased risk for
serious violence (e.g., aggravated assault, robbery, rape,
individualism, and
and gang ﬁghts). Assimilation,
intergenerational/intercultural conﬂict enhanced the
impact of certain stressors (e.g., emotional hardship,
physical abuse, and emotional abuse) to predict violent
behavior. In a third study using the same sample,
acculturative dissonance (a measure of the amount of
conﬂicting cultural messages adolescents experience)
was found as signiﬁcantly predictive of serious vio-
lence, with full mediation through peer delinquency
(Le and Stockdale 2008).

Why Would High Assimilation Be
a Risk Factor?
Various hypotheses have been put forth to explain the
relationship among high assimilation, substance use,
youth violence, and health and mental health prob-
lems. Assimilation theorists interpret ﬁndings on
these problems as evidence that immigrants are taking
on behaviors that are tolerated in the host culture.
A behavior adaptation hypothesis helps to explain this

Assimilation A 193

A

dynamic, stating that assimilating individuals are tak-
ing on behaviors that are tolerated, or even supported,
by the host society (Castro et al. 1996). For instance,
immigrant youth initiate alcohol and substance use to
ﬁt into and identify with American peer groups.
Women markedly increase their alcohol consumption
as traditional Latina gender role constraints against
such behavior are eroded (Caetano 1987; Markides
et al. 1988; Rogler et al. 1991). Obesity tends to increase
as immigrants adopt the dietary habits of the US pop-
ulation, eating fast foods with high saturated fat levels.
In addition, assimilating individuals may adopt
“American” attitudes toward many behaviors such
as alcohol, drugs, or fast food, and disregard their
previously held culture-of-origin attitudes of these
behaviors. Of course, Americans are not a homogenous
group and have diverse attitudes concerning any of
these topics. However, the central issue appears to be
that assimilating individuals see what is and is not
tolerated in the host
society and change their
behavioral repertoires accordingly, gradually replacing
culture-of-origin behaviors,
routines, beliefs, and
norms with those from the host society.

that

This perspective of assimilation is supported by
evidence in the research literature on acculturation
and health. It appears that signiﬁcant changes in health
behaviors occur across generations
suggest
US-born children of immigrant parents, and later
generations, will report health behaviors similar to
those of non-Latino White US citizens. Unfortunately,
the evidence available also suggests that this cultural
adaptation comes at a high personal price. Healthy
behaviors characteristic of foreign-born immigrants
are often lost in subsequent generations, signaling
a strikingly negative aspect of assimilation. In the
past, assimilation ideology was concerned with the
integration of foreigners into the host society, mainly
through education and intermarriage for White Euro-
pean immigrants. This historic context stressed the
beneﬁts of assimilation. In light of new evidence illu-
minating the immigrant paradox showing decreased
health associated with assimilation, it is critical to
consider the negative aspects of assimilation. Along
with new educational and economic opportunities,
melting pot assimilation may strip immigrants of the
healthy behaviors they bring from their countries of
origin while fostering poor health and mental health
functioning that is characteristic of the host society.

Alternately, researchers suggest that negative health
behaviors, such as alcohol and substance use, may be
undertaken as a strategy for coping with assimilation
stress (Gil et al. 2000). Maladaptive behavior is thought
to derive from “increased perceptions of discrimina-
tion, internalization of minority status, and/or social-
ization into cultural attitudes and behaviors that have
a disintegrative effect on family ties” (Gil et al. 1994,
p. 45). This maladaptive behavior results in self-depre-
cation, ethnic self-hatred, and a weakened ego structure
in the assimilated individual (Rogler et al. 1991).
Further, maladaptive coping that includes substance
use, aggressive behavior, hypertension, mental health
problems, and obesity has been linked to generational
differences between assimilating family members.
A resilient ﬁrst generation of immigrant parents tends
to focus on perceived increases in their standard of
living, leaving them thankful for new opportunities
and protected by traditional values. In contrast, the
perceptions of subsequent generations (e.g., assimi-
lated US-born children of immigrant parents) tend
to focus more on deprivation because of higher
unrealized expectations and aspirations, which have
the potential to lead these generations to turn to mal-
adaptive coping strategies (Burnam et al. 1987; Rogler
et al. 1991). At the same time, negative health behavior
patterns increase perceived stress, adding to the difﬁcul-
ties inherent in the acculturation process. Ultimately,
coping with assimilation stress with negative health
behaviors becomes a self-propelling cycle, causing
some US-born Latino and Asian adolescents and adults
to become immersed in high-risk behaviors such as
substance use, antisocial behavior, and to experience
mental health problems.

It is unclear from extant research which of these
theoretical explanations should take precedence. Fur-
ther research is needed to fully explore and explain the
assimilation process. At the same time, it is clear that
legislators and social service workers may undermine
healthy immigrant behaviors by over emphasizing
assimilation. Indeed, if policymakers want to empha-
size healthy behavior
in this youthful minority
population, they should provide support for US-
born minority youth to reconnect to their cultural
heritages. In doing so, some of the negative effects of
assimilation may be avoided by reintegrating cultural
assets that have been lost in the great American
melting pot.

194 A Assimilation

Cross-References
▶ Acculturation
▶ Bicultural Stress
▶ Immigration

References
Al-Issa, I., & Tousignant, M. (1997). Ethnicity, immigration, and

psychopathology. New York: Plenum.

Berry, J. W. (1998). Acculturation stress. In P. B. Organista, K. M. Chun,
& G. Marin (Eds.), Readings in ethnic psychology (pp. 117–122).
New York: Routledge.

Berry, J. W., Phinney, J. S., Sam, D. L., & Vedder, P. (2006). Immigrant
youth: Acculturation, identity and adaptation. Applied Psychol-
ogy, 55, 303–332. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.2006.00256.x.

Bird, H. R., Canino, G., Davies, M., Duarte, C. S., Febo, V., Ramirez, R.,
et al. (2006a). A study of disruptive behavior disorders in Puerto
Rican youth: I. Background, design, and survey methods. Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 45,
1032–1041. doi:10.1097/01.chi.0000227879.65651.cf.

Bird, H. R., Davies, M., Duarte, C. S., Shen, S., Loeber, R., &
Canino, G. (2006b). A study of disruptive behavior disorders in
Puerto Rican youth: II. Baseline prevalence, comorbidity, and
correlates in two sites. Journal of the American Academy of
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 45, 1042–1053. doi:10.1097/01.
chi.0000227878.58027.3d.

Brook, J. S., Martin W., Balka, E. B., Win, Pe. T., & Gursen, M. D.
(1998). African American and Puerto Rican drug use: A longi-
tudinal study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 36(9), 1260–1268.

Buchanan, R. L., & Smokowski, P. R. (2009). Pathways from accul-
turation stress to substance use among Latino adolescents:
Results from the Latino Acculturation and Health Project.
Substance Use
740–762. doi:10.1080/
10826080802544216.

and Misuse,

44,

Bui, H. N., & Thongniramol, O. (2005). Immigration and self-
reported delinquency: The interplay of immigration, genera-
tions, gender, race, and ethnicity. Journal of Crime and Justice,
28(2), 71–80.

Buriel, R., Calzada, S., & Vasquez, R. (1982). The relationship of
traditional Mexican American culture to adjustment and delin-
quency among three generations of Mexican American male
adolescents. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 4, 41–55.
doi:10.1177/07399863820041003.

Burnam, M. A., Hough, R. L., Karno, M., Escobar, J. I., & Telles, C. A.
(1987). Acculturation and lifetime prevalence of psychiatric
disorders among Mexican Americans in Los Angeles. Journal of
Health and Social Behavior, 28, 89–102. doi:10.2307/2137143.
Caetano, R. (1987). Acculturation and drinking patterns among U.S.
Hispanics. British Journal of Addiction, 82, 789–799. doi:10.1111/
j.1360-0443.1987.tb01546.x.

Carvajal, S. C., Photiades, J. R., Evans, R. I., & Nash, S. G. (1997).
Relating a social inﬂuence model to the role of acculturation in
substance use among Latino adolescents. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 27, 1617–1628. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1997.
tb01616.x.

Carvajal, S. C., Hanson, C. E., Romero, A. J., & Coyle, K. K. (2002).
Behavioural risk factors and protective factors in adolescents:
A comparison of Latino and non-Latino Whites. Ethnicity and
Health, 7, 181–193. doi:10.1080/1355785022000042015.

Castro, F. G., Coe, K., Gutierres, S., & Saenz, D. (1996). Designing
health promotion programs for Latinos. In P. M. Kato & T. Mann
in health psychology
(Eds.), Handbook of diversity issues
(pp. 319–346). New York: Plenum.

Chun, K. M., Organista, P. B., & Marin, G. (Eds.). (2003). Accultur-
ation: Advances in theory, measurement, and applied research.
Washington: American Psychological Association.

Coatsworth, J. D., Maldonido-Molina, M., Pantin, H., & Szapocznik, H.
(2005). A person-centered and ecological investigation of accultur-
ation strategies in Hispanic immigrant youth. Journal of Commu-
nity Psychology, 33, 157–174. doi:10.1002/jcop. 20046.

Dahlberg, L. L., & Krug, E. G. (2002). Violence: A global public
health problem. In E. G. Krug, L. L. Dahlberg, J. A. Mercy,
A. B. Zwi, & R. Lozano (Eds.), World report on violence and
health (pp. 1–21). Geneva: World Health Organization. Retrieved
from http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2002/9241545615_
eng.pdf.

de Anda, D. (1984). Bicultural socialization: Factors affecting the

minority experience. Social Work, 29, 101–107.

De La Rosa, M. (2002). Acculturation and Latino adolescents’ sub-
stance use: A research agenda for the future. Substance Use and
Misuse, 37, 429–456. doi:10.1081/JA-120002804.

Delgado, M. (1998). Alcohol use/abuse among Latinos: Issues and
examples of culturally competent service. Binghampton: Haworth
Press.

Dinh, K. T., Roosa, M. W., Tein, J. Y., & Lopez, V. A. (2002). The
relationship between acculturation and problem behavior prone-
ness in a Hispanic youth sample: A longitudinal mediation
model. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 30, 295–309.
doi:10.1023/A:1015111014775.

Dumka, L. E., Roosa, M. W., & Jackson, K. M. (1997). Risk, conﬂict,
mother’s parenting, and children’s adjustment in low-income,
Mexican immigrant, and Mexican American families. Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 59, 309–323. doi:10.2307/353472.
Ebin, V. J., Sneed, C. D., Morisky, D. E., Rotheram-Borus, M. J.,
Magnusson, A. M., & Malotte, C. K. (2001). Acculturation and
interrelationships between problem and health-promoting
behaviors among Latino adolescents.
Journal of Adolescent
Health, 28, 62–72. doi:10.1016/S1054-139X(00)00162-2.

Feliciano, C. (2001). The beneﬁts of biculturalism: Exposure to
immigrant culture and dropping out of school among Asian
and Latino youths. Social Science Quarterly, 82, 865–879.
doi:10.1111/0038-4941.00064.

Fridrich, A. H., & Flannery, D. J. (1995). The effects of ethnicity and
acculturation on early adolescent delinquency. Journal of Child
and Family Studies, 4, 69–87. doi:10.1007/BF02233955.

Gil, A. G., & Vega, W. A. (1996). Two different worlds: Acculturation
stress and adaptation among Cuban and Nicaraguan families.
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 13, 435–456.
doi:10.1177/0265407596133008.

Gil, A. G., Vega, W. A., & Dimas, J. M. (1994). Acculturative stress and
personal adjustment among Hispanic adolescent boys. Journal of

43–54.

Psychology,

Community
22,
doi:10.1002/1520-
6629(199401)22:1 < 43::AID-JCOP2290220106 > 3.0.CO;2-T.
Gil, A. G., Wagner, E. F., & Vega, W. A. (2000). Acculturation,
familism and alcohol use among Latino adolescent males:
Longitudinal
Journal of Community Psychology,
28, 443–458. doi:10.1002/1520-6629(200007)28:4 < 443::AID-
JCOP6 > 3.0.CO;2-A.

relations.

Go, C. G., & Le, T. N. (2005). Gender differences in Cambodian
delinquency: The role of ethnic identity, parental discipline,
and peer delinquency. Crime and Delinquency, 51, 220–237.
doi:10.1177/0011128704273466.

Gonzales, N. A., Knight, G. P., Morgan-Lopez, A. A., Saenz, D., &
Sirolli, A. (2002). Acculturation and the mental health of Latino
youths: An integration and critique of
In
J. M. Contreras, K. A. Kerns, & A. M. Neal-Barnett (Eds.), Latino
children and families in the United States (pp. 45–76). Westport:
Greenwood.

the literature.

Assimilation A 195

A

Samaniego, R. Y., & Gonzales, N. A. (1999). Multiple mediators of the
effects of acculturation status on delinquency for Mexican
of Community
American adolescents. American Journal
Psychology, 27, 189–210. doi:10.1023/A:1022883601126.

Schwartz, S. J., Zamboanga, B. L., & Jarvis, L. H. (2007). Ethnic
identity and acculturation in Hispanic early adolescents: Medi-
ated relationships to academic grades, prosocial behaviors, and
externalizing symptoms. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority
Psychology, 13, 364–373. doi:10.1037/1099-9809.13.4.364.
Shrake, E. K., & Rhee, S. (2004). Ethnic identity as a predictor of
problem behaviors among Korean American adolescents.
Adolescence, 39, 601–622. Retrieved from http://ﬁndarticles.
com/p/articles/mi_m2248/is_155_39/ai_n9488744/.

Smith, E. P., & Guerra, N. G. (2006). Introduction. In N. G. Guerra &
E. P. Smith (Eds.), Preventing youth violence in a multicultural
(pp. 3–14). Washington: American Psychological
society
Association.

Gonzales, N. A., Deardorff, J., Formoso, D., Barr, A., & Barrera, M., Jr.
(2006). Family mediators of the relation between acculturation
and adolescent mental health. Family Relations, 55, 318–330.
doi:10.1111/j.1741-3729.2006.00405.x.

Smokowski, P. R., & Bacallao, M. L. (2006). Acculturation and
aggression in Latino adolescents: A structural model focusing
on cultural risk factors and assets. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 34, 657–671. doi:10.1007/s10802-006-9049-4.

Hovey, J. D., & King, C. A. (1996). Acculturative stress, depression,
and suicidal ideation among immigrant and second-generation
Latino adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 1183–1192. doi:10.1097/00004583-
199609000-00016.

Knight, G. P., Virdin, L. M., & Roosa, M. (1994). Socialization and
family correlates of mental health outcomes among Hispanic and
Anglo-American families. Child Development, 65, 212–224.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1994.tb00745.x.

Le, T. N., & Stockdale, G. D. (2005). Individualism, collectivism, and
delinquency in Asian American adolescents. Journal of Clinical
Child and Adolescent Psychology, 34, 681–691. doi:10.1207/
s15374424jccp3404_10.

Le, T. N., & Stockdale, G. D. (2008). Acculturative dissonance, ethnic
identity, and youth violence. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minor-
ity Psychology, 14, 1–9. doi:10.1037/1099-9809.14.1.1.

Le, T. N., & Wallen, J. (2007). Risks of non-familial violent physical
and emotional victimization in four Asian ethnic groups. Journal
of Immigrant and Minority Health, 11, 174–187. doi:10.1007/
s10903-007-9100-8.

Markides, K., Krause, N., & Mendes De Leon, C. F. (1988). Accultur-
ation and alcohol consumption among Mexican Americans:
A three-generation study. American Journal of Public Health, 78,
1178–1181. doi:10.2105/AJPH.78.9.1178.

Ngo, H. M., & Le, T. N. (2007). Stressful life events, culture, and
violence. Journal of Immigrant Health, 9, 75–84. doi:10.1007/
s10903-006-9018-6.

Organista, P. B., Organista, K. C., & Kurasaki, K. (2003). The relation-
ship between acculturation and ethnic minority mental health.
In K. M. Chun, P. B. Organista, & G. Marin (Eds.), Acculturation:
Advances in theory, measurement, and applied research (pp. 139–
162). Washington: American Psychological Association.

Rogler, L. H., Cortes, D. E., & Malgady, R. G. (1991). Acculturation
and mental health status among Hispanics. American Psycholo-
gist, 46, 585–597. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.46.6.585.

Smokowski, P. R., David-Ferdon, C., & Stroupe, N. (2009a). Accul-
turation, youth violence, and suicidal behavior in minority
adolescents: A review of the empirical
literature. Journal of
Primary Prevention, 30(3/4), 215–264. doi:10.1007/s10935-009-
0173-0.

Smokowski, P. R., Rose, R. A., & Bacallao, M. L. (2009b). Accultur-
ation and aggression in Latino adolescents: Modeling longitudi-
nal trajectories from the Latino Acculturation and Health
Project. Child Psychiatry and Human Development, 40,
589–608. doi:10.1007/s10578-009-0146-9.

Smokowski, P. R., Buchanan, R. L., & Bacallao, M. L. (in press).
Acculturation stress and aggressive behavior in Latino adoles-
cents: Examining mediation pathways in the Latino Accultura-
tion and Health Project. International Journal of Child Health and
Human Development.

Sommers, I., Fagan, J., & Baskin, D. (1993). Sociocultural inﬂuences
on the explanation of delinquency for Puerto Rican youths.
Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 15, 36–62. doi:10.1177/
07399863930151002.

St. John de Crevecoeur, J. H. (1782). Letters from an American farmer.
Retrieved from http://xroads.virginia.edu/(cid:4)hyper/CREV/home.
html.

Suarez-Orozco, C., & Suarez-Orozco, M. (2001). Children of immi-

grants. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Szapocznik, J., & Kurtines, W. (1980). Acculturation, biculturalism
and adjustment among Cuban Americans. In A. M. Padilla (Ed.),
some new ﬁndings
Acculturation: Theory, models,
(pp. 139–159). Boulder: Westview.

and

Vega, W. A., & Gil, A. G. (1998). Drug use and ethnicity in early

adolescence. New York: Plenum.

Vega, W. A., Gil, A. G., Warheit, G. J., Zimmerman, R. S., & Apospori, E.
(1993). Acculturation and delinquent behavior among Cuban
American adolescents: Toward an empirical model. American
Journal of Community Psychology, 21, 113–125. doi:10.1007/
BF00938210.

196 A Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

Vega, W. A., Khoury, E. L., Zimmerman, R. R., Gil, A. G., & Warheit,
G. J. (1995). Cultural conﬂicts and problem behaviors of Latino
adolescents in home and school environments. Journal of Com-
munity Psychology, 23, 167–179. doi:10.1002/1520-6629(199504)
23:2 < 167::AID-JCOP2290230207 > 3.0.CO;2-O.

Wall, J. A., Power, T. G., & Arbona, C. (1993). Susceptibility to
antisocial peer pressure and its relation to acculturation in
Mexican American adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Research,
8, 403–418. doi:10.1177/074355489384004.

Welte, J. W., & Barnes, G. M. (1995). Alcohol and other drug use
among Hispanics in New York State. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research, 19, 1061–1066. doi:10.1111/j.1530-
0277.1995.tb00989.x.

Willgerodt, M. A., & Thompson, E. A. (2006). Ethnic and genera-
tional inﬂuences on emotional distress and risk behaviors among
Chinese and Filipino American adolescents. Research in Nursing
and Health, 29, 311–324. doi:10.1002/nur.20146.

Yu, S. M., Huang, Z. J., Schwalberg, R. H., Overpeck, M., &
Kogan, M. D. (2003). Acculturation and the health and well-
being of U.S.
immigrant adolescents. Journal of Adolescent
Health, 33, 479–488. doi:10.1016/S1054-139X(03)00210-6.
Zapata, J. T., & Katims, D. S. (1994). Antecedents of substance abuse
among Mexican-American school-age children. Journal of Drug
Education, 24, 233–251.

Assimilative Psychodynamic
Psychotherapy

PATRICK M. GREHAN
Derner Institute of Advanced Psychological Studies,
Adelphi University, Garden City, NY, USA

Introduction
Psychotherapy for adolescents with emotional and
behavioral disorders is complicated. Adolescents in
need of therapy are often not motivated to participate
in therapy and frequently struggle with issues of depen-
dence, authority, control, and trust. These and other
complications impact the formation of a therapeutic
alliance between the therapist and the adolescent,
which is the best predictor of psychotherapy outcome.
This essay identiﬁes some of the challenges of provid-
ing effective psychotherapy for adolescents with psy-
chological difﬁculties. It is proposed that adolescents
is
beneﬁt
ﬂexible, effective, and attuned to the relationship.
Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy, developed
by Stricker and Gold (1996) and adapted for use with

from an integrative psychotherapy that

adolescents by Grehan and Freeman (2009), is put
forward as well suited for work with this population.

Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy is an
integrative approach comprised of a comprehensive
psychodynamically oriented conceptual
framework
that freely incorporates ideas, techniques, and strate-
gies from other models of psychotherapy. Given ado-
lescents’ greater dependence than adults on the world
around them, an increased emphasis is placed on sys-
tems variables and the importance of “goodness of ﬁt”
with the environment. Therapists who employ assimi-
lative psychodynamic psychotherapy (APP) beneﬁt
from the framework and richness of attending to rela-
tionship issues. The psychodynamic framework allows
for a focus on the relationship and the interpersonal
ﬁeld between the therapist and the client as a major
source of information as well as an instrument for
treatment. In addition, active interventions are freely
drawn from cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for
their original purposes as well as psychodynamic
purposes. A case example illustrating the application
of this approach is presented. The strengths and limi-
tations to this approach are discussed.

Adolescents and Psychopathology
As numerous essays in this encyclopedia make clear,
adolescents are not simply “little adults.” Rather, this is
a developmental period marked by signiﬁcant cogni-
tive, social, and physical changes. In addition, many
adolescents struggle with developmental issues such as
dependence on adults and the formation of a clear
identity. These issues all occur while they manage
shifting family and peer dynamics as well as changing
academic and work demands.

Although many adolescents in western cultures do
not exhibit signiﬁcant “storm and stress” (Arnett
1999), an estimated 20% of 9–17-year olds have
a diagnosable emotional or behavioral disorder (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services 1999).
These adolescents are more likely to exhibit mood
disorders (6%), anxiety disorders (13%), disruptive
disorders (10%), or substance abuse disorders (2%;
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
1999). Youth suffering from these disorders are more
likely to experience impairments in social, academic,
and occupational functioning as well as serious behav-
ioral problems.

itself

in a heightened sense of

Detailed descriptions of developmental challenges
faced by adolescents are available elsewhere in this
volume; however, it is worthwhile to review speciﬁc
examples to illustrate how developmental issues can
interact with neurological or psychological difﬁculties
to result in problematic behavior patterns. One such
example is the development of introspection, which
exhibits
self-
consciousness in adolescents. Often the adolescent
believes that his or her behavior is the focus of everyone
else’s concern and attention (Elkind 1978). In addition,
this egocentricity is displayed in the belief that their
experiences are unique and would not be understood
by others or that they are not as susceptible to risk as
others (Steinberg 2008). These egocentric beliefs may
serve to protect self-esteem, but can also inhibit com-
munication with adults and increase the potential for
high-risk behavior. This can be especially problematic
among adolescents who have experienced trauma or
who suffer from psychological disorders. Issues such as
egocentric beliefs can compound difﬁculties with weak
impulse control, poor emotional regulation, depressed
mood, or psychosis. These combinations may increase
high-risk behavior or withdrawal from their familial
and school support networks.

Adolescents in Therapy
Therapy with adolescents poses unique challenges and
is often considered a difﬁcult endeavor (Oetzel and
Scherer 2003). Many adolescents referred to therapy
attribute their problems to others and are often espe-
cially sensitive to issues of dependence, authority, con-
In addition, many adolescents,
trol, and trust.
especially those exhibiting deﬁant behavior, do not to
perceive themselves as needing therapy but are directed
to do so by authority ﬁgures such as parents, school
personnel, or the juvenile justice system (Oetzel and
Scherer 2003; Politano 1993). Therefore, the adoles-
cent’s motivation to participate in therapy as well as
the formation of a therapeutic alliance may be
compromised. The therapeutic alliance refers to the
quality of the helping relationship between the client
and the therapist. Bordin (1979) described the thera-
peutic alliance as consisting of an agreement on the
goals of therapy, an agreement on the tasks of therapy,
and an emotional bond between the therapist and the
client. The therapist joins with “the client by expressing
concern about the client and family members and

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy A 197

A

inquiring about personal problems” to trigger the
development of alliance (Oetzel and Scherer 2003,
p. 216). In turn, clients respond by engaging in the
process of working toward the goals of therapy.

An alliance is difﬁcult to form with adolescents who
do not share the same goals or are resistant to partic-
ipating in therapy (DiGiuseppe et al. 1996; Oetzel and
Scherer 2003). This is problematic given that the ther-
apeutic alliance has been identiﬁed as a critical element
in psychotherapy effectiveness with adolescents (Shirk
and Karver 2003). Kazdin et al. (2005) demonstrated
that alliance was associated with greater therapeutic
change, fewer perceived barriers, and treatment accept-
ability in this population.

In addition to the relationship with the adolescent,
the therapist has to consider the alliance with the
parents or guardians. The therapist can provide the
adolescent with conﬁdentiality; however, this conﬁ-
dentiality is often tested when there is a need to engage
parents in the therapy. Forming alliances with both the
parents and the adolescent can be challenging if there
are differences in goals, opinions, and values. In addi-
tion, adolescents who act in provocative or potentially
dangerous ways can make it especially challenging to
maintain alliances with all parties involved. The thera-
pist has to negotiate both sets of goals, as attending to
one set of goals over the other can lead to resistance,
conﬂict, or impasse.

Which Psychotherapy Approach?
Although evidence indicates that 70–80% of adoles-
cents with mental health problems beneﬁt
from
psychotherapy (Weisz et al. 1987, 1995), it is estimated
that the majority of adolescents in need either lack
access to or otherwise do not engage in psychotherapy
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
1999). Furthermore, Kazdin et al. (1997) reported
that 40–60% of families that engage in therapy termi-
nate prematurely. Therefore, it is valuable to explore
psychotherapy approaches that maximize adolescent
engagement and treatment effectiveness.

Given the unique challenges of conducting psycho-
therapy with adolescents, it is not sufﬁcient to conduct
therapy in the same manner as with adults. For exam-
ple, therapists need to differentiate between typical
development and psychopathology. Oetzel and Scherer
(2003) recommended that therapists assess develop-
mental considerations and reﬂect upon their possible

198 A Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

effects on therapeutic engagement. It is also necessary
to differentiate between minor developmental crises
and psychopathology. In addition, a foundation in
adolescent development can help recognize risk factors
that
increase susceptibility to difﬁculties such as
depression, substance use, eating disorders, and family
conﬂicts (Steinberg 2008). An understanding of devel-
opment impacts clinical decision making as well as goal
setting (Oetzel and Scherer 2003).

Therapists are challenged to establish an authentic
and collaborative working relationship. Adolescents
insincerity and pretence
tend to be intolerant of
(Rubenstein 1996). Therefore,
therapists need to
convey an authentic and respectful nonjudgmental
acceptance that does not condone antisocial or self-
destructive behavior. Given the importance of the
alliance to outcome and the likelihood that clients
will terminate therapy prematurely rather than raise
concerns about problems with the alliance (Miller
et al. 2005), it is recommended that therapists offer
adolescents choices (Oetzel and Scherer 2003) and
even elicit feedback about the therapy process (Miller
et al. 2005). Several studies have demonstrated that
eliciting client feedback is a signiﬁcant predictor of
treatment outcome (e.g., Bachelor and Horvath 1999).
It is proposed that adolescents beneﬁt from psycho-
therapy that is ﬂexible, effective, and attuned to the
relationship. Grehan and Freeman (2009) proposed
that an approach that combines the relationship-
centered aspects of psychodynamic therapy and the
problem-solving aspects of cognitive behavioral ther-
apy (CBT) could successfully address these criteria.
More speciﬁcally, assimilative psychodynamic psycho-
therapy allows for theoretically consistent integration
of
from diverse
approaches like CBT into a psychodynamic framework.
This approach is described in greater detail followed by
an examination of how it is relational, ﬂexible, and
effective.

psychotherapeutic

techniques

Assimilative Psychodynamic
Psychotherapy
Stricker and Gold (1996) developed assimilative psy-
chodynamic psychotherapy (APP), to be an integrative
approach comprised of a comprehensive psychody-
namically oriented conceptual framework that freely
incorporates ideas, techniques, and strategies from

the

other models of psychotherapy. As with many contem-
porary psychodynamic models, this approach empha-
sizes
exploration of unconscious processes,
motives, conﬂicts, anxieties, defenses, and the dynamic
roots of behavior. In addition, active interventions are
freely drawn from other psychotherapies for their
original purposes as well as psychodynamic purposes.
For example, an intervention such as recording events
in a thought log may be selected to produce the change
for which it was originally designed such as modifying
thoughts and behavior as well as its hypothesized
impact on important psychodynamic issues.

Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy employs
a three-tier model of personality structure and change.
The types of assessment and intervention modalities
may differ at each tier. Tier 1 consists of behavior and
interpersonal skills and can include the use of behavior
contracts and social skills training. Tier 2 includes
cognition, perception, and affect and can include
CBT interventions such as Socratic dialogues. Finally,
Tier 3 includes psychodynamic conﬂict, self-represen-
tations, and object
representations. Examples of
methods used in this tier include attention to the
recurrence of interpersonal themes in the therapy rela-
tionship referred to in the psychodynamic literature as
transference and countertransference. Psychological
causation is conceptualized as multidirectional and
the focus of attention moves among the interactions
of unconscious motivation, conscious experience,
action, and the impact of the behavior and attitudes
of signiﬁcant others. Stricker and Gold (2005) pro-
posed that change begins and can take place within
and among any of the tiers and can have reciprocal
effects on the other tiers.

is
Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy
based upon a psychodynamic relational model
in
which an individual’s sense of self develops in the
context of signiﬁcant past and present interpersonal
relationships. The relational nature of this theory is
also helpful in conceptualizing the role that others
play in the development and maintenance of psycho-
pathology. Indeed, it may be argued that individuals in
the adolescent’s life become unwitting participants in
their repetitive patterns and play a role in the mainte-
nance of that behavior. This may be especially true
among adolescents whose identities are still being
formed and whose interpersonal relationships seem
more ﬂuid than in adults.

Applying APP to Adolescents
Stricker and Gold (1996) originally developed assimi-
lative psychodynamic psychotherapy for individual
work with adults. In 2009, Grehan and Freeman
proposed that when therapists using APP attended to
system factors, this approach was well suited to adoles-
cent psychotherapy. Speciﬁcally, they made a case for
the importance of attending to and addressing the
“goodness of ﬁt” between the adolescent and the sys-
tems in their life. In other words, the adolescent’s
pathology is viewed as both an intrinsic difﬁculty and
a product of the context within which the problem
manifests itself. An adolescent’s presenting problem
is assumed to result from a unique interaction of
family dynamics, faulty thinking, skills deﬁcits, psycho-
dynamics, as well as a mismatch between biological
predisposition/temperament
environmental
demands.

and

Attention to the Relationship in
Therapy
Therapists who employ APP beneﬁt from the frame-
work and richness of attending to relationship issues.
Psychodynamic therapists tend to focus on relation-
ships, both inside and outside of the therapy ofﬁce
(Shedler 2010). In fact, relationally inﬂuenced psycho-
dynamic
self-
psychological) treat the interpersonal ﬁeld between
the therapist and the client as a major source of infor-
mation as well as an instrument for treatment (Aron
1996).

(e.g., object

therapists

relations,

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy A 199

A

Flexibility in Therapy
It is also proposed that adolescents beneﬁt from an
integrative therapy ﬂexible enough to change with
their needs. Therapists employing traditional therapies
developed for adults may ﬁnd themselves in a bind.
Being ﬂexible and adaptive to the adolescent’s needs
may challenge the conceptual framework of the thera-
peutic approach while remaining faithful
to the
approach may limit the therapist’s freedom to respond
ﬂexibly to the adolescent. Garcia and Weisz (2002)
reported that the most common reason for premature
termination was related to therapists who were not
ﬂexible enough to adapt to client’s needs.

The ability to freely draw active interventions are
from other psychotherapies for their original purposes
as well as psychodynamic purposes allows the therapist
to choose interventions for their purported outcome,
rather than because they ﬁt a particular model.
Combining psychodynamic and cognitive behavioral
approaches is valuable given their unique and comple-
are
mentary strengths. Psychodynamic
distinguished from other therapies by their focus on
affect and the expression of emotion, exploration of
attempts to avoid distressing thoughts and feelings, and
the identiﬁcation of recurring themes and patterns in
thoughts, feelings, self-concept, relationship, and life
experiences.
from other
approaches in their discussion of past experience,
focus on interpersonal relationship, an exploration of
the therapy relationship, and exploration of fantasy life
(Shedler 2010).

In addition,

they differ

therapies

The advantage of focusing on the interpersonal ﬁeld
becomes evident when considering the multiple ways
in which adolescents may experience and respond to
a therapist. For example, a therapist who is directive
and goal oriented may be perceived as an extension of
authority ﬁgures in their lives with aims of changing
the adolescent. On the other hand, a less active thera-
pist who refrains from self-disclosure may be experi-
enced as inauthentic or withholding. In addition, given
that adolescents referred for therapy often experience
conﬂicts around intimacy, it is not unusual that they
experience intense reactions as well as elicit strong
reactions in their therapist. In fact, there are numerous
ways an adolescent may respond to a therapist or elicit
responses from a therapist. Psychodynamic conceptu-
alizations lend themselves well to understanding these
dynamics.

In contrast, CBT is a goal-oriented approach that
lends itself well to immediate direct intervention. It is
a time-efﬁcient approach whose principles are gener-
ally easily understood and applied. Adolescents beneﬁt
from the fact that it teaches behavioral and emotional
self-control as well as the wide array of available cogni-
tive, emotional, and behavioral techniques. A therapist
using APP could shift among various approaches such
as a collaborative goal-directed approach, a supportive-
introspective approach, a here-and-now approach and
even an examination of current and past interpersonal
dynamics and the patterns of interaction that impact
their current difﬁculties.

Effectiveness of Therapy
Finally, the approach should be based on treatment
approaches that have been shown to be effective. It is

200 A Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

for the efﬁcacy and effectiveness of

a popular misconception that CBT is the only treat-
ment of choice and that psychodynamic therapy has
not been shown to be effective. CBT enjoys a great deal
of popularity in academic circles and the vast majority
of psychotherapy research employs this approach.
Although psychodynamic therapies have fallen out of
favor, the literature continues to be actively developed
as evidenced by the emergence of relational psychody-
namic approaches (e.g., Greenberg and Mitchell 1983).
Although there is far less research on psychodynamic
approaches than CBT, there is considerable empirical
support
this
approach among adults (Shedler 2010). In comparison
to the adult literature, the psychotherapy literature on
working with adolescents is sparse (Holmbeck et al.
2006) and research in psychotherapy effectiveness in
children and adolescents lags behind that of adults.
Nevertheless, there continues to be support for the
efﬁcacy of psychodynamic therapy with children and
adolescents (e.g., Leichsenring et al. 2004; Trowell et al.
2007). Although speciﬁc data about the effectiveness of
APP with adolescents are not available, evidence from
psychotherapy effectiveness studies employing either
CBT or dynamic approaches suggests that a combined
approach would most likely be effective.

Case Example
What follows is a case that illustrates the application of
APP to adolescents. Tom was a 17-year-old seen for
individual therapy in a metropolitan suburb in the
northeastern United States. This adolescent, whose
identifying information has been disguised, started
therapy with a “tough guy” attitude. During his ﬁrst
session, he casually stated that he did not need to see
a therapist and that he was only doing so because his
father was forcing him to do so. Once rapport was
developed, he added that he “did not mind coming,”
just that he had “nothing to talk about.”

Tom’s father, Joe, initiated the referral. He was
a sharply dressed businessman who presented with
a serious and intense demeanor. Although Joe was
raised in a tough blue-collar neighborhood, he had
worked his way up to being an executive and ﬂaunted
his upper middle class wealth with visible luxury items
including his home, cars, and suits. Joe stated that he
sought out therapy for Tom because his son was “argu-
mentative, oppositional and lazy.” Joe reported that he
believed that Tom’s difﬁculties were related to his

mother, whom Joe had divorced 12 years earlier. He
reported she had difﬁculty setting limits with Tom and
gave as an example his chronic issues with truancy
when living with her. For example, Tom had skipped
out of school over 50 school days in a single year. Joe
sought custody and the court ordered Tom to live with
his father. Tom continued to struggle with attendance
and the school district transferred him to an alternative
high school for students who were at risk for dropping
out. Joe initiated therapy after Tom had been living
with him for a year.

At home, Tom and Joe frequently engaged in power
struggles. Arguments would lead to Joe yelling at and
punishing Tom, who in turn would defy his father and
alternate between provoking and avoiding him. Both
father and son admitted to “losing control” with each
other from time to time. On one occasion, Tom called
911 claiming that his father hit him. Tom would
become enraged at his father’s domineering and inﬂex-
ible parenting. He also confronted other authority
ﬁgures such as teachers and even police ofﬁcers.

When therapy began, it was apparent that they
avoided discussing certain topics with each other. For
example, Joe knew of Tom’s knife collection, but avoided
discussing its signiﬁcance given their volatile relation-
ship. In session, Tom admitted to smoking pot several
times a day. In fact, Tom often appeared stoned during
sessions and reported being “high” much of the day. Joe
seemed unaware of this even after having previously
found marijuana while going through Tom’s pockets.
Joe believed Tom when he denied that it was his.

Tom visited his mother on alternate weekends and
longed to live with her again. He reported that she was
accepting of him and he “got away with whatever he
wanted” with her. Nonetheless, he remained disap-
pointed and did not feel she understood him. In
contrast, Joe was a ﬁrm disciplinarian. He followed
through on his word but had little interest in his son’s
experience. Both of Tom’s parents had used him as
collateral in their divorce and the conﬂict between
them that followed. He reported that the only thing
he cared about was “hanging out” with his friends and
playing handball. He was withdrawn from his family,
staying out as late as possible and minimizing contact
with them.

In the ﬁrst few sessions, Tom was responsive to
inquiry but did not initiate conversation. His energy
level was low and insight was poor, both of which were

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy A 201

A

likely worsened by his drug use. Early on, he related
a story of how he had told a prior therapist about drug
paraphernalia he had hidden in his room and how his
father had mysteriously found it the following day. This
was Tom’s way of communicating the importance of
trust in the current therapeutic relationship.

Tom’s withdrawal and anger were conceptualized as
ways of coping with his pain and loneliness of having
been a narcissistic extension stuck between a control-
ling father and an ineffective mother who were at
loggerheads with each other. Developmentally, he was
struggling with issues of independence and identity.
The goal of therapy was to help Tom work through
his anger toward adults and himself. In order to do so,
it was necessary to address the daily drug use, as it
interfered with the development of insight and respon-
sibility for his behavior.

Once it appeared that a working relationship had
been established, Tom engaged in a discussion about
his goals for therapy. His stated goal was to move back
in with his mother. In discussing this goal, he was open
to discussing his drug use that the therapist considered
an important target for intervention. Since Tom spoke
freely about his drug use, the therapist engaged him
in Socratic dialogue, which is a cognitive (Tier 2)
approach to explore his beliefs about pot use and its
effects. The drug use was not judged on a moral basis,
but instead explored in terms of its role in his life and
its effects on his goal. Over the course of several
sessions, Tom began to identify some negative effects
of his pot smoking and of hanging out with his
“druggie friends.” This identiﬁcation coincided with
the development of a romantic relationship. Although
his girlfriend was comfortable with his drug use, Tom
sought to spend more time with her and began to
recognize that the drug use and his friends interfered
with their relationship. Although this was a cognitive
intervention, it was also used for its dynamic goals.
From a dynamic standpoint, he was dissociated from
how he used drugs to manage his disappointment and
anger with his parents. In addition, his drug use also
functioned as a form of rebellion toward his father
while also being self-destructive.

Due to issues of conﬁdentiality, the therapist could
not inform Joe about Tom’s drug use. If Tom suspected
that the therapist “snitched” on him, even indirectly, it
would have been a breach of trust that would have
ended his engagement in therapy. Although Tom’s

romantic relationship had reduced his drug use, it
continued to play a major part in his life and the
therapist believed that Tom would need more signiﬁ-
cant intervention in order to reduce its use to a level
that did not negatively impact his functioning (a Tier 1
goal).

Shortly afterward, Tom returned home so clearly
stoned that Joe became alarmed and had Tom take
a store bought drug test. Needless to say, Tom failed
the test. Given that Tom was in the process of getting
a driver’s permit and desperately wanted a car, Joe
wanted to use this as leverage to stop the drug use.
The therapist consulted with both of them in negotiat-
ing an agreement in which Tom would get continued
use of a car in exchange for passing weekly drug tests.
Surprisingly, Tom did not rebel, but instead agreed to
these conditions and made a concerted effort to stop
smoking pot. Although it is possible that he had
expected a harsher reaction from his father, and
believed this as an opportunity to maintain some free-
dom and the ability to see his girlfriend, is was also
possible that in this situation he experienced his father
as caring rather than punitive.

Over the course of several months, Tom made
notable progress. His daily pot smoking was almost
completely eliminated, he developed an interest in
graduating from school, and the level of his conﬂict at
home decreased signiﬁcantly. He still avoided his
family and felt anger toward his father, but it was
being directed at getting out of his home and fueled
his desire to graduate and get a job. Tom’s relationship
with the therapist allowed him to bridge the gap
between him and his father.

At the start of therapy, the therapist’s contact with
the father was frequent, primarily because Joe drove his
son to the appointments. Once Tom began to show
improvement, he began to miss appointments after
several months of consistent attendance. Tom would
simply not show up for a session. The therapist’s phone
calls to Joe’s mobile phone went straight to voice mail
and Joe would not call back, even though his phone
never left his side. Each time Tom would show up the
following week and Joe would claim to have left
a message on the therapist’s voicemail. Joe would insist
on paying for the missed session and was adamant that
Tom should continue therapy. This lapse occurred
several times and each time, Joe became resisted the
therapist’s efforts to discuss this further.

202 A Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

The therapist experienced the inconsistency in
appointments as disruptive and believed that Tom
continued to beneﬁt from therapy. When asked, Tom
expressed a desire to continue therapy. Joe’s lack of
responsibility and courtesy left the therapist feeling
annoyed. A few months later, Tom started driving
himself to his appointments and the therapist’s contact
with Joe stopped altogether. Joe would send an occa-
sional check with Tom that paid most, but never all, of
the balance of their bill. This was not likely a lack
of ﬁnances and instead was experienced like the use of
money as power. Joe did not respond to the therapist’s
attempts to contact him about his son’s therapy. When
the therapist inquired with Tom about the difﬁculty
communicating with his father, Tom became protective
of his father.

The therapist felt angry and in a bind. Although
Joe’s avoidance was not keeping him from working
with Tom, he felt as if he was being dismissed and
rendered powerless. He believed that Joe’s disengage-
ment from his son’s therapy would undermine its
effectiveness and he felt helpless to do anything about
it. The therapist’s only leverage was to threaten to stop
therapy, which appeared to be too drastic a reaction.
Becoming confrontational with Joe might have made
the therapist feel more powerful, but the likely result
would be Joe’s termination of Tom’s therapy.

With time, the therapist recognized this situation as
what relational psychoanalysts refer to as an enactment
(e.g., Hirsch 1996). An enactment refers to intense
interpersonal reactions to current events in the therapy
relationship that repeat patterns from the adolescent
and therapist’s individual histories. An enactment usu-
ally unfolds in the following manner. First, the adoles-
cent repeats an interpersonal relational pattern in
which he or she is replicating a way of relating that
may be part of the current problem. The therapist has
an inevitable interpersonal reaction based on his or her
own history in the context of the therapeutic relation-
ship. The key to an enactment is that the open and
attentive therapist eventually recognizes the enactment
in which he or she is participating, affording an oppor-
tunity to respond in a way that could lead to a different
and healthier outcome than the patient has experienced
in the past.

In this case, the therapist was the recipient of what
Tom experienced with his father: feeling used and ren-
dered powerless. The therapist understood in a deep

and meaningful way the source of Tom’s anger and
they were also
withdrawal. He recognized that
replaying a family dynamic in Tom’s life. Joe used subtle
and coercive forms of power while maintaining the
fac¸ade that he was acting in his son’s interest. On the
other hand, the therapist found himself in a role similar
to the way Tom experienced his mother; being caring
and supportive, but ineffective in protecting him from
his father’s coercion. They were reliving an important
family dynamic.

This immersion in the enactment brought Tom and
the therapist into the “here and now.” This realization
had a signiﬁcant effect on the therapist’s ability to work
with Tom. He no longer felt constrained in his response
and gained an understanding of Tom’s subjective expe-
rience that allowed them to explore these issues in a way
that was previously not possible. This recognition gave
the therapist the freedom to explore Tom’s experience
and help him regain his voice when he was feeling
coerced and powerless. This emotional insight along
with Tom’s efforts to change allowed him to make
continued progress.

the recurrence of

This case illustrates the advantage of combining
active goal-directed approaches with the dynamic
interpersonal
formulations of
themes in the therapy relationship. In this case, reduc-
ing the drug use was crucial to change and allowed the
dynamics to take place and be addressed. In addition,
the immersion in the interpersonal dynamics allowed
for a greater understanding and sympathy for Tom’s
experience.

Discussion
As this case example illustrates, applying APP to ado-
lescents offers a ﬂexible yet theoretically consistent
framework for approaching this population (Grehan
and Freeman 2009). This framework takes behavior,
cognition, object representations, and systems variables
into account while maintaining a ﬂexible therapeutic
stance. Adolescents are attempting to develop their
sense of self and beneﬁt from support and ﬂexibility
in terms of determining their own needs. The ability to
freely draw active interventions from other psychother-
apies for their original purposes as well as psychody-
to choose
namic purposes allows
interventions for their purported outcome, rather
than because they ﬁt a particular model. This view
echoes Miller et al. (2005) outcome informed work,

the therapist

which posits that the outcome of an intervention mat-
ters more than the nature of the intervention itself.

Applying APP to adolescents has signiﬁcant face
validity. It is reasonable to expect that adapting thera-
peutic approaches based on the needs of the adolescent
leads to a higher likelihood of therapeutic success.
However,
to examine
empirically and there are no controlled trials to date
to support that this complex additive model results in
improved outcomes.

this formulation is difﬁcult

APP is best suited for verbal and insightful adoles-
cents for whom a long-term treatment is appropriate
and whose families can be engaged in therapy.
Although the ﬂexibility of this approach suggests that
it has the potential to be effective with a variety of
populations, the relative complexity of this approach
may not be well suited for adolescents who pose imme-
diate danger to themselves or others (e.g., psychosis,
severe behavioral difﬁculties) or require the structure
and limits of a residential
In
addition, the requirement for verbal interaction limits
the effectiveness of this approach with adolescents with
developmental delays.

treatment

facility.

Although there are several advantages of applying
APP to adolescents, there are challenges and questions
that need to be addressed. Although a stated goal of
APP with adolescents is to increase the “goodness of
ﬁt” between the adolescents and their environment, it is
difﬁcult and at times impractical for therapists to
engage outside individuals to adapt to the adolescent.
Consulting with parents may be possible, yet doing so
with schools and other settings may be difﬁcult given
issues such as trust and conﬁdentiality.

In addition, adding goal-directed interventions to
a psychodynamic conceptualization can be challenging.
For example, while some interventions are active and
practitioner led, this may at times conﬂict with the
collaborative and patient-driven nature of APP (e.g.,
Stricker and Gold 2005). Furthermore, evidence sug-
gests that CBT and dynamic therapies with adolescents
do not differ signiﬁcantly in terms of effectiveness; it is
unclear whether the ﬂexibility provided by the model
presented here outweighs the challenges created by the
complexity in implementing this approach. Nonethe-
it offers a ﬂexible and relationally attuned
less,
approach that may be particularly well suited to com-
plex cases where other approaches have not been
successful.

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy A 203

References
Arnett, J. J. (1999). Adolescent storm and stress, reconsidered.

A

American Psychologist, 54(5), 317–326.

Aron, L. (1996). A meeting of minds: Mutuality in psychoanalysis.

Hillsdale: The Analytic Press.

Bachelor, A., & Horvath, A. (1999). The therapeutic relationship. In
M. A. Hubble, B. L. Duncan, & S. D. Miller (Eds.), The heart and
soul of change: What works in therapy (pp. 133–178). Washington:
American Psychological Association.

Bordin, E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic
concept of the working alliance. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research
and Practice, 16, 252–260.

DiGiuseppe, R., Linscott, J., & Jilton, R. (1996). Developing the
therapeutic alliance in child-adolescent psychotherapy. Applied &
Perspective Psychology, 5, 85–100.

Elkind, D. (1978). Understanding the young adolescent. Adolescence,

13, 127–134.

Garcia, J. A., & Weisz, J. R. (2002). When youth mental health care
stops: Therapeutic relationship and other reasons for ending
youth outpatient treatment. Journal of Consulting & Clinical
Psychology, 70, 439–443.

Greenberg, J., & Mitchell, S. (1983). Object relations in psychoanalytic

theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Grehan, P., & Freeman, A. (2009). Neither child nor adult: Applying
integrative therapy to adolescents. Journal of psychotherapy
Integration, 19(3), 269–290.

Hirsch, I. (1996). Observing-participation, mutual enactment, and
the new classical models. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 32,
359–383.

Holmbeck, G. N., O’Mahar, K., Colder, C., & Updegrove, A. (2006).
Cognitive-behavioral therapy with adolescents: Guides from
developmental psychology. In P. Kendall (Ed.), Child and adoles-
cent therapy. New York: Guilford.

Kazdin, A., Holland, L., & Crowley, M. (1997). Family experiences of
barriers to treatment and premature termination from child
therapy.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65,
453–463.

Kazdin, A. E., Marciano, P. L., & Whitley, M. K. (2005). The thera-
peutic alliance in cognitive-behavioral treatment of children
referred for oppositional, aggressive, and antisocial behavior.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73(4), 726–730.
Leichsenring, F., Rabung, S., & Leibing, E. (2004). The efﬁcacy of
short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy in speciﬁc psychiatric
disorders: A meta-analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61(12),
1208–1216.

Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., & Hubble, M. A. (2005). Outcome-
informed clinical work. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried
(Eds.), Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration (2nd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press.

Oetzel, K. B., & Scherer, D. G. (2003). Therapeutic engagement with
adolescents in psychotherapy. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research,
Practice, Training, 40(3), 215–225.

Politano, P. M. (1993). A conceptualization of psychotherapy with
children and adolescents. In A. J. Finch, W. M. Nelson, & E. S. Ott
(Eds.), Cognitive-behavioral procedures with children and adoles-
cents: A practical guide. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

204 A Assortative Mating

Rubenstein, A. K. (1996). Interventions for a scattered generation:
Treating adolescents in the nineties. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice, Training, 33, 353–360.

Shedler, J. (2010). The efﬁcacy of psychodynamic psychotherapy.

American Psychologist, 65(2), 98–109.

Shirk, S. R., & Karver, M. (2003). Prediction of treatment outcome
from relationship variables in child and adolescent therapy:
A meta-analytic review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 71, 452–464.

Steinberg, L. (2008). Adolescence (8th ed.). New York: McGraw Hill.
Stricker, G., & Gold, J. (1996). Psychotherapy integration: An assim-
ilative psychodynamic approach. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 3(1), 47–58.

Stricker, G., & Gold, J. (2005). Assimilative psychodynamic psycho-
therapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of
psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University
Press.

Trowell, J., Joffe, I., Campbell, J. C., Clemente, C., Almqvist, F.,
Soininen, M., et al. (2007). Childhood depression: A place for
psychotherapy. An outcome study comparing individual psycho-
dynamic psychotherapy and family therapy. European Journal of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 16, 157–167.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1999). Mental
health: A report of the surgeon general. Rockville: U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration, Center for Mental Health Ser-
vices, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Mental
Health. Retrieved April 9, 2010 from http://www.surgeongeneral.
gov/library/mentalhealth/home.html

Weisz, J. R., Weiss, B., Alicke, M. D., & Klotz, M. L. (1987). Effective-
ness of psychotherapy with children and adolescents: A meta-
analysis
Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 55(4), 542–549.

for clinicians.

Weisz, J. R., Weiss, B., Han, S., Granger, D. A., & Morton, T. (1995).
Effects of psychotherapy with children and adolescents revisited:
A meta-analysis of treatment outcome studies. Psychological
Bulletin, 117, 450–468.

Assortative Mating

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Assortative mating represents a tendency in individuals
to mate with other people who share certain similari-
ties, such as a particular trait or qualities like intelli-
gence or hair color. The concept has been commonly
accepted by evolutionary theorists and behavior

geneticists who have studied mating by a variety of
species. For example, in various studies that focus on
comparisons made between identical twins (genetically
identical) and fraternal twins (nongenetically identi-
cal), positive assortative mating for the trait of social
attitudes have been quite strong, especially for identical
twins (Abrahmson and Baker 2002). This ﬁnding sug-
gests that this tendency could be impacted by genetic
factors, especially in assortative mating practices based
on social interactions. Numerous studies have found
support for this process whereby individuals choose
partners with desired attributes that often include
behaviors and traits that are similar to their own (see
Rhule-Louie and McMahon 2007).

This phenomenon could hold true especially for
younger adults and adolescents because of the added
inﬂuence of family and peer environments on their
developing social attitudes and behaviors. In cases of
adolescents who engage in problem behavior, for exam-
ple, adolescents exhibit a tendency to select partners or
mates with a similar disposition to participate in ques-
tionable activities (Rhule-Louis and McMahon 2007).
Other important studies have found that, whereas
assortative mating for many individual-difference vari-
ables (such as personality traits) is low, assortative
mating for actual antisocial behaviors is substantial
(Krueger et al. 1998). This research reveals that adoles-
cents’ predilection to select mates with this same pref-
erence pattern can exacerbate their rate of problem
behaviors. In a study of individuals who exhibit char-
acteristics of antisocial disorders, it was discovered that
persons who display an assortative mating preference
for other persons who also exhibit antisocial tendencies
have a higher frequency of engaging in criminal behav-
ior, perhaps in response to their partner’s capacity to
engage in undesirable actions as well (Simons et al.
2002). These types of studies are of increasing signiﬁ-
cance in that assortative mating has become a concept
that has moved from a narrow focus on selecting for
physical factors and personality dispositions to much
more complex traits like behaviors.

References
Abrahamson, A. C., & Baker, L. A. (2002). Rebellious teens? Genetic
and environmental inﬂuences on the social attitudes of adoles-
cents. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1382–1408.

Athletic Programs and Title IX A 205

A

Krueger, R., Mofﬁtt, T., Caspi, A., Bleske, A., & Silvas, P. (1998).
Assortative mating for antisocial behavior: Developmental and
methodological implications. Behavior Genetics, 28, 173–186.
Rhule-Louie, D. M., & McMahon, R. J. (2007). Problem behavior and
romantic relationships: Assortative mating, behavior contagion,
and desistance. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 10,
53–100.

Simons, R. L., Stewart, E., Gordon, L., Conger, R. D., & Elder, G. H.
(2002). A test of life-course explanations for stability and change
in antisocial behavior from adolescence to young adulthood.
Criminology, 40, 401–434.

Athletic Programs and Title IX

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

“Title IX” is the common term used to refer to Title IX
of the Education Amendments of 1972 (2010). Title IX
is a United States federal law requiring that “No person in
the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded
from participation in, be denied the beneﬁts of, or be
subjected to discrimination under any education pro-
gram or activity receiving Federal ﬁnancial assistance. . .”
(Id.). In its broad prohibition against sex discrimination
in the provision of educational programs, the statute
applies to an entire institution or school as long as any
part of it receives federal funding. Given the heavy reli-
ance on federal funds to operate schools, the statute has
a very broad and powerful reach. It even reaches school
activities that receive little federal funding, like school
sports. That reach has been quite controversial and even
unexpected given that the statute originally was meant to
address employment practices of federally ﬁnanced insti-
tutions. Title IX expanded its reach when what used to be
called the Department of Health, Education and Welfare,
which was granted the power to create implementation
regulations, chose to give the statute a very broad inter-
pretation as it substantially expanded the law’s coverage
and its own enforcement power. Gradually, Title IX
evolved to address discrimination in all aspects of educa-
tion, ranging from admissions, housing, course offerings,
recruitment, ﬁnancial assistance, and counseling to
student health and sexual harassment. The area that was

not even envisioned when the statute was enacted, school
athletics, has become the most frequent focus of claims
and commentaries relating to Title IX.

The Ofﬁce for Civil Rights in the US Department
of Education (OCR) administers Title IX. The OCR
promulgates regulations in furtherance of the mandate
it receives from the legislation that created Title IX.
Most notably, OCR regulations require all institutions
receiving federal funds to conduct self-evaluations,
with those evaluations examining how institutions
comply with the statute’s mandate of not discriminat-
ing in educational activities. The OCR then uses those
statements
the institution
to determine whether
complies with the federal mandates.

In terms of athletic programs, the OCR has set
several factors that are considered when determining
whether an institution or school has violated its man-
dates. For example, it examines whether the selection of
sports and levels of competition effectively accommo-
date the interests and abilities of members of both sexes
and the extent to which there is an appropriate provi-
sion of equipment and supplies, scheduling of games
and practice time, travel and per diem allowance,
assignment and compensation of coaches and tutors,
the provision of locker rooms, practice and competitive
facilities, the provision of medical and training facilities
and services, the provision of housing and dining facil-
ities and services, and publicity. Although some schools
may not do as well on some factors as others, they still
can avoid sanctions because the factors are considered
as a whole. These factors, however, were further elabo-
rated upon by a policy interpretation for Title IX that
includes what became known as the “three-prong test”
of an institution’s compliance: (1) providing athletic
participation opportunities
that are substantially
proportionate to the student enrollment, (2) demon-
strating a continual expansion of athletic opportunities
for the underrepresented sex, or (3) making a full and
effective accommodation of the interest and ability of
underrepresented sex (Ofﬁce for Civil Rights 2005). By
showing compliance with any of these three prongs, an
institution could receive their federal funds.

The legislation and resulting regulations have been
deemed extremely effective. Reviews note, for example,
an 850% increase in participation in sports for high
school girls 30 years after the mandates were started in

206 A Attachment During Adolescence

1972; they also note that girls have gone from being about
7% to being over 40% of school athletes (Eckes 2006).
Given the important role that sports can play in foster-
ing positive youth development (Anderson-Butcher
et al. 2003), these certainly are striking ﬁndings.

Although the above would seem to be extremely
positive developments, and at least seem fair to the
extent that they seek to ensure equality, the regulations
have been the subject of considerable criticism (for
brief reviews, see Johnson 1998; Little 2008). Among
the most frequent criticisms has been the costs that the
enforcement of the regulations has had on male teams,
arguing that they have been cut to replace them with
female sports. Critics also have argued that there is
a need for separation of the sexes for particular sports,
females are at increased injury risk, and participating in
sports is a privilege rather than a right. In addition,
there are arguments that litigation costs draw much
needed funds away from educational programs.

This area of law presents an important development
in the rights of adolescents. Research continues to dem-
onstrate the importance of athletic participation, and the
beneﬁts found in that research are complemented by the
real beneﬁts that can accrue to athletes during adulthood.
Legal developments in this area show how school ofﬁcials
have increased obligations to ensure opportunities for
more students than traditionally has been the case.
There still is much developing in this area that serves as
a good example of how gender disparities in educational
opportunities are not only a consequence of problematic
stereotypes but also a cause of those stereotypes.

References
Anderson-Butcher, D., Newsome, W. S., & Ferrari, T. M. (2003).
Participation in boys and girls clubs and relationships to youth
outcomes. Journal of Community Psychology, 31, 39–55.

Eckes, S. E. (2006). Title IX and high school opportunities: Issues of
equity on and in the Court. Wisconsin Women’s Law Journal, 21,
175–194.

Education Amendments of 1972. (2010). Title IX. 20 U.S.C. } 1681.
Johnson, T. J. (1998). Throwing like a girl: Constitutional implica-
tions of Title IX regarding gender discrimination in high school
athletic programs. Northern Illinois University Law Review, 18,
575–600.

Little, J. (2008). Running against the wind: Sex discrimination in high
school girl’s cross country. UMKC Law Review, 76, 711–725.
Ofﬁce for Civil Rights. (2005). Additional clariﬁcation of intercolle-
giate athletics policy: Three-part test – part three. United States
Department of Education. http://www.ed.gov/about/ofﬁces/list/
ocr/docs/title9guidanceadditional.pdf. Accessed 11 Jan 2010.

Attachment During
Adolescence

KIRSTEN L. BUIST
Research Center Psychosocial Development in
Context, Utrecht University, The Netherlands

Overview
This essay considers a number of important issues
concerning attachment during adolescence. It begins
with a short historical description of attachment theory
the importance of studying
and its development,
attachment during adolescence, and relevant measure-
ment issues. Then, it examines the source of individual
differences in quality of attachment, changes in quality
of attachment during adolescence, and the connection
between attachment and adolescent psychosocial (mal)
adjustment.

Key Definitions
A general deﬁnition of attachment is an enduring
affectional bond of substantial intensity (Ainsworth
1989). Two names that are almost synonymous with
attachment theory are those of John Bowlby and Mary
Ainsworth. Both have provided indispensable contri-
butions to attachment theory as it still stands today.
Bowlby represented the theoretical force behind attach-
ment theory, and Ainsworth provided valuable empir-
ical corroboration. Bowlby theorized that human
infants have a natural disposition to form close affec-
tional bonds to other human beings (attachment ﬁg-
ures), and that these bonds, or attachments, serve the
purpose of survival. The attachment system is a system
of homeostasis, the desired outcome of which is prox-
(Bowlby 1982;
attachment ﬁgure
imity of
Ainsworth 1989). It is activated in times of stress.
When a child feels frightened, tired, sick, alone, or
unsafe in any way, he or she will exhibit attachment
behavior, such as crying or calling out or otherwise
seeking contact with the attachment ﬁgure (depending
on the child’s developmental capabilities). This display
of attachment behavior triggers caregiving behavior
from the attachment ﬁgure, thus resulting in the
attachment ﬁgure’s proximity. This behavioral system
is evolutionary reinforced, as closeness to a caring adult
increases an infant’s chances of survival. When the

the

Attachment During Adolescence A 207

A

child feels safe and secure, deactivation of the attach-
ment system occurs, and attachment ﬁgures provide
a safe base from which the child can explore the world.
Security in times of stress and facilitation of explora-
tion are two important, interrelated functions of the
attachment system.

Over time, attachment experiences are integrated to
form an internal working model of attachment, which
can be secure or insecure. Insecure attachment is
further differentiated into insecure avoidant, insecure
resistant, and disorganized attachment. These different
categories represent different strategies for interacting
with parents (or other attachment ﬁgures). Securely
attached children are conﬁdent in themselves and
others. They are emotionally expressive: they feel secure
enough to show their emotions, positive as well as
negative. When upset, they are generally easily soothed
by their parents, who are usually sensitive to their
needs. Children with insecure avoidant attachment
seem to minimize their attachment behavior: they
outwardly show minimal signs of distress in stressful
situations and barely use their parents for comfort.
Children with insecure resistant attachment seem to
maximize their attachment behavior: they are difﬁcult
to soothe by parents when they are upset, and may
show anger toward them. Generally, they seem preoc-
cupied with their parents. Children assigned to the last
category, disorganized attachment, have in common
that they lack a clear consistent behavioral strategy
toward their parents. These children may act strange,
scared, or stereotypical in stressful situations.

Attachment is not limited to infancy, but remains
important during the entire life span. However, with
increasing age, attachment relationships change in
form and function. An infant needs his or her parents
in order to survive, but as the infant reaches childhood
and adolescence, he or she becomes progressively more
independent. The dependability of the infant is less
relevant in adolescence, whereas the attachment rela-
tionship itself is as relevant as ever. Therefore, the form
and function of attachment behavior changes as the
physical and cognitive competence of an individual
changes.

According to theorists, attachment has two dimen-
sions. In infancy and early childhood, working models
of attachment are inferred from experiments such as
the Strange Situation, which focus on the behavioral
dimension of attachment (Hinde 1982). This behavioral

dimension of attachment concerns the extent to which
children use attachment ﬁgures as a safe base for
exploration. The second dimension of attachment,
the affective/cognitive dimension, contains the affec-
tively toned cognitive expectancies that are part of
a person’s working model of attachment (Bretherton
1985). As children mature in adolescence, the affective/
cognitive dimension of attachment can be directly
tapped by self-report measures.

Why Study Attachment in
Adolescence?
Most of
the studies concerning attachment have
focused on infancy and early childhood, and adult
attachment has also received considerable attention.
However, comparatively less is known about attach-
ment during adolescence. The historical view of ado-
lescence as a period of storm and stress might not be as
universally true for all adolescents as once posited.
However, adolescence is a transitional period,
in
which many social, cognitive, and physical changes
take place. An important developmental task for ado-
lescents is identity formation and acquiring more
autonomy from parents while maintaining a healthy
relationship with parents at the same time. So, during
adolescence, children and parents need to renegotiate
their relationship as well as their positions and roles
within the family. For most adolescents, it is a time of
increased conﬂicts with parents and feelings of insecu-
rity. It is already indicated earlier in this essay that the
attachment system is triggered by stress and feelings of
insecurity. Since adolescence is a period of life in which
children and their families are confronted with a great
number of changes and challenges, quality of parent–
adolescent attachment is important in increasing the
odds of a positive outcome. Therefore, it is crucial to
study attachment during adolescence.

Measures and Measurement Issues
Whether one studies attachment in infancy, childhood,
or adolescence has its consequences for the way quality
of attachment is measured. In infancy, observation of
attachment behavior is most common, since one
cannot ask an infant to describe his or her quality of
attachment verbatim. As the child matures in adoles-
cence, however, cognitive changes allow the adolescent
to adequately put his or her feelings and thoughts into
words. From this period onward, researchers can

208 A Attachment During Adolescence

instruments

simply ask participants of attachment studies to indi-
cate how they feel about other persons and about
themselves. There have been some observational stud-
ies concerning adult attachment, but because attach-
ment behavior itself becomes less easily triggered and
recognizable as such, and because questionnaires and
interviews are a more time-efﬁcient way of studying
attachment, adolescent attachment research is domi-
nated by self-report measures and interview methods.
When studying attachment relationships during
adolescence, one should use an instrument that reliably
measures the affectively based cognitive expectancies of
felt security concerning speciﬁc attachment ﬁgures,
and can be used with early to late adolescents. There
are several
that measure attachment
beyond infancy. A general distinction can be made
between measures that asses attachment style, such as
the Adult Attachment Interview (AAI; George et al.
1985), and measures that asses attachment relation-
ships, for example, the Inventory of Parent and Peer
Attachment (IPPA; Armsden and Greenberg 1987).
The AAI is a frequently used, reliable, and valid retro-
spective semi-structured interview,
in which older
adolescents and adults reﬂect on past attachment expe-
riences. In the last decade, researchers have also
adjusted this measure for use with children (Child
Attachment Interview) and adolescents (Attachment
Interview for Childhood and Adolescence). Transcripts
of the interviews are coded concerning descriptions of
childhood attachment experiences, the language used
in these descriptions, and whether the person is able to
provide a coherent, integrated description of these
experiences. All these instruments aim at capturing
a generalized representation of attachment, as opposed
to current attachment relationships. The IPPA (or
questionnaires based on the IPPA, such as the IPPA-R
and People in My Life questionnaire) is also an often-
used questionnaire that assesses the affective/cognitive
dimension of attachment. It has been constructed with
the purpose of use with adolescents. As one of the few
available instruments that measure current parent–
adolescent attachment relationships,
it provides an
indication of felt security by measuring the adolescent’s
trust in the availability and sensitivity of the attach-
ment ﬁgure, the quality of communication, which
fosters comfort, and the extent of anger and alienation
in the relationship with the attachment ﬁgure.

Both types of measures (attachment style and
attachment relationship) show excellent psychometric
and theoretical quality, as indicated by good validity
and reliability, as well as a ﬁrm basis in traditional
attachment theory. Which type of attachment measure
to use is largely dependent on the type of research
question one wishes to study.

Sources of Individual Differences
An important issue from both a theoretical as well as
a practical, clinical point of view is the explanation for
individual differences in attachment. Theoretically,
a theory of development is incomplete if it does not
offer hypotheses concerning which circumstances lead
to particular outcomes. Clinically, it is important to
understand the conditions that can lead to speciﬁc
outcomes for the sake of intervention. Concerning
adolescent attachment, one needs to know whether
differences in quality of attachment are associated
with characteristics of the adolescent, characteristics
of the attachment ﬁgure, or of the speciﬁc relationships
in order to effectively improve quality of attachment. If
quality of attachment represents a characteristic of the
adolescent, then interventions to enhance psychosocial
adjustment and well-being by increasing this quality
should focus primarily on the adolescent. A focus on
working models of attachment
such an
approach. Experience with attachment ﬁgures over
time leads an individual to shape a working model of
these attachment relationships and create a general
working model of attachment, which the person uses
when engaging in new relationships (Bowlby 1982).
Consequently, in this view, quality of attachment is
conceptualized as a characteristic of an individual.

favors

However, in infant attachment studies, sensitivity
and responsivity of the attachment ﬁgure have shown
to be of major inﬂuence regarding quality of attach-
ment of the infant (van IJzendoorn et al. 1992).
Research has also shown that interventions concerning
parenting behavior are associated with changes in
quality of infant attachment. For adolescents, parents
are usually still the primary attachment ﬁgures, so these
relationships are still very inﬂuential
attachment
concerning adolescent psychosocial adjustment.
If
characteristics of the attachment ﬁgure are essential
for individual differences in quality of attachment,
then intervention should focus primarily on the

attachment ﬁgure and caregiving behavior, instead of
solely on the adolescent.

A third possibility is that differences in quality of
attachment are characteristics of the relationship itself,
the unique combination of both the adolescent and
the attachment ﬁgure. Research has shown that quality
of attachment may be relationship speciﬁc (Goossens
and van IJzendoorn 1990). A person can be securely
attached to mother and insecurely attached to father,
and vice versa. If this hypothesis holds for adolescents,
then focusing exclusively on either the adolescent or on
both of the parents would not be a fruitful way of
increasing quality of parent–adolescent attachment.

characteristics of

It might well be that all three sources are important,
but that one is more inﬂuential than the other. Because
until recently no adequate methodology was available
to disentangle individual versus relationship effects,
this issue remained a question of theoretical orienta-
tion. Nowadays, however, sophisticated methodology,
such as the Social Relations Model (Kenny and LaVoie
1984), enables us to examine this question statistically.
The Social Relations Model (SRM) is a statistical tool
for disentangling individual, dyadic, and group sources
of variance in dyadic data, which are named actor,
partner, relationship, and group effects in the SRM.
So, for example, it can help us determine whether
differences between adolescents concerning adoles-
cent–mother quality of attachment are best explained
by characteristics of the adolescent (adolescent’s actor
effect),
attachment ﬁgure
(mother’s partner effect), characteristics of the speciﬁc
relationship (adolescent–mother relationship effect),
and/or characteristics of the family as a whole (family
effect). Application of the SRM to family attachment
data (Buist et al. 2004) showed that differences between
adolescents in quality of parental attachment were best
internal working model
explained by adolescents’
(about 50% of the explained variance) and relation-
ship-speciﬁc
the
explained variance). This is consistent with the idea
that internal working models of attachment and attach-
ment relationship are two related, but separate con-
structs (Allen 2008). However, although characteristics
of the attachment ﬁgure and of the family as a whole
were less important, they still accounted for 10% and
15% of
respectively. So,
sensitivity of the attachment ﬁgure contributes to

the explained variance,

(about 25% of

characteristics

the

Attachment During Adolescence A 209

A

differences in parental attachment in adolescence, and
there are also family-level differences concerning the
degree to which attachment relationship within fami-
lies are secure. Further longitudinal research also
showed that most (but not all) of these attachment
processes are relatively stable (Buist et al. 2008). The
contribution of internal working models, sensitivity of
the attachment ﬁgure, and family characteristics does
not change during adolescence, but that of the unique
adjustment between adolescents and their parents
increases.

Continuity Versus Change
Another important question concerning attachment is
the degree to which it changes over time, or whether
attachment is relatively stable. Research into continuity
or
change of attachment quality has provided
contradicting results, some studies ﬁnding age-related
changes, and others failing to ﬁnd them. These differ-
ences in ﬁndings can be explained by different concep-
tualizations of the construct of attachment. A lot of
research concerning adolescent attachment has focused
on attachment style, internal working models of attach-
ment. Since these internal working models of attach-
ment are based on a large number of attachment
experiences over a prolonged time period, attachment
style is thought to be quite stable over time. Researchers
who focus on this particular conceptualization and
apply matching measurements (e.g., the AAI) generally
ﬁnd stability. For example, some researchers have been
able to demonstrate that attachment security in infancy
can successfully predict attachment security in late
adolescence. Additionally, these studies generally use
attachment categories (e.g., secure vs. insecure; secure
vs.
insecure
disorganized). Following that approach, stability is
indicated by remaining in the same category at two
different points in time, whereas change means that
an individual shifts from one category to another
(e.g., from secure to insecure avoidant).

insecure avoidant,

insecure resistant,

On the other hand, studies that focused on quality
of speciﬁc current attachment relationships instead
of attachment style or internal working models of
attachment have generally found age-related changes
in quality of parent–adolescent attachment. Short-term
longitudinal studies have shown that these speciﬁc
attachment relationships tend to change during this

210 A Attachment During Adolescence

developmental period,
indicating that quality of
adolescent–parent attachment tends to decrease from
early to middle adolescence, followed by a gradual
increase until late adolescence. So, attachment style
seems to be relatively stable, whereas speciﬁc attach-
ment relationships change during adolescence.

Attachment and Adolescent
Adjustment
Attachment has been consistently linked to positive as
well as negative behavioral outcomes. Positive attach-
ment experiences result in a child or adolescent with
conﬁdence in himself or herself and in the availability
important others. Consequently,
and sensitivity of
attachment security is associated with better academic
performance and increased emotional and social com-
petence, as indicated by a greater sense of social accep-
tance as well as higher quality of peer relationships and
friendships.

Insecure attachment, however, increases the risk of
a wide array of behavioral problems. Negative attach-
ment experiences in infancy and childhood result in an
internal working model of attachment that includes
a negative image of self and of the social world. An
insecurely attached child views himself or herself as
unworthy of love and views the (social) world as
negative and untrustworthy. Reﬂecting the importance
of quality of attachment for psychosocial (mal)adjust-
ment, this connection has been the subject of consid-
erable research efforts.

Concerning problem behavior, a distinction should
be made between the different insecure attachment
categories, as they are associated with different types
of problem behaviors and psychopathologies (Allen
2008). Adolescent depression can be predicted by
infant insecure resistant and avoidant attachment.
These children have learned from early experiences
that attachment ﬁgures are unavailable, creating
a negative self-image and low self-esteem in combina-
tion with a decreased sense of control, which often
manifests itself in depressive symptoms in adolescence.
Anxiety disorders have been linked to insecure resistant
attachment. Parents of insecure resistant children may
be either rejecting or overprotective, resulting in less
exploration and more fearfulness in their children.

Externalizing problems have also been linked to
insecure attachment. Only a small proportion of
severely aggressive and delinquent adolescents are

securely attached. Similarly, both insecure avoidant
and disorganized attachment signiﬁcantly increase the
risk of aggression, substance abuse, and delinquency in
adolescence. The oppositional or antisocial behavior
reﬂects a disregard for other people’s feelings, which
may result from the experience that attachment ﬁgures
often disregard the child’s feelings.

Most of these studies have taken place in Western
societies. Whereas the evidence concerning the impor-
tance of parent–adolescent attachment for adjustment
and problem behavior is compelling, more research in
non-Western societies is needed to examine whether
the links between attachment and adjustment are
inﬂuenced by different cultural and social values.

References
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1989). Attachment beyond infancy. American

Psychologist, 44, 709–716.

Allen, J. P. (2008). The attachment system in adolescence. In
J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory,
research, and clinical applications (pp. 419–435). New York:
Guilford.

Armsden, G. C., & Greenberg, M. T. (1987). The inventory of parent
and peer attachment: Individual differences and their relation-
ship to psychological well-being in adolescence. Journal of Youth
and Adolescence, 16(5), 427–453.

Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment (2nd ed.).

New York: Basic Books.

Bretherton, I. (1985). Attachment theory: retrospect and prospect.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 50
(1–2), 3–35.

Buist, K. L., Dekovic´, M., Meeus, W., & van Aken, M. A. G. (2004).
Attachment in adolescence: A Social Relations Model analysis.
Journal of Adolescent Research, 19, 826–850.

Buist, K. L., Dekovic´, M., & Reitz, E. (2008). Attachment in adoles-
cence: A longitudinal application of the Social Relations Model.
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 25, 429–444.

George, C., Kaplan, N., & Main, M. (1985). The adult attachment
interview. Berkeley: University of California. Unpublished
manuscript.

Goossens, F. A., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1990). Quality of infants’
attachments to professional caregivers: Relation to infant-parent
attachment and day-care characteristics. Child Development, 61,
832–837.

Hinde, R. A. (1982). Attachment: some conceptual and biological
issues. In C. M. Parkes & J. Stevenson-Hinde (Eds.), The place of
attachment in human behavior. London: Tavistock Publications.
Kenny, D. A., & LaVoie, L. (1984). The Social Relations Model. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 18, pp. 142–182). San Diego: Academic.

van IJzendoorn, M. H., Goldberg, S., Kroonenberg, P. M., & Frenkel,
O. J. (1992). The relative effects of maternal and child problems
on the quality of attachment: A meta-analysis of attachment in
clinical samples. Child Development, 63, 840–858.

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) A 211

A

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD)

CARLIN J. MILLER
Department of Psychology, University of Windsor,
Windsor, ON, USA

Overview
Attention-Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is
the single most common psychiatric diagnosis in child-
hood and adolescence. Estimates of prevalence vary
widely, but consensus opinions suggest that between
3% and 7% of children have ADHD (American
Psychiatric Association 2000). The disorder has the
potential to disrupt or interfere with all aspects of func-
tioning, including academic achievement, employment,
social and familial
relationships, and law-abiding
behavior. As such, it also represents a signiﬁcant cost
to society each year. Furthermore, because the disorder
is often initially present in early childhood and may
continue into adulthood, it signiﬁcantly impacts indi-
viduals and those around them across the lifespan. It
also often presents with comorbid psychiatric diagnoses
and is frequently accompanied by additional areas of
difﬁculty, such as problems with interpersonal relation-
ships. There is a signiﬁcant body of empirical ﬁndings
on ADHD, which support a biological etiology of the
disorder, although the role environmental variables play
should not be underestimated. Empirically supported
treatment typically involves medication and/or psycho-
social intervention. Despite the signiﬁcant investment
in research about ADHD, this disorder remains contro-
versial in the media and in society in general.

Presentation of ADHD
If one surveys the general public, one might assume
that ADHD has made a relatively recent appearance in
diagnostic circles. This assumption is
inaccurate.
George Still initially described the childhood syndrome
in 1902 as an “abnormal defect in moral control of
children” (as cited in Spencer et al. 2007). The condi-
tion continued to appear in the clinical literature as
“minimal brain dysfunction” for many years. With the
publication of the second edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual (DSM), the text
that serves as
a foundation for all psychiatric diagnoses in 1968, the

new label for this disorder was “hyperkinetic reaction
of childhood.” The third edition of the DSM split the
disorder into two separate diagnoses, attention-deﬁcit
disorder with and without hyperactivity. In the revision
of the third edition of the DSM in 1987, the diagnosis
was split in ADHD and attention-deﬁcit disorder
(ADD). With the fourth edition in 1994 and its text
revision in 2000, the disorder was fully uniﬁed with
four subtypes, which are more fully discussed below.

Symptoms. Symptoms of ADHD fall

into two
domains: Inattention and Hyperactivity. The diagnostic
criteria, described more fully below, require symptoms
to fall within either domain or in both domains for
diagnosis. Symptoms are required to be present in child-
hood, must be developmentally inappropriate, occur in
multiple contexts, and cause signiﬁcant impairment.

The inattention features associated with ADHD are
often described as difﬁculty maintaining attentional set
or distractibility. When asked to describe the behavior
of a particular
individual with ADHD, parents,
teachers, and coworkers often enumerate behaviors
such as not being able to organize work toward
a goal, not listening to instructions, missing careless
mistakes when checking work, avoiding tasks that
require sustained effort, being “ﬂighty,” and being eas-
ily distracted by other events in the environment. For
individuals with ADHD, losing belongings, not follow-
ing through with multistep procedures, and difﬁculty
in ﬁnishing tasks in a timely fashion make school,
work, and some relaxation activities unsuccessful.
Additionally, there is a body of research to suggest
that some individuals with inattention symptoms
appear to have “slow cognitive tempo” characterized
by a day-dreamy or sluggish state (Hartman et al.
2004).

Although the inattention symptoms that are often
part of ADHD have signiﬁcant cognitive consequences,
it is the hyperactivity and the impulsivity that often
have the most signiﬁcant behavioral consequences.
Individuals with hyperactivity-impulsivity are often
described as having seemingly endless energy. Even
when able to remain in a seat, they may ﬁdget or
squirm excessively. They may disturb others when
engaged in supposedly quiet activities. This high level
of activity may make sitting through a class, meeting,
or a meal difﬁcult to impossible. The impulsivity is
often manifested as impatience or intrusive behavior.
It may also lead individuals to engage in risky or

212 A Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

considering

activities without

dangerous
conse-
quences. Although the outward symptoms may remit
somewhat over development, many adolescents and
adults with ADHD report feeling restless and have
difﬁculty with sedentary activities.

As a result of changes in behavior across the
lifespan, many of the behaviors commonly associated
with ADHD are highly prevalent
in very young
children, such as a high level of activity and difﬁculty
ignoring competing stimuli in the immediate environ-
ment, yet are expected to fade as the individual
becomes an older adolescent and adult. Thus, implicit
in the list of symptoms is a focus on the developmental
appropriateness of the behavior given the individual’s
age and other demographic characteristics. However
frustrating the presenting behaviors, the symptoms
must be considered in the context of the individual’s
development. For example, behavior involving running
from activity to activity, being noisy while playing/
working, and staying with a given task for just
a couple minutes would be considered within normal
limits for a young child but signiﬁcantly aberrant in late
adolescence. Furthermore, it may be that symptoms
change in nature over time. Generalized distractibility
in childhood may become procrastination or poor time
management and work avoidance in adolescence. Like-
wise, running and climbing at inappropriate times in
childhood may transform into avoidance of situations
requiring prolonged sitting, becoming bored easily,
and impatience with others as the child becomes an
adolescent or young adult.

Prevalence. As previously mentioned, ADHD is the
common childhood psychiatric diagnosis,
most
although speciﬁc incidence rates vary widely based on
sampling techniques, population parameters, and
other methodological issues. In a study that pooled
prevalence rates across 102 child and adolescent sam-
ples, 5.23% of the population should meet criteria for
diagnosis (Polanczyk et al. 2007). Data from a World
Health Organization sample (Fayyad et al. 2007) sug-
gest a somewhat lower prevalence rate, 3.4%, which
may reﬂect subtle diagnostic differences between the
DSM used in North America and the International
Classiﬁcation of Diseases (ICD-10) criteria used pre-
dominantly in Europe. In a large epidemiologic sample
from the United States, 8.6% of participants met full
diagnostic criteria for ADHD (Merikangas et al. 2010).
Across all studies, the disorder is noticeably more

common in males than in females, with the disorder
occurring approximately twice or thrice as often in
males (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
[CDC] 2005a). A review of cross-cultural studies
suggests similar prevalence patterns North America
and Europe, but there is extremely limited data from
samples in developing countries (Faraone et al. 2003).
Cited prevalence rates in adolescence and into early
adulthood are signiﬁcantly more variable. A number of
longitudinal studies have documented that this disor-
der is persistent in at least some individuals into adult-
hood (e.g., Halperin et al. 2008). One study suggested
that 60–85% of individuals receiving a childhood diag-
nosis of ADHD continue to have signiﬁcant symptoms
and at least some impairment in adulthood (Barkley
et al. 1990). Data from an epidemiologic study using
a US sample suggest that approximately 4% of adults
meet full diagnostic criteria for ADHD (Kessler et al.
2005). One signiﬁcant methodological issue in many
studies of the persistence of this disorder in adulthood
is the fact that the DSM does not allow for changes in
developmental norms for behavior. For example, an
individual with four or ﬁve symptoms of hyperactivity
in childhood may appear only minimally different
from peers, yet these same behaviors in an older ado-
lescent may represent signiﬁcant behavioral dysfunc-
tion. Thus, there is poor consensus related to what
might construe appropriate diagnostic criteria for an
older adolescent or adult. Speciﬁcally, results from one
study demonstrated that 1% of that sample had six
symptoms of ADHD (i.e., met full diagnostic criteria),
whereas 2.5% exhibited at least four symptoms (Kooij
et al. 2005). Anecdotal and empirical evidence suggest
that it is the hyperactive and impulsive symptoms that
decline across development while
symptoms of
inattention persist (Biederman et al. 2000). Despite
speciﬁc diagnostic
the lack of agreement about
standard for older adolescents and adults, there is
clear data to suggest that a signiﬁcant number of people
persist in their presentation of symptoms.

Models of ADHD. Although ADHD has been fre-
quently described as a disorder of executive functioning
(Nigg and Casey 2005), there are multiple competing
and sometimes complementary models to explain
the myriad of behavioral and cognitive symptoms.
Regardless of the model applied, the neuropsychologi-
cal deﬁcits associated with ADHD, such as response
time variability, poor set shifting, and response errors

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) A 213

A

(e.g., Halperin et al. 2008) have been extensively
documented in the literature.

The predominant model of ADHD involves an
impairment of executive functions (Barkley 1997) and
is typically linked to prefrontal cortex functioning.
Barkley posited that ADHD is the result of impairment
in four speciﬁc executive functioning areas: working
memory, self-regulation, internalization of speech, and
behavioral analysis and synthesis. These impairments
were hypothesized to cause secondary impairments in
cognitive control as well as motor control. Building on
Barkley’s model, it may be that ADHD is not the result
of single unifying deﬁcit in executive functioning, but
a series of possible deﬁcits in one of more areas of
executive functioning (Nigg et al. 2005). Inhibitory
control, a component of executive functioning is also
often posited as a central feature of ADHD (e.g., Nigg
2001) and is necessary for self-control, emotional
regulation, and cognitive ﬂexibility.

In contrast with the focus on executive functioning
and inhibitory control, a delay aversion model of
ADHD has also been proposed (Sonuga-Barke et al.
1996). With this model, the neurobiological system
associated with connecting present behaviors and
future contingencies is hypothesized to be dysfunc-
tional. This line of reasoning explains why individuals
with ADHD often have difﬁculty in working for
extended periods of time, especially if the reward
structure is nebulous or the rewards vary in magnitude
and timing of reward.

The cognitive-energetic model of ADHD (Sergeant
2005) offers a third explanation for the typical symp-
toms and behaviors associated with ADHD. In the
cognitive-energetic model, the primary dysregulation
is at the level of activation and effort necessary to
optimize cognitive functioning. In this model, the
arousal centers in the brain fail to upregulate for
more challenging cognitive and behavioral tasks. This
model offers an alternate explanation for the increased
reaction time variability that has been shown across
many studies of individuals with ADHD.

Common comorbidities. ADHD frequently appears
with other conditions (i.e., comorbidity). The most
common comorbidity occurs with Oppositional
(ODD) and Conduct Disorder
Deﬁant Disorder
(CD). Speciﬁcally, 30–50% of children with ADHD
also have either ODD or CD (Biederman et al. 1991).
ODD is characterized by a pattern of negativistic,

later

hostile, and deﬁant behavior, whereas as CD is charac-
terized by habitual rule breaking with a pattern of
aggression, destruction, lying, stealing, and/or truancy.
In many cases, ODD appears relatively early in the
developmental progression with criteria for CD being
(American Psychiatric
met
Association 2000). When diagnostic criteria for both
disorders are met, only CD is diagnosed and is gener-
ally considered to be more concerning than ODD.
Adolescents with comorbid ADHD and CD are at sig-
niﬁcantly increased risk for more negative life-course
outcomes (Biederman et al. 2008a).

in development

Learning disabilities, particularly reading disabil-
ities or dyslexia, are also commonly comorbid with
ADHD. Between 20% and 35% of children with
ADHD also have learning disabilities (Spencer et al.
2007). Although some studies have suggested that
either ADHD causes learning disabilities or vice versa,
it is more likely that there are common underlying
genetic or neurobiological risk factors for these disor-
ders (Couto et al. 2009). The presence of learning
disabilities with ADHD suggests a need for additional
treatment and intervention (Hechtman 1999).

Because of the high prevalence rate of ADHD in the
general population, it is not surprising there is a high
comorbidity rate with other disorders, such as depres-
sion (up to 33%; Pliszka 2000), anxiety disorders (up to
50%; MTA Cooperative Group 1999a, b), and tic dis-
orders (Spencer et al. 1999). There is some controversy
about the comorbidity rates with ADHD and bipolar
disorder, which was previously known as manic-
depression. One longitudinal
sample documented
relatively high comorbidity rates (e.g., up to 16%;
Biederman et al. 1992) whereas other studies have
suggested signiﬁcantly lower comorbidity rates (e.g.,
less than 2%; McGough et al. 2008).

As development proceeds, comorbidity patterns
change somewhat over time. Three particular patterns
have been repeatedly cited in the literature. First, ado-
lescents and adults with ADHD are at signiﬁcant risk
for developing a substance use disorder (Elkins et al.
2007). Individuals with this comorbidity are also at
further risk for some of the more negative outcomes
associated with ADHD, which will be described in
more detail below. It appears that ADHD may, likewise,
increase the risk for a transition from less signiﬁcant
substance experimentation to more severe substance
dependence in a shorter period of time than typically

214 A Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

developing peers (Wilens et al. 2005b). Second, comor-
bidity rates with depression also increase over develop-
ment (Daviss 2008). Lastly, individuals with persistent
ADHD are also at signiﬁcantly increased risk for
a comorbid personality disorder diagnosis. Speciﬁcally,
risk is increased for Borderline, Antisocial, Narcissistic,
Avoidant, and Paranoid Personality Disorders (Miller
et al. 2008), all of which portend signiﬁcant risk for
poor outcomes. Although it is not clear how the
etiological factors involved in ADHD may relate to
comorbidity patterns in each case, the severity of these
patterns suggests a potential for signiﬁcant lifelong
dysfunction in some individuals with ADHD.

Additional issues with ADHD. Related to the symp-
toms of ADHD and possibly the high rate of comor-
bidity with learning disabilities, many individuals with
ADHD have signiﬁcant difﬁculty in school. Despite
intelligence test scores generally within the average
range, many individuals with ADHD have lower than
expected reading and math achievement (Biederman
et al. 1996). A number of studies suggest that these
academic problems are persistent (Barkley et al.
1990), resulting in lower class rankings, taking longer
to complete high school, and reduced rates of attending
and completing college/university. Additionally, a diag-
nosis also increases risk for repeated grades, special
education placement, and a need for remedial instruc-
tion (Biederman et al. 1996). Furthermore, students
with ADHD are suspended or expelled more often than
their typically developing peers (LeFever et al. 2002).

getting

and maintaining

Research with adolescents and adults suggests that
individuals with ADHD are also at risk for having
employment
difﬁculty
(Halmoy et al. 2009). Perhaps partially related to aca-
demic difﬁculties leading to lower levels of education
described above, individuals with ADHD are also at
risk for underemployment and/or chronic unemploy-
ment (Biederman et al. 2008b). Employers often
describe these individuals as performing more poorly
and statistical evidence supports the assumption that
they are more likely to either quit or be ﬁred from their
jobs (Murphy and Barkley 1996).

A number of studies suggest that individuals with
ADHD have social difﬁculties with more than half
being rejected by peers (Hoza et al. 2005). Difﬁculties
with inattention also make it more difﬁcult for indi-
viduals with ADHD to learn social skills by observing
others (Cunningham et al. 1991) and to attend to social

cues (Landau and Milich 1988). Additionally, those
with hyperactive and impulsive features may also
exhibit intrusive social behaviors that are off-putting
to peers (Whalen and Henker 1991). There is data to
suggest that both males and females with ADHD are at
risk for social difﬁculties (Hoza et al. 2005). Individuals
with ADHD are more likely to socialize with deviant
peers (Berndt and Keefe 1995) and may even prefer
those who are also experiencing social
rejection
(Nangle et al. 1996). There is also evidence that
individuals with ADHD begin sexual activity earlier,
are less likely to use contraception, have more total
partners, and more likely to experience a teen preg-
nancy (Barkley et al. 2006). Thus, when one considers
the full range of social difﬁculties, it is not surprising
that by adolescence and adulthood, individuals with
ADHD report high rates of failed relationships and
social dysfunction (Eakin et al. 2004).

Numerous studies document the increased risk for
law breaking and involvement in the justice system by
those with ADHD. One longitudinal study suggested
that within 3 years of diagnosis, preadolescents with
ADHD exhibit signiﬁcantly higher rates of delinquency
(Molina et al. 2007). A longer-term longitudinal study
has demonstrated that these individuals as adults are
more likely to have been arrested, convicted, and incar-
cerated than individuals without ADHD (Mannuzza
et al. 2008). This same study suggested that individuals
with ADHD are also more like to commit felonies and
aggressive offenses. Many incarcerated individuals,
particularly those with psychopathy, have histories of
an ADHD diagnosis during childhood or adolescence
(Johansson et al. 2005).

Poor control of impulses and difﬁculty managing
multiple simultaneous stimuli also predicts poor func-
tioning as a driver. Adolescents and adults with ADHD
are two to four times more likely to be involved in an
automobile accident (Barkley and Cox 2007). Risky
trafﬁc behaviors, including more rear-end collisions,
tickets for reckless driving, driving without a license,
and driving with a suspended license, are also more
common in these individuals (Fischer et al. 2007). This
pattern of driving difﬁculties has signiﬁcant economic
and safety implications at the individual level and for
society in general.

Factors predicting persistence and poor outcomes. As
described in the preceding paragraphs, the outcomes
associated with ADHD, particularly when it persists

into adolescence, can be bleak. In short, all areas of life,
from education and employment to relationships and
personal safety can be compromised with this diagno-
sis. Yet, the diagnosis of ADHD is not deterministic for
poor outcomes. Indeed, for individuals who either have
remission of symptoms during adolescence or who ﬁnd
niches where success is more likely optimal functioning
is common. Within the individual, high levels of symp-
toms or signiﬁcant impairment in childhood predict
poorer outcomes in the long term (Molina et al. 2009).
Longitudinal studies of ADHD suggest that there are
several factors that predict poor outcomes, including
maternal psychopathology, larger family size, psychiat-
ric comorbidity, and persistently impulsive behaviors
(Biederman et al. 1998). The effects of treatment on
outcome are equivocal with some authors suggesting
treatment lowers risk for poor outcomes (Hechtman
1999), whereas others have suggested type and intensity
of treatment has little effect on long-term prognosis
(Molina et al. 2009).

Cost of ADHD to society. As the most common
psychiatric diagnosis during the developmental period,
ADHD represents a signiﬁcant cost to society. The
most common time for diagnosis is during the
school-age period (Leslie and Wolraich 2007), but, as
previously described, symptoms are often present early
in childhood and continue into adulthood for many.
A fairly recent study on the economic impact of ADHD
suggests that the total annual cost of ADHD to society
is in excess of $42 billion (Pelham et al. 2007). These
authors estimated that each individual with ADHD, on
average, needs $14,576 (2005 US dollars) in care across
educational, medical, and legal contexts each year. As
such, this disorder represents a signiﬁcant cost to
society, and not treating represents a potential for
even greater cost.

Diagnostic Criteria for ADHD
The current diagnostic criteria for ADHD are from the
fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (American Psychiatric Association
2000), although a revision leading to the ﬁfth edition is
in progress and is expected in May 2013. The current
criteria require the following:

1. Six developmentally inappropriate and maladap-
tive symptoms of inattention and/or six develop-
mentally inappropriate and maladaptive symptoms

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) A 215

of hyperactivity-impulsivity for at least 6 months.
The DSM-IV manual provides speciﬁc descriptions
of nine symptoms in each domain.

2. Some of the symptoms must be present before

A

7 years.

3. Some of the symptoms must be present in at least

two settings.

4. The symptoms must cause clinical impairment in

a major life area.

5. Symptoms are not better explained by a different

disorder.

In DSM-IV, there are four subtypes of ADHD. The
Combined type, which is the most common with
50–75% of diagnoses (Spencer et al. 2007; Wolraich
et al. 1996), requires at least six symptoms in both the
inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive domains. The
Predominantly Inattentive subtype requires only six
symptoms of inattention, although there may be sub-
clinical features of hyperactivity-impulsivity present.
The Predominantly Inattentive subtype accounts for
20–30% of diagnoses (Spencer et al. 2007; Wolraich
et al. 1996). The Predominantly Hyperactive-Impulsive
subtype requires only six symptoms of hyperactivity-
impulsivity, although there may be subclinical features
of inattention present, and accounts for less than 15%
of diagnoses (Spencer et al. 2007; Wolraich et al. 1996).
The ﬁnal subtype, ADHD: Not Otherwise Speciﬁed, is
used only when there are prominent symptoms of
inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity, but
the
criteria are not clearly met. The fourth edition of the
DSM also speciﬁcally notes that for individuals who
no longer meet full diagnostic criteria, particularly
adolescents and adults, but did in the past, “In partial
remission” should be speciﬁed.

At the time of publication, the changes proposed
for DSM-V (Until the ﬁfth edition of the DSM is
published, ongoing updates about proposed changes
in the diagnostic criteria for ADHD and other disorders
are available on the American Psychiatric Association’s
Web site: http://www.dsm5.org) have not been solidi-
ﬁed but there are a number of criticisms of the current
diagnostic criteria. These criticisms are summarized on
the Web site for the DSM working group on ADHD
and include issues with the age of onset criteria, par-
ticularly for children with Predominantly Inattentive
Type ADHD, threshold artifacts due to the organiza-
tion of subtypes, and the failure of the criteria to

216 A Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

account for developmental changes in symptoms over
time. As previously described, the last of these is
particularly important for adolescents with ADHD.
Multiple
studies have documented that many
adolescents (and adults) with ongoing and signiﬁcant
impairment due to ADHD symptoms may not meet
full diagnostic criteria for the disorder because of
a diminution in hyperactivity-impulsivity symptoms
over time. Speciﬁcally, although the individual may
become better able to control impulsive behavior or
limit physical activity in certain settings, there are cog-
nitive costs for this level of control and inattention
symptoms are likely to linger. Thus, the adolescent
with ADHD may have some remission of symptoms
but signiﬁcant dysfunction in school, work, or social
interactions may remain.

Etiology
The most widely accepted conceptualization of ADHD
is as a disorder characterized by deﬁcits in executive
functioning, with particular deﬁcits in response inhi-
bition, vigilance, working memory, and planning
(Willcutt et al. 2005). These deﬁcits are thought to be
largely genetic, although the role of environmental
factors, particularly those that interact with genetic
factors, cannot be underestimated. These genetic and
environmental factors are believed to inﬂuence prena-
tal neuroanatomical development and subsequent
neurophysiological functioning.

Genetic factors. Multiple studies support the notion
that ADHD is the most heritable of all psychiatric
disorders with a heritability rate greater than 75%
(e.g., Faraone et al. 2005). Data from these studies
were derived from twin samples, families of individuals
with ADHD, adoption samples, and molecular genetics
surveys. Siblings of individuals with ADHD have three
to ﬁve times greater risk for ADHD (Faraone et al.
1993), but the familial clustering is not speciﬁc for
ADHD subtype (Smalley et al. 2001). Although the
studies strongly support an underlying genetic risk for
ADHD, it is clear that not all individuals with ADHD
carry each genetic risk factor and many individuals
carrying one or more of the genetic risk factors do
not exhibit ADHD symptoms (Pliszka 2000). And,
each gene of risk accounts for approximately 1% of
the variance in ADHD symptoms suggesting that poly-
morphisms or other factors likely play a role in the
expression of ADHD symptoms (Kuntsi et al. 2006).

Across multiple studies, several genes-of-risk have
been highlighted for their role in ADHD. Multiple
dopamine-related genes are implicated,
including
DRD4, DRD5, DAT1, and dopamine b(cid:3)hydroxylase
(Pliszka and AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues
2007). Additionally, several serotonin genes, such as
5-HTT, HTRIB, and SNAP-25 are implicated (Faraone
et al. 2005). A recent meta-analysis of ADHD genetics
studies suggests the strongest evidence for the involve-
ment of DRD4, with more equivocal ﬁndings for DAT1
(Faraone et al. 2005). As described below, it is likely
that these genes-of-risk interact with environmental
factors in most cases of
individuals with ADHD
symptoms.

Neuroanatomical factors. The effects of the genes
associated with risk for ADHD likely have their effects
in neuroanatomical development and neurochemistry.
As a caveat to the following research on neuroanatom-
ical differences associated with ADHD, there is not
a “neuroanatomical proﬁle” that is consistent across
those who have been diagnosed with ADHD. Thus,
structural and functional imaging techniques are not
a valid diagnostic tool at this point.

Across numerous studies, there is evidence of neu-
roanatomical differences in the brains of individuals
with ADHD compared to individuals without ADHD
(Krain and Castellanos 2006). Several studies have
demonstrated reduced volume and cortical thickness
in the prefrontal cortex in individuals with ADHD
(Castellanos et al. 2002). Beyond the prefrontal cortex,
some studies have also cited structural abnormalities in
the parietal areas and the temporal lobes (Shaw et al.
2006). Additionally, growth trajectories for cortical
maturation are also delayed in some individuals with
ADHD (Shaw et al. 2006).

In addition to the cortical differences noted in
ADHD, there is also evidence for subcortical abnor-
malities. Some studies have documented reduced
volume in the striatum, speciﬁcally the caudate nucleus
and the pallidum (Castellanos et al. 2002). Reduced
gray matter has also been reported in the right putamen
and the globus pallidus (Ellison-Wright et al. 2008).
One study reported corresponding increases in hippo-
campal volume, which may be a compensatory mech-
anism for coping with aberrant functioning in other
areas of the brain (Plessen et al. 2006). The cerebellum,
traditionally thought to be involved only in motor
coordination, has also been implicated in ADHD.

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) A 217

A

Reduced cerebellar volume, particularly in the poste-
rior inferior cerebellar vermis, has been noted in those
with ADHD (Castellanos et al. 2002). These differences
have been shown to be independent of medication
effects (Valera et al. 2007).

As one might expect with structural differences
within the brain, there are corresponding differences
in activation patterns during tasks related to executive
functioning, a primary deﬁcit in ADHD. For example,
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is less active in indi-
viduals with ADHD (Dickstein et al. 2006). This lower
level of activity has been implicated in the slower and
more variable reaction times seen in individuals with
ADHD (Weissman et al. 2006), as well as other prob-
lems with various executive functioning tasks. Activa-
tion is also reduced in the anterior cingulate cortex
(Zametkin et al. 1990) and the striatum (Zametkin
et al. 1993). The functional differences found in the
anterior cingulate cortex has been associated with the
failure to adjust cognitive strategies to meet changing
demands or an increase in error rates during executive
functioning tasks (Pliszka et al. 2006). There are also
changes in frontostriatal functioning, especially in tasks
where inhibiting a highly over-learned or prepotent
response is required (Durston et al. 2007). Cerebellar
activity may also be reduced during executive function-
ing tasks, suggesting a deﬁcit in predicting future events
(Durston et al. 2007). Other studies have documented
lobe
reduced activation patterns in the temporal
(Schweitzer et al. 2000), including the related subcor-
tical structures such as the basal ganglia (Rubia et al.
2007). A meta-analysis of 16 functional imaging studies
reported that ADHD is generally characterized by
signiﬁcant hypoactivity in the prefrontal cortex and
anterior cingulate cortex (Dickstein et al. 2006).

Environment (including gene x environment interac-
tions). A few environmental factors have been impli-
cated in ADHD in a small number of individuals. The
risk for ADHD is increased by 2.5 times when alcohol is
consumed during pregnancy (Mick et al. 2002a).
Furthermore, those who consume alcohol during preg-
nancy are also more likely to smoke cigarettes while
pregnant (Knopik et al. 2005), another risk factor for
ADHD (Mick et al. 2002b). The same study reported
that perinatal stress and low birth weight were also
correlated with ADHD. Likewise, pregnancy complica-
tions have been implicated (Pineda et al. 2007). Other
environmental risk factors for a small subsample of

those with ADHD include traumatic brain injury
(Max et al. 1998), severe early deprivation, such as
that might occur in orphanages in developing countries
(Kreppner et al. 2001), and exposure to lead, often
through paint
lower-income homes
(Biederman and Faraone 2005). Psychosocial risk
factors, such as high levels of family conﬂict, low family
cohesion, and parental psychopathology, have also
been linked with ADHD (Biederman et al. 1995).

in older,

The inconsistencies in genetic studies of ADHD are
likely the result of interplay between genetic and envi-
ronmental factors (Wermter et al. 2010). Thus, it may
be that ADHD is the result of an individual carrying
one or more genes-of-risk and then experiencing an
environment that increases the likelihood ADHD will
occur (Caspi et al. 2002). The high rate of heritability
for ADHD (Faraone et al. 2005) provides an example of
this scenario: a parent with ADHD may pass along their
genes-of-risk to their offspring as well as providing an
environment that potentiates the genetic risk. The
environmental characteristics may be biological, such
as prenatal exposure to alcohol or tobacco, or psycho-
social stressors.

The nature of these gene–environment interactions
has been documented in several studies. For example,
DAT1 polymorphisms may only increase risk for
ADHD in the presence of intrauterine exposure to
alcohol (Brookes et al. 2006) or tobacco (Kahn et al.
2003). Similar results have been reported for DRD4
(Neuman et al. 2007) and CHRNA4 (Todd and
Neuman 2007). The interaction of DAT1 with psycho-
logical adversity has also been documented (Laucht
et al. 2007).

Assessment of ADHD
The Practice Parameters for ADHD posted on the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
(AACAP) web site (Pliszka and AACAP Work Group
on Quality Issues 2007) provide an excellent model for
the assessment process that is most appropriate for
ADHD. This model is highly similar to assessment
methods
recommended by nonmedical clinicians
(Kamphaus and Campbell 2006). Neither laboratory
tests nor
imaging procedures provide deﬁnitive
evidence for an ADHD diagnosis. For the clinician,
whether physician or psychologist, the diagnostic pro-
cess is focused on gathering information from multiple
sources, such as the patient, his or her parent/s, and

218 A Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

teachers. Information should be gathered from detailed
interviews as well as standardized behavior rating
scales. The interviews may be conducted with the
patient and his or her parent/s together, although it
may lead to underreporting by an adolescent patient,
particularly with behaviors of which the parent is
unlikely to approve, such as substance experimentation
or risky sexual behaviors. Parents may also become
hesitant to provide full information if the adolescent
is likely to become angry or upset by the information
the parent provides. Parents may also be uncomfort-
able reporting about their own history in front of an
adolescent patient. For these reasons, it may be more
effective to separately interview each individual. Inter-
views should focus on all of the symptoms associated
with ADHD, including duration, frequency, and sever-
ity of symptoms, where impairment occurs, and symp-
toms associated with comorbid conditions. Parents
should also be queried about the patient’s developmen-
tal and medical history, as well as family history of
psychopathology and current family functioning. The
patient interview should focus on behaviors that are
unlikely to be observed by parents or teachers. Addi-
tionally, standardized behavior rating scales should be
completed by the parent and the teacher. In some cases,
clinicians may also ask the adolescent patient
to
complete self-report behavior rating scales. This entire
assessment can be completed by a physician or
a psychologist.

A common concern in the diagnostic process is
what other assessment is appropriate. According the
previously described practice parameters from AACAP,
no other assessment is necessary unless warranted. For
example, if there are current difﬁculties with academic
work or school performance suggesting low cognitive
ability or a learning disability, then neuropsychological
or psychoeducational assessment may be indicated.
This type of assessment
typically involves testing
intellectual functioning, specialized cognitive function-
ing such as memory or receptive language, and
academic achievement. If the information from the
clinical interviews indicates a medical history that is
within normal
laboratory
testing or neurological testing is unlikely to reveal
problems and is not warranted. As previously
described, imaging procedures have not yet advanced
to the point of being diagnostic for ADHD and are
therefore not warranted.

then additional

limits,

Treatment
Medication. Medication is the typical treatment of
choice for most individuals with ADHD. Stimulant
medications, such as Ritalin or methylphenidate, are
the most frequent prescription for all children in the
United States with 4% of females and 9% of males
receiving prescriptions at any one time (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] 2005b). The
most common developmental window for stimulant
treatment is during the school-age period (Leslie and
Wolraich 2007). The rates of stimulant treatment are
quite variable with factors such as geographic location,
demographic characteristics of the patient (e.g., race/
ethnicity, age, sex), and socioeconomic status (SES) of
the family playing a role in who receives medication
and who does not (Leslie and Wolraich 2007).

least

some diminution of

One reason for the high prevalence of stimulant
treatment is the long history of efﬁcacy data on these
medications. This class of medications has been used in
children and adolescents for more than 70 years, with
ongoing improvements in longer duration dosing and
reduction of side effects. Studies of these medications
have been rigorous across multiple large-scale clinical
trials, which typically involve double-blind, placebo-
controlled, multicenter studies (Pliszka and AACAP
Work Group on Quality Issues 2007). Approximately
70% of individuals taking stimulant medications expe-
rience at
symptoms
(Biederman and Spencer 2008), with males and females
similar in their response to medication (Hinshaw
2007). Greater severity of ADHD symptoms correlates
with a lower rate of response to medication (Hinshaw
2007). In addition to reducing the primary symptoms
of ADHD, stimulant medication may improve second-
ary areas of difﬁculty, such as driving performance
(Barkley and Cox 2007). Typically, the short-term
effects for these medications is positive (Hechtman
and Greenﬁeld 2003), but there are notable methodo-
logical confounds in longer-term studies. One recent
study suggested that the positive effects for these med-
ications are maximized in the ﬁrst 3 years of treatment
and treatment beyond that point provides limited
improvement (Faraone and Glatt 2009). It is presumed
that these medications are effective because they block
the reuptake of dopamine and norepinephrine at the
synaptic cleft (Volkow and Swanson 2003).

Despite signiﬁcant evidence for the efﬁcacy of
stimulant medications, there are some drawbacks in

treating children with stimulant medication. Although
side effects, such as insomnia and abdominal pain, are
generally mild (Wolraich et al. 2007) and the medica-
tions are typically well tolerated (Wilens et al. 2005a),
about half of individuals treated with stimulant medi-
cations report at least one side effect over the duration
of treatment (Charach et al. 2004). The most common
side effect is appetite loss (Charach et al. 2004).
Although uncommon, there have also been reports of
cardiovascular concerns in some children receiving
stimulant medications (Samuels et al. 2006), but these
concerns are not typically clinically signiﬁcant (Wilens
et al. 2005a). Effects on growth are fairly common
(Spencer et al. 2006). These effects are greatest during
the initial treatment period (Swanson et al. 2007).
Another concern that is frequently raised by parents
and the media is the possibility of early treatment with
stimulants increases the risk for later substance abuse/
dependence. Data from multiple longitudinal studies
suggest that these concerns are unwarranted with
treatment having either no effect on later substance
problems (Volkow and Swanson 2008) or a protective
effect against substance problems (Wilens et al. 2003).
Research from multiple studies also suggests that while
medication reduces symptoms of ADHD, it does not
necessarily improve all areas of functioning (Rapport
et al. 1994).

for

stimulant medications

There are also non-stimulant medications available
for the treatment of ADHD, although they are generally
less effective (Rapport et al. 1994) than stimulant
medications. The most common of these medications
is a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor called
Strattera (generic: atomoxetine). It is an improvement
over
some individuals
because is not a controlled substance, there are fewer
side effects associated with it, and it may be safer for
substance use disorders
individuals with active
(Michelson et al. 2001). It appears to be most effective
for individuals who have comorbid ADHD and anxiety
disorders (Pliszka and AACAP Work Group on Quality
Issues 2007). In addition to atomoxetine, several
medications have not been approved by the Food and
Drug Administration for the treatment of ADHD, but
have been effective for selected populations. These
and
medications
hypotensives (blood pressure medications).

certain antidepressants

include

Psychosocial treatments. Because not all individuals
to medication

a positive

response

experience

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) A 219

A

treatments, as described above, and parents may prefer
to avoid giving medications for a behavioral disorder
(Krain et al. 2005), psychosocial treatments for ADHD
have been developed. Effective models for these treat-
ments include parent behavioral training and teacher
consultation with classroom modiﬁcation (Knight
et al. 2008). The NIMH Collaborative Multisite Multi-
modal Treatment Study (MTA), a longitudinal project
following treatment outcomes of children diagnosed
with ADHD more than a decade ago, developed what
is considered to be the “Cadillac model” of psychoso-
cial treatment. This program combined an intensive
academic intervention including a paraprofessional to
work speciﬁcally on behaviors, intensive behavioral
shaping with regular self-, peer-, and teacher-assess-
ments, parent training, and social skills instruction (It
should be noted that this extremely high level of inter-
vention, outside of a funded treatment study, is rarely
available and is generally unaffordable for many fami-
lies who have children or adolescents with ADHD);
(Wells et al. 2000). Results from this study suggested
that there were some beneﬁts to this high level of
intervention, although they were not signiﬁcantly
greater
than medication for most participants
(Swanson et al. 2008). Although behavioral treat-
ments,
typically focused on teaching signiﬁcant
adults, such as parents and teachers, to use contingent
applications of rewards and punishments in response
to speciﬁc behaviors, may be effective for some indi-
viduals (Pelham and Fabiano 2008), there is no empir-
ical evidence for
their efﬁcacy when used with
adolescents (Raggi and Chronis 2006). Furthermore,
it is not clear that behavioral treatments improve core
ADHD symptoms (Hechtman et al. 2004). Likewise,
teacher-training programs may have some limited
positive effects on classroom behavior in individuals
with ADHD (DuPaul and Eckert 1997). Individuals
with comorbid ADHD and anxiety disorders experi-
enced a better response to behavioral
treatment
than treatment involving medication in one study
(Hinshaw 2007).

Treatments combining medication and psychosocial
approaches. The efﬁcacy of combining medication and
psychosocial treatments has been validated in a number
of studies, although it is not entirely clear that the
beneﬁt of combined treatment is signiﬁcantly greater
than medication alone (Hechtman et al. 2004). Results
from the previously described MTA study suggested

220 A Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

that for most of their participants combined treatment
did not provide signiﬁcant improvement in beneﬁts
over medication alone for core ADHD symptoms
(Swanson et al. 2008). In contrast, other areas of func-
tioning, such as internalizing symptoms, parent–child
relationships, and reading achievement were all posi-
tive affected by combined treatment (MTA Cooperative
Group 1999a,b). From that study, there was also
evidence suggesting that combined treatments may
result in lower medication doses when titration is
tightly controlled (Vitiello et al. 2001). There may be
added beneﬁt of combined treatment for children and
adolescents from minority backgrounds (Arnold et al.
2003). Children from homes with fewer ﬁnancial
resources may also experience greater improvements
in their social skills when they receive combined treat-
ments (Hinshaw 2007). In total, although combined
treatments have intuitive appeal and may be appropri-
ate for speciﬁc populations, the high cost of such inter-
vention may make this approach unavailable to many
families.

Non-empirically supported treatments. A number of
additional treatments are routinely offered by a range
of practitioners as solutions for ADHD. The treatments
described here have little or no empirical support for
their use in this population. Although there is signiﬁ-
cant support
for the use of cognitive-behavioral
therapy (CBT) for many psychiatric populations, this
therapy modality has not been shown to be effective in
treating childhood ADHD (Bloomquist et al. 1991). In
contrast, CBT may be effective as part of a therapeutic
regime in adolescents and adults with ADHD (Solanto
et al. 2010). In contrast to the mixed results of CBT,
there is no evidence to suggest that changes in diet,
including reducing/eliminated sugar, result in changes
in ADHD behaviors. The so-called Feingold diet has
been repeatedly shown to be ineffective in the treat-
ment of ADHD (e.g., Kavale and Forness 1983). Like-
wise, although there are numerous claims of efﬁcacy
with nutritional supplements having positive effects on
ADHD symptoms, these claims lack empirical support
(Chalon 2009). Although several different types of
biofeedback are popular in the treatment of ADHD,
empirical support
for biofeedback does not exist
(Monastra 2008). Sensory integration therapies, often
provided by occupational therapists either in schools or
privately, have also been proposed as a treatment for
reducing ADHD symptoms but the claims have not

been supported by scientiﬁc data (Vargas and Camilli
1999). Social skills instruction has received signiﬁcant
attention in the research literature, but numerous
studies have shown the newly learned behaviors typi-
cally do not generalize to other settings and individuals
with ADHD continue to be non-preferred peers, even
when transitioning to a new environment (Antshel and
Remer 2003). These therapies, when used in combina-
tion or alone, may represent a signiﬁcant outlay of
resources for the family of the individual with ADHD
but do not generally result in the desired behavioral or
functional changes.

Conclusion
ADHD is generally a lifelong disorder that may be
associated with poor functional outcomes for some
individuals. When symptoms partially or completely
remit in adolescence of adulthood, some level of inat-
tention and associated impairment often remains. This
prevalent disorder is known to heritable, although there
is a clear role for environmental factors in symptoms
and in severity of ADHD. Symptoms of inattention and
hyperactivity-impulsivity have the potential to impact
upon all areas of
including academic
functioning,
achievement, employment, social relationships, and
personal safety. Treatment typically involves prescrip-
tion medication although there is some empirical
support for psychosocial treatment. Future research in
ADHD is likely to focus upon further elucidating
factors in the epigenetic landscape that portend risk
for ADHD and developing innovative early interven-
tions that reduce the risk for poor outcomes.

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychi-
atric Association.

Antshel, K. M., & Remer, R. (2003). Social skills training in children
with attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder: A randomized-
controlled clinical trial. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent
Psychology: The Ofﬁcial Journal for the Society of Clinical Child
and Adolescent Psychology, American Psychological Association,
Division 53, 32(1), 153–165.

Arnold, L. E., Elliot, M., Sachs, L., Bird, H., Kraemer, H. C., Wells,
K. C., et al. (2003). Effects of ethnicity on treatment attendance,
stimulant response/dose, and 14-month outcome in ADHD.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71(4), 713–727.
Barkley, R. A. (1997). Behavioral inhibition, sustained attention, and
executive functions: Constructing a unifying theory of ADHD.
Psychological Bulletin, 121(1), 65–94.

Barkley, R. A., & Cox, D. (2007). A review of driving risks and
impairments associated with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder and the effects of stimulant medication on driving
performance.
Journal of Safety Research, 38(1), 113–128.
doi:10.1016/j.jsr.2006.09.004.

Barkley, R. A., Fischer, M., Edelbrock, C. S., & Smallish, L. (1990). The
adolescent outcome of hyperactive children diagnosed by
research criteria: I. an 8-year prospective follow-up study. Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 29,
546–557.

Barkley, R. A., Fischer, M., Smallish, L., & Fletcher, K. (2006). Young
adult outcome of hyperactive children: Adaptive functioning in
major life activities. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 45(2), 192–202. doi:10.1097/01.
chi.0000189134.97436.e2.

Berndt, T. J., & Keefe, K. (1995). Friends’ inﬂuence of adolescents’
adjustment to school. Child Development, 66(5), 1312–1329.
Biederman, J., & Faraone, S. V. (2005). Attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder. Lancet, 366(9481), 237–248. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(05)66915-2.

Biederman, J., & Spencer, T. J. (2008). Psychopharmacological inter-
ventions. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North
America, 17(2), 439–458, xi. doi: 10.1016/j.chc.2007.12.001
Biederman, J., Newcorn, J., & Sprich, S. (1991). Comorbidity of
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder with conduct, depressive,
anxiety, and other disorders. The American Journal of Psychiatry,
148(5), 564–577.

Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Keenan, K., Benjamin, J., Krifcher, B.,
Moore, C., et al. (1992). Further evidence for family-genetic risk
factors in attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. Patterns of
comorbidity in probands and relatives psychiatrically and
pediatrically referred samples. Archives of General Psychiatry,
49(9), 728–738.

Biederman, J., Milberger, S., Faraone, S. V., Kiely, K., Guite, J.,
Mick, E., et al. (1995). Family-environment risk factors for
attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. A test of rutter’s indica-
tors of adversity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52(6), 464–470.
Biederman, J., Faraone, S., Milberger, S., Guite, J., Mick, E., Chen, L.,
et al. (1996). A prospective 4-year follow-up student of atten-
tion-deﬁcit hyperactivity and related disorders. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 53, 437–446.

Biederman, J., Mick, E., & Faraone, S. V. (1998). Normalized func-
tioning in youths with persistent attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder. The Journal of Pediatrics, 133(4), 544–551.

Biederman, J., Mick, E., & Faraone, S. V. (2000). Age-dependent
decline of symptoms of attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder:
Impact of remission deﬁnition and symptom type. The American
Journal of Psychiatry, 157(5), 816–818.

Biederman, J., Petty, C. R., Dolan, C., Hughes, S., Mick, E.,
Monuteaux, M. C., et al. (2008a). The long-term longitudinal
course of oppositional deﬁant disorder and conduct disorder in
ADHD boys: Findings from a controlled 10-year prospective
longitudinal follow-up study. Psychological Medicine, 1, 1–10.
Biederman, J., Petty, C. R., Fried, R., Kaiser, R., Dolan, C. R.,
Schoenfeld, S., et al. (2008b). Educational and occupational
underattainment in adults with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) A 221

disorder: A controlled study. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
69(8), 1217–1222.

A

Bloomquist, M. L., August, G. J., & Ostrander, R. (1991). Effects of
a school-based cognitive-behavioral
intervention for ADHD
children. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 19(5), 591–605.
Brookes, K. J., Mill, J., Guindalini, C., Curran, S., Xu, X., Knight, J.,
et al. (2006). A common haplotype of the dopamine transporter
gene associated with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder and
interacting with maternal use of alcohol during pregnancy.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(1), 74–81. doi:10.1001/
archpsyc.63.1.74.

Caspi, A., McClay, J., Mofﬁtt, T. E., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I. W.,
et al. (2002). Role of genotype in the cycle of violence in
maltreated children. Science (New York, N.Y.), 297(5582),
851–854. doi:10.1126/science.1072290.

Castellanos, F. X., Lee, P. P., Sharp, W. S., Jeffries, N. O., Greenstein,
D. K., Clasen, L. S., et al. (2002). Developmental trajectories of
brain volume abnormalities in children and adolescents with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disroder. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 288, 1740–1748.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2005). Mental
health in the united states. prevalence of diagnosis and medica-
tion treatment
for attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder–
united states, 2003. MMWR: Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 54(34), 842–847.

Chalon, S. (2009). The role of fatty acids in the treatment of
ADHD. Neuropharmacology, 57(7–8), 636–639. doi:10.1016/j.
neuropharm.2009.08.012.

Charach, A., Ickowicz, A., & Schachar, R. (2004). Stimulant treatment
over ﬁve years: Adherence, effectiveness, and adverse effects.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychi-
atry, 43(5), 559–567. doi:10.1097/00004583-200405000-00009.

Couto, J. M., Gomez, L., Wigg, K., Ickowicz, A., Pathare, T.,
Malone, M., et al. (2009). Association of attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder with a candidate region for reading
disabilities on chromosome 6p. Biological Psychiatry, 66(4),
368–375. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.02.016.

Cunningham, C. E., Siegel, L. S., & Offord, D. R. (1991). A dose-
response analysis of the effects of methylphenidate on the peer
interactions and simulated classroom performance of ADD
children with and without conduct problems.
Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 32(3),
439–452.

Daviss, W. B. (2008). A review of co-morbid depression in pediatric
ADHD: Etiology, phenomenology, and treatment. Journal of
Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 18(6), 565–571.
doi:10.1089/cap.2008.032.

Dickstein, S. G., Bannon, K., Castellanos, F. X., & Milham, M. P.
(2006). The neural correlates of attention deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder: An ALE meta-analysis. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry,
1051–1062.
and Allied Disciplines,
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2006.01671.x.

47(10),

DuPaul, G. J., & Eckert, T. L. (1997). The effects of school-based
interventions
for attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder:
A meta-analysis. School Psychology Review, 26(1), 5–27. Retrieved
from PsycINFO database.

222 A Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

Durston, S., Davidson, M. C., Mulder, M. J., Spicer, J. A., Galvan, A.,
Tottenham, N., et al. (2007). Neural and behavioral correlates of
expectancy violations in attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines,
48(9), 881–889. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2007.01754.x.

Eakin, L., Minde, K., Hechtman, L., Ochs, E., Krane, E., Bouffard, R.,
et al. (2004). The marital and family functioning of adults with
ADHD and their spouses. Journal of Attention Disorders, 8(1),
1–10.

Elkins, I. J., McGue, M., & Iacono, W. G. (2007). Prospective effects
of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder,
and sex on adolescent substance use and abuse. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 64(10), 1145–1152. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.64.
10.1145.

Ellison-Wright, I., Ellison-Wright, Z., & Bullmore, E. (2008). Struc-
tural brain change in attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
identiﬁed by meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 8, 51. doi:10.1186/
1471-244X-8-51.

Faraone, S. V., & Glatt, S. J. (2009). A comparison of the efﬁcacy of
medications for adult attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
using meta-analysis of effect sizes. The Journal of Clinical Psychi-
atry. doi:10.4088/JCP.08m04902pur.

Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J., Lehman, B. K., Keenan, K., Norman, D.,
Seidman, L. J., et al. (1993). Evidence for the independent famil-
ial transmission of attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder and
learning disabilities: Results from a family genetic study. The
American Journal of Psychiatry, 150(6), 891–895.

Faraone, S. V., Sergeant, J., Gillberg, C., & Biederman, J. (2003). The
worldwide prevalence of ADHD: Is it an american condition?
World Psychiatry: Ofﬁcial Journal of the World Psychiatric Associ-
ation (WPA), 2(2), 104–113.

Faraone, S. V., Perlis, R. H., Doyle, A. E., Smoller, J. W., Goralnick,
J. J., Holmgren, M. A., et al. (2005). Molecular genetics of
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
57, 1313–1323.

Fayyad, J., De Graaf, R., Kessler, R., Alonso, J., Angermeyer, M.,
Demyttenaere, K., et al. (2007). Cross-national prevalence and
correlates of adult attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. The
British Journal of Psychiatry: The Journal of Mental Science, 190,
402–409. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.106.034389.

Fischer, M., Barkley, R. A., Smallish, L., & Fletcher, K. (2007). Hyper-
active children as young adults: Driving abilities, safe driving
behavior, and adverse driving outcomes. Accident Analysis and
Prevention, 39(1), 94–105. doi:10.1016/j.aap.2006.06.008.
Halmoy, A., Fasmer, O. B., Gillberg, C., & Haavik, J. (2009).
Occupational outcome in adult ADHD: Impact of symptom
proﬁle, comorbid psychiatric problems, and treatment: A cross-
sectional study of 414 clinically diagnosed adult ADHD patients.
Journal of Attention Disorders, 13(2), 175–187. doi:10.1177/
1087054708329777.

Halperin, J. M., Trampush, J. W., Miller, C. J., Marks, D. J., &
Newcorn, J. H. (2008). Neuropsychological outcome in adoles-
cents/young adults with childhood ADHD: Proﬁles of persisters,
remitters and controls. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychia-
try, and Allied Disciplines, 49(9), 958–966. doi:10.1111/j.1469-
7610.2008.01926.x.

Hartman, C. A., Willcutt, E. G., Rhee, S. H., & Pennington, B. F.
(2004). The relation between sluggish cognitive tempo and
DSM-IV ADHD. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 32(5),
491–503.

Hechtman, L. (1999). Predictors of long-term outcome in children
with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Pediatric Clinics of
North America, 46(5), 1039–1052.

Hechtman, L., & Greenﬁeld, B. (2003). Long-term use of stimulants
in children with attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder: Safety,
efﬁcacy, and long-term outcome. Paediatric Drugs, 5(12),
787–794.

Hechtman, L., Abikoff, H., Klein, R. G., Greenﬁeld, B., Etcovitch, J.,
Cousins, L., et al. (2004). Children with ADHD treated with
long-term methylphenidate and multimodal psychosocial treat-
ment: Impact on parental practices. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43(7), 830–838.
doi:10.1097/01.chi.0000128785.52698.19.

Hinshaw, S. P. (2007). Moderators and mediators of treatment out-
come for youth with ADHD: Understanding for whom and how
interventions work.
Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 32(6),
664–675. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsl055.

Hoza, B., Mrug, S., Gerdes, A. C., Hinshaw, S. P., Bukowski, W. M.,
Gold, J. A., et al. (2005). What aspects of peer relationship
are impaired in children with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder? Journal of Clinical and Consulting Psychology, 73,
411–423.

Johansson, P., Kerr, M., & Andershed, H. (2005). Linking adult
psychopathy with childhood hyperactivity-impulsivity-attention
problems and conduct problems through retrospective self-
Journal of Personality Disorders, 19(1), 94–101.
reports.
doi:10.1521/pedi.19.1.94.62183.

Kahn, R. S., Khoury, J., Nichols, W. C., & Lanphear, B. P. (2003). Role
of dopamine transporter genotype and maternal prenatal
smoking in childhood hyperactive-impulsive, inattentive, and
oppositional behaviors. The Journal of Pediatrics, 143(1),
104–110. doi:10.1016/S0022-3476(03)00208-7.

Kamphaus, R. W., & Campbell, J. M. (Eds.). (2006). Psychodiagnostic
assessment of children: Dimensional and categorical approaches.
Hoboken: Wiley. Retrieved from PsycINFO.

Kavale, K. A., & Forness, S. R. (1983). Hyperactivity and diet treat-
ment: A meta-analysis of the feingold hypothesis. Journal of
Learning Disabilities, 16(6), 324–330. Retrieved from PsycINFO
database.

Kessler, R. C., Adler, L. A., Barkley, J., Conners, K. C., Faraone, S. V.,
Greenhill, L. L., et al. (2005). Patterns and predictors of atten-
tion-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder persistence into adulthood:
Results from the national comorbidity survey replication.
Biological Psychiatry, 57, 1442–1451.

Knight, L. A., Rooney, M., & Chronis-Tuscano, A. (2008). Psychoso-
for attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.

treatments

cial
Current Psychiatry Reports, 10(5), 412–418.

Knopik, V. S., Sparrow, E. P., Madden, P. A., Bucholz, K. K., Hudziak,
J. J., Reich, W., et al. (2005). Contributions of parental alcohol-
ism, prenatal substance exposure, and genetic transmission to
child ADHD risk: A female twin study. Psychological Medicine,
35(5), 625–635.

Kooij, J. J., Buitelaar, J. K., van den Oord, E. J., Furer, J. W., Rijnders,
C. A., & Hodiamont, P. P. (2005). Internal and external validity of
attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder in a population-based
sample of adults. Psychological Medicine, 35(6), 817–827.

Krain, A. L., & Castellanos, F. X. (2006). Brain development and

ADHD. Clinical Psychology Review, 2, 433–444.

Krain, A. L., Kendall, P. C., & Power, T. J. (2005). The role of treatment
acceptability in the initiation of treatment for ADHD. Journal
of
doi:10.1177/
1087054705279996.

Attention Disorders,

425–434.

9(2),

Kreppner, J. M., O’Connor, T. G., Rutter, M., & English and Roma-
nian Adoptees Study Team. (2001). Can inattention/overactivity
be an institutional deprivation syndrome? Journal of Abnormal
Child Psychology, 29(6), 513–528.

Kuntsi, J., Neale, B. M., Chen, W., Faraone, S. V., & Asherson, P.
issues for the
(2006). The IMAGE project: Methodological
molecular genetic analysis of ADHD. Behavioral and Brain
Functions: BBF, 2, 27. doi:10.1186/1744-9081-2-27.

Landau, S., & Milich, R. (1988). Social communication patterns of
attention-deﬁcit-disordered boys. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 16(1), 69–81.

Laucht, M., Skowronek, M. H., Becker, K., Schmidt, M. H., Esser, G.,
Schulze, T. G., et al. (2007). Interacting effects of the dopamine
transporter gene and psychosocial adversity on attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder symptoms among 15-year-olds from
a high-risk community sample. Archives of General Psychiatry,
64(5), 585–590. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.64.5.585.

LeFever, G. B., Villers, M. S., Morrow, A. L., & Vaughn, E. S. (2002).
Parental perceptions of adverse educational outcomes among
children diagnosed and treated for ADHD: A call for improved
school/provider collaboration. Psychology in the Schools, 39(1),
63–71. doi:10.1002/pits.10000.

Leslie, L. K., & Wolraich, M. L. (2007). ADHD service use patterns in
32(6), 695–710.

of Pediatric Psychology,

Journal

youth.
doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsm023.

Mannuzza, S., Klein, R. G., & Moulton, J. L., 3rd. (2008). Lifetime
criminality among boys with attention deﬁcit hyperactivity dis-
order: A prospective follow-up study into adulthood using ofﬁ-
records. Psychiatry Research, 160(3), 237–246.
cial arrest
doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2007.11.003.

Max, J. E., Arndt, S., Castillo, C. S., Bokura, H., Robin, D. A.,
Lindgren, S. D., et al. (1998). Attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity
symptomatology after traumatic brain injury: A prospective
study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 37(8), 841–847. doi:10.1097/00004583-199808000-
00014.

McGough, J. J., Loo, S. K., McCracken, J. T., Dang, J., Clark, S.,
Nelson, S. F., et al. (2008). CBCL pediatric bipolar disorder
proﬁle and ADHD: Comorbidity and quantitative trait loci
analysis.
the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 47(10), 1151–1157. doi:10.1097/CHI.
0b013e3181825a68.

Journal of

Merikangas, K. R., He, J. P., Brody, D., Fisher, P. W., Bourdon, K., &
Koretz, D. S. (2010). Prevalence and treatment of mental disor-
ders among US children in the 2001–2004 NHANES. Pediatrics,
125(1), 75–81. doi:10.1542/peds.2008-2598.

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) A 223

A

Michelson, D., Faries, D., Wernicke, J., Kelsey, D., Kendrick, K., Sallee,
F. R., et al. (2001). Atomoxetine in the treatment of children
and adolescents with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: A
randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-response study. Pediatrics,
108(5), E83.

Mick, E., Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Sayer, J., & Kleinman, S.
(2002a). Case-control study of attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder and maternal smoking, alcohol use, and drug use during
pregnancy. Journal of
the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 41(4), 378–385. doi:10.1097/00004583-
200204000-00009.

Mick, E., Biederman, J., Prince, J., Fischer, M. J., & Faraone, S. V.
(2002b).
low birth weight on attention-deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral
Pediatrics: JDBP, 23(1), 16–22.

Impact of

Miller, C. J., Flory, J. D., Miller, S. R., Harty, S. C., Newcorn, J. H., &
Halperin, J. M. (2008). Childhood attention-deﬁcit/hyperactiv-
ity disorder and the emergence of personality disorders in
adolescence: A prospective follow-up study. The Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 69(9), 1477–1484.

Molina, B. S., Flory, K., Hinshaw, S. P., Greiner, A. R., Arnold, L. E.,
Swanson, J. M., et al. (2007). Delinquent behavior and emerging
substance use in the MTA at 36 months: Prevalence, course,
and treatment effects. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46(8), 1028–1040. doi:10.1097/chi.
0b013e3180686d96.

Molina, B. S., Hinshaw, S. P., Swanson, J. M., Arnold, L. E., Vitiello, B.,
Jensen, P. S., et al. (2009). The MTA at 8 years: Prospective
follow-up of children treated for combined-type ADHD in
a multisite study. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 48(5), 484–500. doi:10.1097/CHI.
0b013e31819c23d0.

Monastra, V. J. (2008). Quantitative electroencephalography and
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: Implications for clinical
practice. Current Psychiatry Reports, 10(5), 432–438.

MTA Cooperative Group. (1999a). Moderators and mediators of
treatment response for children with attention-deﬁcit/hyperac-
tivity disorder: The multimodal treatment study of children with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 56(12), 1088–1096.

MTA Cooperative Group. (1999b). A 14-month randomized clinical
trial of treatment strategies for attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56(12), 1073–1086.
Murphy, K., & Barkley, R. A. (1996). Attention deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder adults: Comorbidities and adaptive impairments.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 37(6), 393–401.

Nangle, D. W., Erdley, C. A., & Gold, J. A. (1996). A reﬂection on the
popularity construct: The importance of who likes or dislikes
a child. Behavior Therapy, 27(3), 337–352. doi:10.1016/S0005-
7894(96)80021-9.

Neuman, R. J., Lobos, E., Reich, W., Henderson, C. A., Sun, L. W., &
Todd, R. D. (2007). Prenatal smoking exposure and dopaminer-
gic genotypes interact to cause a severe ADHD subtype. Biological
Psychiatry, 61(12), 1320–1328. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.08.049.
Nigg, J. T. (2001). Is ADHD a disinhibitory disorder? Psychological

Bulletin, 127(5), 571–598.

224 A Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

Nigg, J. T., & Casey, B. J. (2005). An integrative theory of attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder based on the cognitive and affec-
tive neurosciences. Developmental Psychopathology, 17, 785–806.
Nigg, J. T., Willcutt, E. G., Doyle, A. E., & Sonuga-Barke, E. J.
(2005). Causal heterogeneity in attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder: Do we need neuropsychologically impaired subtypes?
Biological Psychiatry, 57(11), 1224–1230. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.
2004.08.025.

Pelham, W. E., Jr., & Fabiano, G. A. (2008). Evidence-based psycho-
social treatments for attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology: The Ofﬁcial
Journal for the Society of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology,
American Psychological Association, Division 53, 37(1), 184–214.
doi:10.1080/15374410701818681.

Rubia, K., Smith, A. B., Brammer, M. J., & Taylor, E. (2007). Temporal
lobe dysfunction in medication-naive boys with attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder during attention allocation and
its relation to response variability. Biological Psychiatry, 62(9),
999–1006. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.02.024.

Samuels, J. A., Franco, K., Wan, F., & Sorof, J. M. (2006). Effect of
stimulants on 24-h ambulatory blood pressure in children with
ADHD: A double-blind, randomized, cross-over trial. Pediatric
Nephrology (Berlin, Germany), 21(1), 92–95. doi:10.1007/
s00467-005-2051-1.

Schweitzer, J. B., Faber, T. L., Grafton, S. T., Tune, L. E., Hoffman,
J. M., & Kilts, C. D. (2000). Alterations in the functional anatomy
of working memory in adult attention deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 157(2), 278–280.

Pelham, W. E., Foster, E. M., & Robb, J. A. (2007). The economic
impact of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder in children
and adolescents. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 32(6), 711–727.
doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsm022.

Sergeant, J. A. (2005). Modeling attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
the cognitive-energetic
disorder: A critical appraisal of
model. Biological Psychiatry, 57(11), 1248–1255. doi:10.1016/
j.biopsych.2004.09.010.

Pineda, D. A., Palacio, L. G., Puerta, I. C., Merchan, V., Arango, C. P.,
Galvis, A. Y., et al. (2007). Environmental inﬂuences that affect
attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: Study of a genetic iso-
late. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 16(5), 337–346.
doi:10.1007/s00787-007-0605-4.

Plessen, K.

J., Bansal, R., Zhu, H., Whiteman, R., Amat, J.,
Quackenbush, G. A., et al. (2006). Hippocampus and amygdala
morphology in attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 63(7), 795–807. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.
63.7.795.

Pliszka, S. R. (2000). Patterns of psychiatric comorbidity with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 9(3), 525–540, vii.

Pliszka, S., & AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues. (2007). Practice
parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and
adolescents with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
46(7), 894–921. doi:10.1097/chi.0b013e318054e724.

Pliszka, S. R., Glahn, D. C., Semrud-Clikeman, M., Franklin, C.,
Perez, R., III, Xiong, J., et al. (2006). Neuroimaging of inhibitory
control areas in children with attention deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder who were treatment naive or in long-term treatment.
The American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(6), 1052–1060.
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.163.6.1052.

Polanczyk, G., de Lima, M. S., Horta, B. L., Biederman, J., & Rohde,
L. A. (2007). The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: A systematic
review and metaregression analysis. The American Journal of
Psychiatry, 164(6), 942–948. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.164.6.942.
Raggi, V. L., & Chronis, A. M. (2006). Interventions to address the
academic impairment of children and adolescents with ADHD.
Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 9(2), 85–111.
doi:10.1007/s10567-006-0006-0.

Rapport, M. D., Denney, C., DuPaul, G. J., & Gardner, M. J. (1994).
Attention deﬁcit disorder and methylphenidate: Normalization
rates, clinical effectiveness, and response prediction in 76
children. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adoles-
cent
doi:10.1097/00004583-
Psychiatry,
199407000-00015.

882–893.

33(6),

Shaw, P., Lerch, J., Greenstein, D., Sharp, W., Clasen, L., Evans, A.,
et al. (2006). Longitudinal mapping of cortical thickness and
clinical outcome in children and adolescents with attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry,
63(5), 540–549. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.5.540.

Smalley, S. L., McCracken, J., & McGough, J. (2001). Reﬁning the
ADHD phenotype using affected sibling pair families. American
Journal of Medical Genetics, 105(1), 31–33.

Solanto, M. V., Marks, D. J., Wasserstein, J., Mitchell, K., Abikoff, H.,
Alvir, J. M., et al. (2010). Efﬁcacy of meta-cognitive therapy for
adult ADHD. The American Journal of Psychiatry. doi:10.1176/
appi.ajp.2009.09081123.

Sonuga-Barke, E. J., Williams, E., Hall, M., & Saxton, T. (1996).
Hyperactivity and delay aversion. III: The effect on cognitive
style of imposing delay after errors. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 37(2), 189–194.

Spencer, T., Biederman, M., Coffey, B., Geller, D., Wilens, T., &
Faraone, S. (1999). The 4-year course of tic disorders in boys
with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 56(9), 842–847.

Spencer, T. J., Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J., Lerner, M., Cooper, K. M.,
Zimmerman, B., et al. (2006). Does prolonged therapy with
a long-acting stimulant suppress growth in children with
ADHD?
the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 45(5), 527–537. doi:10.1097/01.chi.
0000205710.01690.d4.

Journal of

Spencer, T. J., Biederman, J., & Mick, E. (2007). Attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder: Diagnosis, lifespan, comorbidities, and
neurobiology. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 32(6), 631–642.
doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsm005.

Swanson, J. M., Elliott, G. R., Greenhill, L. L., Wigal, T., Arnold, L. E.,
Vitiello, B., et al. (2007). Effects of stimulant medication on
growth rates across 3 years in the MTA follow-up. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46(8),
1015–1027. doi:10.1097/chi.0b013e3180686d7e.

Swanson, J., Arnold, L. E., Kraemer, H., Hechtman, L., Molina, B.,
Hinshaw, S., et al. (2008). Evidence, interpretation, and qualiﬁ-
cation from multiple reports of long-term outcomes in the

Authenticity in Relationships A 225

A

multimodal treatment study of children with ADHD (MTA):
Part II: Supporting details. Journal of Attention Disorders, 12(1),
15–43. doi:10.1177/1087054708319525.

Todd, R. D., & Neuman, R. J. (2007). Gene-environment interactions
in the development of combined type ADHD: Evidence for
a synapse-based model. American Journal of Medical Genetics.
Part B, Neuropsychiatric Genetics: The Ofﬁcial Publication of the
International Society of Psychiatric Genetics, 144B(8), 971–975.
doi:doi:10.1002/ajmg.b.30640.

Valera, E. M., Faraone, S. V., Murray, K. E., & Seidman, L. J. (2007).
Meta-analysis of structural imaging ﬁndings in attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 61(12), 1361–1369.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.06.011.

Vargas, S., & Camilli, G. (1999). A meta-analysis of research on
sensory integration treatment. The American Journal of Occupa-
tional Therapy: Ofﬁcial Publication of the American Occupational
Therapy Association, 53(2), 189–198.

Vitiello, B., Severe, J. B., Greenhill, L. L., Arnold, L. E., Abikoff, H. B.,
Bukstein, O. G., et al. (2001). Methylphenidate dosage for
children with ADHD over time under controlled conditions:
Lessons from the MTA. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40(2), 188–196. doi:10.1097/
00004583-200102000-00013.

Volkow, N. D., & Swanson, J. M. (2003). Variables that affect the
clinical use and abuse of methylphenidate in the treatment of
ADHD. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(11), 1909–1918.
Volkow, N. D., & Swanson, J. M. (2008). Does childhood treatment of
ADHD with stimulant medication affect substance abuse in
adulthood? The American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(5),
553–555. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2008.08020237.

Weissman, D. H., Roberts, K. C., Visscher, K. M., & Woldorff, M. G.
(2006). The neural bases of momentary lapses in attention.
Nature Neuroscience, 9(7), 971–978. doi:10.1038/nn1727.

Wells, K. C., Pelham, W. E., Kotkin, R. A., Hoza, B., Abikoff, H. B.,
Abramowitz, A., et al. (2000). Psychosocial treatment strategies
in the MTA study: Rationale, methods, and critical issues in
design and implementation. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychol-
ogy, 28(6), 483–505.

Wermter, A. K., Laucht, M., Schimmelmann, B. G., Banaschweski, T.,
Sonuga-Barke, E. J., Rietschel, M., et al. (2010). From nature
versus nurture, via nature and nurture, to gene x environment
interaction in mental disorders. European Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 19(3), 199–210. doi:10.1007/s00787-009-0082-z.
Whalen, C. K., & Henker, B. (1991). Social impact of stimulant
treatment for hyperactive children. Journal of Learning Disabil-
ities, 24(4), 231–241.

Wilens, T. E., Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J., & Gunawardene, S.
(2003). Does stimulant therapy of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder beget later substance abuse? A meta-analytic review of
the literature. Pediatrics, 111(1), 179–185.

Wilens, T., McBurnett, K., Stein, M., Lerner, M., Spencer, T., &
Wolraich, M.
(2005a). ADHD treatment with once-daily
from a long-term
OROS methylphenidate: Final
open-label study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 44(10), 1015–1023. doi:10.1097/01.
chi.0000173291.28688.e7.

results

Wilens, T. E., Kwon, A., Tanguay, S., Chase, R., Moore, H., Faraone,
S. V., et al. (2005b). Characteristics of adults with attention
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder plus substance use disorder: The
role of psychiatric comorbidity. The American Journal on
Addictions/American Academy of Psychiatrists in Alcoholism and
Addictions, 14(4), 319–327. doi:10.1080/10550490591003639.
Willcutt, E. G., Doyle, A. E., Nigg, J. T., Faraone, S. V., & Pennington,
B. F. (2005). Validity of the executive function theory of atten-
tion-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: A meta-analytic review. Bio-
logical Psychiatry, 57(11), 1336–1346. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.
2005.02.006.

Wolraich, M. L., Hannah, J. N., Pinnock, T. Y., Baumgaertel, A., &
Brown, J. (1996). Comparison of diagnostic criteria for atten-
tion-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder in a county-wide sample.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychi-
atry, 35(3), 319–324. doi:10.1097/00004583-199603000-00013.

Wolraich, M. L., McGuinn, L., & Dofﬁng, M. (2007). Treatment of
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder in children and adoles-
cents: Safety considerations. Drug Safety: An International
Journal of Medical Toxicology and Drug Experience, 30(1), 17–26.
Zametkin, A. J., Nordahl, T. E., Gross, M., King, A. C., Semple, W. E.,
Rumsey, J., et al. (1990). Cerebral glucose metabolism in adults
with hyperactivity of childhood onset. The New England Journal
of Medicine, 323(20), 1361–1366.

Zametkin, A. J., Liebenauer, L. L., Fitzgerald, G. A., King, A. C.,
Minkunas, D. V., Herscovitch, P., et al. (1993). Brain metabolism
in teenagers with attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 50(5), 333–340.

Authenticity in Relationships

SALLY A. THERAN
Psychology Department, Wellesley College, Wellesley,
MA, USA

Overview
This essay begins with a deﬁnition of authenticity in
adolescence. Next, theory related to authenticity in
relationships is discussed. Recent empirical ﬁndings
related to predictors and outcomes of authenticity in
relationships are then discussed. Finally, directions for
future research in the area of authenticity in relation-
ships are reviewed.

Introduction
The concept of authenticity in relationships is deﬁned
as the extent to which one can be open and authentic in
relationships. Recently, quantitative researchers have

226 A Authenticity in Relationships

empirically examined the theoretical concept of
authenticity in relationships (Harter et al. 1998;
Smolak and Munstertieger 2002; Theran 2009, 2010;
Tolman et al. 2006). Authenticity in relationships has
also been termed “low level of voice” (Gilligan et al.
1990), “silencing of the self,” (Jack 1991), “false self ”
(Harter 1997) or “inauthentic relationships” (Impett
et al. 2008).

Theory on Authenticity in
Relationships
Theorists have suggested that girls and boys are social-
ized differently in that girls are taught to value relation-
ships and connectedness more than are boys (Jack
1991; Jordan et al. 1991). Chodorow (1987) suggested
that another reason for gender differences in relational
experiences is that girls unconsciously identify with
their mothers, while boys identify as being separate
from their mothers. Psychologists who study women
from a developmental perspective, a clinical orienta-
tion, or a psychoanalytic point of view all agree that
women’s orientation to relationships is the central
component of female identity and emotional activity
(Jack 1991). According to the relational view, the self is
embedded in relationships, and women deﬁne them-
selves within the context of relationships, rather than
within the context of external accomplishments. The
self-in-relation model suggests that aspects of the self
(e.g., creativity, autonomy) develop from within the
context of relationships, and that separation is not
necessary to enhance and create the self (Jordan et al.
1991). Relational theory explains the importance of
relationships for females, yet girls may struggle with
maintaining them during adolescence (Miller 1991).

Gilligan and others have argued that girls hit
a relational impasse at adolescence (Brown and Gilligan
1992; Taylor et al. 1995). Girls have been socialized all
their lives to emphasize the importance of intimacy and
relationships, and to be a “good woman.” When they
reach adolescence, it is assumed that they will continue
to nurture and value relationships; however, society does
not value the emphasis on relationships, and does not
reward them for their relational approach. Instead,
society values individualism, assertiveness, and indepen-
dence. As a result, girls are taught to both devalue
relationships and achieve independence and autonomy.
Thus, according to these theorists, girls lose either
way, in that they either lose their connection with their

inner self to preserve relationships, or they sacriﬁce
relationships with others in order to become indepen-
dent (Taylor et al. 1995). The subsequent friction and
conﬂict result in girls’ ambivalence and low levels of
authenticity in relationships. This theory suggests that
girls, as the result of both a relational impasse in early
adolescence and identiﬁcation with their mothers, may
compromise their true selves for the sake of preserving
relationships, and inauthentic relationships
result
(Gilligan et al. 1990).

Rather than construing authenticity in relation-
ships as a universal construct, Harter’s
research
indicates that authenticity in relationships is context
dependent (Harter et al. 1997c, 1998). Harter et al.
(1997a) found that adolescents reported the highest
levels of self-reported false self-behavior with their
fathers (30–40% of attributes), lower levels of false
self-behavior (20–25%) with classmates, teachers, and
their mothers, and the least false self-behavior with
close friends (10–15%). Another study by Harter et al.
(1998) found that girls, compared to boys, had higher
levels of authenticity in relationships with female
classmates and close friends; for boys and girls, levels
of authenticity in relationships with close friends were
higher than other relationships. When asked why they
engaged in false self-behavior, adolescents reported
three main reasons. First, they noted that they wanted
to please others, impress others, and/or gain acceptance
from others. Second, they described an alienation
process from their true self, due to lack of validation
from others. Finally, they reported that they were
experimenting with different versions of themselves,
akin to trying on different styles of clothing, and were
trying to ﬁgure out which self was the best ﬁt (Harter
et al. 1996). More recent research has attempted to
unravel possible developmental predictors of lower
levels of authenticity in relationships, and to examine
relational contributions to authenticity in relationships
across different contexts.

Predictors of Authenticity in
Relationships
Recently, researchers have examined gender role social-
ization and attachment as predictors of authenticity
in relationships. Brown and Gilligan (1992) argued
that female adolescents experience a crisis of iden-
tity when they are pressured by society to accept the
“good woman” stereotype, which emphasizes caring

and relatedness even if that requires self-sacriﬁce.
However, adolescent girls vary in terms of their gen-
der role socialization, and not all girls accept the
“good woman” stereotype. Speciﬁcally, Rose and
Montemayor (1994) found that only a third of their
adolescent girl participants could be classiﬁed as fem-
inine; they deﬁned feminine as having masculine scores
below the median and feminine scores above the
median.

Researchers have examined how gender role social-
ization may be related to authenticity in relationships.
Researchers using the Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI)
found that, for eighth grade girls, the femininity scale
of the BSRI was positively correlated with authenticity
in relationships, although it was only a trend (Tolman
and Porche 2000). Another study found that both the
femininity scale and the masculinity scale from the
BSRI were correlated with aspects authenticity in rela-
tionships for adolescents, and speciﬁcally, that higher
femininity scores were correlated with lower scores on
feeling divided between one’s true self and one’s false
self (Hart and Thompson 1996).

(i.e., peers, classmates, best

More recently, Theran (2009) used a current scale of
gender role socialization and found, in a diverse sample
of 14-year-old girls, that gender role socialization
predicted higher levels of authenticity in relationships.
Speciﬁcally, higher levels of masculinity and femininity
predicted higher levels of authenticity with authority
ﬁgures (i.e., parents, teachers), and higher levels of
masculinity predicted higher levels of authenticity
with peers
friends).
Theran’s results demonstrate that masculinity and
androgyny may lead to higher levels of authenticity in
relationships, and the internalization of femininity is
not related to negative outcomes. Thus, more current
quantitative research does not support Gilligan et al.’s
theory that if girls have internalized the societal ideal of
the “good woman,” they may be more likely to have
lower levels of authenticity during adolescence, and feel
that their relationships cannot be both close and honest
(Brown 1998; Brown and Gilligan 1992).

Theran (2009) also examined the role of attachment
as a predictor of authenticity in relationships, following
Harter et al.’s (1997c) suggestion that the origins of
later authentic relationships may be based in the early
parent–child relationship. In addition, Theran (2009)
argued that given that authenticity in relationships
relational
is

inherently

construct,

relational

a

Authenticity in Relationships A 227

A

contributors to authenticity in relationships should be
examined. Theran (2009) found that, in a sample of
adolescent girls, dismissive parental attachment was
negatively related to authenticity in relationships with
authority ﬁgures, suggesting that adolescents may have
lower levels of authenticity in relationships as a result of
having the attachment system deactivated. That is,
adolescents’ disconnection from attachment ﬁgures
might lead to disconnection from their own interper-
sonal/emotional needs. The underlying anxiety from
a dismissive parental attachment may result in the
failure of authentic connections with such ﬁgures.

Outcomes of Authenticity in
Relationships
Quantitative research has demonstrated that low levels
of authenticity in relationships have serious negative
repercussions. The majority of the research on out-
comes of authenticity in relationships has focused on
individual-level outcomes, such as well-being. Theory
suggests that feeling that one’s close relationships are
mutual and that one can be authentic with intimate
partners would generate more positive feelings about
the self and fewer depressive symptoms (Jack 1991).

In general, research supports theory that higher
levels of authenticity are predictive of higher levels of
self-esteem. Speciﬁcally, Tolman et al. found that ado-
lescent girls’ low levels of authenticity in relationships
with peers were predictive of lower levels of self-esteem
(Tolman et al. 2006; Tolman and Porche 2000). In the
ﬁrst longitudinal study of authenticity in relationships
across adolescence, Impett et al. (2008) found that as
authenticity in relationships increased throughout
adolescence, so did levels of self-esteem; in addition,
authenticity in relationships was the only salient
predictor of self-esteem. Finally, Harter et al. (1996)
found that when the motive for false self-behavior was
devaluation of the self, false self-behavior was nega-
tively related to positive psychosocial adjustment.

Authenticity in relationships is also related to
symptomatology. Tolman and Porche
depressive
(2000) found that low levels of authenticity in relation-
ships with peers were correlated with high levels of
depressive symptomatology. Similarly, Theran (2010)
found that authenticity in relationships with authority
ﬁgures and peers predicted psychological well-being
(self-esteem and depression). Thus, all of the results
linking authenticity in relationships and well-being

228 A Authenticity in Relationships

suggest that being authentic in relationships is crucial
for good mental health.

Smolak and Munstertieger (2002) investigated the
relation between eating behaviors and authenticity in
relationships in a sample of college students. They
found that eating behaviors such as eating restraint,
eating when angry, eating when depressed, and binging
were consistently correlated with levels of authenticity
with parents, professors, and male students for women
only. Interestingly, authenticity in relationships with
females was not signiﬁcantly correlated with eating
behaviors, and none of these factors were signiﬁcantly
correlated for male college students.

Additional research has examined authenticity in
relationships as a predictor of relational outcomes,
such as quality of
friendship and social support.
Theran (2010) found that higher levels authenticity in
relationships predicted higher levels of intimacy in
relationships in a sample of adolescent girls; this is
in contrast to theory that remaining authentic in ado-
lescence threatens the intimacy and security of friend-
ships (Brown and Gilligan 1992). Interestingly, conﬂict
in relationships was positively correlated with friend-
ship intimacy, suggesting that some conﬂict is inherent
in close and intimate relationships (Theran 2010).

Social support, another relational construct, has
also been shown to be related to authenticity in
relationships. For example, being authentic in relation-
ships has been found to be signiﬁcantly correlated to
feeling validated, a form of support, within the rela-
tionship (Harter et al. 1997b). Theran (2010) found
that emotional and approval support moderated the
relation between lower levels of authenticity and
well-being (i.e., depressive symptomatology and self-
esteem). Speciﬁcally, at lower levels of authenticity in
relationships, girls with higher levels of social support
had signiﬁcantly fewer depressive symptoms than did
girls with lower levels of support, but at higher levels of
authenticity in relationships, there was no difference in
depressive symptoms for higher versus lower approval
and emotional social support. That is, the negative
effects of lower levels of authenticity with authority
ﬁgures on well-being were buffered by strong emo-
tional and approval support from parents. This ﬁnding
suggests that approval and emotional support from
authority ﬁgures can play a powerful role in protecting
against the negative implications of inauthentic rela-
tionships; for girls with lower levels of authenticity with

authority ﬁgures, having good support from parents
buffered them against depressive symptoms, and their
depressive symptoms are approximately the same as
those girls with higher levels of authenticity.

Need for Future Research
Although some researchers have begun to investigate
the origins of lower levels of authenticity in relation-
ships (e.g., Theran 2009), there remains a need for
more longitudinal work that continues to test theories
of authenticity in relationships, and examines which
aspects of early childhood might cause lower levels of
authenticity in relationships in early adolescence. Such
longitudinal work would help determine when authen-
ticity in relationships begins to decrease, and which
factors may predict this decrease. One possible factor
that may impact authenticity in relationships is early
childhood trauma. Harter (1997) suggested that the
experience of early childhood trauma puts a child at
risk for suppressing his/her true self. Speciﬁcally, the
psychological aspects of abuse, such as not having
experiences validated and lack of an empathic connec-
tion, lead one to suppress the true self, and inauthentic
relationships may result. In addition, in order to main-
tain the relationship with the parent, the child may
attempt to please the parent, and be a “good” child; as
part of this process, the inauthentic self, and the inau-
thentic relationship, may become more available than
the true self (Harter 1997).

In addition, future research should examine the role
of gender in authenticity in relationships. The majority
of the qualitative and quantitative research has exam-
ined authenticity in relationships with adolescent girl
participants (e.g., Impett et al. 2008; Theran 2009).
Further research should be conducted with adolescent
boys in order to determine if the overall structure of
authenticity in relationships applies to boys; this is
especially salient given recent ﬁndings that authenticity
may be just as salient for boys as for girls (Liang et al.
2008).

References
Brown, L. M. (1998). Raising their voices: The politics of girls’ anger.

Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Brown, L. M., & Gilligan, C. (1992). Meeting at the crossroads:
Women’s psychology and girls’ development. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

Chodorow, N. (1987). Feminism and difference: Gender, relation,
and difference in psychoanalytic perspective. In M. R. Walsh

(Ed.), The psychology of women: Ongoing debates (pp. 246–264).
New Haven: Yale University Press.

Gilligan, C., Lyons, N. P., & Hammer, T. J. (1990). Making connections:
The relational worlds of adolescent girls at Emma Willard School.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Hart, B. I., & Thompson, J. M. (1996). Gender role characteristics
and depressive symptomatology among adolescents. Journal of
Early Adolescence, 16, 407–426.

Harter, S. (1997). The personal self in social context: Barriers to
authenticity. In R. D. Ashmore & L. J. Jussim (Eds.), Self and
identity: Fundamental issues (Vol. 1, pp. 81–105). New York:
Oxford University Press.

Harter, S., Marold, D. B., Whitesell, N. R., & Cobbs, G. (1996).
A model of the effects of perceived parent and peer support
on adolescent
false self behavior. Child Development, 67,
360–374.

Harter, S., Bresnick, S., Bouchey, H. A., & Whitesell, N. R. (1997a).
The development of multiple role-related selves during adoles-
cence. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 835–853.

Harter, S., Waters, P. L., Pettitt, L. M., Whitesell, N., Kofkin, J., &
Jordan, J. (1997b). Autonomy and connectedness as dimensions
of relationship styles in men and women. Journal of Social and
Personal Relationships, 14, 147–164.

Harter, S., Waters, P. L., & Whitesell, N. R. (1997c). Lack of voice as
a manifestation of false self-behavior among adolescents: The
school setting as a stage upon which the drama of authenticity is
enacted. Educational Psychologist, 32, 153–173.

Harter, S., Waters, P. L., Whitesell, N. R., & Kastelic, D. (1998). Level
of voice among female and male high school students: Relational
support, and gender orientation. Developmental
context,
Psychology, 34, 892–901.

Impett, E. A., Sorsoli, L., Schooler, D., Henson, J. M., & Tolman, D. L.
(2008). Girls’ relationship authenticity and self-esteem across
adolescence. Developmental Psychology, 44, 722–733.

Jack, D. C. (1991). Silencing the self: Women and depression.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Jordan, J. V., Kaplan, A. G., Miller, J. B., Stiver, I. P., & Surrey, J. L.
(Eds.). (1991). Women’s growth in connection: Writings from the
Stone Center. New York: Guilford Press.

Liang, B., Tracy, A., Kenny, M., & Brogan, D. (2008). Gender differ-
ences in the relational health of youth participating in a social
competency program. Journal of Community Psychology, 36,
499–514.

Miller, J. B. (1991). The development of women’s sense of self.
In J. V. Jordan, A. G. Kaplan, J. B. Miller, I. P. Stiver, & J. L. Surrey
(Eds.), Women’s growth in connection: Writings from the Stone
Center (pp. 11–26). New York: Guilford Press.

Rose, A. J., & Montemayor, R. (1994). The relationship between
gender role orientation and perceived self-competency in male
and female adolescents. Sex Roles, 31, 579–595.

Smolak, L., & Munstertieger, B. F. (2002). The relationship of gender
and voice to depression and eating disorders. Psychology of
Women Quarterly, 26, 234–241.

Taylor, J. M., Gilligan, G., & Sullivan, A. M. (1995). Between voice and
silence: Women and girls, race and relationships. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Autism A 229

A

Theran, S. A. (2009). Predictors of level of voice in adolescent girls:
Ethnicity, attachment, and gender role socialization. Journal of
Youth and Adolescence, 38, 1027–1037.

Theran, S. A. (2010). The impact of authenticity with authority
ﬁgures and peers on girls’ friendships, self-esteem, and depressive
symptomatology. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 27,
519–534.

Tolman, D. L., & Porche, M. V. (2000). The adolescent femininity
ideology scale: Development and validation of a new measure for
girls. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 24, 365–376.

Tolman, D. L., Impett, E. A., Tracy, A. J., & Michael, A. (2006).
sounding good: Femininity ideology and
Looking good,
adolescent girls’ mental health. Psychology of Women Quarterly,
30, 85–95.

Autism

ROGER J. R. LEVESQUE
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA

Autism is a type of pervasive developmental disorder
that is characterized by severe deﬁcits in social interac-
tion and communication as well as by deﬁcits in ﬁne
and gross motor skills; it is also characterized by a
limited range of activities and interests and often by
repetitive and stereotyped behaviors (see, e.g., Folstein
2006). Importantly, autism also is a spectrum disorder,
which means that it covers a wide set of differences and
abilities. Asperger Syndrome is at one end, with this
syndrome characterized as high functioning autism.
Classic or Kanner’s autism is at the other end of
the spectrum and is characterized by profound devel-
opmental delays and challenges. Other pervasive
developmental disorders include Rett Syndrome, Frag-
ile X Syndrome, and pervasive developmental disorder
not otherwise speciﬁed (PDD-NOS). The prevalence of
autism remains highly disputed, with the high end of
prevalence estimates of the entire autism spectrum
being reported to reach as high as 1% or even higher
(Posserud et al. 2010). Equally contentious is the claim
that autism rates have increased, with the emerging
conclusion being that rates may have increased, but
that the increase may be more apparent than real due
to, for example, deﬁnitional changes (see Waterhouse
2008).

230 A Autism Spectrum Disorders

Cross-References
▶ Asperger Syndrome
▶ Autism Spectrum Disorders

References
Folstein, S. (2006). The clinical spectrum of autism. Clinical

Neuroscience Research, 6, 113–117.

Posserud, M., Lundervold, A. J., Lie, S. A., & Gillberg, C. (2010).
The prevalence of autism spectrum disorders: Impact of diag-
nostic instrument and non-response bias. Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 45, 319–327.

Waterhouse, L. (2008). Autism overﬂows: Increasing prevalence and
proliferating theories. Neuropsychology Review, 18, 273–286.

Autism Spectrum Disorders

2,

1, JONATHAN R. PLETCHER

KYLAN S. TURNER
2
CYNTHIA R. JOHNSON
1Department of Instruction & Learning, University of
Pittsburgh School of Education, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital of
Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Overview
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are biologically
based, neurodevelopmental disorders of childhood
onset characterized by signiﬁcant impairment in social
interactions and communication as well as restricted
or stereotyped patterns of behavior and interests
(American Psychiatric Association 2000). As many as
1 in 110 children are affected (Center for Disease
Control and Prevention 2009). Typically recognized
during early childhood, the vast majority of research
focused on preadolescent
and interventions has
children. Since adolescence is a period of immense
social, cognitive, and behavioral change, youth affected
by Autism Spectrum Disorders face unique challenges
to achieving adult status deﬁned by typical societal
norms. Following a brief review of the changing deﬁ-
nitions of ASD diagnoses as they relate to adolescents
and young adults, this essay will provide a discussion of
current evidence and insights regarding the develop-
ment of personal identity, social relationships, roles
within social institutions, and behavioral health issues
in the context of adolescents with ASD.

Autism Spectrum Disorders
Within the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorder: Fourth Edition, Text Revision (American Psy-
chiatric Association 2000), ASDs are classiﬁed in the
group of diagnoses of pervasive developmental disorders
and include (1) Autistic Disorder, (2) Asperger’s Disor-
der, and (3) Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Not
Otherwise Speciﬁed (PDD, NOS). Also assumed under
this class are two rare diagnoses that include (1) Rett’s
Disorder and (2) Childhood Disintegrative Disorder
(CDD). For the purposes of this essay, Autistic Disorder,
Asperger’s Disorder, and PDD, NOS will be referred to
as ASDs as this terminology is commonly accepted now.
Within the proposed revisions for the DSM-V to be
published in 2012, the overlap of these diagnostic
categories and criteria will be more streamlined.

In 1943, Leo Kanner, MD coined the term “infantile
autism” in describing a group of 11 children who had
a lack of social interest, communication deﬁcits, and
a resistance to change (Kanner 1943). Since then, the
diagnostic label for Autistic Disorder has been pre-
served as the “classic” description of autism. By deﬁni-
tion, these children display symptoms in all three
categories with a total of at least six symptoms speciﬁed
across the three categories of impairment: (1) impair-
ment in social interactions; (2) impairment in commu-
nication; and (3) restricted repetitive and stereotyped
patterns of behavior, interest, and activities.

Soon after, an Austrian pediatrician, Hans Asperger,
described a small group of children who had strong
cognitive and language skills, but who nonetheless had
social deﬁcits, keen and unusual interests and some
motor “clumsiness” (Asperger 1944). Also noted was
a family history of such behavioral differences. Cur-
rently, the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for Asperger’s
Disorder include a qualitative impairment in social
interactions and restricted, repetitive and stereotyped
patterns of behaviors, interests, and activities. How-
ever, by deﬁnition, there is no evidence of cognitive or
language delay. Over the last 2 decades, studies exam-
ining the validity of the diagnosis of Asperger’s Disor-
der versus high-functioning autism have resulted in
further characterization of each. However, controversy
remains over whether Asperger’s Disorder represents
a separate category or is a milder presentation of high-
functioning autism. Some differences between the two
groups have been shown in their cognitive proﬁles.
It is generally held that individuals with Asperger’s

Disorder have stronger verbal skills than nonverbal
skills, but this has not been a consistent ﬁnding.

The diagnosis of PDD, NOS is applicable for those
individuals who display many of the characteristics of
Autistic Disorder or Asperger’s Disorder, but have
is often
milder and fewer symptoms.
described as “mild autism.” It is generally believed
that the prognosis is better (Gillberg 1991). This
diagnosis may also be used when sufﬁcient information
is not gathered during the diagnostic process to deter-
mine a more speciﬁc ASD diagnosis.

In fact,

it

Rett’s Disorder is a relatively rare disorder, believed
to affect one in every 10,000–15,000 live female births.
Rett’s Disorder was ﬁrst described by a physician in
the 1960s and is characterized by apparent typical devel-
opment followed by a period of loss of tone, upper
extremity motor function, and speech. While the age
of regression varies during the preschool years, the loss
of abilities can be quite sudden and dramatic. The loss of
purposeful hand use is usually associated with the obser-
vation of repetitive hand wringing at midline. Other
early symptoms include difﬁculty in crawling or walking
and low levels of eye contact. Given some of the
overlapping behavioral characteristics such as limited
eye contact and repetitive behaviors, Rett’s Disorder
may be mistaken for autism or PDD, NOS. Most girls
with Rett’s Disorder have intellectual disabilities. Rett’s
Disorder is now known to be a genetic disorder with two
genes implicated. Given the rarity of Rett’s Disorder
much less is known about the long-term prognosis.

Even rarer than Rett’s Disorder is Childhood
Disintegrative Disorder (CDD). Children with CDD
display behaviors consistent with autism but after
a longer period of typical development (3–5 years of
age). A regression in skills is followed by minimal
recovery of these skills. Hence, there is a difference in
onset and it is also believed the course and prognosis is
different (Volkmar et al. 2005). These children may
develop typical language, display social interests, accom-
plish toilet training, and other self-care skills. With the
onset of CDD, loss of these skills is evidenced along with
a general loss of interest in their environment. It is
estimated that less than 2 children per 100,000 who are
diagnosed with an ASD have CDD. These children are
often evaluated for other neurological diseases and dis-
orders because of the pronounced loss of skills. The
prognosis for CDD is much more guarded than for
Autistic Disorder, Asperger’s Disorder, and PDD, NOS.

Autism Spectrum Disorders A 231

A

While these disorders share the common character-
istics of impairment in communication and social abil-
ities along with restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped
behaviors, there is considerable variability with respect
to extent and severity of the impairment. Furthermore,
additional variability is introduced as ASDs very often
co-occur with global developmental delays and intel-
lectual disability. Between 30% and 51% of children
with ASDs also meet criteria for intellectual disability
(Center for Disease Control 2009). Individuals with
ASDs may be functioning in the severe range of
intellectual disability, but may also be in the superior
or gifted range of cognitive functioning. Regardless
social-
of
communication deﬁcits, the presence of behaviors
that present difﬁculties in continued development
and learning signiﬁcantly interfere with functioning.
Throughout this essay, such behaviors will be referred
to as interfering behaviors, due to the way in which they
literally “interfere with functioning.”

functioning or

the child’s

intellectual

Under development at the time of chapter prepara-
tion, several changes to the deﬁnitions described above
have been proposed for the DSM-V. A full review of
up-to-date considerations can be found at www.dsm5.
org. One consideration is a redeﬁnition of ASD
subtypes based on present core symptom domains:
social deﬁcits only, social and communication deﬁcits,
and social, communication, and repetitive behaviors
combined. Further discussion regarding the interrela-
tionship of repetitive and stereotyped behavior with
each other and with obsessive–compulsive behaviors
may result in separation of similar behaviors based on
age of onset. For example, childhood onset of repeti-
tive, rigid, or ritualistic behaviors may be considered to
be associated with ASD, while similar behaviors that
develop in adults may be indicative of Obsessive–
Compulsive or other Anxiety Disorders. Causing
some controversy, there is a proposal in DSM-V to
collapse high-functioning autism and Asperger’s Disor-
der. The evolving understanding of the neurobiologic
underpinnings and cultural factors that can impact the
interpretation of ASD core symptom domains will also
likely impact the changing deﬁnitions.

Adolescent Development
Given that much of the social and cultural expectations
about the behavior of adolescents is derived by what
commonly occurs in this developmental stage, it is

232 A Autism Spectrum Disorders

important to explore potential signiﬁcant differences
from the norm for children with ASD. The develop-
mental trajectory for all individuals, regardless of ASD
diagnosis,
includes the progressive separation from
parents toward the establishment of an individual iden-
tity. Inherent to this gradual separation includes devel-
oping the capacity for autonomous function, engaging
in meaningful social relationships, adapting to societal
proscriptions of gender and vocational roles, and self-
determination. How the features of ASD affect each of
these developmental tasks is highly variable based on
individual factors, family and community support and
acceptance, and access to effective interventions. There-
fore, it is impossible, and likely counterproductive, to
refer to the most average range of symptoms or proﬁle
that adolescents affected by ASD show at different stages
of their development. Rather, in this discussion, the
ways that features of ASD can affect a typical develop-
mental trajectory will be presented. This perspective
assists in appropriately highlighting the areas of concern
throughout development and to select areas of focus for
speciﬁc interventions for adolescents with ASD.

Children are expected to enter adolescence with
abilities to function in social and academic settings.
Between the ages of 11 and 17, children progress
through middle and high school and take on increas-
ingly greater burdens of responsibility and expectations
for independence. Middle school is often a time when
children are asked to take more responsibility for their
own independent work at school and parents often
begin to trust their child to engage in more activities
without their direct supervision (e.g., group social
activities, staying over friends’ homes, and extended
ﬁeld trips). Adolescence in Western society also often
implies that children are increasingly entrusted to make
appropriate decisions, including risk taking, as they
become more curious about adulthood and are given
more opportunities for independence. This course of
social expectations usually coincides with physiological
growth rendering adolescents with an increasingly
pronounced need to exhibit self-control.

While this is the framework for children who are
developing typically, the road map for individuals with
ASDs becomes blurry when attempting to establish
appropriate expectations for decision-making and
healthy behavior during this age. Parents and caregivers
of adolescents with ASD may struggle with challenging
decisions. Parents may be conﬂicted during this stage of

their child’s development as they may have a desire to
see their children take on more independent social
lives, but have real concerns that poor decisions with
adverse consequences in social situations will be made
with the lessened support. This issue is particularly
challenging when a child presents with some requisite
skills and motivation to want to engage with peers
socially, but clearly still has difﬁculty in increasingly
complex social settings. This scenario is commonly
observed in adolescents with Asperger’s Disorder or
high-functioning autism. It is highly recommended
that ongoing social development training continue
during this time in a child’s life because adolescents
with and without disabilities are faced with increasingly
complex stressors. This stress stems from their own
changing physiology and wavering self-control, peer
groups who may demonstrate varying levels of
sensitivity about the adolescent’s differences and social
competence, and from diminished support
from
school personnel who tend to focus more on academic
instruction in the middle and high school years and less
on social development for individual students. Within
this context, current research on varying aspects of
identity development is discussed here.

Gender and Sexual Development
Adolescents with ASDs present the same course of
reproductive development as individuals without an
ASD. However, the issues facing adolescents with
ASDs is that the physiological changes are often com-
plicated by a lack of understanding or awareness of how
these changes may be perceived by the outside world.
The common issue during adolescent sexual develop-
ment is that their bodies mature, but social deﬁcits still
present signiﬁcant impairment in determining appro-
priate interactions and behaviors. The literature
exploring the concept of sexuality in individuals with
ASDs is very commonly simpliﬁed to only include the
explanation of speciﬁc sexual behaviors, and often
excludes the psychological and emotional
intimacy
that otherwise accompanies the broader notion of
sexuality (Realmuto and Ruble 1999). The notions of
self-image, emotions, values, attitudes, beliefs, and
relationships are also included in the concept of sexu-
ality; as one’s concept of sexuality is a dynamic process,
which is modiﬁed by responses to interactions, experi-
ences, and formal and informal education, regardless of
ASD diagnosis (Koller 2000).

Autism Spectrum Disorders A 233

A

identity is

Gender identity is deﬁned as one’s sense of self as it
relates to socially proscribed norms for males and
females. Gender
separate, and often
unrelated, to sexual orientation or physical traits. Gen-
der Identity Dysphoria (GID) results when emotional
distress results from a mismatch between physical
traits, social expectations, and one’s sense of gender.
There is increasing evidence that GID and ASD may
co-occur at increased rates. De Vries et al. (2010)
conducted a systematic sampling of children and ado-
lescents with the diagnosis of GID found that there was
a ten-time increase in the co-occurrence of ASD symp-
toms than in the general population. Several theories
have been posited as to why there may be a relationship
between these diagnoses, including gender dysphoria as
a feature of ASD, as well as that the co-occurrence may
represent a separate diagnosis such as OCD.

What is provided in the literature regarding sexu-
ality likely reﬂects more about what little is known
about the particular perspective of individuals with
ASDs on sexuality than it does about the actual extent
to which individuals with ASDs experience and express
their own sexuality (Realmuto and Ruble 1999). Unfor-
tunately, communication and social deﬁcits in children
with ASDs may present signiﬁcant risk for harm to the
individual during sexual development if appropriate
sexual education is not provided. An estimated
20–25% of adolescents without disabilities are sexually
abused. Arguably, the ﬁgure for children with ASDs
may be higher due to the core deﬁcits impeding report-
age (Koller 2000).

Due to these differences and the continued hope of
addressing the concerns of safety and independence of
children with ASDs, an individualized and comprehen-
sive sexual education training program is essential for
every adolescent with an ASD. Koller (2000) reviewed
several sexual education programs, which all sought to
address teaching about body parts, reproduction, birth
control, sexual health and life cycle, male and female
social/sexual behavior, dating, marriage, parenting,
establishing relationships, abuse awareness, boundary
issues, self-esteem, and assertiveness skills training.
These issues were recommended in the curriculum as
a series of topics that would be instructed with parents
or caregivers of the child as the primary educators,
though a team approach has also been consistently
recommended. The focus of this curriculum was to
emphasize the unique needs of the child in order to

encourage expression of sexuality in a way that ensures
that the child and other participants are safe and fully
aware of the implications of their behavior. Thus, it is
clear that the level of abstract reasoning and cognitive
ability of the child be taken into account when design-
ing and implementing this type of program.

What is known through the research of sexual
behaviors in individuals with ASDs is that a great
many will exhibit what are deemed to be publicly
inappropriate sexual behaviors. Both masturbatory
behavior and sexual behavior targeted toward others
are often highlighted as inappropriate. Masturbation is
a natural sexual behavior and may, for many individ-
uals with ASDs, be the sole means of sexual release. The
likelihood of individuals with autism to engage in self-
pleasuring behaviors is often thought to be higher due
to the propensity for this population to engage in self-
stimulatory behaviors (Dalldorf 1985). It is imperative
that sexual education programs address ways of teach-
ing appropriate and safe manners in which to express
this need; this may include explicitly determining loca-
tions and times in which engaging in such behaviors
would be appropriate. The literature in this area sup-
ports addressing all of these behaviors in a direct and
matter-of-fact manner. These efforts should also be
supported with reinforcement of appropriate behav-
iors and the provision of clear, visual signals of the
time when breaks for self-pleasuring will be permitted
(Fouse and Wheeler 1997).

Sexual behaviors directed toward others is an area
of considerable concern for those caring for children
with ASDs. A common practice in research of sexual
behavior is to assert that sexual expression is the right
of all individuals. However, this practice must include
the caveat that the sexual expression occur to the degree
to which their desires and needs align with what they
may emotionally and physically manage, and that this
be exhibited without harm to themselves or others.
Individuals with ASDs also have the right to seek and
receive guidance and support to learn speciﬁc social
and sexual behaviors that align with the views of the
individual’s place of residence. Finally, great care
should be taken when providing guidance to an indi-
vidual with an ASD who is seeking to direct their sexual
interest to another person. While it is important to
support individuals in the appropriate expression of
these behaviors, sexuality includes showing tenderness,
care, and empathy to the degree to which ideally, a level

234 A Autism Spectrum Disorders

of mutual emotional intimacy is developed between
two people. Given the well-documented deﬁcits that
individuals with ASDs present in this area of social
development, support of sexual
interactions with
others may require careful consideration of risks and
beneﬁts.

Interpersonal Relationships
Verbal and nonverbal forms of communication are at
the crux of social relationships for adults. As a child
progresses through adolescence, immense qualitative
and quantitative change typically occurs in most, if
not all, social relationships. As the nature of relation-
ships change, the meaning of words is in constant ﬂux,
as context, nonverbal cues, intimacy, and myriad other
factors increasingly affect how they are interpreted.
This poses unique challenges for individuals affected
by ASD, as differences in speech and language develop-
ment are the hallmark of the spectrum of disorders.
Repetitive and/or
language
through echolalic speech (repeating what they have
heard) and scripting (rote repetition of phrases in
response to verbal cues) can signiﬁcantly impede the
individual’s ability to communicate effectively and
form appropriate intimate relationships. Additionally,
for adolescents who do develop functional language,
generalization of skills may not occur naturally and
might remain context-dependent until such skills are
speciﬁcally taught across communicative partners,
settings, and stimuli.

idiosyncratic use of

For example, individuals with Asperger’s Disorder
and high-functioning autism often exhibit hyperlexia
(early, precocious reading and verbal abilities). How-
ever, these individuals may be quite literal in their
interpretation of
language, tend to be experts on
obscure topics, and usually conform to a rigid self-
imposed moral code. This results in language develop-
ment that includes pedantic speech styles, insistence on
particular topics of conversation, and deﬁcits in the
ability to be pragmatic about the use of language.
Although their language may be quite complex com-
pared to that demonstrated by individuals with ASD on
the whole, individuals with Asperger’s Disorder and
high-functioning autism often cannot read the inter-
ests of their communicative partners or maintain ﬂex-
ibility in topic. This communication deﬁcit has the
potential to present major obstacles for adolescents as
they attempt to navigate peer interactions and social

environments independently. It often becomes a major
impediment to forming intimate interpersonal rela-
tionships that in turn contribute to social function
and achievement, including family relationships, work-
place and postsecondary education settings, and with
friends and other social support networks.

Inability, or limited ability, to employ and respond
to nonverbal cues and modes of communication often
further contributes to formation of atypical social skills
repertoire. Impairments in the use of eye contact and
hand gesture are often considered hallmarks of autism.
However, other nonverbal social behaviors such as the
use of joint attention and facial expressions are also
pervasive. This contributes to limited social reciprocity,
or the lack of understanding of the reciprocal back and
forth nature of social interaction, as the adolescent with
ASD does not develop the ability to respond to the
needs and interests of others. This can lead to frustra-
tion and even anger on the part of communication
partners as repeated verbal and nonverbal cues do not
result in the desired response. For individuals severely
affected by ASD, these nonreciprocal social interactions
may go unnoticed or cause any internal distress. How-
ever, individuals with Asperger’s Disorder may show
more interest in social interactions and relationships.
The lack of awareness and understanding of social cues
coupled with the dearth in ability to use pragmatic
language often results in failures to build upon simple
social interactions and to develop and maintain mean-
ingful relationships. This shortcoming can contribute
to an unpleasant emotional response. Further deepen-
ing the problem, affected individuals may have
difﬁculty modulating emotions in that they may either
be over reactive or under reactive to a situation. As
peers and other individuals may come to avoid or
manipulate
individuals with
interactions,
Asperger’s Disorder or high-functioning autism may
become socially isolated, targets of ridicule or violence,
or identiﬁed as juvenile delinquents as they respond to
the inappropriate actions and words of others.

social

In contrast to the dire picture painted when com-
munication and social interaction differences are not
appropriately recognized, there are many examples of
adolescents and young adults with ASD who form
appropriate and deep social bonds with family and
peers. This can result when the differences in commu-
nication style and skills are accepted, and individuals
to build social
are

included in opportunities

relationships in a full variety of settings. Teachers,
peers, and affected individuals can be educated on
how to appropriately interpret and respond to differ-
ences in verbal and nonverbal cues. When the unique
skills and interests of
individuals with Asperger’s
Disorder or high-functioning autism are celebrated
and supported, the individuals have the potential to
become highly successful adults who are able to enjoy
the beneﬁts of social relationships as independent
adults.

Social Institutions and Societal Roles
The federal mandate to include children with disabil-
ities in public educational settings (IDEA 2004) has
been instrumental in changing the way schools and
professionals respond to the needs of children and
teens with ASD. While the long-term vision of inclu-
sion in public education is to contribute to the facili-
tation of social and academic growth throughout
adolescence and adulthood,
the stigmatization of
children with ASDs (or, arguably, any disability or
developmental difference) in middle and high school
remains quite striking (Jackson and Attwood 2002).
One measure of how schools respond to the learning
and social needs of children and adolescents with ASD
is through the National Survey of Children with Special
Health Care Needs. This periodic telephone survey last
completed in 2005–2006 employs parent report of sat-
isfaction with school and community services for those
with a child with a special health care need, including
ASD. Montes et al. (2009) stated parents of children
and adolescents with ASD reported a signiﬁcantly
higher degree of dissatisfaction with, and access to,
school and community services when compared to
parents of other children with special health care
needs. In spite of signiﬁcant legislative and institutional
change brought about primarily by parent and profes-
sional advocates, schools and communities still must
strive to adequately provide accessible, appropriate
services for adolescents with ASD.

As discussed in the previous section on social rela-
tionships, troubling behaviors and potentially criminal
acts may occur during this age as individuals with
Asperger’s Disorder or high-functioning
autism
attempt to ﬁt in with social groups. Violence, ﬁre-
setting, and aggression have all been documented as
behaviors that emerge in this time period. While, it has
been postulated that these behaviors may occur due to

Autism Spectrum Disorders A 235

the child’s circumscribed interests and/or lack of social
understanding, adolescents with ASD exhibiting such
behaviors are at risk for being placed in alternative
placements such as group homes and juvenile deten-
tion centers (Barnhill et al. 2000).

A

Given the chronic nature of ASD, the impact of
social and/or communication deﬁcits as well as inter-
fering behaviors is likely to be felt by individuals and
families as the affected individual transitions to adult-
hood. The need for continued support from parents
and siblings may cause adverse strain on family rela-
tionships, which can be signiﬁcantly exacerbated by
persistent behavioral problems. Identifying commu-
nity supports that can assist with transitioning to
semi-independent or independent living, workplaces,
and civic engagement pose an additional burden for
families. This process
and
accessing services typically across a number of service
systems, including postsecondary educational, mental
health, vocational habilitation, advocacy, and medical
subspecialists to name a few. Providing appropriate
treatment for the growing number of children, adoles-
cents, and young adults identiﬁed with ASDs has
become a challenge to state and local systems (Croen
et al. 2002). The need for comprehensive, coordinated,
and universally accessible services for young adults
with ASD is evidenced by the increased proportion of
affected adults who are unemployed and dependent on
family and government systems (National Research
Council 2001).

identifying

includes

Behavioral Health Concerns
Children and adolescents with ASDs commonly exhibit
serious behavior problems such as tantrums, aggres-
sion, self-injury, hyperactivity, and noncompliance.
An estimated 50–70% of children with ASDs have
emotional problems
co-occurring behavioral or
(Gadow et al. 2004). Often an additional challenge
during adolescence is a child’s physical growth that
may exacerbate the challenge of addressing behaviors,
which impede functioning and treatment, especially for
children who are lower functioning. During the early
stages of a child’s life, aggression, tantrums, and other
challenging behaviors present
signiﬁcant concern;
however, as a child demonstrates greater size and
strength through puberty, the possibility of imposing
danger on themselves and others increases signiﬁcantly
during behavioral episodes (Koller 2000).

236 A Autism Spectrum Disorders

While the goal of early intervention is that many of
these behaviors will be addressed by training the child
not to engage in them earlier in the child’s life (while
they are still physically small and behaviors may be
more easily contained), the chronic nature of ASDs
often implies that new patterns of behavior will arise.
For this reason, adolescence presents new challenges for
families and treatment teams. Educational, mental
health, and other treatment
teams addressing or
dealing with aggressive or destructive behaviors may
consider staff and child safety more intensely (e.g.,
ensuring that staff are trained appropriately in preven-
tion of behaviors and are physically capable of
protecting the child and themselves from injury).

Currently, the few approaches used in the treatment
of ASDs and its associated symptoms with an empirical
base, include speciﬁc interventions based on applied
behavior analysis (ABA) (Smith et al. 2006), compre-
hensive educational intervention (National Research
Council 2001), and pharmacotherapy (Scahill and
Martin 2005). Intervention may focus on the core
symptoms of ASDs and overall development. Alterna-
tively, treatment of speciﬁc behavioral symptoms such
as stereotypic behaviors, hyperactivity, aggression, self-
injury, or speciﬁc skill development such as daily living
skills, communication, or joint attention.

Contributions of Applied Behavior
Analysis
The applied behavior analysis treatment literature is
replete with studies demonstrating the effectiveness of
these procedures for individuals with ASDs (Matson
et al. 1996; Schreibman 2000). This model, based on
operant learning theory, presumes that antecedent
stimuli and consequences inﬂuence both the acquisi-
tion and maintenance of behaviors. Investigations
embracing this approach have demonstrated attenua-
tion of interfering behaviors (e.g., aggression, self-
injury, tantrums, noncompliance, ritualistic behaviors)
as well as the acquisition of skills (National Research
Council 2001). Recently, there has been a shift in the
ABA ﬁeld toward prevention and antecedent manage-
ment strategies (Luiselli 2006) and away from reliance
on consequence-based strategies. These approaches
include use of visual strategies, modiﬁcations in daily
schedule, and rearranging of the physical setting. Visual
schedules have been used to improve on-task behavior
as well as independence in following the classroom

schedule. Environmental adaptations include modiﬁ-
cation in lighting and sound and physical arrangement
of the space.

(e.g., aggression,

Comprehensive programs target not only speciﬁc
interfering behaviors
self-injury,
tantrums, noncompliance, ritualistic behaviors) but
also skill acquisition across broad domains such as
communication and social skills over a relatively long
period (e.g., 2 years). Although the conceptual frame-
work and interventions differ across such programs,
there are many common features. Speciﬁcally, all pro-
grams emphasize the importance of early intervention,
the use of specially trained staff, a low staff to student
ratio, a focus on the child’s social development and
communication skills, a high value on individualized
treatment, and active involvement of the family. Dif-
ferences include the degree of structure and level of
intensity of the various program models. Several com-
prehensive educational programs have published out-
come data showing developmental gains in language
functioning or IQ (National Research Council 2001).

Psychopharmacology treatment in ASDs has been
a long-standing practice, most commonly employed as
an adjunct to educational, behavioral, and other treat-
ment approaches. Medications do not primarily treat
the core behavioral symptoms of autism but rather
target particular behavioral or psychiatric symptoms.
These include disruptive and aggressive behaviors,
attention and hyperactivity symptoms, and affective
symptoms such as anxiety and depression. Despite the
wide use of psychotropic medications, efﬁcacy studies
of medications speciﬁcally in individuals with ASDs
have been limited. Classes of medications prescribed
for individuals with ASDs include primarily stimulants,
antipsychotics, antidepressants, and mood stabilizers.

As with other treatments for ASDs, pharmacological
treatment is not curative but rather alleviates behavioral
symptoms or clusters of symptoms. For example, meth-
ylphenidate is believed to increase norepinephrine,
which results
in improved attention. Fluoxetine,
a serotonin reuptake inhibitor, increases availability of
serotonin, which is implicated in the regulation of
mood. While these effects inferred from use in other
populations, the mechanism for children with ASDs
may vary, or in fact be side effects of the medication.
For example, risperidone affects both the dopamine and
serotonin systems but can be quite sedating, allowing
for a short-term decrease in disruptive behaviors.

Special Considerations for Individuals
with High-Functioning Autism/
Asperger Disorder
For adolescents, clinicians must consider using differ-
ent treatment modalities (than those used typically
with children with autism and intellectual disabilities),
which lend themselves to the distinctive proﬁles of
children with higher functioning abilities (Sofronoff
et al. 2005). Anderson and Morris (2006) indicated
that there was a substantially higher than expected
rate of clinically signiﬁcant anxiety and depression
diagnoses, as well as other comorbid disorders (i.e.,
eating disorders, substance abuse, obsessive–compul-
sive disorder, bipolar affective disorder) in individuals
diagnosed with Asperger’s Disorder
high-
functioning autism. Interventions containing elements
that address the areas of comorbid disorders, social
training, and relationship formation would be helpful
for this group of adolescents (White et al. 2010).
is

an
approach that originated in the ﬁeld of psychotherapy.
This framework involves altering and challenging an
individual‘s cognitions around events and situations in
order to modify future behavior (White et al. 2010;
Anderson and Morris 2006). CBT focuses on the iden-
tiﬁcation and modiﬁcation of cognitive schemas that
are dysfunctional for individuals. While CBT presents
a promising framework for continued work with
children with high-functioning ASDs, more research
is required in order to determine its effectiveness for
adolescents in this population.

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy

(CBT)

or

Cross-References
▶ Asperger Syndrome
▶ Autism

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed., Text Rev.). Washington:
American Psychiatric Association.

Anderson, S., & Morris, J. (2006). Cognitive behaviour therapy for
people with Asperger’s syndrome. Behavioural and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 34, 293–303.

Asperger, H. (1944). Die “Autistichen psychopathen” im kindesalter.
Archiv fur Psuchiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten, 117, 76–136.
Barnhill, G. P., Hagiwara, T., Myles, B. S., Simpson, R. L., Brick, M. L.,
& Griswold, D. E. (2000). Parent, teacher and self-report of
problem and adaptive behaviors in children and adolescents
with Asperger syndrome. Diagnostique, 25, 147–167.

Autism Spectrum Disorders A 237

A

Center for Disease Control and Prevention. (2009). Prevalence of
autism spectrum disorders: Autism and developmental disabil-
ities monitoring network, United States, 2006. Surveillance
Summaries, 58, 1–20.

Croen, L., Grether, J., Hoogstrate, J., & Selvin, S. (2002). The chang-
ing prevalence of autism in California. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 32, 207–215.

Dalldorf, J. S. (1985). Medical needs of the autistic adolescent. In
E. Schopler & G. E. Mesibov (Eds.), Autism in adolescents and
adults (pp. 149–168). New York: Plenum.

de Vries, A. L. C., Noens, I. L. J., Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., van Berckelaer-
Onnes, I. A., & Doreleijers, T. A. (2010). Autism spectrum
disorders in gender dysphoric children and adolescents. Journal
of Autism Developmental Disorders, open access at www.
Springerlink.com, 1007/s10803-010-0935-9.

Fousse, B., & Wheeler, M. (1997). A treasure chest of behavioral
strategies for individuals with autism. Arlington: Future Horizons.
Gadow, K. D., DeVincent, C. J., Pomeroy, J., & Azizian, A. (2004).
Psychiatric symptoms in preschool children with PDD and clinic
and comparison samples. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 34, 379–393.

Gillberg, C. (1991). Clinical and neurobiological aspects of asperger
syndrome in six family studies. In U. Frith (Ed.), Autism and
Asperger syndrome (pp. 122–146). Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. } 1400 et seq.

(2004).

Jackson, L., & Attwood, T. (2002). Freaks, geeks and Asperger syn-
drome: A user’s guide to adolescence. London: Jessica Kingsley
Publishers.

Kanner, L. (1943). Autistic disturbances of affective contact. Nervous

Child, 2, 217–250.

Koller, R. (2000). Sexuality and adolescents with autism. Sexuality

and Disability, 18, 125–135.

Luiselli, J. K. (2006). Antecedent assessment & intervention: Supporting
children & adults with developmental disabilities in community
settings. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.

Matson, J. L., Benavidez, D. A., Compton, L. S., Paclawskyj, T., et al.
(1996). Behavioral treatment of autistic persons: A review of
research from 1980 to the present. Research in Developmental
Disabilities, 17, 433–465.

Montes, G., Halterman, J. S., & Magyar, C. I. (2009). Access to and
satisfaction with school and community health services for US
children with ASD. Pediatrics, 124, S407–S413.

National Research Council. (2001). Educating children with autism.

Washington: National Academy Press.

Realmuto, G. M., & Ruble, L. A. (1999). Sexual behaviors in autism:
Problems of deﬁnition and management. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 29, 121–127.

Scahill, L., & Martin, A. (2005). Psychopharmacology. In F. Volkmar,
R. Paul, A. Klin, & D. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook of autism and
pervasive developmental disorders (3rd ed., pp. 1102–1117).
Hoboken: Wiley.

Schreibman, L. (2000). Intensive behavioral/psychoeducational treat-
ments for autism: Research needs and future directions. Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30, 373–378.

238 A Auto Theft

Smith, T., Scahill, L., Dawson, G., Guthrie, D., Lord, C., Rogers, S.,
et al. (2006). Designing research studies on psychosocial
interventions in autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 105, 269–285.

Sofronoff, K., Attwood, T., & Hinton, S. (2005). A randomized con-
trolled trial of a CBT intervention for anxiety in children with
Asperger syndrome. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
46, 1152–1160.

Volkmar, F. R., Koenig, K., & State, M. (2005). Childhood disintegra-
tive disorder. In F. R. Volkmar, R. Paul, A. Klin, & D. Cohen
(Eds.), Handbook of autism and pervasive developmental disorders
(3rd ed., pp. 70–87). Hoboken: Wiley.

White, S. W., Albano, A. M., Johnson, C. R., Kasari, C., Klin, A.,
Oswald, D., et al. (2010). Development of a cognitive-behavioral
intervention program to treat anxiety and social deﬁcits in teens
with high-functioning autism. Clinical Child and Family Psychol-
ogy Review, 13, 77–90.

Auto Theft

MANDEEP K. DHAMI
Institute of Criminology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, England, UK

Overview
Auto theft is a common property crime that is often
committed by young offenders. Research on youth auto
theft has involved analysis of ofﬁcial statistics or crim-
inal
justice agency records, and surveys of young
offenders or school-based youth. Studies have exam-
ined the characteristics, experiences, and motivations
of auto thieves, as well as explored the potential deter-
rence and prevention or intervention strategies. Auto
theft is primarily committed by males. The term “joy-
rider” describes those youth who commit auto theft
primarily for recreation. Situational crime prevention
strategies, tougher sentencing policies, and negative
personal experiences do little to deter youth auto
thieves.

The Problem of Youth Auto Theft
Auto theft is the theft or attempted theft of a motor
vehicle such as car, truck, bus, and motorcycle. Auto
thieves are often divided into older professionals steal-
ing primarily for proﬁt and younger amateurs stealing
largely for recreation. Auto theft is a common property
crime. It is also a common crime committed by young

offenders. The penalties for auto theft vary across juris-
dictions but often include ﬁnes, community sentences
(probation), and imprisonment.

Aims and Methods of Past Research
on Youth Auto Theft
Research on auto theft has examined the characteris-
tics, experiences, and motivations of auto thieves, as
well as explored the potential deterrence and preven-
tion or intervention strategies. Many studies have
focused on youth auto thieves, and involved secondary
analysis of ofﬁcial statistics or criminal justice agency
records, or qualitative and quantitative surveys of small
samples of young offenders (e.g., Dawes 2002; Light
et al. 1993; McMurran and Whitman 1997). For
instance, Dawes (2002) conducted semi-structured
interviews with 30, 15–22-year-old, indigenous Austra-
lian youth who were in detention and correction
centers for auto theft. Light et al. (1993) conducted
semi-structured interviews with 100 English auto
thieves aged from 14 to 35, some of whom had been
in motor projects. Finally, McMurran and Whitman
(1997) interviewed 110 male, 15–21-year-olds with
a previous history of stealing cars, who were in
a young offenders’ institution.

Focusing on young offenders can skew our under-
standing of the youth auto theft phenomenon, as many
youth are unlikely to be caught. Thus, it is unclear how
those who are not caught differ from those who are
caught, and it makes it difﬁcult to assess who should be
the target of crime reduction strategies. Furthermore,
analyses of ofﬁcial ﬁgures and records on youth auto
theft are limited by the policies and procedures that
may exist for recording crimes across different agencies
and over time, and by the fact that not all pertinent
information is necessarily documented (or legible).
Ofﬁcial statistics typically reﬂect only a small propor-
tion of crime, and these may be unrepresentative since
they are those that victims were motivated to report
and those that could be successfully prosecuted. Finally,
self-report data is subject to social desirability response
bias, which may lead to underreporting of the offenses
that youth were involved in.

Fortunately, there is a small body of research that
also focuses on auto theft in the general population of
youth (e.g., Dhami 2008; Fleming 1999; Fleming et al.
1994; Spencer 1992). In a study of 86 boys from
a British school, Spencer (1992) found that a small

proportion had engaged in auto theft to some degree
(i.e., from being present when a car was stolen, through
stealing property from a car, to stealing a car). Simi-
larly, in a study involving 1,254 grade 8 and 11 youth in
eight schools across B.C., Canada, Fleming et al. (1994)
found that 5% reported having stolen a vehicle and
12% said they had been a passenger in a stolen car.
Finally, in a study of 779 grade 9–12 youth in 13 schools
across B.C., Canada, Dhami (2008) found that 14%
reported having ridden in a stolen car, 17% said they
had thought about stealing a car, 10% said they had
tried to steal a car, 8% claimed to have stolen a car, and
6% reported they had been caught in a stolen car.

Studying auto theft in the general population of
youth can yield a broader understanding of
the
phenomenon, and reveal a “hidden” sample of
school-attending youth who engage in auto theft.
school-based youth typically
However,
exclude those who are not at school on the day of
data collection because they skipped classes, or were
suspended or excluded from school. These youth may
be at greater risk of engaging in auto theft.

studies of

Characteristics, Experiences, and
Motivations of Youth Auto Thieves
The youth auto theft literature has made progress in
describing the characteristics of young auto thieves. It
has been revealed that youth auto thieves tend to be
from lower socioeconomic groups.
teenage males,
A majority are white. Most live with their family mem-
bers, and expect to do household chores. Sometimes,
discipline and parental supervision is lacking. Youth
auto thieves are generally uninterested or not engaged
in school, and are typically unemployed. They do not
tend to engage in formal extracurricular activities or
active leisure pursuits, and instead tend to “hang out.”
Youth auto thieves may have criminal friends as well as
family members who engage in criminal behavior. They
may use alcohol and drugs, and engage in other delin-
quent or criminal activities, as well as be gang
members.

There are, however, some similarities between
youth who engage in auto theft and those who do
not. Dhami (2008) found no signiﬁcant difference
between youth in the general population who reported
various levels of engagement in auto theft and those
who did not in terms of the average age of the two
groups, the average number of other youth at home,

Auto Theft A 239

A

and the average weekly hours spent on chores and
paid work.

Studies have also recorded youths’ experiences of
auto theft. It is suggested that youths are often passen-
gers in stolen cars before they begin stealing them.
Youth auto thieves often have been found to be repeat
offenders, and most offenses are not planned in
advance. They often commit auto theft in groups, and
after school. Although youth auto thieves may use
alcohol, drugs, or solvents, auto theft does not neces-
sarily coincide with the use of such substances. Simi-
larly, although some youth auto thieves may engage in
other criminal activities, a signiﬁcant proportion of
youth describe themselves as specializing in auto
theft. The families of youth auto thieves may know of
their engagement in the offense, but are often powerless
to prevent their offending behavior.

status,

recognition, masculinity,

Some researchers have developed and applied
typologies when describing the experiences of youth
auto thieves and explaining their motivations. Auto
theft may be for recreation (e.g., entertainment, fun,
power,
sex, and
a challenge), transport (e.g., utilitarian, short-term
personal use, long-term personal use, and for commis-
sion of another crime), and proﬁt (e.g., car stripping,
sale of parts, resale, and fraudulent insurance claims).
The term “joyrider” is commonly used to describe
those youth who commit auto theft primarily for
recreation. It is important to recognize that youth
auto thieves may have multiple motivations and that
these may change over time. Thus, the categories of
motivations are not mutually exclusive, and youths’
motivations may shift from one type to another.

Studies have also explored the factors that motivate
youth to initiate, sustain, and desist in auto theft. Here,
the peer group emerges as a key factor inﬂuencing
youth to engage in auto theft. For instance, it has
been found that many youth auto thieves say they
started to steal cars because their friends were already
involved in the activity, while other reasons included
wanting to drive (including learning how to). Beyond
these, other reasons for initial involvement in auto theft
include avoiding boredom, need for excitement/fun,
need for money, to steal, to impress friends, and
a desire to wreck vehicles.

In terms of continuing to steal cars, the reasons
sometimes given by youth are for fun, going fast,
convenience, freedom, excitement, feeling of power,

240 A Auto Theft

avoiding boredom, trying different models of cars,
a challenge, status, and to sell the vehicle. As their
involvement in auto theft continues, youth may report
becoming more skilled in terms of technique and
speed. Peers who were teachers can become co-
offenders, and offenders may increase their rate of
theft from cars or theft for proﬁt, as well as use of cars
for commission of other crimes such as “ramraiding”
(i.e., using the vehicle to break through the windows or
doors of a closed shop to allow theft). Indeed, the
motivations for persisting in auto theft change to
focus more on obtaining money than either feeling
a “buzz” or avoiding boredom. In fact, there are some
researchers who consider auto theft an addictive
behavior.

Some evidence suggests that as youth become young
adults they desist from auto theft. The reasons some-
times provided for ceasing auto theft included taking up
other activities, ﬁnding other modes of transport, want-
ing to avoid the adverse consequences of offending,
deciding to obey the law, no longer feeling tempted,
and changing friends or peer group. In addition,
desistance may be associated with the threat of prison,
“growing out of it,” and (males) acquiring a girlfriend.

Deterring and Preventing Youth
Auto Theft
Studies reveal that youth auto thieves do not consider
auto theft to be a serious problem or view joyriding as
a serious crime compared to other crimes. Further-
more, some do not believe it is wrong to steal a car or
steal from it. Against this backdrop, there has been
some discussion about the most effective strategies for
deterring and preventing youth auto theft.

Situational crime prevention strategies such as tar-
get hardening via locks, alarms immobilizers, and
in
wheel protectors, have not been very successful
reducing auto theft. Indeed, some youth say that they
are not deterred by car alarms. Similarly, strategies that
make it more likely for youth to get caught such as
tracking devices, and
informant hotlines, curfews,
public awareness campaigns have also had limited
effectiveness.

Deterrence may be achieved via sentencing policy,
and some researchers have promoted the use of
increased punishment. The most common penalties
for auto theft are ﬁnes and community sentences or
probation. However, only a small proportion of youth

actually come to police attention. Youth tend to believe
that the chances of being caught are small, and they
think that they would evade harsh punishment. Even
when youth auto thieves do overestimate the chances of
receiving a custodial sentence, this does not appear to
deter them. Similarly, youth do not appear to be
deterred by their experiences of being caught or
sentenced, even to custodial sentences.

Youth may be deterred from auto theft via their own
negative experiences. However, studies have found that
youths’ experiences of accidents do little to deter them.
Nevertheless, it has been found that while youth may
not be deterred by the personal risks involved in joy-
riding, many youth who know victims of joyriding say
that knowledge contributed to their decision to stop.

Youth auto theft may be dealt with by changing
offenders’ attitudes to auto theft, reducing their moti-
vations to offend, and channeling their interest in cars
in a legal way. Providing youth with relatively cheap
recreational facilities may prevent them from being
bored, and “hanging out” and eventually becoming
involved in auto theft. It has been found that offenders
recommend educational programs highlighting the
dangers of auto theft and joyriding. By contrast, some
youth recommend that provision of activities for
young people would help prevent auto theft.

Strategies designed to reduce youth auto theft often
target young offenders who have been caught. They
participate in programs via outreach or referral, some-
times after being cautioned or sentenced to probation.
Some programs engage youth in activities at times
when they are most likely to offend. Programs may
make them think about their offending behavior, and
redirect their attention to more prosocial pursuits with
long-term personal development such as car mechanics
courses, sports, voluntary work, and creative programs,
and provide them with access to driving, as well as
education on safe driving.

Dhami (2008) found that compared to youth in the
general population who reported various levels of
engagement in auto theft, those who said they had
not engaged in auto theft were signiﬁcantly more likely
to view it as something that could ruin their image or
life or have negative consequences for other people. In
addition, the auto thieves in this sample considered the
problem of youth auto theft as signiﬁcantly less impor-
tant to themselves and their peers, than youth who had
not engaged in auto theft. Both groups, however,

equally recognized that the problem of youth auto theft
was important to the police and judges as well as their
parents. Finally, compared to youth who had not
engaged in auto theft, auto thieves believed that more
adult support and greater intervention by the criminal
justice system would both prove to be a signiﬁcantly
less-effective deterrence, but that a greater provision of
other activities would be signiﬁcantly more effective in
preventing auto theft.

Future Directions for Preventing and
Understanding Youth Auto Theft
Strategies designed to reduce youth auto theft often
target young offenders who have been caught. It may
be worth considering the effectiveness of such projects
for “at risk” school-attending youth who think about
auto theft but have not begun stealing cars and youth
who engage in auto theft but have not yet been caught.
These could be operated as part of a school organized
general studies class, for example, and could include an
element of peer intervention. Alternatively, a view of
auto theft as an addictive behavior implies that inter-
ventions such as behavioral self-control training and
relapse prevention may be useful, along with interven-
tions that provide rewarding replacement activities.

Although much of the past research on youth auto
theft has been atheoretical, the ﬁndings do bear upon
the potential value of control theory, social disorgani-
zation theory, routine activity theory, and rational
choice theory. There has also been some discussion
on the usefulness of an addiction-based model of
youth auto theft. Future research ought to test various
theories of crime in explaining the phenomenon of
youth auto theft.

There are many aspects of youth auto theft that
need to be further researched. For instance, there is
a need to better understand how youths’ perceptions
of young auto thieves affect their likelihood of being
involved in auto theft. It would be interesting to further
explore the types of cost-beneﬁt calculations that may
be (sub)consciously done by groups of youth (i.e.,
youth who report engagement in auto theft and those
who do not) in order to determine how well they are
calibrated to the objective probabilities of obtaining
speciﬁc potential beneﬁts of auto theft as well as incur-
ring speciﬁc potential costs, and then to determine how
speciﬁc beneﬁts and costs are balanced to act as
a motivation or deterrence for auto theft.

Autonomy and Its Assessment A 241

Cross-References
▶ Delinquency

A

References
Dawes, G. (2002). Figure eights, spin outs and power slides: Aborig-
inal and Torres Straight Islander youth and the culture of joyrid-
ing. Journal of Youth Studies, 5, 195–208.

Dhami, M. K. (2008). Youth auto theft: A survey of a general popu-
lation of Canadian youth. Canadian Journal of Criminology and
Criminal Justice, 50, 187–209.

Fleming, Z., Brantingham, P., & Brantingham, B. (1994). Exploring
auto theft in British Columbia. In R. V. Clarke (Ed.), Crime
prevention studies (Vol. 3, pp. 47–90). Monsey: Criminal Justice
Press.

Fleming, Z. T. (1999). The thrill of it all: Youthful offenders and auto
theft. In P. Cromwell (Ed.), In their own words: Criminals on
crime (pp. 71–79). Los Angeles: Roxbury Publishing.

Light, R., Nee, C., & Ingham, H. (1993). Car theft: The offender’s
perspective (Home Ofﬁce Research Study No. 130). London: Home
Ofﬁce.

McMurran, M., & Whitman, J. (1997). The development of a brief
intervention for car theft. In J. E. Hodge, M. McMurran, & C. R.
Hollin (Eds.), Addicted to crime? (pp. 191–201). Chichester:
Wiley.

Spencer, E. (1992). Car crime and young people on a Sunderland
housing estate (Police Research Group Crime Prevention Unit
Series Paper No. 40). London: Home Ofﬁce.

Autonomy and Its Assessment

TROY E. BECKERT
Emma Eccles Jones College of Education and Human
Services, Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA

Overview
Originally considered as a developmental
task of
toddlerhood, autonomy has gained in importance as
a pivotal part of adolecence as well. Many conceptual
deﬁnitions exist
in the literature but only a few
researchers have attempted to measure the construct
empirically. Initial attempts at measuring dependency,
an antonym of autonomy, were strengthened by subse-
quent measures of a global construct. However, more
progress has been made by the measurement of speciﬁc
domains of behavior, emotion, and cognition.

Adolescent autonomy is manifest in a young per-
son’s ability to act, feel, and think independently.
Erikson (1963) originally characterized autonomy as

242 A Autonomy and Its Assessment

a task tied to toddlerhood. Today, however, scholars
give it considerable attention as a central part of ado-
lescent development. Recently, it has received enough
attention in the ﬁeld of adolescent development that in
some circles it rivals identity development as the most
important task of adolescence. Zimmer-Gembeck and
Collins’ (2003) seminal chapter on autonomy develop-
ment during adolescence provides a good historical
overview of the topic. The increased consideration of
the importance of autonomy at this stage of develop-
ment has lead to an increased focus on its measurement
in adolescence. We are closer to understanding adoles-
cent autonomy because of the measurement tools
available.

Scholars conceptually deﬁne autonomy in different
ways based on theoretical and philosophical allegiance.
Anna Freud’s (1958) psychoanalytic view represents
a detachment from parents; she saw autonomy as
adolescent rebellion against parental control. This
detachment model has lead to rich data, speciﬁcally as
it relates to previous attachment patterns in childhood.
Another familiar conceptualization of autonomy fol-
lows a Durkheim (1957) view, which represents a quest
for independence and individuality. This view parallels
Erikson’s (1963) or Mahler’s (Mahler et al. 1975) view
of adolescent autonomy as self-regulation.

Researchers also use varied approaches to measure
adolescent autonomy. Some have attempted to mea-
sure the construct as a whole. However, an overarching
categorization, into three main areas, provides a more
manageable approach to understanding adolescent
autonomy and most likely explains how the construct
has emerged as one of the foremost development
milestones of these formative teenage years. The most
fruitful attempts to measure adolescent autonomy
operationalize it in terms of behavior, emotion, or
cognition.

Comprehensive Measures of
Autonomy
Early attempts to measure autonomy did so by
addressing the entire construct. Rather than measuring
it directly, however, these early researchers focused
attention on the measurement of dependency, an anto-
nym of autonomy. In 1961, Zuckerman, Levitt, and
Lubin used concepts from the literature of various
descriptions of personality traits that parallel depen-
dency (Zuckerman et al. 1961). They shaped an

instrument to measure three distinct yet related traits
of a dependent or compliant personality. These traits
included succorance, or a marked need for approval
and affection from others; deference, or a tendency to
subordinate to others while inhibiting assertiveness;
and abasement, or a tendency toward guilt and self-
blame. Hirschfeld and colleagues developed a 48-item
self-report inventory designed to assess interpersonal
dependency with clinical and nonclinical populations
(Hirschfeld et al. 1977). The use of the instrument with
nonclinical, or participants who are not diagnosed with
a disorder that associates with dependency is impor-
tant to note. Prior to this time, developmentalists did
not emphasize the importance of autonomy in adoles-
cence as an important developmental
transition.
Hirschfeld and colleagues demonstrated statistically
that the newly created inventory consisted of three
components. These components included emotional
reliance on another person, a lack of social self-conﬁ-
dence, and assertion of autonomy. Later, Austrian
also
researchers Rossmann and Bloschl
researching clinical and nonclinical populations, devel-
oped another self-report dependency questionnaire,
The Grazer Dependence Scale. Rossman and Bloschl
designed this scale to measure emotional dependency,
achievement-related dependency, and instrumental
dependency. In each of these developed instruments,
the reliance on measuring dependency limited the
utility of using them to study autonomy directly.

(1982),

Bekker (1993) recognized the one-sided reliance on
dependency of the previously described questionnaires.
She also identiﬁed, in the early dependency measure-
ment tools, a lack of a feministic perspective that might
account for some potentially important gender differ-
ences in adolescent autonomy. Maintaining an attempt
toward a global measure of autonomy, she created the
Autonomy Scale (Bekker). The original scale consisted
of 50 items. Following an initial factor analysis, she
reduced the scale to the 42 most salient items. Response
options for the items were on a seven-point Likert scale
ranging from “completely ﬁts me” to “absolutely does
not ﬁt me.” Hypothesized to encompass ﬁve scales, the
ﬁnal version of the instrument reduced to three factors
including self-awareness, sensitivity to others, and
capacity for managing new situations. Bekker and van
Assen (2006) maintained the original three factors in
a revised and shortened 30-item instrument known as
the Autonomy-Connectedness Scale (ACS-30).

Attempts to measure adolescent autonomy as
a whole, either from a dependency perspective or
from a global perspective, remain too broad to offer
detailed insight into the developmental patterns and
trajectories
in adolescence. Dependency, although
acknowledged as an ample antonym of autonomy,
cannot adequately assess autonomy any better than
studying marital discord can inform us about marriage
satisfaction. Likewise, Bekker’s work, while serving an
essential role in informing the design of more deﬁned
measurement tools, measured autonomy too broadly
to render any clear direction about how to beneﬁt
healthy trajectories
in
separated
speciﬁc domains. Subsequent measures
adolescent autonomy into speciﬁc areas of behavior,
emotion, and cognition.

in adolescent development

Measurement of Behavioral
Autonomy
Behavioral autonomy entails an ability to act for one’s
self. Most developmentalists recognize that humans
seek and receive independence throughout the lifespan.
However, there appear to be noticeable spikes in the
importance of autonomy for toddlers and adolescents.
In toddlerhood, children learn to walk. They also learn
to regulate their bodily functions and use the toilet
without assistance, feed themselves, and put on their
own clothes. All these events create a sense of indepen-
dence for the young child. Similarly, adolescents begin
to experience new freedoms as activities with friends,
away from parents, increase and young people begin to
act like adults. Behavioral choices in adolescence range
from choosing hairstyle and manner of dress to decid-
ing about risk-taking behaviors like using drugs and
alcohol or being sexually active.

it is less complicated,

Historically, behavioral autonomy was the ﬁrst
speciﬁc area to be measured. This is most likely due
to two factors. First,
from
a measurement perspective, to observe evidence of
behavioral autonomy directly. It is easier to measure
the actions of a participant than it is to measure their
emotions or their thoughts. Second, there is a direct
connection between behavioral
and
autonomy
Erikson’s
lifespan development,
“autonomy versus shame or doubt.” Autonomy in tod-
dlerhood is about behavioral independence. It was
a logical ﬁrst step in developing measures of assessment
to examine independent behavior in adolescence.

second stage of

Autonomy and Its Assessment A 243

A

Many

researchers have described behavioral
autonomy conceptually. They use terms such as self-
reliance (Greenberger 1984), functional independence
(Hoffman 1984), self-regulation (Markus and Wurf
1987), competence (Deci and Ryan 2000), personal
control (Flammer 1991), nonconformity (Ryan 1993),
and reﬂective autonomy (Koestner and Losier 1996) to
describe the process of acting independently. However,
reliable and valid instruments to measure the construct
accompanied none of these conceptualizations. The
main researchers in this ﬁeld of inquiry who have
created instruments to measure behavioral autonomy
include Felman and Quatman (1988), Rosenthal and
Bornholt (1988), Felman and Rosenthal (1990), and
Daddis and Smetana (2005).

2

ago,

Over

decades

Feldman

devised
a measurement of adolescent behavioral autonomy.
Together with her colleague Quatman, Feldman cre-
ated a 21-item questionnaire called the Teen Timetable
(Felman and Quatman 1988). These items included
a variety of everyday life management domains that
they conceptually grouped as autonomy, oppositional
autonomy, social interaction, and leisure. Response
options included a ﬁve-point scale of age ranges for
when the adolescents thought their parents should
allow them to do the task. The response options ranged
from 1 = before age 12, 2 = 12–14 years of age, 3 = 15–
17 years of age, 4 = 18 years of age and older, and 5 =
not at all. Parents completed an equivalent question-
naire with slight verbiage change to accommodate the
adult responder. There was no indication of any factor
analysis for the Teen Timetable by either Feldman and
Quartman or other researchers.

At the same time as Feldman’s Teen Timetable,
Rosenthal and Bornholt (1988) were also designing an
assessment of behavioral autonomy. Their instrument,
the Developmental Timetable Questionnaire, consisted
of 65 items comprising eight domains. These domains
included interpersonal sensitivity, initiative or inde-
pendence,
responsibility,
unsupervised activities, social behavior with friends,
self-control, and respect or politeness. Rosenthal’s
scales demonstrated adequate internal reliability on
the initially reported scores.

maturity,

personal

Two years later, Felman and Rosenthal (1990)
joined forces to create the Revised Teen Timetable that
reports to be a 19-item inventory combination of
the Feldman Teen Timetable and the Rosenthal

244 A Autonomy and Its Assessment

Developmental Timetable. Overall, there is signiﬁcant
overlap in the two earlier versions of the question-
naires. However, upon close examination, the Revised
Teen Timetable is more akin to the Felman and
Quatman (1988) Teen Timetable, with over 63% of
from that original
items
the
instrument.

coming directly

More recently, Daddis and Smetana (2005) again
revised the Teen Timetable to create the 24-item Teen
Timetable measure. Daddis adapted the original
Felman and Quatman (1988) measure by dropping
three items (doing homework, taking a part-time job,
and going to a rock concert with friends) and adding
ﬁve items dealing with responsibilities. These items
included deciding how to talk to parents, how to keep
their bedroom, whether to use slang or curse words,
their ability to prepare their own dinner, and how to do
chores. Many of these additions are similar in content
to items on the Rosenthal and Bornholt (1988) 65-item
inventory. Daddis used a similar scale as the previous
versions of the Teen Timetable but he varied the
age options slightly (1 = before age 14, 2 = 14–15,
3 = 16–17, 4 = 18 or older, 5 = never). Daddis’ change
of age options is interesting. As society continues to
push adult behavior choices toward younger children,
it would seem logical to move the age of ﬁrst option
younger rather than older to maximize variability.

Each of these measurements attempts to highlight
areas of behavioral change in the transition from child-
hood to adult status. Several researchers feel that
behavioral autonomy should remain primarily a task
of toddlerhood because the observable tasks of toddlers
are more salient and because the rationale for behav-
ioral choices in adolescence has a stronger emotional
and cognitive basis. Instead of focusing on what parents
allow adolescents to do independently, some scholars
focus on how adolescents begin to develop their own
affective domain by untying themselves from their
emotional dependence on their parents or primary
caregivers.

Measurement in Emotional
Autonomy
Since the late 1980s, researchers have emphasized the
role of emotions in an adolescent’s quest for indepen-
dence. Anna Freud’s theoretical conceptualization of
adolescence provides a foundation for this line of
assessment. According to Freud (1958), adolescence is

a time when children rebel against their primary care-
givers toward an independence of emotional connec-
tion. The rebellion then results in an opposition to
their caregiver attachment experienced in infancy.
Conceptual
interpretations of emotional autonomy
include emotional and social independence (Flammer
1991; Hoffman 1984); mutuality and permeability
(Grotevant and Cooper 1985); relatedness (Deci and
Ryan 2000); connectedness, separateness, and detach-
ment (Beyers et al. 2003; Frank et al. 1988); and reactive
autonomy (Koestner and Losier 1996). Once again,
reliable and valid instruments to measure the concep-
tualizations accompanied none of
these. A few
researchers have attempted the empirical measurement
of emotional autonomy. Steinberg and Silverberg
(1986), Noom et al. (2001), and Allen et al. (1994)
have each developed different ways to assess emotional
autonomy.

Steinberg and Silverberg (1986) constructed the
Emotional Autonomy Scale (EAS). The EAS consists of
a 20-item instrument that used Likert type scales to
create four subscales of emotional autonomy. The sub-
scales include (a) parents as people, (b) parental
deidealization, (c) non-parental dependency, and (d)
individuation. Steinberg and Silverberg constructed
these subscales according to Blos’s (1979) theoretical
perspective of adolescent individualization (Schmitz
and Baer 2001). While researchers have used the EAS
often over the past 2 decades, controversy still sur-
rounds its connection to Anna Freud’s (1958) negative
view of adolescent development that involves detach-
ment
than a more healthy
rather
approach of adolescent autonomy being in harmony
with parental preferences (Ryan and Lynch 1989).
Critics have also questioned the apparent lack of con-
vergent validity (Hill and Holmbeck 1986). Questions
remain as to whether EAS actually measures emotional
autonomy or whether it measures something more
related to detachment.

from parents

Noom et al. (2001) included emotional autonomy
as one of three dimensions of their conceptualization
and measurement of autonomy. Using the earlier work
of Bekker (1991), Noom and colleagues constructed
a 15-item questionnaire purporting to assess attitudi-
nal, emotional, and functional autonomy. Despite the
fact that their instrument attempts to measure a more
inclusive scope of autonomy, by including attitudinal
and functional dimensions of autonomy, the emphasis

remains on the distancing of the adolescent from
parental inﬂuences.

Recently, Allen and his colleagues (Allen et al. 2002)
have been the most active in exploring new ways to
conceptualize and measure emotional autonomy. Allen
et al. employed a qualitative approach to code mother–
adolescent interactions for behaviors exhibiting auton-
omy. They devised their own coding system that they
refer to as the Autonomy and Relatedness Coding Sys-
tem. Their scale includes ten different groups of speech
patterns anchored by concrete observable behaviors.
Allen and his research team use their assessment to
examine adolescent development of emotional auton-
omy across domains.

Each of these approaches attempts to assess areas of
emotional change, as children become adults. Contro-
versy remains about the utility of such measures. A shift
of emotional dependence on parents to emotional
dependence on others does not necessarily constitute
autonomy. Scholarly work on attachment through the
lifespan brings question to the detachment model of
emotional autonomy. Instead of focusing on this affec-
tive shift, it might be more beneﬁcial to focus on how
adolescents begin to develop their own cognitive
domain. Humans who think independently will most
likely recognize the proper nature of their emotional
connections to caregivers and will most likely display
behavioral independence. Adolescence is a time when
young people begin to think independently, without
undue inﬂuence from outside sources,
including
parents.

Measurement in Cognitive Autonomy
Many of the researchers in this ﬁeld have included
a conceptual component that encompassed cognitive
autonomy. Indeed, Allen et al. (2002) describe their
measure as an assessment of both emotional and cog-
nitive autonomy. However, none of the measures
attempts to validate the conceptualization of the con-
struct. Only recently have scholars begun to examine
the signiﬁcance of assessing young people’s impres-
sions of their own independent thought (Casey and
de Haan 2002; Stefanou et al. 2004). Conceptualizing
independent
thought and cognitive autonomy in
a decision-making model has received noted consider-
ation (see Jacobs and Klaczynski 2005). However,
restricting it to a simple decision-making model falls
construct.
short of a full

appreciation of

the

Autonomy and Its Assessment A 245

A

Unquestionably, decision making is a signiﬁcant
component of adolescent independent thought, but it
represents only one aspect of cognitive autonomy.
A more comprehensive approach, beyond decision
making, seems warranted. Initial steps toward the con-
ceptual and practical development of one method of
assessing adolescent cognitive autonomy are underway.
Beckert and colleagues (Beckert 2007; Lee et al.
2009) have developed a measurement tool, the Cogni-
tive Autonomy and Self-Evaluation (CASE) inventory,
toward the measurement of cognitive autonomy in
adolescence. This instrument endeavors to quantify
ﬁve areas of independent thought. A review of relevant
literature in psychology, sociology, and human devel-
opment highlights many areas of independent thought
that deserve consideration. Additionally, the authors of
the CASE inventory used a grounded theory approach
thought
to identify salient areas of
for consideration. Once categorical coding of
the
open-ended data reached saturation, support for the
emergent categories was sought from the literature.
The use of this type of grounded theory approach
with supporting literature is consistent with the con-
struction of instruments in social science areas that
encompass multiple operational deﬁnitions of speciﬁc
constructs (Charmaz 2003).

independent

The CASE inventory operationally deﬁnes cognitive
autonomy in ﬁve domains. These domains entail
a capacity to evaluate thought and make logical deduc-
tions (Miller and Drotar 2007; Zimmerman 2000), to
voice opinion (Reed and Spicer 2003),
to make
decisions or generate alternatives (Galotti 2002), to
capitalize on comparative validations (Bednar and
Fisher 2003; Finken 2005), and to self-assess or self-
reﬂect (Demetrious 2003; Dunning et al. 2004; Peetsma
et al. 2005). Beckert’s inventory is a 27-item instrument
using a six-point Likert scale with response options
ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. Initial
investigations of instrument validity, using factor anal-
ysis, revealed a goodness of ﬁt for ﬁve related, but
statistically unique areas. The reliability and validity
of scores from diverse populations support the subscale
distinction (Beckert 2007).

The CASE inventory assesses implications toward
evaluative thinking that include thinking about the
consequences of decisions, looking at situations from
other’s perspectives, weighing possible risks, eval-
uating daily actions, considering alternative decisions,

246 A Autonomy and Its Assessment

thinking about effect of actions, weighing the long-
term effect of decisions, and evaluating thoughts.
A young person’s inclination to voice opinions is mea-
sured on the inventory by the adolescent’s willingness
to speak up in class discussions, to share views when
disagreements arise, to stand up for what the adoles-
cent thinks is right, valuing their own opinion, and
speaking out in other school situations. Decision mak-
ing, as measured on the inventory, entails a recognition
that there are consequences to decisions, that their way
of thinking and decision making have improved with
age, that they think more about the future than previ-
ously, and that they are better at decision making than
their friends. The measurement on the inventory of
self-assessing includes an ability to identify self-
strengths, abilities, and talents. Finally, comparative
validation, on the inventory includes needs to have
family members and friends approve decisions, to
have views match those of parents, friends, and others.

Conclusion
We are closer to understanding adolescent autonomy
the efforts to measure the construct.
because of
Research in this ﬁeld has
conceptualized the
construct in many ways. The inability to envision the
construct uniformly has lead to diverse interpretations
of what autonomy really entails. Consequently,
relatively few scholars have attempted to develop mea-
surements of autonomy. Some researchers have tried to
measure the whole construct, while others focused on
behavioral, emotional, or cognitive domains within the
area of adolescent autonomy. Scholars continue to
attempt to tap the full richness that exists in the impli-
cations of the development of adolescent autonomy.
Nonetheless, strength exists in the attempts. As we
learn more about how an adolescent becomes an
adult in behavioral, emotional, and cognitive realms,
we will be better able to assess the transition.

References
Allen, J. P., Hauser, S. T., Bell, K. L., & O’Connor, T. G. (1994).
Longitudinal assessment of autonomy and relatedness in adoles-
cent-family interactions as predictors of adolescent ego develop-
ment and self-esteem. Child Development, 65, 179–194.

Allen, J., Marsh, P., McFarland, C., McElhaney, K., Land, D., Jodl, K.,
et al. (2002). Attachment and autonomy as predictors of the
development
and delinquency during
skills
midadolescence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
70(1), 56–66.

social

of

Beckert, T. (2007). Cognitive autonomy and self evaluation in ado-
lescence: A conceptual investigation and instrument develop-
ment. North American Journal of Psychology, 9(3), 579–594.
Bednar, D. E., & Fisher, T. D. (2003). Peer referencing in adolescent
decision making as a function of perceived parenting style.
Adolescence, 38, 607–621.

Bekker, M. (1991). The movable boundaries of the female ego.

Eburon: Delft.

Bekker, M. (1993). The development of an autonomy scale based on
recent insights into gender identity. European Journal of Person-
ality, 7, 177–194.

Bekker, M., & van Assen, M. (2006). A short form of the autonomy
scale: Properties of the autonomy-connectedness scale. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 86(1), 51–60.

Beyers, W., Goossens, L., Vansant, I., & Moors, E. (2003). A structural
model of autonomy in middle and late adolescence: Connected-
ness, separation, detachment, and agency. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 32(5), 351–365.

Blos, P. (1979). The adolescent passage. New York: International

Universities Press.

Casey, B. J., & de Haan, M. (2002). Introduction: new methods in
developmental science. Developmental Science, 5(3), 265–267.
Charmaz, K. (2003). Grounded theory. In M. Lewis-Beck, A. E.
Bryman, & T. F. Liao (Eds.), The Sage encyclopedia of social
science research methods (pp. 440–444). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Daddis, C., & Smetana, J. (2005). Middle-class African American
families’ expectations for adolescents’ behavioral autonomy.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 29(5), 371–381.
Deci, E., & Ryan, R. (2000). The support of autonomy and the control
of behavior. In T. Higgins & A. Kruglanski (Eds.), Motivational
science: Social and personality perspectives
(pp. 128–145).
New York: Psychology Press.

Demetrious, A. (2003). Mind, self, and personality: Dynamic inter-
actions from late childhood to early adulthood. Journal of Adult
Development, 10(3), 151–171.

Dunning, D., Heath, C., & Suls, J. (2004). Flawed self-assessment:
Implications for health, education, and the workplace. Psycho-
logical Science in the Public Interest, 5(3), 69–106.

Durkheim, E. (1957). Professional ethics and civic morals. London:

Routledge.

Erikson, E. (1963). Children in Society. New York: Norton.
Felman, S. S., & Quatman, T. (1988). Factors inﬂuencing age expec-
tations for adolescent autonomy: A study of early adolescents
and parents. Journal of Early Adolescence, 8(4), 325–343.

Felman, S. S., & Rosenthal, D. A. (1990). The acculturation of auton-
omy expectations in Chinese high schoolers residing in two
western nations. International Journal of Psychology, 25, 259–281.
Finken, L. L. (2005). The role of consultants in adolescents’ decision
making: A focus on abortion decisions. In J. J. Jacobs & P. A.
Klaczynski (Eds.), The development of judgment and decision mak-
ing in children and adolescents (pp. 255–278). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Flammer, A. (1991). Self-regulation. In R. M. Lerner, A. C. Petersen,
& J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Encyclopedia of adolescence (Vol. 2,
pp. 1001–1003). New York: Garland.

Frank, S., Avery, C., & Laman, M. (1988). Young adults’ perceptions
of their relationships with their parents: Individual differences in

Autonomy and Its Assessment A 247

A

connectedness, competence, and emotional autonomy. Develop-
mental Psychology, 24, 729–737.

Freud, A. (1958). Adolescence: Research at the Hampstead child-
therapy clinic and other papers 1956–1965. London: International
Universities.

Galotti, K. M. (2002). Making decisions that matter: How people face

important life choices. Mahwah: Erlbaum.

Greenberger, E. (1984). Deﬁning psychosocial maturity in adoles-
cence. In P. Karoly & J. J. Steffen (Eds.), Adolescent behavior
disorders: Foundations and contemporary concerns (Vol. 3,
pp. 3–37). Lexington: Lexington Books, D.C. Health.

Grotevant, H., & Cooper, C. (1985). Patterns of interaction in family
relationships and development of identity exploration in adoles-
cence. Child Development, 56, 415–428.

Hill, J., & Holmbeck, G. (1986). Attachmetn and autonomy during
adolescence. In G. Whitehurst (Ed.), Annals of child development
(Vol. 3, pp. 145–189). Greenwich: JAI.

Hirschfeld, R., Klerman, G., Gough, H., Barrett, J., Korchin, S., &
Chodoff, P. (1977). A measure of interpersonal dependency.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 41, 610–618.

Hoffman, J. (1984). Psychological separation of late adolescents from
their parents. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 31, 77–91.
Jacobs, J. E., & Klaczynski, P. A. (Eds.). (2005). The development of
judgment and decision making in children and adolescents.
Mahwah: Erlbaum.

Koestner, R., & Losier, G. (1996). Distinguishing reactive versus
reﬂective autonomy. Journal of Personality, 64(2), 465–494.
Lee, C., Beckert, T., & Goodrich, T. (2009). The relationship between
individualistic, collectivistic, and transitional cultural value ori-
entations and adolescents’ autonomy and identity status. Journal
of Youth and Adolescence, 0.1007/s10964-009-9430-z.

Mahler, M., Pine, F., & Bergman, A. (1975). The psychological birth of
the human infant: Symbiosis and individuation. London: Karnac.
Markus, H., & Wurf, E. (1987). The dynamic self-concept: A social
psychological perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 38,
299–337.

Peetsma, T., Hascher, T., Van Der Veen, I., & Roede, E. (2005).
Relations between adolescents’ self-evaluations, time perspec-
tives, motivation for school and their achievement in different
countries and at different ages. European Journal of Psychology of
Education, 20, 209–225.

Reed, V., & Spicer, L. (2003). The relative importance of selected
communication skills for adolescents’ interactions with their
teachers: High school teachers’ opinions. Language, Speech, and
Hearing Services in Schools, 34, 343–357.

Rosenthal, D., & Bornholt, L. (1988). Expectaitons about develop-
ment in Greek- and Anglo-Australian families. Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, 19(1), 19–34.

Rossmann, P., & Bloschl, L. (1982). Psychosocial dependency and
depression: An empirical analysis. Journal of Differential and
Diagnostic Psychology, 3(1), 35–46.

Ryan, R. (1993). Agency and organization: Intrinsic motivation,
autonomy, and the self
In
R. Dienstbier & J. Jacobs (Eds.), Nebraska symposium on motiva-
tion: Developmental perspectives on motivation (Vol. 40, pp. 1–
56). Lincoln: University Press.

in psychological development.

Ryan, R., & Lynch, J. (1989). Emotional autonomy versus detach-
ment: Revisiting the vicissitudes of adolescence and young adult-
hood. Child Development, 60, 340–356.

Schmitz, M., & Baer, J. (2001). The vicissitudes of measurement:
A conﬁrmatory factor analysis of the emotional autonomy
scale. Child Development, 72(1), 207–219.

Stefanou, C. R., Perencevich, K. C., DiCintio, M., & Turner, J. C.
(2004). Supporting autonomy in the classroom: Ways teachers
encourage student decision making and ownership. Educational
Psychologist, 39(2), 97–110.

Steinberg, L., & Silverberg, S. (1986). The vicissitudes of autonomy in

early adolescence. Child Development, 57, 841–851.

Zimmer-Gembeck, M. J., & Collins, W. A. (2003). Autonomy devel-
opment during adolescence. In G. R. Adams & M. Berzonsky
(Eds.), Blackwell handbook of adolescence (pp. 175–204). Oxford:
Blackwell.

Miller, V., & Drotar, D. (2007). Decision-making competence and
adherence to treatment in adolescents with diabetes. Journal of
Pediatric Psychology, 32, 178–188.

Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Attaining self-regulation: A social cognitive
perspective. In M. Boekaerts & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Handbook of
self-regulation (pp. 13–39). San Diego: Academic.

Noom, M., Dekovic, M., & Meeus, W. (2001). Conceptual analysis
and measurement of adolescent autonomy. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 30(5), 577–595.

Zuckerman, M., Levitt, E., & Lubin, B. (1961). Concurrent and
construct validity of direct and indirect measures of dependency.
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 25(4), 316–323.

