The lecture is Professor William Dunham.
Professor Dunham is the Truman Kaler Professor of Mathematics
at Muhlenburg College in Allentown, Pennsylvania.
He received his undergraduate degree from the University of Pittsburgh,
where he was awarded the MM Culver Award
as the University's Outstanding Mathematics major in his senior year.
He went on to earn his PhD from Ohio State University in 1974.
Professor Dunham taught at Hanover College in Indiana
before joining the faculty at Muhlenburg College.
He received teaching awards from both institutions,
as well as the award for Distinguished College or University Teaching
from the Eastern Pennsylvania and Delaware section
of the Mathematical Association of America.
He has been a visiting professor at the Ohio State University
and at Harvard University,
where he was invited to teach an undergraduate course
on the work of the great Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler.
Professor Dunham is a prolific author
and has garnered critical acclaim for his papers, articles and books
on mathematics and mathematical history.
His first book, Journey Through Genius,
the Great Theorums of Mathematics,
became a Book of the Month club selection
and has since been translated into Spanish, Italian, Japanese, Korean and Chinese.
In 1994, he published The Mathematical Universe,
which was chosen by the Association of American Publishers
as the outstanding mathematics book of that year.
In 2008, his biographical study of Euler entitled
Euler, the Master of Assault,
won the Mathematical Association of America's Beckenbach Book Prize.
Professor Dunham is a well-regarded public speaker
and has been invited to address a wide variety of audiences
on the subject of mathematics and its history.
In addition to giving presentations to the staffs at Texas Instruments
and the Goddard Space Flight Center,
Professor Dunham has appeared on the BBC,
on national public radios, Talk of the Nation
and at the Smithsonian Institution.
The course guidebook that comes with these lectures includes
lecture guides, exercises, a timeline and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course,
you may find it useful to review these materials before or after each lecture.
