And that will begin by my assuming exactly the opposite of what I'm trying to show.
Trying to show there's no solution, OK, suppose there is one.
So I'm going to assume there is a solution to that equation.
I've got to call it something, suppose it's A. Now, what that means is if I substitute
A into that equation, it's going to work.
So if I replace x by A, I will get that A squared plus 2A plus 1 over A plus 2 is A.
That would follow from the assumption that there is a solution.
Now is there a contradiction there?
Well, you might not see it.
It takes a little work, but there is.
Here's how I'll extract it.
Let me cross-multiply that fraction.
So you leave the A squared plus 2A plus 1 on the left, but on the right, you take the
A times that denominator A plus 2.
So now we would know that A squared plus 2A plus 1 is equal to A times the quantity A
plus 2.
I can multiply out on the right side, distribute the A across.
So A times A plus A times 2, and you'd be left with this fact.
A squared plus 2A plus 1 is A squared plus 2A.
Now subtract A squared from each side, gone, subtract 2A from each side, gone, and what
remains on the left is 1, and what remains on the right is 0.
And so you would have concluded that 1 equals 0.
Well, that's certainly not true.
That's a contradiction.
That's an absurdity.
What happened then was, by assuming there was a solution to that equation, I reasoned
my way down and reached a contradiction.
That means I can conclude that no solution exists to that equation.
That's an indirect proof.
It calls for a QED.
Proof is over.
So we'll see these kinds of arguments in the course.
Indirect proof is really very slick.
The mathematician G.H. Hardy described it in a very charming way.
He's thinking of chess, where you make a sacrifice.
You give up some chess piece in the hopes of eventually winning.
And what he did, he saw proof by contradiction as being rather the same thing.
You give up the result you want to prove.
You say, all right, maybe it's false.
You're going out on a limb.
Here's what Hardy said, that the weapon of proof by contradiction is a far finer gambit
than any chess gambit.
A chess player may offer the sacrifice of a pawn, or even a piece, but a mathematician
offers the game.
In proof by contradiction, you give away your conclusion.
But it's a fake sacrifice, because in the end, you establish it.
