Hello, my name is William Dunham.
I am the Truman-Keylor Professor of Mathematics at Muhlenberg College, and I'd like to welcome
you to our course about great thinkers and great theorems.
This course will be a journey through the history of mathematics, where I will focus
on the foremost mathematicians of all time, our great thinkers, and the extraordinary
masterpieces that they produced, our great theorems.
Math courses come in various shapes and sizes, you've probably taken many in your day.
Some of them are designed to impart mathematical skills.
So you might have a course in algebra to learn the skill of solving equations.
A course in trigonometry would give you the skill of working with right triangles.
This isn't a course about acquiring skills.
Other math courses are about applications.
Boy, nothing has greater applications than mathematics.
They're great courses in statistics, for instance.
You learn statistics and you can apply it to election results, to drug testing, all sorts
of things.
Differential equations, a more sophisticated application to explain where the satellites
will be next week or whether a bridge will stand up.
Wonderful courses.
This course isn't about applications either.
If you want an analogy, if you want a parallel, this course is most like a course on art history.
You can easily imagine a course.
In fact, let me give a parallel title.
Great artists, great paintings.
A course on that would introduce you to the great artists of history.
You'd meet Vermeer, Rembrandt, Monet, Van Gogh.
You'd place them in their historical context, figure out what was going on in the art world,
before they arrived, what they did, what they passed on to future artists.
But you would also look at their work.
You'd have to see their masterpieces.
You wouldn't be able to appreciate these artists without seeing what they did to see
a Vermeer interior, a Rembrandt self-portrait, a Monet water lily, a Van Gogh starry night.
Or you could have a course titled Great Authors, Great Novels, a literature course, where you
would meet Austen and Dickens and Twain and read their works.
Well, in this course, we're going to want to see the masterpieces as well as just talk
about the great creators.
So this will be a course where understanding the theorems is central.
Now, I should point out it's not an encyclopedic survey of the history of mathematics.
It's impossible any more than you could study every painter or every author.
So I'll ask you to trust me in my selection of the mathematicians and their results.
But I think I've got a good lineup for you.
In this course, we will regard theorems as the products of the creative imagination of
our mathematicians.
The theorems will be artworks.
And like artworks, we can judge them by certain characteristics.
Now one of the most obvious is just the incredible genius that emerges that can pop off the page
