or pop off the screen as you see these results unfurl.
But there's other maybe more narrow qualities that you're looking for in a great theorem
as a great work of art.
One of them is elegance, economy.
Some of these theorems are extremely elegant where they go from premise to conclusion in
what seems like the quickest possible way.
So you're convinced that it could not be improved upon no matter what you did.
This is the quintessential proof of that result.
And when you see that, you know you're in the presence of mathematical beauty.
Another feature of a beautiful theorem is a certain element of unexpectedness, an element
of surprise.
And it's not just in the conclusion as to what it is that's being proved.
We'll see examples where the conclusion is surprising indeed.
But sometimes it's in the manner in which the mathematician reaches it.
You're following along with the argument and you don't know where this is headed.
Where's this proof going?
And then suddenly proof surprise occurs and there it is.
The result falls out.
And when you see that, that's a special, special moment.
Now these lectures will take various forms.
Some of them will be quite biographical as we look at the great thinkers.
You want to meet some of these people.
You want to meet Archimedes, learn about his life and his memorable death, Cardano, the
most bizarre figure from the history of mathematics, Newton, Leibniz, Euler, Gauss.
These are people you should get to know.
I have a colleague who tells me he became a historian because it allowed him to make
such interesting friends.
I think you'll meet some interesting friends here.
Other lectures, maybe the typical lecture, will be sort of a hybrid.
There'll be some biography, there'll be some history, there'll be some math.
The math might be fairly simple or might even be just presented in an expository rather
than a technical fashion.
But then there will be some lectures that are entirely mathematical.
The whole lecture might be devoted to deriving one result to proving one theorem.
This is where we're going to look carefully at these great landmarks.
Now these will be challenging, a whole lecture devoted to one theorem.
I understand that, and here's my pledge that I will try to break these arguments down into
little bite-sized pieces so you can follow each step.
And at the end, step back and say, yeah, I see it, I get it.
That's my goal, to make these understandable.
In spite of the challenge, if you can get it, it's extremely rewarding to be able to
follow one of these arguments.
Why?
Well, there's the self-satisfaction you get.
To be able to see what one of these great thinkers did, it's like when you understand
a poem.
