My pet phyto might be a mammal, but it might be a wombat or something.
It doesn't have to be a dog.
So there's a case where the converse isn't true.
If mathematicians prove a theorem, they have to start afresh to prove the converse.
It doesn't automatically follow.
And there's one great example we'll see of this in a few lectures.
And that is the Pythagorean theorem.
Everybody knows the Pythagorean theorem.
If you have a right triangle, then the square on the hypotenuse is the sum of the squares
on the other two sides.
That's as great a theorem as there is.
What about the converse?
If you have a triangle where the square on one side is the sum of the squares on the
other two, then it's a right triangle.
Is that true?
It doesn't have to be.
We've seen the converse doesn't automatically follow.
That's a separate problem.
And a lot of people who know the Pythagorean theorem don't know whether the converse is
valid or not.
Well, Euclid checked this out.
It turned out to be the last proposition in the first book of Euclid's Elements, and
we'll see him attack the converse.
So stay tuned.
Well, I want to conclude this lecture by just giving you a brief introduction to some
of the great thinkers whom we will meet here.
There's quite an array of spectacularly good mathematicians.
Let me just mention a few of them.
One of them is Euclid.
I just mentioned Euclid and his elements.
I would show you a picture of Euclid, but nobody knows what Euclid looked like.
We don't have likenesses of these ancient folks.
If you see a picture of Euclid in some artist's rendition, Euclid's picture will be somebody
with a beard and a toga, and that's about it.
He kind of looks like pictures you see of Homer or Escalas.
They're all the same pictures.
We don't really know what they look like.
Later in the course, I should say, we will get to mathematicians that we do know what
they look like because we have paintings of them, and by the end we'll actually have photographs,
which is sort of neat.
But for Euclid, we don't know what he looked like, but we sure know what he wrote, and
that was the elements.
Euclid's elements pretty much universally regarded as the greatest mathematics text ever.
We're going to spend three lectures looking at this and trying to see why this work is
so famous, so revered.
I have up here on the screen a frontispiece from an English translation of the elements
