patient because it is eternal.
We're going to be looking at eternal theorems in this course.
Well, one thing I want to do in this introductory lecture is sort of limber up the mathematical
muscles.
So I want to talk about two points of logic that we'll be seeing over and over again as
the course proceeds.
And one of them is, how do you prove a theorem?
What's the strategy?
And I want to mention two lines of attack when proving a theorem and give examples.
One of them is direct proof, seems like pretty obvious sort of thing.
The idea there is, you reason from the hypothesis to the conclusion.
A theorem will always have that form.
If this happens, then that happens.
And in a direct proof, you just reason from the hypothesis to the conclusion directly,
as the name suggests.
All right, let me give an example.
I'll draw this example from the realm of number theory.
The number theory is dealing with the whole numbers, the simplest system, one, two, three,
or sometimes called the natural numbers, the counting numbers.
So my theorem here that I'm going to prove directly is coming from that arena.
Here it is, theorem.
If the whole number m is a perfect square, then so is m plus m plus m plus m.
So that's the statement of the theorem.
Now perfect square, perfect square is like nine, three times three, 16, four times four.
So what I'm saying is if m is a perfect square and you add it to itself four times, you end
up with a perfect square.
Proof, here comes a direct proof of that.
First of all, let's say because m is a perfect square, we know that m is equal to k squared
for some whole number k.
Now I'm not getting specific here.
If m is 16, it's four squared, four times four.
If m is 25, it's five times five.
I don't know what m is, it's just a perfect square, but I do know it looks like k times
k for some whole number k.
So now my challenge is to look at m plus m plus m plus m and see if that indeed comes
out to be a perfect square as well.
Now you know you could check this with nine, m is nine is a perfect square, nine plus nine
plus nine plus nine is 36, six squared, yeah.
You could check it with 25, you could check it with 49, but you can't check it for every
number.
There's infinitely many perfect squares.
So I can't hope to prove this by just listing the cases, there's too many.
So I'm proving it this way in a more abstract fashion.
So back to my proof.
Now we have m is equal to k squared for some whole number k, and now I look at m plus m
plus m plus m.
