Hello, my name is William Dunham.
I am the Truman-Keylor Professor of Mathematics at Muhlenberg College, and I'd like to welcome
you to our course about great thinkers and great theorems.
This course will be a journey through the history of mathematics, where I will focus
on the foremost mathematicians of all time, our great thinkers, and the extraordinary
masterpieces that they produced, our great theorems.
Math courses come in various shapes and sizes, you've probably taken many in your day.
Some of them are designed to impart mathematical skills.
So you might have a course in algebra to learn the skill of solving equations.
A course in trigonometry would give you the skill of working with right triangles.
This isn't a course about acquiring skills.
Other math courses are about applications.
Boy, nothing has greater applications than mathematics.
They're great courses in statistics, for instance.
You learn statistics and you can apply it to election results, to drug testing, all sorts
of things.
Differential equations, a more sophisticated application to explain where the satellites
will be next week or whether a bridge will stand up.
Wonderful courses.
This course isn't about applications either.
If you want an analogy, if you want a parallel, this course is most like a course on art history.
You can easily imagine a course.
In fact, let me give a parallel title.
Great artists, great paintings.
A course on that would introduce you to the great artists of history.
You'd meet Vermeer, Rembrandt, Monet, Van Gogh.
You'd place them in their historical context, figure out what was going on in the art world,
before they arrived, what they did, what they passed on to future artists.
But you would also look at their work.
You'd have to see their masterpieces.
You wouldn't be able to appreciate these artists without seeing what they did to see
a Vermeer interior, a Rembrandt self-portrait, a Monet water lily, a Van Gogh starry night.
Or you could have a course titled Great Authors, Great Novels, a literature course, where you
would meet Austen and Dickens and Twain and read their works.
Well, in this course, we're going to want to see the masterpieces as well as just talk
about the great creators.
So this will be a course where understanding the theorems is central.
Now, I should point out it's not an encyclopedic survey of the history of mathematics.
It's impossible any more than you could study every painter or every author.
So I'll ask you to trust me in my selection of the mathematicians and their results.
But I think I've got a good lineup for you.
In this course, we will regard theorems as the products of the creative imagination of
our mathematicians.
The theorems will be artworks.
And like artworks, we can judge them by certain characteristics.
Now one of the most obvious is just the incredible genius that emerges that can pop off the page
or pop off the screen as you see these results unfurl.
But there's other maybe more narrow qualities that you're looking for in a great theorem
as a great work of art.
One of them is elegance, economy.
Some of these theorems are extremely elegant where they go from premise to conclusion in
what seems like the quickest possible way.
So you're convinced that it could not be improved upon no matter what you did.
This is the quintessential proof of that result.
And when you see that, you know you're in the presence of mathematical beauty.
Another feature of a beautiful theorem is a certain element of unexpectedness, an element
of surprise.
And it's not just in the conclusion as to what it is that's being proved.
We'll see examples where the conclusion is surprising indeed.
But sometimes it's in the manner in which the mathematician reaches it.
You're following along with the argument and you don't know where this is headed.
Where's this proof going?
And then suddenly proof surprise occurs and there it is.
The result falls out.
And when you see that, that's a special, special moment.
Now these lectures will take various forms.
Some of them will be quite biographical as we look at the great thinkers.
You want to meet some of these people.
You want to meet Archimedes, learn about his life and his memorable death, Cardano, the
most bizarre figure from the history of mathematics, Newton, Leibniz, Euler, Gauss.
These are people you should get to know.
I have a colleague who tells me he became a historian because it allowed him to make
such interesting friends.
I think you'll meet some interesting friends here.
Other lectures, maybe the typical lecture, will be sort of a hybrid.
There'll be some biography, there'll be some history, there'll be some math.
The math might be fairly simple or might even be just presented in an expository rather
than a technical fashion.
But then there will be some lectures that are entirely mathematical.
The whole lecture might be devoted to deriving one result to proving one theorem.
This is where we're going to look carefully at these great landmarks.
Now these will be challenging, a whole lecture devoted to one theorem.
I understand that, and here's my pledge that I will try to break these arguments down into
little bite-sized pieces so you can follow each step.
And at the end, step back and say, yeah, I see it, I get it.
That's my goal, to make these understandable.
In spite of the challenge, if you can get it, it's extremely rewarding to be able to
follow one of these arguments.
Why?
Well, there's the self-satisfaction you get.
To be able to see what one of these great thinkers did, it's like when you understand
a poem.
When you get it, you see what the poet was up to.
That makes you feel good about yourself, and that's worthy.
The other reason this is a good undertaking is because you will get to appreciate genius,
really appreciate genius, by looking at these arguments as they unravel.
And where do you see some of the genius that we will encounter?
It's all over the course.
Euler, the 18th century mathematician, who's probably my favorite, has proofs that are
just spectacular, and I'm going to show you two of these.
When I teach this, sometimes students will say, how did he think of this?
How did Euler come up with this?
And you can look at the argument, and you can make some suggestions, well, maybe he
was led from this step to that step by a certain idea, a certain something that he saw there,
but in the final analysis, I end up saying, I don't know.
He was Euler.
He was a genius, and you just can't explain it.
It's like asking, why did Shakespeare put the balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet?
Well, it's a great scene.
You can see it's spectacular, but what made him think of it?
Well, he was Shakespeare.
This is what genius looks like, and by following these theorems, you'll get to see what genius
looks like.
Now, I've drawn the analogy between this course and courses on the history of art and literature.
Let me say that in one way, this course differs from other kinds of surveys, and in particular,
imagine a course on the history of medicine, great physicians, great treatments.
There might be such a course.
It would be fascinating, and you could go back to the ancient times and study the physicians,
Hippocrates and those folks, and then how they treated ailments.
What you would do, however, as you came up to the modern period was discard those old
treatments.
In the old days, they thought your disease was caused by some imbalance in bile and
phlegm and all these bodily fluids, and they would treat you by bleeding you or something.
Well, we don't do that anymore.
We've advanced beyond those ancient medical practices.
In mathematics, however, that doesn't happen.
If a theorem is proved once, it's proved forever, and we're going to see results from
ancient Greece that are still being used in 18th and 19th century mathematics.
We'll cite them in this course because they were proved.
It's a wonderful thing that progress in mathematics does not come at the expense of the past.
In that sense, math differs from so many other subjects, so many other fields.
The mathematician Hermann Honkel put it best, perhaps, when he said this.
In most sciences, one generation tears down what another has built and what one has established
another undoes.
In mathematics alone, each generation adds a new story to the old structure.
In math, you're not discarding anything.
You're just building upwards.
Or if you like a more succinct version of that, Oliver Hevisside said, logic can be
patient because it is eternal.
We're going to be looking at eternal theorems in this course.
Well, one thing I want to do in this introductory lecture is sort of limber up the mathematical
muscles.
So I want to talk about two points of logic that we'll be seeing over and over again as
the course proceeds.
And one of them is, how do you prove a theorem?
What's the strategy?
And I want to mention two lines of attack when proving a theorem and give examples.
One of them is direct proof, seems like pretty obvious sort of thing.
The idea there is, you reason from the hypothesis to the conclusion.
A theorem will always have that form.
If this happens, then that happens.
And in a direct proof, you just reason from the hypothesis to the conclusion directly,
as the name suggests.
All right, let me give an example.
I'll draw this example from the realm of number theory.
The number theory is dealing with the whole numbers, the simplest system, one, two, three,
or sometimes called the natural numbers, the counting numbers.
So my theorem here that I'm going to prove directly is coming from that arena.
Here it is, theorem.
If the whole number m is a perfect square, then so is m plus m plus m plus m.
So that's the statement of the theorem.
Now perfect square, perfect square is like nine, three times three, 16, four times four.
So what I'm saying is if m is a perfect square and you add it to itself four times, you end
up with a perfect square.
Proof, here comes a direct proof of that.
First of all, let's say because m is a perfect square, we know that m is equal to k squared
for some whole number k.
Now I'm not getting specific here.
If m is 16, it's four squared, four times four.
If m is 25, it's five times five.
I don't know what m is, it's just a perfect square, but I do know it looks like k times
k for some whole number k.
So now my challenge is to look at m plus m plus m plus m and see if that indeed comes
out to be a perfect square as well.
Now you know you could check this with nine, m is nine is a perfect square, nine plus nine
plus nine plus nine is 36, six squared, yeah.
You could check it with 25, you could check it with 49, but you can't check it for every
number.
There's infinitely many perfect squares.
So I can't hope to prove this by just listing the cases, there's too many.
So I'm proving it this way in a more abstract fashion.
So back to my proof.
Now we have m is equal to k squared for some whole number k, and now I look at m plus m
plus m plus m.
Well, that's k squared plus k squared plus k squared plus k squared.
And I see there I have four k squareds.
So m plus m plus m plus m is four k squareds, but that is a perfect square because four
k squared is two k, the quantity squared, two k times two k is four k squared.
So indeed, m plus m plus m plus m is the square of twice k, if k is a whole number, twice
k is a whole number, voila, m plus m plus m plus m is a perfect square.
The proof is over and we write QED.
Now what's that?
That's an abbreviation for the Latin quote, errat demonstrandum, it means the proof is
over.
We always like to see that coming up, QED.
So that was a direct proof.
Now there is another strategy though for proving a result.
It's called the indirect proof or the proof by contradiction.
This is more subtle, it's very clever, nice bit of logic going on here.
Here's what you do.
You still want to prove that the hypothesis implies the conclusion.
But for an indirect proof, you assume the hypothesis true is true, but assume the conclusion
is false.
And from that, reason your way to a logical contradiction, to a flaw.
Get yourself into logical hot water.
If that happens, you may conclude that the conclusion you were trying to prove is true,
that by negating it, by rejecting that conclusion, if you get to a contradiction, you've shown
in a sense that the conclusion cannot be false.
It's got to be true, and you've proved your result indirectly.
Now we'll see this in the hands of some great mathematicians.
Archimedes does a wonderful proof for the area of a circle in which he proves it with
double contradiction.
Where do you see that one?
And other mathematicians will invoke and employ this slick method of proof.
Let me give an example, just so you see one here.
This one will come from the domain of algebra, simple algebra.
Suppose this is my theorem.
There is no solution to the equation x squared plus 2x plus 1 over x plus 2 equals x.
So there's my equation.
The theorem says there's no solution to that.
Can't be.
Well, again, you can see I can't check this.
I mean, I could let x equal 5 and stick it in there, and it doesn't solve it.
So 5 isn't the solution.
I could check 7.
That isn't the solution.
But I can't check every number.
So if I want to show there's no solution, I have to be a little more logically sophisticated.
Here's what I'll do.
My proof will be by contradiction.
And that will begin by my assuming exactly the opposite of what I'm trying to show.
Trying to show there's no solution, OK, suppose there is one.
So I'm going to assume there is a solution to that equation.
I've got to call it something, suppose it's A. Now, what that means is if I substitute
A into that equation, it's going to work.
So if I replace x by A, I will get that A squared plus 2A plus 1 over A plus 2 is A.
That would follow from the assumption that there is a solution.
Now is there a contradiction there?
Well, you might not see it.
It takes a little work, but there is.
Here's how I'll extract it.
Let me cross-multiply that fraction.
So you leave the A squared plus 2A plus 1 on the left, but on the right, you take the
A times that denominator A plus 2.
So now we would know that A squared plus 2A plus 1 is equal to A times the quantity A
plus 2.
I can multiply out on the right side, distribute the A across.
So A times A plus A times 2, and you'd be left with this fact.
A squared plus 2A plus 1 is A squared plus 2A.
Now subtract A squared from each side, gone, subtract 2A from each side, gone, and what
remains on the left is 1, and what remains on the right is 0.
And so you would have concluded that 1 equals 0.
Well, that's certainly not true.
That's a contradiction.
That's an absurdity.
What happened then was, by assuming there was a solution to that equation, I reasoned
my way down and reached a contradiction.
That means I can conclude that no solution exists to that equation.
That's an indirect proof.
It calls for a QED.
Proof is over.
So we'll see these kinds of arguments in the course.
Indirect proof is really very slick.
The mathematician G.H. Hardy described it in a very charming way.
He's thinking of chess, where you make a sacrifice.
You give up some chess piece in the hopes of eventually winning.
And what he did, he saw proof by contradiction as being rather the same thing.
You give up the result you want to prove.
You say, all right, maybe it's false.
You're going out on a limb.
Here's what Hardy said, that the weapon of proof by contradiction is a far finer gambit
than any chess gambit.
A chess player may offer the sacrifice of a pawn, or even a piece, but a mathematician
offers the game.
In proof by contradiction, you give away your conclusion.
But it's a fake sacrifice, because in the end, you establish it.
So that's one bit of logic, the different proof strategies.
The other bit of logic I want to mention here is the contrast between a statement and its
converse.
This will be important throughout the course, so let's just review that.
A statement will have the form, if A, then B. The converse reverses the role of a hypothesis
in the conclusion.
So instead of if A, then B, if hypothesis, then conclusion, you flip it around, and the
converse says, if B, then A. So this is an interchange.
It forms these logical cousins, if you will, the statement and its converse.
And mathematicians, if they've proved a statement, almost always say, what about the converse?
Let's take a look at it.
It makes a nice logical package.
Now let me give an example of a statement and converse from the realm of plane geometry.
So here's my theorem.
If a triangle has three equal sides, it has three equal angles.
So you have a triangle.
It's equilateral, three equal sides.
Does it follow that it has three equal angles?
Well, if you remember from your geometry course, it does.
So that's true.
So that theorem is correct.
We would say it this way.
An equilateral triangle is an equi-angular triangle.
Now what about the converse?
The converse would be, remember you've got to flip the hypothesis and conclusion, so
now I would say if a triangle has three equal angles, it has three equal sides.
If it's equi-angular, then it's equilateral.
Yeah, that's true also.
So here's a case where the theorem is true and its converse is as well.
And that's great.
Mathematicians love that sort of thing.
But I should point out that it does not necessarily follow that the converse must be true just
because the theorem is.
This is an important fact to remember.
The converse needn't be true.
It might be, as it was in this case, doesn't have to be.
And to illustrate that, I will take an example from the world of pets.
Now suppose I have this theorem.
If phyto is a dog, then phyto is a mammal.
Well sure, if phyto is a dog, phyto is a mammal.
That's true.
What's the converse to that?
The converse would say, if phyto is a mammal, then phyto is a dog.
Hmm, I mean, think about that.
You see, that's not true, right?
I might have a pet.
My pet phyto might be a mammal, but it might be a wombat or something.
It doesn't have to be a dog.
So there's a case where the converse isn't true.
If mathematicians prove a theorem, they have to start afresh to prove the converse.
It doesn't automatically follow.
And there's one great example we'll see of this in a few lectures.
And that is the Pythagorean theorem.
Everybody knows the Pythagorean theorem.
If you have a right triangle, then the square on the hypotenuse is the sum of the squares
on the other two sides.
That's as great a theorem as there is.
What about the converse?
If you have a triangle where the square on one side is the sum of the squares on the
other two, then it's a right triangle.
Is that true?
It doesn't have to be.
We've seen the converse doesn't automatically follow.
That's a separate problem.
And a lot of people who know the Pythagorean theorem don't know whether the converse is
valid or not.
Well, Euclid checked this out.
It turned out to be the last proposition in the first book of Euclid's Elements, and
we'll see him attack the converse.
So stay tuned.
Well, I want to conclude this lecture by just giving you a brief introduction to some
of the great thinkers whom we will meet here.
There's quite an array of spectacularly good mathematicians.
Let me just mention a few of them.
One of them is Euclid.
I just mentioned Euclid and his elements.
I would show you a picture of Euclid, but nobody knows what Euclid looked like.
We don't have likenesses of these ancient folks.
If you see a picture of Euclid in some artist's rendition, Euclid's picture will be somebody
with a beard and a toga, and that's about it.
He kind of looks like pictures you see of Homer or Escalas.
They're all the same pictures.
We don't really know what they look like.
Later in the course, I should say, we will get to mathematicians that we do know what
they look like because we have paintings of them, and by the end we'll actually have photographs,
which is sort of neat.
But for Euclid, we don't know what he looked like, but we sure know what he wrote, and
that was the elements.
Euclid's elements pretty much universally regarded as the greatest mathematics text ever.
We're going to spend three lectures looking at this and trying to see why this work is
so famous, so revered.
I have up here on the screen a frontispiece from an English translation of the elements
from 1570, so very long ago, this was an important text, and they would make these books with
these wonderful, decorated, opening pages like this one.
So we'll meet Euclid.
His work, the elements, was so famous that you didn't even have to mention that you were
talking about Euclid's elements if you would just cite a number, a theorem number.
People would automatically know what it was.
Here, I liken it to this.
If I said I'm going to read to you Genesis 2-3, I don't have to say, oh, this is from
the Bible.
Everybody knows that.
It's so famous.
If I said my First Amendment rights are violated, no one's going to say First Amendment to
what?
They know First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
And for so many centuries in mathematics, if you said, oh, that theorem follows from 147,
what that meant was the 47th proposition of the first book of Euclid, and you didn't
even have to say Euclid's elements.
147 was good enough.
This result was that famous.
All right, who are some other great thinkers?
Well, one is Archimedes.
What did Archimedes look like?
He looked like Euclid.
I'm pretty sure of that.
We're going to take a look at a proof of Archimedes that reads as follows.
The area of any circle is equal to a right-angled triangle in which one of the sides about the
right angle is equal to the radius and the other to the circumference of the circle.
Now this looks quite convoluted if you read this.
It's just a bunch of words.
It's hard to see what he's getting at.
The Greeks didn't have algebra.
If they wanted to express a result that we would write as a formula, they had to write
it as a sentence like this, some of which ended up sounding a little complicated, some of
which actually end up sounding rather poetic.
But this is a great theorem.
What it is, if you translate it into modern terminology, is it's looking at a circle and
telling you what the area is.
Area is pi r squared.
And that result is due to Archimedes.
We'll see it proved.
This is the one that uses the double contradiction.
It's a great argument.
He was a great thinker if ever there was one.
The Greek mathematicians were so extraordinary that G.H. Hardy said Greek mathematics is
the real thing.
This is not some primitive precursor.
This is real mathematics.
And Hardy went on to write this.
The Greeks first spoke a language which modern mathematicians can understand.
As Littlewood said to me once, they are not clever school boys or scholarship candidates
but fellows of another college.
The Greeks are your colleague if you're a mathematician.
So we'll spend a good bit of time on the Greeks.
Then we'll jump to medieval Islam, to the world of Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi, the
great Arabic scholar who wrote a treatise on algebra that is regarded as the greatest
mathematics text of the medieval period and was very influential not only in the Islamic
world but in Europe after the Renaissance.
We'll meet Gerolamo Cardano, this very strange character from 16th century Italy who published
the first proof of the solution of the cubic equation, the third degree equation, by subdividing
a cube in a most fascinating way.
It's a great proof from a very strange person.
So I think you enjoy meeting Cardano.
In the next century the 17th will meet Newton and Leibniz, Isaac Newton, Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz, the co-creators of the calculus.
Talk about their extraordinary genius and their unseemly battle with one another over
which of them deserved more credit for this great subject.
And moving on we'll run into Leonhardt Euler, the great Swiss mathematician, the most prolific
mathematician in history, and his successor Carl Friedrich Gauss, not so prolific but
every bit is powerful.
And we'll end up with Georg Cantor in the 19th century who gave us the theory of the
infinite, a very profound, radical, exciting idea.
So those will be some of our great thinkers.
Let me end this with a couple of quotations from Bertrand Russell.
Russell was a mathematician, a logician, a philosopher, a social critic, winner of the
Nobel Prize for Literature, quite an extraordinary character of his own, and he characterized
mathematics in these words, knowing no compromise, no practical limitations, no barrier to the
creative activity embodying the passionate aspiration after the perfect from which all
great works springs.
This was his characterization of mathematics.
And Russell went on to say, remote from human passions, remote even from the pitiful facts
of nature, the generations have gradually created an ordered cosmos where pure thought
can dwell as in its natural home.
I love that last line.
Russell had a way with words, but I guess that's what it takes to win the Nobel Prize
in Literature, but these sentiments will guide us in the lectures to come as we consider
our theorems as works of art occupying that place where pure thought dwells.
So with that send off, we'll begin our long journey through the history of mathematics.
Bring on the great thinkers.
Bring on the great theorems.
