When you get it, you see what the poet was up to.
That makes you feel good about yourself, and that's worthy.
The other reason this is a good undertaking is because you will get to appreciate genius,
really appreciate genius, by looking at these arguments as they unravel.
And where do you see some of the genius that we will encounter?
It's all over the course.
Euler, the 18th century mathematician, who's probably my favorite, has proofs that are
just spectacular, and I'm going to show you two of these.
When I teach this, sometimes students will say, how did he think of this?
How did Euler come up with this?
And you can look at the argument, and you can make some suggestions, well, maybe he
was led from this step to that step by a certain idea, a certain something that he saw there,
but in the final analysis, I end up saying, I don't know.
He was Euler.
He was a genius, and you just can't explain it.
It's like asking, why did Shakespeare put the balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet?
Well, it's a great scene.
You can see it's spectacular, but what made him think of it?
Well, he was Shakespeare.
This is what genius looks like, and by following these theorems, you'll get to see what genius
looks like.
Now, I've drawn the analogy between this course and courses on the history of art and literature.
Let me say that in one way, this course differs from other kinds of surveys, and in particular,
imagine a course on the history of medicine, great physicians, great treatments.
There might be such a course.
It would be fascinating, and you could go back to the ancient times and study the physicians,
Hippocrates and those folks, and then how they treated ailments.
What you would do, however, as you came up to the modern period was discard those old
treatments.
In the old days, they thought your disease was caused by some imbalance in bile and
phlegm and all these bodily fluids, and they would treat you by bleeding you or something.
Well, we don't do that anymore.
We've advanced beyond those ancient medical practices.
In mathematics, however, that doesn't happen.
If a theorem is proved once, it's proved forever, and we're going to see results from
ancient Greece that are still being used in 18th and 19th century mathematics.
We'll cite them in this course because they were proved.
It's a wonderful thing that progress in mathematics does not come at the expense of the past.
In that sense, math differs from so many other subjects, so many other fields.
The mathematician Hermann Honkel put it best, perhaps, when he said this.
In most sciences, one generation tears down what another has built and what one has established
another undoes.
In mathematics alone, each generation adds a new story to the old structure.
In math, you're not discarding anything.
You're just building upwards.
Or if you like a more succinct version of that, Oliver Hevisside said, logic can be
