Well, that's k squared plus k squared plus k squared plus k squared.
And I see there I have four k squareds.
So m plus m plus m plus m is four k squareds, but that is a perfect square because four
k squared is two k, the quantity squared, two k times two k is four k squared.
So indeed, m plus m plus m plus m is the square of twice k, if k is a whole number, twice
k is a whole number, voila, m plus m plus m plus m is a perfect square.
The proof is over and we write QED.
Now what's that?
That's an abbreviation for the Latin quote, errat demonstrandum, it means the proof is
over.
We always like to see that coming up, QED.
So that was a direct proof.
Now there is another strategy though for proving a result.
It's called the indirect proof or the proof by contradiction.
This is more subtle, it's very clever, nice bit of logic going on here.
Here's what you do.
You still want to prove that the hypothesis implies the conclusion.
But for an indirect proof, you assume the hypothesis true is true, but assume the conclusion
is false.
And from that, reason your way to a logical contradiction, to a flaw.
Get yourself into logical hot water.
If that happens, you may conclude that the conclusion you were trying to prove is true,
that by negating it, by rejecting that conclusion, if you get to a contradiction, you've shown
in a sense that the conclusion cannot be false.
It's got to be true, and you've proved your result indirectly.
Now we'll see this in the hands of some great mathematicians.
Archimedes does a wonderful proof for the area of a circle in which he proves it with
double contradiction.
Where do you see that one?
And other mathematicians will invoke and employ this slick method of proof.
Let me give an example, just so you see one here.
This one will come from the domain of algebra, simple algebra.
Suppose this is my theorem.
There is no solution to the equation x squared plus 2x plus 1 over x plus 2 equals x.
So there's my equation.
The theorem says there's no solution to that.
Can't be.
Well, again, you can see I can't check this.
I mean, I could let x equal 5 and stick it in there, and it doesn't solve it.
So 5 isn't the solution.
I could check 7.
That isn't the solution.
But I can't check every number.
So if I want to show there's no solution, I have to be a little more logically sophisticated.
Here's what I'll do.
My proof will be by contradiction.
