This is real mathematics.
And Hardy went on to write this.
The Greeks first spoke a language which modern mathematicians can understand.
As Littlewood said to me once, they are not clever school boys or scholarship candidates
but fellows of another college.
The Greeks are your colleague if you're a mathematician.
So we'll spend a good bit of time on the Greeks.
Then we'll jump to medieval Islam, to the world of Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi, the
great Arabic scholar who wrote a treatise on algebra that is regarded as the greatest
mathematics text of the medieval period and was very influential not only in the Islamic
world but in Europe after the Renaissance.
We'll meet Gerolamo Cardano, this very strange character from 16th century Italy who published
the first proof of the solution of the cubic equation, the third degree equation, by subdividing
a cube in a most fascinating way.
It's a great proof from a very strange person.
So I think you enjoy meeting Cardano.
In the next century the 17th will meet Newton and Leibniz, Isaac Newton, Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz, the co-creators of the calculus.
Talk about their extraordinary genius and their unseemly battle with one another over
which of them deserved more credit for this great subject.
And moving on we'll run into Leonhardt Euler, the great Swiss mathematician, the most prolific
mathematician in history, and his successor Carl Friedrich Gauss, not so prolific but
every bit is powerful.
And we'll end up with Georg Cantor in the 19th century who gave us the theory of the
infinite, a very profound, radical, exciting idea.
So those will be some of our great thinkers.
Let me end this with a couple of quotations from Bertrand Russell.
Russell was a mathematician, a logician, a philosopher, a social critic, winner of the
Nobel Prize for Literature, quite an extraordinary character of his own, and he characterized
mathematics in these words, knowing no compromise, no practical limitations, no barrier to the
creative activity embodying the passionate aspiration after the perfect from which all
great works springs.
This was his characterization of mathematics.
And Russell went on to say, remote from human passions, remote even from the pitiful facts
of nature, the generations have gradually created an ordered cosmos where pure thought
can dwell as in its natural home.
I love that last line.
Russell had a way with words, but I guess that's what it takes to win the Nobel Prize
in Literature, but these sentiments will guide us in the lectures to come as we consider
our theorems as works of art occupying that place where pure thought dwells.
So with that send off, we'll begin our long journey through the history of mathematics.
Bring on the great thinkers.
Bring on the great theorems.
