So that's one bit of logic, the different proof strategies.
The other bit of logic I want to mention here is the contrast between a statement and its
converse.
This will be important throughout the course, so let's just review that.
A statement will have the form, if A, then B. The converse reverses the role of a hypothesis
in the conclusion.
So instead of if A, then B, if hypothesis, then conclusion, you flip it around, and the
converse says, if B, then A. So this is an interchange.
It forms these logical cousins, if you will, the statement and its converse.
And mathematicians, if they've proved a statement, almost always say, what about the converse?
Let's take a look at it.
It makes a nice logical package.
Now let me give an example of a statement and converse from the realm of plane geometry.
So here's my theorem.
If a triangle has three equal sides, it has three equal angles.
So you have a triangle.
It's equilateral, three equal sides.
Does it follow that it has three equal angles?
Well, if you remember from your geometry course, it does.
So that's true.
So that theorem is correct.
We would say it this way.
An equilateral triangle is an equi-angular triangle.
Now what about the converse?
The converse would be, remember you've got to flip the hypothesis and conclusion, so
now I would say if a triangle has three equal angles, it has three equal sides.
If it's equi-angular, then it's equilateral.
Yeah, that's true also.
So here's a case where the theorem is true and its converse is as well.
And that's great.
Mathematicians love that sort of thing.
But I should point out that it does not necessarily follow that the converse must be true just
because the theorem is.
This is an important fact to remember.
The converse needn't be true.
It might be, as it was in this case, doesn't have to be.
And to illustrate that, I will take an example from the world of pets.
Now suppose I have this theorem.
If phyto is a dog, then phyto is a mammal.
Well sure, if phyto is a dog, phyto is a mammal.
That's true.
What's the converse to that?
The converse would say, if phyto is a mammal, then phyto is a dog.
Hmm, I mean, think about that.
You see, that's not true, right?
I might have a pet.
