from 1570, so very long ago, this was an important text, and they would make these books with
these wonderful, decorated, opening pages like this one.
So we'll meet Euclid.
His work, the elements, was so famous that you didn't even have to mention that you were
talking about Euclid's elements if you would just cite a number, a theorem number.
People would automatically know what it was.
Here, I liken it to this.
If I said I'm going to read to you Genesis 2-3, I don't have to say, oh, this is from
the Bible.
Everybody knows that.
It's so famous.
If I said my First Amendment rights are violated, no one's going to say First Amendment to
what?
They know First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
And for so many centuries in mathematics, if you said, oh, that theorem follows from 147,
what that meant was the 47th proposition of the first book of Euclid, and you didn't
even have to say Euclid's elements.
147 was good enough.
This result was that famous.
All right, who are some other great thinkers?
Well, one is Archimedes.
What did Archimedes look like?
He looked like Euclid.
I'm pretty sure of that.
We're going to take a look at a proof of Archimedes that reads as follows.
The area of any circle is equal to a right-angled triangle in which one of the sides about the
right angle is equal to the radius and the other to the circumference of the circle.
Now this looks quite convoluted if you read this.
It's just a bunch of words.
It's hard to see what he's getting at.
The Greeks didn't have algebra.
If they wanted to express a result that we would write as a formula, they had to write
it as a sentence like this, some of which ended up sounding a little complicated, some of
which actually end up sounding rather poetic.
But this is a great theorem.
What it is, if you translate it into modern terminology, is it's looking at a circle and
telling you what the area is.
Area is pi r squared.
And that result is due to Archimedes.
We'll see it proved.
This is the one that uses the double contradiction.
It's a great argument.
He was a great thinker if ever there was one.
The Greek mathematicians were so extraordinary that G.H. Hardy said Greek mathematics is
the real thing.
This is not some primitive precursor.
