demonstrative geometry, is Thales.
So the legend has it that he was the first person to prove things.
Thales lived not in Greece proper, what we think of Greece today, but on the eastern
shore of the Aegean, which is currently western Turkey.
He was renowned for his genius not only in mathematics, but in philosophy and in astronomy.
He was one of the wise men of his time.
But our interest in Thales is that he was supposedly, according to tradition, the first
person to prove theorems.
We don't have any documents from this far back, so this is all tradition, but it probably
has some soundness.
What theorems?
Well, let me mention three theorems that are attributed to him.
One is this very important fact, that the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal.
We would say are congruent, but I'll use the old language, the base angles of an isosceles
triangle are equal.
Now there's a picture of a triangle, A, B, C. Let's suppose we say it's isosceles, which
means that two of the sides are the same, A, C, and B, C are equal.
And then tradition holds that Thales proved from that fact that the angle at A equals
the angle at B. So the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal.
Famous result, Thales gets credit for it.
The sum of the angles of any triangle is two right angles.
So this is another one of the theorems that Thales supposedly addressed.
So we take a triangle, any triangle, A, B, C, and what the theorem is saying is if you
take the angle at A plus the angle at B plus the angle at C, you get two right angles.
Now you might expect that to say 180 degrees, but at this time the Greeks did not measure
angles in degrees.
Rather, you just measure them in terms of how many right angles there were.
And for a triangle, the answer is two from Thales.
Finally, the third result that I want to mention is called Thales theorem, a bit of
a tongue twister there.
This is less well known, and I'm going to actually show you a proof of this one.
It's very nice.
It says an angle inscribed in a semicircle is right.
So what's that even mean?
Here's what's up.
Suppose I have a semicircle.
So my center is O, my radius is OA, I draw the semicircle, any semicircle, this is generic,
and then you pick a point C anywhere on the semicircle.
So the C is also entirely general.
Now draw line AC, draw line BC, and you have thereby constructed an angle inscribed in
a semicircle, that is angle ACB is inscribed within the semicircle.
What Thales theorem contends and will prove is that that's a right angle.
Angle ACB is a right angle.
