but why?
Well, that's not part of the Egyptian tradition.
Okay, second non-Greek civilization I want to mention, just briefly, is that of Mesopotamia.
The Babylonians and their neighbors had a rich mathematical tradition, often focused
on numbers and the properties of whole numbers.
And we know about this through clay tablets that have survived over the centuries.
I guess unlike the Egyptians who would write on papyrus, which if you think about it will
decay and dissolve over time, the folks in Mesopotamia would take a stylus and engrave
things on a clay tablet, which would then either be dried or even baked, so it comes
out like a brick.
And these things last a long time, and there are museums and libraries all over the world
that have clay tablets from Mesopotamia that they're translating and studying to learn
about the mathematics of the time.
Now, I'm not going to say any more about this because this could be a whole course just
on Mesopotamian mathematics, but I wanted to just indicate it was out there and flourishing.
So too was mathematics in China.
Again, a whole course could be devoted to it.
I'm just going to show you one picture, one diagram that we have from Chinese mathematics.
This comes from a document called the Chao Pei Suan Qing, and if you look at it, it's
a pretty design.
I mean, you might just enjoy the picture.
It's got these vertical lines, these horizontal lines forming a grid, and then in the middle
is this sort of cockeyed square sitting there.
Now, why am I showing this design to you?
Because this is doing something mathematical.
There's something going on here that's quite sophisticated and quite impressive from the
Chinese mathematical tradition, but I'll ask you to hang on to the end of the lecture to
see what it is.
Now, the idea of proving a general mathematical result originated not with any of these civilizations,
but with the Greeks.
And there's two key words there in what I just said, general mathematical result.
The Greeks would try to attack the general problem.
They wouldn't look at that one, frustum.
They would look at frusta, generally, and try to learn something.
It wasn't that individual right triangle of interest, but all right triangles.
And this is a very important extension to do general results rather than specific ones.
But even more important is the word proving.
They wanted to prove the general result.
That is, give a logical argument starting from easy premises and working your way down
until you have established this result for once and for all.
The idea of proving things, we attribute to the Greeks, and that, of course, has colored
all of mathematics ever since.
The person who is supposedly the first mathematician from ancient Greece, the so-called father of
