The first great work we'll examine in this course is Euclid's Elements, which is a masterpiece
indeed.
But that will begin in our next lecture.
In this lecture, I want to talk about some pre-Euclidean mathematics.
In particular, I want to give a brief introduction to the mathematics of three non-Greek civilizations
that had robust traditions, and then introduce a pair of Greek mathematicians who predated
Euclid, but who left very deep footprints.
The first of our non-Greek civilizations is that of ancient Egypt.
So we're back at the dawn of recorded history.
Our knowledge of their mathematics comes from papyri, papyrus' roles that have survived
all the years, and in particular, there's one called the Moscow papyrus, dated around
1850 BC.
This contains a theorem, a result about pyramids.
We know that Egyptians love their pyramids, but actually it isn't a full pyramid, but
something called the frustum of a pyramid, and that might require just a little review.
What is a frustum?
Here's the idea.
If you have a pyramid with a square base coming to a peak, and you took a plane parallel to
that base and sliced through it, on top you'd have a little pyramid.
Remove that.
What's left on the bottom is called the frustum.
It's like a pedestal.
And here's a picture of one.
In fact, this is the very one that's going to be referred to in the Moscow papyrus.
If you look at the dimensions, the square base around the bottom is 4 by 4 by 4 by 4.
It tapers up to a square top that's 2 by 2 by 2 by 2, and the gap between the top and
bottom is 6 units.
So this is the frustum that we're going to be looking at.
What do we do with it?
The question is, find its volume.
Find its volume.
That's not trivial.
And this is what the Egyptian scribe writes about in the papyrus.
And let me read to you the solution, how you find the volume of this thing.
Here's what the papyrus says.
You are to square this 4, result 16.
You are to double 4, result 8.
You are to square 2, result 4.
You are to add the 16, the 8, and the 4, result 28.
You are to take 1 third of 6, result 2.
You are to take 28 twice, result 56.
See it is 56.
You will find it right.
Now, a modern person looking at this is completely befuddled.
What is this about?
Where are these numbers coming from?
What's going on here?
It's very opaque.
And it requires three observations.
First of all, guess what the right answer is?
The volume of that frustum is 56.
They got it.
The Egyptians got it.
And I would hate to think what would happen if you went out on the street today and asked
somebody to find the volume of that frustum.
How many would come up with 56 as did the Egyptian scribe who wrote this papyrus almost
4,000 years ago?
So that's pretty impressive.
They must have been on to something.
Second observation is that the papyrus addressed a particular frustum.
Notice that one with those dimensions 4 by 4 by 4 by 4, 2 by 2 by 2 by 2, height 6.
That was fine.
But what if you have a frustum that is 5 by 5 by 5 by 5 and 3 by 3 by 3 by 3 and height
12?
What do you do?
And what you have to do is look at the recipe that they gave you for their frustum and try
to make the analogy between their numbers and the ones you have, the dimensions of your
solid, and figure out how to make this conversion so that you get the right answer following
their recipe.
But it's not spelled out in a general fashion, it's just that one particular body that they're
looking at.
Now, we would expect that this should be done in general.
We would imagine a frustum that was A by A by A by A, the square on top B by B by B
the height between them H, and we'd come up with a general formula, which is this.
This is the actual answer to this thing.
The volume is 1 third H, 1 third the height, times A squared plus AB plus B squared.
And now you could use this for any frustum you encounter, you're not restricted to that
particular one.
So this idea of attacking a general problem rather than a specific one was foreign to
the Egyptians.
It's now something, of course, we come to expect.
I should note, if you use that general formula and put in the dimensions of their frustum,
A is 4, B is 2, H is 6, you get 56, naturally you get the right answer.
The third observation is this, and this is maybe the most critical.
There's no suggestion in this papyrus as to why this works.
It's just presented as a recipe, you follow it, see you will find it right, you were told,
but why?
Well, that's not part of the Egyptian tradition.
Okay, second non-Greek civilization I want to mention, just briefly, is that of Mesopotamia.
The Babylonians and their neighbors had a rich mathematical tradition, often focused
on numbers and the properties of whole numbers.
And we know about this through clay tablets that have survived over the centuries.
I guess unlike the Egyptians who would write on papyrus, which if you think about it will
decay and dissolve over time, the folks in Mesopotamia would take a stylus and engrave
things on a clay tablet, which would then either be dried or even baked, so it comes
out like a brick.
And these things last a long time, and there are museums and libraries all over the world
that have clay tablets from Mesopotamia that they're translating and studying to learn
about the mathematics of the time.
Now, I'm not going to say any more about this because this could be a whole course just
on Mesopotamian mathematics, but I wanted to just indicate it was out there and flourishing.
So too was mathematics in China.
Again, a whole course could be devoted to it.
I'm just going to show you one picture, one diagram that we have from Chinese mathematics.
This comes from a document called the Chao Pei Suan Qing, and if you look at it, it's
a pretty design.
I mean, you might just enjoy the picture.
It's got these vertical lines, these horizontal lines forming a grid, and then in the middle
is this sort of cockeyed square sitting there.
Now, why am I showing this design to you?
Because this is doing something mathematical.
There's something going on here that's quite sophisticated and quite impressive from the
Chinese mathematical tradition, but I'll ask you to hang on to the end of the lecture to
see what it is.
Now, the idea of proving a general mathematical result originated not with any of these civilizations,
but with the Greeks.
And there's two key words there in what I just said, general mathematical result.
The Greeks would try to attack the general problem.
They wouldn't look at that one, frustum.
They would look at frusta, generally, and try to learn something.
It wasn't that individual right triangle of interest, but all right triangles.
And this is a very important extension to do general results rather than specific ones.
But even more important is the word proving.
They wanted to prove the general result.
That is, give a logical argument starting from easy premises and working your way down
until you have established this result for once and for all.
The idea of proving things, we attribute to the Greeks, and that, of course, has colored
all of mathematics ever since.
The person who is supposedly the first mathematician from ancient Greece, the so-called father of
demonstrative geometry, is Thales.
So the legend has it that he was the first person to prove things.
Thales lived not in Greece proper, what we think of Greece today, but on the eastern
shore of the Aegean, which is currently western Turkey.
He was renowned for his genius not only in mathematics, but in philosophy and in astronomy.
He was one of the wise men of his time.
But our interest in Thales is that he was supposedly, according to tradition, the first
person to prove theorems.
We don't have any documents from this far back, so this is all tradition, but it probably
has some soundness.
What theorems?
Well, let me mention three theorems that are attributed to him.
One is this very important fact, that the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal.
We would say are congruent, but I'll use the old language, the base angles of an isosceles
triangle are equal.
Now there's a picture of a triangle, A, B, C. Let's suppose we say it's isosceles, which
means that two of the sides are the same, A, C, and B, C are equal.
And then tradition holds that Thales proved from that fact that the angle at A equals
the angle at B. So the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal.
Famous result, Thales gets credit for it.
The sum of the angles of any triangle is two right angles.
So this is another one of the theorems that Thales supposedly addressed.
So we take a triangle, any triangle, A, B, C, and what the theorem is saying is if you
take the angle at A plus the angle at B plus the angle at C, you get two right angles.
Now you might expect that to say 180 degrees, but at this time the Greeks did not measure
angles in degrees.
Rather, you just measure them in terms of how many right angles there were.
And for a triangle, the answer is two from Thales.
Finally, the third result that I want to mention is called Thales theorem, a bit of
a tongue twister there.
This is less well known, and I'm going to actually show you a proof of this one.
It's very nice.
It says an angle inscribed in a semicircle is right.
So what's that even mean?
Here's what's up.
Suppose I have a semicircle.
So my center is O, my radius is OA, I draw the semicircle, any semicircle, this is generic,
and then you pick a point C anywhere on the semicircle.
So the C is also entirely general.
Now draw line AC, draw line BC, and you have thereby constructed an angle inscribed in
a semicircle, that is angle ACB is inscribed within the semicircle.
What Thales theorem contends and will prove is that that's a right angle.
Angle ACB is a right angle.
Why?
Let's see a proof.
So there's my diagram.
This proof, again, we're not sure this is what Thales did, but everybody thinks it is.
It's such a beautiful natural argument.
It's actually what Euclid uses in Book 3 of the Elements when he proves this theorem.
So this is probably what Thales did.
Let me look at triangle ABC and label the angles alpha and beta, the angles at A and
B. So we're going to keep track of those.
Now the critical step is this, draw line OC, that is you draw line from the center of
the semicircle out to your point on the semicircle OC.
That creates two triangles.
You can see them there left and right, and we're going to examine each of those two
triangles individually.
First of all, look at triangle AOC, the one to the left.
Notice that OA and OC are equal because they're radii of the semicircle.
All radii are equal.
So triangle OAC there is isosceles.
It's got two equal sides, and hence two equal angles by the result of Thales, meaning that
angle ACO up there is also alpha.
So the base angles of the isosceles triangle are the same, so I can put an alpha up there
at angle ACO.
But triangle BOC to the right is also isosceles for the same reason.
OB is a radius, OC is a radius, you've got a triangle with two equal sides, hence the
base angles are equal.
So if there's a beta at one base angle, there's a beta up there at angle OCB.
So now you've kind of distributed the angles around, and now let's just look at the big
picture.
And triangle ABC, the big triangle we formed, I know that angle A plus angle B plus angle
C at the top must add up to two right angles.
That's what Thales supposedly had proved.
But angle A is alpha, angle B is beta, and angle C up there is alpha plus beta, and that
would add up to two right angles.
Well, look at the left side, alpha plus beta plus alpha plus beta, that's two alphas plus
two betas is two right angles, split everything in half, one alpha plus one beta is one right
angle, but alpha plus beta is angle ACB.
So angle ACB is alpha plus beta, which is a right angle, that's what we had to prove.
The angle inscribed in the semicircle is right, QED, proof is over.
So this is Thales' theorem, a nice result from long, long ago in Greek mathematics.
The other mathematician from before Euclid that I want to mention is Pythagoras.
Now everyone's heard of Pythagoras.
He was born on Samos, which is an island just off the coast of modern-day Turkey in the
eastern Aegean.
That's not very far from where Thales lived, and it's possible that a young Pythagoras
might have even met an old Thales.
But in any event, Pythagoras rather quickly pulls up stakes and moves to southern Italy,
to a place called Cretona and takes with him his followers, the so-called Pythagorean brotherhood,
where they establish what you could imagine to be a kind of think tank or even a early
version of a university.
Pythagoras and the followers think together, work together, contemplate nature together,
and make great progress.
They studied music, they studied astronomy, and they studied mathematics.
The Pythagorean philosophy was this.
If you could understand mathematics the way mathematics works, you can understand the
world beyond.
You can apply mathematics to all sorts of different things out there in the real world.
Well there's an idea that has caught on.
To this day, mathematics is as applied as it gets, you can apply mathematics to all
sorts of things, and if you want to trace back the philosophical origins of that approach,
you can trace it back to the Pythagoreans.
It was probably never better stated than by Galileo, many centuries after Pythagoras,
but also working in Italy.
Galileo wrote this, the universe is a grand book that cannot be understood unless one
first learns to comprehend the language and read the letters in which it is composed.
It is written in the language of mathematics.
That idea is still with us, that idea goes back to the Pythagoreans.
But it is not for that that I want to mention Pythagoras, but rather for the great theorem
that bears his name, the Pythagorean theorem.
Remember what it is, you have a right triangle, here's a right triangle with legs of length
A and B, hypotenuse C, and I have my two angles labeled there, the angle opposite side A I'll
call alpha, the angle opposite side B I'll call beta.
So this is a right triangle, that's what the Pythagorean theorem is about, and what the
theorem says is, if you take that right triangle, the square on the hypotenuse is the sum of
the squares on the other two sides.
Everybody knows that.
What not everybody does know however, is that the Greeks thought of this not as an equation
with exponents.
We write the Pythagorean theorem as C squared equals A squared plus B squared, they thought
of it as literal squares, squares built upon the hypotenuse, squares built upon the legs.
So if you look at the picture, I've done this, I've built this green square on the hypotenuse,
a blue square and a gray square on the legs, and what the theorem says is, the area of
the green square on the hypotenuse is the sum of the areas of the blue and the gray square
squares on the legs.
It's quite phenomenal, it's about areas of squares, not our familiar equation C squared
equals A squared plus B squared.
Why not?
Well, the Greeks didn't have algebra, they couldn't have written that, they wouldn't
know what that meant, they didn't have exponents, that's a very concise modern way of writing
the Pythagorean theorem.
The Greeks thought about this in terms of areas of squares.
Now we're so familiar with this result, the Pythagorean theorem, you learn it in school,
you use it, if you know trigonometry, it's the result behind trig, it becomes second
nature and it's easy to forget how amazing this is.
Why is it that the square on the hypotenuse of a right triangle is the sum of the squares
on the legs?
It's not at all self-evident that it's going to work that way.
It's really a result where familiarity can breed contempt or at least indifference.
We should look at this and realize how spectacular a result it is, it's as great a theorem as
mathematics can boast.
Using those lines, let me quote Richard Trudeau, a math author who said this, when the pall
of familiarity lifts, as it occasionally does, and I see the theorem of Pythagoras afresh,
I am flabbergasted, and it would be nice to try to retain that sense of wonder as we
approach this great result.
It is quite amazing.
Now what I'd like to do is show you a proof of the Pythagorean theorem.
If it's this important a result, we better prove it in a course about great theorems.
This proof is one that is often attributed to Pythagoras.
This conceivably is how he would have done it, but again, we're not sure.
We don't have documents from that ancient time, so we're kind of guessing, but there's
a certain naturalness to this argument that would suggest that this might be the way it
went.
What do we do?
Remember we have our right triangle of sides A, B, and C. What I'm going to do first is
build two big squares of the same size.
Side A plus B, A plus B, A plus B, A plus B on the left hand square, and the same dimensions
on the right.
Each of these squares is of side A plus B, and so obviously they have the same area to
start with.
What I'm going to do now is divvy these up, break these up in different ways, and see
what happens.
Look at the left hand square.
Starting in the upper left hand corner, I'm going to mark off along the top a length B.
If the whole length across the top was A plus B, and I put a B there on the left hand part,
then the right hand part across the top must be A.
So there's a segment of length B and then a segment of length A across the top.
Coming down the right side, I'm going to first mark off a segment of length A, and then what's
left would be of length B.
Going across the bottom, I'm going to pick up an A and then a B, and rising up the left
side a B and then an A.
So this is a very strategic way of breaking this up, of locating these points, and just
to be clear, if I were to start in the upper left and go around clockwise, I'm going to
encounter B, A, A, B, A, B, B, A.
Okay, now connect these points with a vertical and horizontal line, and split the rectangle
in upper left and lower right with diagonals.
So I put in a diagonal in the upper left and one in the lower right.
So I've broken this left hand square into that picture.
Let's see, what's the area of that left hand square of the big one?
Well, what I'm going to do is just add up the little pieces into which I've split it.
So notice we have in the upper right a little square A by A, so I put in its area, that's
A squared.
So that's part of the area of the big left hand square.
In the lower left, we have a square also, B by B. So that would give me a B squared
down there.
What's left then are four copies of our original triangle.
Can you see that?
Those four triangles that have been formed by the diagonals, each have a side A, a side
B, and a right angle.
They're all copies of what we started with.
So I'm going to say that the area of the left hand square is the A squared plus the B squared
plus four of these triangles.
And just to see them, how about we'll color them in green, 1, 2, 3, 4, there they are.
So that's one way of thinking of the area of the left hand square with that sort of
subdivision.
And we'll store that for a minute, we'll be back to it.
Now I want to look at the right hand square, which remember was the same size as the left
hand square.
I have shown my triangle again, side A, side B, hypotenuse C. And now I'm going to mark
off points around the right hand square, the big square in this fashion.
Across the top I mark off a chunk of size B, and what remains then will be of size A.
Down the right, same thing, B first then A. Across the bottom, B first then A. Up the
left side, B first then A.
So if you do the trip around this square starting in the upper left, you hit B A, B A, B A,
it's a different subdivision.
Now what I'll do is connect those points I've thus formed.
So I get four lines inside, there they are.
And that creates this quadrilateral inside the big square.
Notice now what I have are triangles in each corner.
And those triangles again are exact copies of the one I started with.
A, side B, a right angle, these are identical.
So the diagonal lines, the oblique lines, those four oblique lines within the big square
each is of length C.
So I label those.
And you know the temptation now is to say, oh that's a square inside there, because it's
C by C by C by C, but that doesn't make it a square.
A figure can have four equal sides but not be square, think of a diamond, which has four
equal sides but is stretched out.
So I have more to do if I claim that's really a square in there.
I've got to make sure it has four right angles.
So how does that work?
Well let me call the angle up at the top, which I've just entered there, call that gamma.
And what my goal is is to convince you that's a right angle.
How do you do that?
Well look at the upper left hand triangle.
It's a copy of my original, and so the angle just to the left of gamma must be an alpha.
Look at the original triangle, the angle opposite side A is alpha, there it is.
So I'll label that alpha.
Look at the triangle in the upper right.
It too is a copy of my original, and so the angle just to the right of gamma is going
to be beta, it's the angle opposite side B.
So along that horizontal line up at the top I have an angle of alpha, then an angle of
gamma, then an angle of beta.
That's going to certainly figure in where we're going.
Look now at the right triangle that we started with.
It has three angles, an alpha, a beta, and a right angle.
But you know that the sum of the three angles of a triangle is two right angles, and so
the alpha plus beta must add up to a single right angle.
That's true of any right triangle, the sum of the two acute angles is a right angle.
Now we can put all this together and reach my conclusion.
If I look at that horizontal line at the top of the right hand square with the alpha, the
gamma, and the beta as the three angles around that line, I know that the sum of the angles
around the line is two right angles.
So two right angles is alpha plus beta plus gamma, you just add those three up.
But we just said alpha plus beta is a right angle, so I replace alpha plus beta with a
right angle and thus conclude that two right angles is one right angle plus gamma, well
subtract a right angle from each side, gamma must be a right angle.
That's what I wanted to show.
In fact, so are the other three angles of that interior quadrilateral, they're all
right angles.
So my quadrilateral in there has four equal sides, four right angles, bingo, it's a square.
And that's the critical step to finish the proof.
Here's how we'll do that.
I'll put both of my big squares up there, so there's the left hand square, the right
hand square, subdivided differently.
Remember we showed the area of the left hand square was the a square plus the b square
plus the four triangles, there they are colored in.
The area of the right hand square, now what's that going to be, the one on the right?
Well, first of all, it's got this square in the middle, kind of cockeyed, but it's c
by c, so that's a c squared is the area of that square.
And then what the only other part there are the four triangles around the edges, and they're
all the same, all copies of my original triangle, so I get four triangles added to the c squared.
And now you say this, look, the left hand square and the right hand square were equal
in area to start with, the left hand squared is a square plus b square plus four triangles,
the right hand squared is c squared plus four triangles, so a squared plus b squared
plus four triangles equals c squared plus four triangles, and if you subtract the four
triangles from each, you get that a squared plus b squared is c squared.
So my picture then would lead to this conclusion, a squared plus b squared is c squared, the
Pythagorean theorem would be proved.
And you can see it in this picture, but if you don't like the algebra, I'm going to
show you a way to prove this geometrically by just removing the green triangles, they're
all the same area, so stare at the picture, left hand square, right hand square, and at
the count of three, the green triangles go, one, two, three, bingo, there it is, the square
on the hypotenuse is the sum of the squares on the legs, you can see it jumping out at
you, that's the Pythagorean theorem, we express it as a squared plus b squared is c squared,
I like the picture to prove it for us.
So there's the proof, maybe the proof due to the Pythagoreans, but you know what I hope
you notice is the picture we saw along the way looks familiar, remember the Chinese diagram
we saw from long ago and from a very different part of the world, there it is, the cock-eyed
square within the square.
What this diagram is doing is proving the Pythagorean theorem, the Chinese style, it's
looking at a right triangle of sides three, four and five and demonstrating that the square
on the hypotenuse is the sum of the squares on the legs, so that's curious, you see the
same picture popping up in two different cultures, you know, the poets in China and Greece were
both writing about love, the mathematicians in China and Greece were both discovering
this picture, it suggests the universal nature of mathematics.
I should mention a quirky book called the Pythagorean Proposition by Elisha Scott Loomis.
He published this about a century ago, in this he's collected hundreds of proofs of
the Pythagorean theorem, hundreds of them, so not just this one but there's lots and
lots of alternatives, it's kind of crazy to see so many proofs of one result and you
might ask why do we need more than one proof of a result and you don't, one proof establishes
it, but you wouldn't ask why do you need just one landscape, why do you need just one portrait,
different artists want to do their own landscapes, their own portraits, different mathematicians
have tried to do different proofs, unique proofs of the Pythagorean theorem and did
they ever, there's more proofs of the Pythagorean theorem than of any other result in mathematics
and if you're interested you can read Loomis' book and find proofs of the Pythagorean theorem
to your heart's content. Well with this the stage is set, we've seen the pre Euclidean
mathematics, now it's time to get on to the great one Euclid and his elements.
