Now, a modern person looking at this is completely befuddled.
What is this about?
Where are these numbers coming from?
What's going on here?
It's very opaque.
And it requires three observations.
First of all, guess what the right answer is?
The volume of that frustum is 56.
They got it.
The Egyptians got it.
And I would hate to think what would happen if you went out on the street today and asked
somebody to find the volume of that frustum.
How many would come up with 56 as did the Egyptian scribe who wrote this papyrus almost
4,000 years ago?
So that's pretty impressive.
They must have been on to something.
Second observation is that the papyrus addressed a particular frustum.
Notice that one with those dimensions 4 by 4 by 4 by 4, 2 by 2 by 2 by 2, height 6.
That was fine.
But what if you have a frustum that is 5 by 5 by 5 by 5 and 3 by 3 by 3 by 3 and height
12?
What do you do?
And what you have to do is look at the recipe that they gave you for their frustum and try
to make the analogy between their numbers and the ones you have, the dimensions of your
solid, and figure out how to make this conversion so that you get the right answer following
their recipe.
But it's not spelled out in a general fashion, it's just that one particular body that they're
looking at.
Now, we would expect that this should be done in general.
We would imagine a frustum that was A by A by A by A, the square on top B by B by B
the height between them H, and we'd come up with a general formula, which is this.
This is the actual answer to this thing.
The volume is 1 third H, 1 third the height, times A squared plus AB plus B squared.
And now you could use this for any frustum you encounter, you're not restricted to that
particular one.
So this idea of attacking a general problem rather than a specific one was foreign to
the Egyptians.
It's now something, of course, we come to expect.
I should note, if you use that general formula and put in the dimensions of their frustum,
A is 4, B is 2, H is 6, you get 56, naturally you get the right answer.
The third observation is this, and this is maybe the most critical.
There's no suggestion in this papyrus as to why this works.
It's just presented as a recipe, you follow it, see you will find it right, you were told,
