And you know the temptation now is to say, oh that's a square inside there, because it's
C by C by C by C, but that doesn't make it a square.
A figure can have four equal sides but not be square, think of a diamond, which has four
equal sides but is stretched out.
So I have more to do if I claim that's really a square in there.
I've got to make sure it has four right angles.
So how does that work?
Well let me call the angle up at the top, which I've just entered there, call that gamma.
And what my goal is is to convince you that's a right angle.
How do you do that?
Well look at the upper left hand triangle.
It's a copy of my original, and so the angle just to the left of gamma must be an alpha.
Look at the original triangle, the angle opposite side A is alpha, there it is.
So I'll label that alpha.
Look at the triangle in the upper right.
It too is a copy of my original, and so the angle just to the right of gamma is going
to be beta, it's the angle opposite side B.
So along that horizontal line up at the top I have an angle of alpha, then an angle of
gamma, then an angle of beta.
That's going to certainly figure in where we're going.
Look now at the right triangle that we started with.
It has three angles, an alpha, a beta, and a right angle.
But you know that the sum of the three angles of a triangle is two right angles, and so
the alpha plus beta must add up to a single right angle.
That's true of any right triangle, the sum of the two acute angles is a right angle.
Now we can put all this together and reach my conclusion.
If I look at that horizontal line at the top of the right hand square with the alpha, the
gamma, and the beta as the three angles around that line, I know that the sum of the angles
around the line is two right angles.
So two right angles is alpha plus beta plus gamma, you just add those three up.
But we just said alpha plus beta is a right angle, so I replace alpha plus beta with a
right angle and thus conclude that two right angles is one right angle plus gamma, well
subtract a right angle from each side, gamma must be a right angle.
That's what I wanted to show.
In fact, so are the other three angles of that interior quadrilateral, they're all
right angles.
So my quadrilateral in there has four equal sides, four right angles, bingo, it's a square.
And that's the critical step to finish the proof.
Here's how we'll do that.
I'll put both of my big squares up there, so there's the left hand square, the right
hand square, subdivided differently.
Remember we showed the area of the left hand square was the a square plus the b square
plus the four triangles, there they are colored in.
