The first great work we'll examine in this course is Euclid's Elements, which is a masterpiece
indeed.
But that will begin in our next lecture.
In this lecture, I want to talk about some pre-Euclidean mathematics.
In particular, I want to give a brief introduction to the mathematics of three non-Greek civilizations
that had robust traditions, and then introduce a pair of Greek mathematicians who predated
Euclid, but who left very deep footprints.
The first of our non-Greek civilizations is that of ancient Egypt.
So we're back at the dawn of recorded history.
Our knowledge of their mathematics comes from papyri, papyrus' roles that have survived
all the years, and in particular, there's one called the Moscow papyrus, dated around
1850 BC.
This contains a theorem, a result about pyramids.
We know that Egyptians love their pyramids, but actually it isn't a full pyramid, but
something called the frustum of a pyramid, and that might require just a little review.
What is a frustum?
Here's the idea.
If you have a pyramid with a square base coming to a peak, and you took a plane parallel to
that base and sliced through it, on top you'd have a little pyramid.
Remove that.
What's left on the bottom is called the frustum.
It's like a pedestal.
And here's a picture of one.
In fact, this is the very one that's going to be referred to in the Moscow papyrus.
If you look at the dimensions, the square base around the bottom is 4 by 4 by 4 by 4.
It tapers up to a square top that's 2 by 2 by 2 by 2, and the gap between the top and
bottom is 6 units.
So this is the frustum that we're going to be looking at.
What do we do with it?
The question is, find its volume.
Find its volume.
That's not trivial.
And this is what the Egyptian scribe writes about in the papyrus.
And let me read to you the solution, how you find the volume of this thing.
Here's what the papyrus says.
You are to square this 4, result 16.
You are to double 4, result 8.
You are to square 2, result 4.
You are to add the 16, the 8, and the 4, result 28.
You are to take 1 third of 6, result 2.
You are to take 28 twice, result 56.
See it is 56.
You will find it right.
