Why?
Let's see a proof.
So there's my diagram.
This proof, again, we're not sure this is what Thales did, but everybody thinks it is.
It's such a beautiful natural argument.
It's actually what Euclid uses in Book 3 of the Elements when he proves this theorem.
So this is probably what Thales did.
Let me look at triangle ABC and label the angles alpha and beta, the angles at A and
B. So we're going to keep track of those.
Now the critical step is this, draw line OC, that is you draw line from the center of
the semicircle out to your point on the semicircle OC.
That creates two triangles.
You can see them there left and right, and we're going to examine each of those two
triangles individually.
First of all, look at triangle AOC, the one to the left.
Notice that OA and OC are equal because they're radii of the semicircle.
All radii are equal.
So triangle OAC there is isosceles.
It's got two equal sides, and hence two equal angles by the result of Thales, meaning that
angle ACO up there is also alpha.
So the base angles of the isosceles triangle are the same, so I can put an alpha up there
at angle ACO.
But triangle BOC to the right is also isosceles for the same reason.
OB is a radius, OC is a radius, you've got a triangle with two equal sides, hence the
base angles are equal.
So if there's a beta at one base angle, there's a beta up there at angle OCB.
So now you've kind of distributed the angles around, and now let's just look at the big
picture.
And triangle ABC, the big triangle we formed, I know that angle A plus angle B plus angle
C at the top must add up to two right angles.
That's what Thales supposedly had proved.
But angle A is alpha, angle B is beta, and angle C up there is alpha plus beta, and that
would add up to two right angles.
Well, look at the left side, alpha plus beta plus alpha plus beta, that's two alphas plus
two betas is two right angles, split everything in half, one alpha plus one beta is one right
angle, but alpha plus beta is angle ACB.
So angle ACB is alpha plus beta, which is a right angle, that's what we had to prove.
The angle inscribed in the semicircle is right, QED, proof is over.
So this is Thales' theorem, a nice result from long, long ago in Greek mathematics.
The other mathematician from before Euclid that I want to mention is Pythagoras.
Now everyone's heard of Pythagoras.
He was born on Samos, which is an island just off the coast of modern-day Turkey in the
eastern Aegean.
