The area of the right hand square, now what's that going to be, the one on the right?
Well, first of all, it's got this square in the middle, kind of cockeyed, but it's c
by c, so that's a c squared is the area of that square.
And then what the only other part there are the four triangles around the edges, and they're
all the same, all copies of my original triangle, so I get four triangles added to the c squared.
And now you say this, look, the left hand square and the right hand square were equal
in area to start with, the left hand squared is a square plus b square plus four triangles,
the right hand squared is c squared plus four triangles, so a squared plus b squared
plus four triangles equals c squared plus four triangles, and if you subtract the four
triangles from each, you get that a squared plus b squared is c squared.
So my picture then would lead to this conclusion, a squared plus b squared is c squared, the
Pythagorean theorem would be proved.
And you can see it in this picture, but if you don't like the algebra, I'm going to
show you a way to prove this geometrically by just removing the green triangles, they're
all the same area, so stare at the picture, left hand square, right hand square, and at
the count of three, the green triangles go, one, two, three, bingo, there it is, the square
on the hypotenuse is the sum of the squares on the legs, you can see it jumping out at
you, that's the Pythagorean theorem, we express it as a squared plus b squared is c squared,
I like the picture to prove it for us.
So there's the proof, maybe the proof due to the Pythagoreans, but you know what I hope
you notice is the picture we saw along the way looks familiar, remember the Chinese diagram
we saw from long ago and from a very different part of the world, there it is, the cock-eyed
square within the square.
What this diagram is doing is proving the Pythagorean theorem, the Chinese style, it's
looking at a right triangle of sides three, four and five and demonstrating that the square
on the hypotenuse is the sum of the squares on the legs, so that's curious, you see the
same picture popping up in two different cultures, you know, the poets in China and Greece were
both writing about love, the mathematicians in China and Greece were both discovering
this picture, it suggests the universal nature of mathematics.
I should mention a quirky book called the Pythagorean Proposition by Elisha Scott Loomis.
He published this about a century ago, in this he's collected hundreds of proofs of
the Pythagorean theorem, hundreds of them, so not just this one but there's lots and
lots of alternatives, it's kind of crazy to see so many proofs of one result and you
might ask why do we need more than one proof of a result and you don't, one proof establishes
it, but you wouldn't ask why do you need just one landscape, why do you need just one portrait,
different artists want to do their own landscapes, their own portraits, different mathematicians
have tried to do different proofs, unique proofs of the Pythagorean theorem and did
they ever, there's more proofs of the Pythagorean theorem than of any other result in mathematics
and if you're interested you can read Loomis' book and find proofs of the Pythagorean theorem
to your heart's content. Well with this the stage is set, we've seen the pre Euclidean
mathematics, now it's time to get on to the great one Euclid and his elements.
