Well, the Greeks didn't have algebra, they couldn't have written that, they wouldn't
know what that meant, they didn't have exponents, that's a very concise modern way of writing
the Pythagorean theorem.
The Greeks thought about this in terms of areas of squares.
Now we're so familiar with this result, the Pythagorean theorem, you learn it in school,
you use it, if you know trigonometry, it's the result behind trig, it becomes second
nature and it's easy to forget how amazing this is.
Why is it that the square on the hypotenuse of a right triangle is the sum of the squares
on the legs?
It's not at all self-evident that it's going to work that way.
It's really a result where familiarity can breed contempt or at least indifference.
We should look at this and realize how spectacular a result it is, it's as great a theorem as
mathematics can boast.
Using those lines, let me quote Richard Trudeau, a math author who said this, when the pall
of familiarity lifts, as it occasionally does, and I see the theorem of Pythagoras afresh,
I am flabbergasted, and it would be nice to try to retain that sense of wonder as we
approach this great result.
It is quite amazing.
Now what I'd like to do is show you a proof of the Pythagorean theorem.
If it's this important a result, we better prove it in a course about great theorems.
This proof is one that is often attributed to Pythagoras.
This conceivably is how he would have done it, but again, we're not sure.
We don't have documents from that ancient time, so we're kind of guessing, but there's
a certain naturalness to this argument that would suggest that this might be the way it
went.
What do we do?
Remember we have our right triangle of sides A, B, and C. What I'm going to do first is
build two big squares of the same size.
Side A plus B, A plus B, A plus B, A plus B on the left hand square, and the same dimensions
on the right.
Each of these squares is of side A plus B, and so obviously they have the same area to
start with.
What I'm going to do now is divvy these up, break these up in different ways, and see
what happens.
Look at the left hand square.
Starting in the upper left hand corner, I'm going to mark off along the top a length B.
If the whole length across the top was A plus B, and I put a B there on the left hand part,
then the right hand part across the top must be A.
So there's a segment of length B and then a segment of length A across the top.
Coming down the right side, I'm going to first mark off a segment of length A, and then what's
left would be of length B.
Going across the bottom, I'm going to pick up an A and then a B, and rising up the left
side a B and then an A.
