So this is a very strategic way of breaking this up, of locating these points, and just
to be clear, if I were to start in the upper left and go around clockwise, I'm going to
encounter B, A, A, B, A, B, B, A.
Okay, now connect these points with a vertical and horizontal line, and split the rectangle
in upper left and lower right with diagonals.
So I put in a diagonal in the upper left and one in the lower right.
So I've broken this left hand square into that picture.
Let's see, what's the area of that left hand square of the big one?
Well, what I'm going to do is just add up the little pieces into which I've split it.
So notice we have in the upper right a little square A by A, so I put in its area, that's
A squared.
So that's part of the area of the big left hand square.
In the lower left, we have a square also, B by B. So that would give me a B squared
down there.
What's left then are four copies of our original triangle.
Can you see that?
Those four triangles that have been formed by the diagonals, each have a side A, a side
B, and a right angle.
They're all copies of what we started with.
So I'm going to say that the area of the left hand square is the A squared plus the B squared
plus four of these triangles.
And just to see them, how about we'll color them in green, 1, 2, 3, 4, there they are.
So that's one way of thinking of the area of the left hand square with that sort of
subdivision.
And we'll store that for a minute, we'll be back to it.
Now I want to look at the right hand square, which remember was the same size as the left
hand square.
I have shown my triangle again, side A, side B, hypotenuse C. And now I'm going to mark
off points around the right hand square, the big square in this fashion.
Across the top I mark off a chunk of size B, and what remains then will be of size A.
Down the right, same thing, B first then A. Across the bottom, B first then A. Up the
left side, B first then A.
So if you do the trip around this square starting in the upper left, you hit B A, B A, B A,
it's a different subdivision.
Now what I'll do is connect those points I've thus formed.
So I get four lines inside, there they are.
And that creates this quadrilateral inside the big square.
Notice now what I have are triangles in each corner.
And those triangles again are exact copies of the one I started with.
A, side B, a right angle, these are identical.
So the diagonal lines, the oblique lines, those four oblique lines within the big square
each is of length C.
So I label those.
