That's not very far from where Thales lived, and it's possible that a young Pythagoras
might have even met an old Thales.
But in any event, Pythagoras rather quickly pulls up stakes and moves to southern Italy,
to a place called Cretona and takes with him his followers, the so-called Pythagorean brotherhood,
where they establish what you could imagine to be a kind of think tank or even a early
version of a university.
Pythagoras and the followers think together, work together, contemplate nature together,
and make great progress.
They studied music, they studied astronomy, and they studied mathematics.
The Pythagorean philosophy was this.
If you could understand mathematics the way mathematics works, you can understand the
world beyond.
You can apply mathematics to all sorts of different things out there in the real world.
Well there's an idea that has caught on.
To this day, mathematics is as applied as it gets, you can apply mathematics to all
sorts of things, and if you want to trace back the philosophical origins of that approach,
you can trace it back to the Pythagoreans.
It was probably never better stated than by Galileo, many centuries after Pythagoras,
but also working in Italy.
Galileo wrote this, the universe is a grand book that cannot be understood unless one
first learns to comprehend the language and read the letters in which it is composed.
It is written in the language of mathematics.
That idea is still with us, that idea goes back to the Pythagoreans.
But it is not for that that I want to mention Pythagoras, but rather for the great theorem
that bears his name, the Pythagorean theorem.
Remember what it is, you have a right triangle, here's a right triangle with legs of length
A and B, hypotenuse C, and I have my two angles labeled there, the angle opposite side A I'll
call alpha, the angle opposite side B I'll call beta.
So this is a right triangle, that's what the Pythagorean theorem is about, and what the
theorem says is, if you take that right triangle, the square on the hypotenuse is the sum of
the squares on the other two sides.
Everybody knows that.
What not everybody does know however, is that the Greeks thought of this not as an equation
with exponents.
We write the Pythagorean theorem as C squared equals A squared plus B squared, they thought
of it as literal squares, squares built upon the hypotenuse, squares built upon the legs.
So if you look at the picture, I've done this, I've built this green square on the hypotenuse,
a blue square and a gray square on the legs, and what the theorem says is, the area of
the green square on the hypotenuse is the sum of the areas of the blue and the gray square
squares on the legs.
It's quite phenomenal, it's about areas of squares, not our familiar equation C squared
equals A squared plus B squared.
Why not?
