So now he's got two congruent schemes to work with.
But he's going to use this one in Proposition 1.11.
I'm going to actually give you this proof.
I think this typifies what Euclid is up to.
Proposition 1.11, he says he wants to show you how to draw a straight line at right angles
to a given straight line from a given point on it.
So my picture would be this.
I have a straight line, there's a point D on it.
I want to construct a perpendicular upward at that point.
Now I'm willing to believe there is a perpendicular upward from that point, but I've got to create
it.
I've got to construct it.
Well, what do you do?
Do you get out your protractor?
No.
A lot of these protractors, that's not one of the allowable tools, nor can you use your
cool software program on the computer.
You've got to use compass and straight edge.
So Euclid has to create this perpendicular with compass and straight edge and prove it
is a perpendicular by the definitions that he's given.
So if you think of it that way, this is a little bit more of a challenge than you might
think.
Let's see what he does.
Euclid says, all right, there's my line and my point D. I want to put up a perpendicular
there.
He begins by taking a point A on the line somewhere other than D. So I put it to the
left of D. So he takes a point A. And now what he wants to do is construct a segment
going the other way from D to B equal in length to DA.
So he wants to sort of duplicate that distance in the other direction.
Now how would you do that?
Well, look, you could do this.
Get out your compass, put the center of D, let DA be the radius, and draw a semicircle.
Where it comes around and hits the line again, we'll call that point B. And sure enough,
since you did this with a compass and you're allowed to use compasses by posthumously 3,
DA is the radius, DB is the radius, they're equal.
And so you've constructed the segment DB equal to DA.
Now, Euclid says, on this segment AB, construct an equilateral triangle, ABC.
Can he do that?
Yes.
Remember, Proposition 11 showed you how on a given segment, you could put up an equilateral
triangle.
If you didn't like this, if you challenged Euclid, how do you know you can do this?
