He would refer you back to Proposition 11.
So Proposition 111 is certainly being built upon the shoulders of Proposition 11.
He builds the equilateral triangle there.
And then finally, he draws the line CD from C, the vertex of the equilateral triangle,
down to D, that original point, and he does that by postulate 1.
You can draw a line between any two points.
So this is his picture.
And now he's going to have to prove something about this particular construction.
What he says is that triangle ADC, the one on the left, and triangle BDC, the one on
the right, are congruent.
So that's his claim, and he's got to justify it.
Why is that?
Well, look, DA and DB are equal because they're radii.
The two horizontal sides, they were radii.
He knows that AC and BC are equal because you had constructed an equilateral triangle.
Those two sides are equal.
And finally, CD is equal to itself.
It's the common side to the two triangles.
So if you look at the left and right triangle, we have equal side horizontally, equal side
oblique, equal vertical, side, side, side will give you congruence.
So indeed, triangle ADC is congruent to triangle BDC.
And that means that angle ADC must equal angle BDC, which I will call theta.
So these common angles, these are equal, theta and theta on either side.
At this point, Euclid's just about done because now he says that means CD is perpendicular
to AB.
Why is that?
Well, remember what the definition was of perpendicularity.
This is where he has to go back to his definition.
And definition 10 said that when a straight line standing on a straight line makes the
adjacent angles equal to one another, each of these angles is right, and the straight
line standing on the other is called a perpendicular to that on which it stands.
It's just what he's got here, theta on one side, theta on the other.
This is a perpendicular.
That's what he claimed.
He's constructed a perpendicular to a line at a point on it, QED, a very nice bit of
Euclidean mathematics, typifying his careful reasoning, his reliance on previous propositions
and his basic definitions and postulates.
From there, more theorems are coming.
I'm just going to mention one last one.
We'll jump ahead a few.
Proposition 120 is this.
It says in any triangle, two sides taken together in any manner are greater than the
