Then using the definitions, the postulates, the common notions and reason Euclid will
deduce a consequence and that will be the first proposition.
Then with the definitions, the postulates, the common notions and the first proposition
he'll deduce the second proposition and the third and the fourth.
Then on he goes until we get to some very sophisticated mathematics, all of it built
upon this foundation of his axioms and definitions.
This is an axiomatic development.
This is how mathematics is still done, developed from a core of axioms and you'll find no
finer example of it than Euclid's elements.
So I want to begin then with the definitions.
So what are these?
Some of the terms he defines are quite familiar to us.
A nice Ossolese triangle is one with two equal sides.
A circle is a curve, all of whose points are a fixed distance from a given point called
the center.
No surprises there.
But I want to show you two definitions that you might find a little surprising.
One of them is definition 10, the 10th of his 23 definitions.
He's trying to define a right angle and perpendicular lines.
Now if somebody asked me how would I define a right angle, I would say well it's 90 degrees
of course, but that's not what Euclid could do because he doesn't have degrees.
Nowhere in the elements, nowhere in the greatest geometry book ever written are angles measured
by degrees.
So he's got to do this some other way and here's his definition of perpendicular lines
and right angles.
Because when a straight line set up on a straight line makes the adjacent angles equal to one
another, each of the equal angles is right and the straight line standing on the other
is called a perpendicular to that on which it stands.
A picture would help.
Here's his diagram.
He has the straight line CD standing on the straight line AB.
We have the two angles adjacent alpha and beta and the definition says that if alpha
equals beta, then we're going to say angle ADC and angle BDC are right angles and CD
is perpendicular.
That's his definition of perpendicularity.
Now why that's important is later whenever he wants to prove something is perpendicular,
he must come back to this definition.
This is what he means by perpendicular.
This is what he's got to do.
And we'll see.
I'll show you an example where he does just that.
The other definition I wanted to put forth was his last definition, definition 23 of
