places like that, where it's translated into Latin and has a sort of second birth in Europe.
In the great universities of the day it was studied, Newton read Euclid's Elements and
thought very highly of it.
From the Enlightenment it was an important document, Jefferson, Ben Franklin, these
folks were quite familiar with it.
And even in the more modern times it still had its impact.
I like the story from the 19th century of a young Illinois liar who was trying to sharpen
his reasoning skills.
He thought as a liar he would have to prove points of law to judges and juries and he
wanted to get better at this.
His name was Abraham Lincoln and he tells us this story.
He said, I left my situation in Springfield, went home to my father's house and stayed
there until I could give any proposition in the first six books of Euclid at sight.
I then found out what demonstrate means and went back to my lost days.
Once Lincoln had read the master Euclid, he knew how to prove something in a clear
rigorous fashion.
It's often said that Lincoln's prose reflects his interest in the Bible and Shakespeare
and that is certainly true.
You can hear the cadences of those great works in his masterful prose.
But I would argue you can also see the echoes of Euclid in Lincoln's writing as Lincoln
will lay out a few hypotheses and then deduce consequences of them in a way that just seems
absolutely clear and perfect.
So Lincoln was a fan.
Later in the 19th century we hear another testimonial.
This is from Bertrand Russell, the great philosopher.
He said, at the age of eleven I began Euclid with my brother as tutor.
This was one of the great events of my life as dazzling as first love.
How often do math books get referred to like that?
And even into the 20th century we have this passage.
If Euclid failed to kindle your youthful enthusiast then you were not born to be a scientific
thinker.
Who wrote that?
Albert Einstein.
So for centuries and centuries this has been revered as a great work and it's my job now
and this lecture and the next two to show you exactly why these folks were so positive
about it.
Here's what Euclid does.
He begins with some definitions.
He's going to tell us what his terms mean.
Some postulates and some common notions as he calls them.
The postulates and common notions are self-evident truths.
The sorts of things he doesn't have to prove he's just going to state them.
