equal so that there's a right angle, then he postulates that these two right angles
are equal to one another.
He doesn't have to prove it.
This is just a posture.
He will accept this as a self-evident truth and what this does is it gives him a uniform
standard for the plane.
A right angle over here equals a right angle over here and that will be very important
in his development.
The fifth postulate is quite different from the first four.
It's much wordier.
It says this, when a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the interior angles
on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines if produced indefinitely
meet on that side on which the angles are less than the two right angles.
Obviously, this is way more complex just to state it.
It's kind of complicated compared to the nice succinct statement, all right angles are equal.
This is a different ball game.
It certainly requires a picture.
So let me show you the picture for postulate five.
We got a straight line AB, we have another straight line CD, and we have a line falling
upon them, EF.
Now I'll look at the interior angles on the same side, so I'm going to look at alpha and
beta there between the two lines, that's what interior means, and to the right of EF.
And what this postulate says is if alpha plus beta, those two angles sum to less than two
right angles, then AB and CD meet to the right on that side.
This is sometimes called the parallel postulate.
Let's call that because Euclid needs this whenever he's going to develop his theory
of parallels later in book one.
But you know that's actually a misnomer, it's not a parallel postulate.
We said parallel lines are those that never meet.
Here he's giving a condition that guarantees that the lines do meet.
And so if there was any justice in the world this should be called the non-parallel postulate.
Well those are his postulates, the five of them, and then he gives five what he calls
common notions.
These are still things he's going to accept without proof.
These are pretty general statements such as common notion one, things which are equal
to the same thing are equal to one another.
Common notion two, if equals be added to equals, the holes are equal.
Common notion three, if equals be subtracted from equals, the remainers are equal.
Common notion four says things which coincide with one another are equal to one another.
This was a little peculiar in its content.
He seems to be saying this, that if you have two objects which can be made to coincide
perfectly so that they're kind of carbon copies of each other, then they coincide, then they
