So he's got A theorem proved.
Now I said there's 465 theorems, so there's 464 more to do, and we're not going to do
them all.
We're going to have to start skipping through some of book one.
So let me hit some high points in the remainder of the book.
Proposition one-four, the fourth proposition, is what we call the side-angle-side congruent
scheme.
It's a way to show triangles are congruent, side-angle-side.
You might remember this if you have triangle ABC and triangle DEF.
Suppose they both have a side A on the bottom, they both have a side of length B to the left,
and the angle at A is alpha, the angle at D is alpha.
So you have two sides and the included angle of one triangle equal two sides and the included
angle of the other.
Then we say by side-angle-side, the triangles are congruent, meaning they are equal in all
respects.
They could be made to coincide, their areas are equal, their angles are equal, they are
carbon copies.
So now that congruent scheme is out there.
In one-five, he proves that in Isosceles triangles, the angles at the base are equal
to one another.
This is a result, remember, that Thales supposedly had proved.
Now I'm not going to go through Euclid's proof, but I want to show you his diagram.
This is the diagram that accompanies his proof.
There you see the Isosceles triangles, ABC there, AB and AC are the equal sides.
And in the course of the proof, he has to do the constructions that you see on the screen.
Now the diagram thus formed has come to be called the Pones Asinorum, which translates
to the bridge of asses.
And there's kind of an amusing reason why that, where that name came from.
First of all, it sort of looks like a bridge.
If you use your imagination, you could imagine crossing over on BC, the bridge has these struts
below holding it up, so it has a kind of resemblance to a bridge.
But more fundamentally, it is the bridge to the remainder of Euclid.
And after you've done the first four propositions, which aren't too hard, Proposition 1.5 is
a little bit more challenging.
And some people, namely the mathematical asses, could not cross this bridge, could not get
over the Pones Asinorum, and thus enter the remainder of Euclid's elements.
So this was a barrier for some folks.
Let me jump ahead a few more to Proposition 1.8.
This is the side-side-side congruent scheme, SSS.
If you have two triangles, ABC, DEF, they both have a side A, they both have a side B, they
both have a side C, so we have three sides of one respectively equal to three sides of
the other, then these triangles are congruent, identical in all respects.
