remaining one.
This is an inequality.
Something's greater than something.
This is sometimes called the triangle inequality.
The idea is, if I draw the picture here, you've got a triangle.
Let's say the sides are AB and C. Any two of these added together is more than the third.
Let's say we'll take A plus B, those two, add up to be more than C. This would be the
triangle inequality applied to those sides.
Now, as you might guess, he proves this using that common notion five.
The whole is greater than the part, and that figures in the proof.
I'm not going to give the proof.
It's actually rather sophisticated.
Even classical times, the Epicurean philosophers criticized this proof.
They said, wait a minute, this proof isn't even necessary.
Anybody knows the two sides of a triangle are longer than the third side.
As a matter of fact, even an ass knows this, said the Epicureans.
Why bother proving this?
Here's what they meant.
If you took a donkey, and you put the donkey at one vertex of the triangle, and you put
the donkey's food at the other side, the donkey knows that it's much quicker to just
go straight alongside C than to go around by A plus B.
The donkey knows that those two sides are more than the third, so the donkey would go
straight to the food.
The Epicurean said, why even bother proving such a thing?
It's just too obvious.
Many centuries later, a Greek commentator named Proclus, who was a fan of Euclid's
elements, he wrote a treatise about Euclid's elements.
He took up Euclid's side of the argument, and Proclus said, no, no, we have to prove
this.
This is Euclid's very mission, was to prove things, even if they seem self-evident.
Here's his words.
Proclus said, yes, yes, granting that the theorem is evident to sense perception.
It is still not clear for scientific thought.
Many things have this character, for example, that fire warms.
This is clear to perception, but it is the task of science to find out how it warms.
And so maybe the triangle inequality is evident even to an ass, but why is it true?
That is Euclid's mission, and that Euclid accomplished beautifully.
Now with this, we are deep in the book one of the elements.
We're going to stop this lecture here, but I'll be back to pick up more results, including
the great Pythagorean theorem and its converse, the theory of parallels, and lots of other
things that come up later in this great masterpiece.
