parallel straight lines.
Euclid says that parallel straight lines are straight lines which being in the same plane
and being produced indefinitely in both directions do not meet one another in either direction.
They're lines that never meet.
Are they everywhere equidistant?
Well maybe, but that's not his definition.
Are they going at the same slope?
Well maybe, but that's not his definition.
His definition is they never meet.
And so if he's going to prove something about parallel lines, he's going to try to show
two lines are parallel, he's got to show they never meet.
Well the definition is being out of the way.
It's now time for him to start giving his postulates.
There are five postulates.
Here they come.
The first one is it is possible to draw a straight line from any point to any point.
So you give me two points, you can draw a straight line between them, the postulate one.
Postulate two.
It is possible to produce a finite straight line continuously in a straight line.
So if you have a little line segment here and you want to extend the straight line in
either direction, go ahead.
You can do it, site postulate two.
If you remember back to your geometry training, this is exactly what you do with a straight
edge.
You've got two points, you line up the straight edge and connect them to form a line segment
as in postulate one.
Or if you already have a segment, you can kind of line up the straight edge and extend
it further.
So these are called the straight edge postulates.
Postulate three says that it is possible to describe a circle with any center and any
radius.
If you give me a center, you give me a radius, I'll make a circle.
If you give me center O, there's a radius, I can make a circle.
What's that?
That's what you do with a compass.
So this is the compass postulate.
Taken together, postulates one, two and three allow you to use compass and straight edge
as your tools of construction and these are called, not surprisingly, the Euclidean tools.
Postulate four says all right angles are equal to one another.
So what Euclidean is saying here is if you have a line standing on a line so that the
adjacent angles are equal, and hence you form the right angle, and somewhere over on the
other part of the plane you have a line standing on a line so that the adjacent angles are
