This is the first of three lectures I'll be giving on Euclid's elements.
The greatest mathematics text of classical times, I would argue the greatest mathematics
text of all time.
What I want to do is give you an overview of the initial parts of book one of Euclid's
elements, how he gets started, take a look at some of the early results.
But before that, I want to give a sense as to why this work has meant so much to so many
over so many centuries.
So I've got to sell the idea of devoting three lectures to this great classic text.
So let me begin with an observation that of Euclid's life, we know virtually nothing.
He ended up in Alexandria, Egypt, heading the School of Mathematics at the Great Library
of Alexandria.
You recall that Alexander the Great had conquered the Mediterranean world and at the mouth of
the Nile had set up this great library to be the center of knowledge and scholarship.
Notice that at its height it had hundreds of thousands of volumes, although volumes in
those days weren't books, but papyrus rolls.
Euclid was brought down to be the head of the School of Mathematics and he sure did a
good job because the mathematics school at Alexandria was preeminent in the world for
centuries after Euclid's time.
Now while there, somewhere around 300 BC, he wrote the Elements, his great masterpiece.
This is a vast compendium.
It's broken into 13 books, as he calls them, or chapters we would say, that contain altogether
465 propositions or theorems that he proves.
It's a very big work.
I liken it to the Iliad of Homer.
I think the elements of Euclid and the Iliad of Homer are cousins, if you will, from two
different disciplines.
They're both old, they're both big.
No one reading the Iliad would confuse it with modern literature.
No one reading the Elements would confuse it with modern mathematics.
Euclid's Elements has no functions in it, it has no trigonometry, it has no calculus.
It's old math.
But anyone reading the Iliad would agree that this is great literature.
It's important, it's powerful, it's beautiful.
And I would say anyone reading Euclid's Elements would recognize this as great mathematics,
powerful, beautiful, important.
So these I think we can keep as a tandem the Elements and the Iliad.
In classical times the Elements was highly regarded, people like Archimedes, a few generations
after Euclid already were referring to it, Heron referred to it, Cicero referred to it.
When classical civilization fell and Greek scholarship was transported to the Islamic
world, the Elements went with it and it was highly revered by the Islamic scholars who
translated it and studied it.
When the Renaissance comes back to Europe the Elements is brought back to Italy, Sicily,
