are equal in all respects.
Their angles are equal, their sides are equal, their perimeters are equal, their areas are
equal, they are identical.
And finally common notion five, the last, the hole is greater than the part, he says.
This will be his way to get at inequalities, and there's lots of those in Euclid's elements.
We're going to see some inequalities always come out of common notion five.
All right, so he's got his definitions, he's got his postulates, he's got his common notions,
the foundations are ready to go, and now he's going to start proving theorems.
I sometimes think at this point, if it were I who was doing this, I'd freeze.
What do you do?
Where do you start?
First theorem going to be, well fortunately Euclid didn't freeze, here it is, proposition
1.1, and this is how we usually write it, with a Roman numeral one, meaning the first
book, and then the Hindu-Arabic one, meaning the first proposition.
So this is the first proposition of the first book, the first thing Euclid proves, on a
finite straight line, he shows you how to construct an equilateral triangle.
So let me take a look at this argument.
We'll start with any segment AB, so there it is, and his job is to put an equilateral
triangle up there.
Euclid says, all right, with center A and radius AB, construct a circle, now can he
do this?
Sure, remember postula 3, so if you give me any center and any radius, I'll make a circle.
So he can cite postula 3 to justify that circular arc.
So he started.
Now he says, let's center B be where your circle is centered, and AB be the radius,
and construct a circle.
Again that's postula 3 being invoked, and you get the second circle.
Euclid let's C be the point where those two arcs intersect, up there.
He then draws line AC and BC.
So we draw these two lines, now can you do that?
Yeah, that's postula 1.
You give me two points, I'll draw a line between them, which is exactly what he's done here.
So in this fashion, he has constructed this figure.
Now he has to show that it's an equilateral triangle.
But that's pretty easy, because Euclid now says, look, AC and AB are equal because they're
radii of that first circle he drew, that BC and AB are equal because they're radii of
the second circle he drew.
But if AC equals AB, and BC equals AB, then it's also true that AC equals BC by common
notion one.
Things equal to the same thing, or equal to each other.
And so AB equals BC equals AC, all three sides of this triangle are the same, the triangle
is equilateral, and that's his proof.
