This is the first of three lectures I'll be giving on Euclid's elements.
The greatest mathematics text of classical times, I would argue the greatest mathematics
text of all time.
What I want to do is give you an overview of the initial parts of book one of Euclid's
elements, how he gets started, take a look at some of the early results.
But before that, I want to give a sense as to why this work has meant so much to so many
over so many centuries.
So I've got to sell the idea of devoting three lectures to this great classic text.
So let me begin with an observation that of Euclid's life, we know virtually nothing.
He ended up in Alexandria, Egypt, heading the School of Mathematics at the Great Library
of Alexandria.
You recall that Alexander the Great had conquered the Mediterranean world and at the mouth of
the Nile had set up this great library to be the center of knowledge and scholarship.
Notice that at its height it had hundreds of thousands of volumes, although volumes in
those days weren't books, but papyrus rolls.
Euclid was brought down to be the head of the School of Mathematics and he sure did a
good job because the mathematics school at Alexandria was preeminent in the world for
centuries after Euclid's time.
Now while there, somewhere around 300 BC, he wrote the Elements, his great masterpiece.
This is a vast compendium.
It's broken into 13 books, as he calls them, or chapters we would say, that contain altogether
465 propositions or theorems that he proves.
It's a very big work.
I liken it to the Iliad of Homer.
I think the elements of Euclid and the Iliad of Homer are cousins, if you will, from two
different disciplines.
They're both old, they're both big.
No one reading the Iliad would confuse it with modern literature.
No one reading the Elements would confuse it with modern mathematics.
Euclid's Elements has no functions in it, it has no trigonometry, it has no calculus.
It's old math.
But anyone reading the Iliad would agree that this is great literature.
It's important, it's powerful, it's beautiful.
And I would say anyone reading Euclid's Elements would recognize this as great mathematics,
powerful, beautiful, important.
So these I think we can keep as a tandem the Elements and the Iliad.
In classical times the Elements was highly regarded, people like Archimedes, a few generations
after Euclid already were referring to it, Heron referred to it, Cicero referred to it.
When classical civilization fell and Greek scholarship was transported to the Islamic
world, the Elements went with it and it was highly revered by the Islamic scholars who
translated it and studied it.
When the Renaissance comes back to Europe the Elements is brought back to Italy, Sicily,
places like that, where it's translated into Latin and has a sort of second birth in Europe.
In the great universities of the day it was studied, Newton read Euclid's Elements and
thought very highly of it.
From the Enlightenment it was an important document, Jefferson, Ben Franklin, these
folks were quite familiar with it.
And even in the more modern times it still had its impact.
I like the story from the 19th century of a young Illinois liar who was trying to sharpen
his reasoning skills.
He thought as a liar he would have to prove points of law to judges and juries and he
wanted to get better at this.
His name was Abraham Lincoln and he tells us this story.
He said, I left my situation in Springfield, went home to my father's house and stayed
there until I could give any proposition in the first six books of Euclid at sight.
I then found out what demonstrate means and went back to my lost days.
Once Lincoln had read the master Euclid, he knew how to prove something in a clear
rigorous fashion.
It's often said that Lincoln's prose reflects his interest in the Bible and Shakespeare
and that is certainly true.
You can hear the cadences of those great works in his masterful prose.
But I would argue you can also see the echoes of Euclid in Lincoln's writing as Lincoln
will lay out a few hypotheses and then deduce consequences of them in a way that just seems
absolutely clear and perfect.
So Lincoln was a fan.
Later in the 19th century we hear another testimonial.
This is from Bertrand Russell, the great philosopher.
He said, at the age of eleven I began Euclid with my brother as tutor.
This was one of the great events of my life as dazzling as first love.
How often do math books get referred to like that?
And even into the 20th century we have this passage.
If Euclid failed to kindle your youthful enthusiast then you were not born to be a scientific
thinker.
Who wrote that?
Albert Einstein.
So for centuries and centuries this has been revered as a great work and it's my job now
and this lecture and the next two to show you exactly why these folks were so positive
about it.
Here's what Euclid does.
He begins with some definitions.
He's going to tell us what his terms mean.
Some postulates and some common notions as he calls them.
The postulates and common notions are self-evident truths.
The sorts of things he doesn't have to prove he's just going to state them.
Then using the definitions, the postulates, the common notions and reason Euclid will
deduce a consequence and that will be the first proposition.
Then with the definitions, the postulates, the common notions and the first proposition
he'll deduce the second proposition and the third and the fourth.
Then on he goes until we get to some very sophisticated mathematics, all of it built
upon this foundation of his axioms and definitions.
This is an axiomatic development.
This is how mathematics is still done, developed from a core of axioms and you'll find no
finer example of it than Euclid's elements.
So I want to begin then with the definitions.
So what are these?
Some of the terms he defines are quite familiar to us.
A nice Ossolese triangle is one with two equal sides.
A circle is a curve, all of whose points are a fixed distance from a given point called
the center.
No surprises there.
But I want to show you two definitions that you might find a little surprising.
One of them is definition 10, the 10th of his 23 definitions.
He's trying to define a right angle and perpendicular lines.
Now if somebody asked me how would I define a right angle, I would say well it's 90 degrees
of course, but that's not what Euclid could do because he doesn't have degrees.
Nowhere in the elements, nowhere in the greatest geometry book ever written are angles measured
by degrees.
So he's got to do this some other way and here's his definition of perpendicular lines
and right angles.
Because when a straight line set up on a straight line makes the adjacent angles equal to one
another, each of the equal angles is right and the straight line standing on the other
is called a perpendicular to that on which it stands.
A picture would help.
Here's his diagram.
He has the straight line CD standing on the straight line AB.
We have the two angles adjacent alpha and beta and the definition says that if alpha
equals beta, then we're going to say angle ADC and angle BDC are right angles and CD
is perpendicular.
That's his definition of perpendicularity.
Now why that's important is later whenever he wants to prove something is perpendicular,
he must come back to this definition.
This is what he means by perpendicular.
This is what he's got to do.
And we'll see.
I'll show you an example where he does just that.
The other definition I wanted to put forth was his last definition, definition 23 of
parallel straight lines.
Euclid says that parallel straight lines are straight lines which being in the same plane
and being produced indefinitely in both directions do not meet one another in either direction.
They're lines that never meet.
Are they everywhere equidistant?
Well maybe, but that's not his definition.
Are they going at the same slope?
Well maybe, but that's not his definition.
His definition is they never meet.
And so if he's going to prove something about parallel lines, he's going to try to show
two lines are parallel, he's got to show they never meet.
Well the definition is being out of the way.
It's now time for him to start giving his postulates.
There are five postulates.
Here they come.
The first one is it is possible to draw a straight line from any point to any point.
So you give me two points, you can draw a straight line between them, the postulate one.
Postulate two.
It is possible to produce a finite straight line continuously in a straight line.
So if you have a little line segment here and you want to extend the straight line in
either direction, go ahead.
You can do it, site postulate two.
If you remember back to your geometry training, this is exactly what you do with a straight
edge.
You've got two points, you line up the straight edge and connect them to form a line segment
as in postulate one.
Or if you already have a segment, you can kind of line up the straight edge and extend
it further.
So these are called the straight edge postulates.
Postulate three says that it is possible to describe a circle with any center and any
radius.
If you give me a center, you give me a radius, I'll make a circle.
If you give me center O, there's a radius, I can make a circle.
What's that?
That's what you do with a compass.
So this is the compass postulate.
Taken together, postulates one, two and three allow you to use compass and straight edge
as your tools of construction and these are called, not surprisingly, the Euclidean tools.
Postulate four says all right angles are equal to one another.
So what Euclidean is saying here is if you have a line standing on a line so that the
adjacent angles are equal, and hence you form the right angle, and somewhere over on the
other part of the plane you have a line standing on a line so that the adjacent angles are
equal so that there's a right angle, then he postulates that these two right angles
are equal to one another.
He doesn't have to prove it.
This is just a posture.
He will accept this as a self-evident truth and what this does is it gives him a uniform
standard for the plane.
A right angle over here equals a right angle over here and that will be very important
in his development.
The fifth postulate is quite different from the first four.
It's much wordier.
It says this, when a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the interior angles
on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines if produced indefinitely
meet on that side on which the angles are less than the two right angles.
Obviously, this is way more complex just to state it.
It's kind of complicated compared to the nice succinct statement, all right angles are equal.
This is a different ball game.
It certainly requires a picture.
So let me show you the picture for postulate five.
We got a straight line AB, we have another straight line CD, and we have a line falling
upon them, EF.
Now I'll look at the interior angles on the same side, so I'm going to look at alpha and
beta there between the two lines, that's what interior means, and to the right of EF.
And what this postulate says is if alpha plus beta, those two angles sum to less than two
right angles, then AB and CD meet to the right on that side.
This is sometimes called the parallel postulate.
Let's call that because Euclid needs this whenever he's going to develop his theory
of parallels later in book one.
But you know that's actually a misnomer, it's not a parallel postulate.
We said parallel lines are those that never meet.
Here he's giving a condition that guarantees that the lines do meet.
And so if there was any justice in the world this should be called the non-parallel postulate.
Well those are his postulates, the five of them, and then he gives five what he calls
common notions.
These are still things he's going to accept without proof.
These are pretty general statements such as common notion one, things which are equal
to the same thing are equal to one another.
Common notion two, if equals be added to equals, the holes are equal.
Common notion three, if equals be subtracted from equals, the remainers are equal.
Common notion four says things which coincide with one another are equal to one another.
This was a little peculiar in its content.
He seems to be saying this, that if you have two objects which can be made to coincide
perfectly so that they're kind of carbon copies of each other, then they coincide, then they
are equal in all respects.
Their angles are equal, their sides are equal, their perimeters are equal, their areas are
equal, they are identical.
And finally common notion five, the last, the hole is greater than the part, he says.
This will be his way to get at inequalities, and there's lots of those in Euclid's elements.
We're going to see some inequalities always come out of common notion five.
All right, so he's got his definitions, he's got his postulates, he's got his common notions,
the foundations are ready to go, and now he's going to start proving theorems.
I sometimes think at this point, if it were I who was doing this, I'd freeze.
What do you do?
Where do you start?
First theorem going to be, well fortunately Euclid didn't freeze, here it is, proposition
1.1, and this is how we usually write it, with a Roman numeral one, meaning the first
book, and then the Hindu-Arabic one, meaning the first proposition.
So this is the first proposition of the first book, the first thing Euclid proves, on a
finite straight line, he shows you how to construct an equilateral triangle.
So let me take a look at this argument.
We'll start with any segment AB, so there it is, and his job is to put an equilateral
triangle up there.
Euclid says, all right, with center A and radius AB, construct a circle, now can he
do this?
Sure, remember postula 3, so if you give me any center and any radius, I'll make a circle.
So he can cite postula 3 to justify that circular arc.
So he started.
Now he says, let's center B be where your circle is centered, and AB be the radius,
and construct a circle.
Again that's postula 3 being invoked, and you get the second circle.
Euclid let's C be the point where those two arcs intersect, up there.
He then draws line AC and BC.
So we draw these two lines, now can you do that?
Yeah, that's postula 1.
You give me two points, I'll draw a line between them, which is exactly what he's done here.
So in this fashion, he has constructed this figure.
Now he has to show that it's an equilateral triangle.
But that's pretty easy, because Euclid now says, look, AC and AB are equal because they're
radii of that first circle he drew, that BC and AB are equal because they're radii of
the second circle he drew.
But if AC equals AB, and BC equals AB, then it's also true that AC equals BC by common
notion one.
Things equal to the same thing, or equal to each other.
And so AB equals BC equals AC, all three sides of this triangle are the same, the triangle
is equilateral, and that's his proof.
So he's got A theorem proved.
Now I said there's 465 theorems, so there's 464 more to do, and we're not going to do
them all.
We're going to have to start skipping through some of book one.
So let me hit some high points in the remainder of the book.
Proposition one-four, the fourth proposition, is what we call the side-angle-side congruent
scheme.
It's a way to show triangles are congruent, side-angle-side.
You might remember this if you have triangle ABC and triangle DEF.
Suppose they both have a side A on the bottom, they both have a side of length B to the left,
and the angle at A is alpha, the angle at D is alpha.
So you have two sides and the included angle of one triangle equal two sides and the included
angle of the other.
Then we say by side-angle-side, the triangles are congruent, meaning they are equal in all
respects.
They could be made to coincide, their areas are equal, their angles are equal, they are
carbon copies.
So now that congruent scheme is out there.
In one-five, he proves that in Isosceles triangles, the angles at the base are equal
to one another.
This is a result, remember, that Thales supposedly had proved.
Now I'm not going to go through Euclid's proof, but I want to show you his diagram.
This is the diagram that accompanies his proof.
There you see the Isosceles triangles, ABC there, AB and AC are the equal sides.
And in the course of the proof, he has to do the constructions that you see on the screen.
Now the diagram thus formed has come to be called the Pones Asinorum, which translates
to the bridge of asses.
And there's kind of an amusing reason why that, where that name came from.
First of all, it sort of looks like a bridge.
If you use your imagination, you could imagine crossing over on BC, the bridge has these struts
below holding it up, so it has a kind of resemblance to a bridge.
But more fundamentally, it is the bridge to the remainder of Euclid.
And after you've done the first four propositions, which aren't too hard, Proposition 1.5 is
a little bit more challenging.
And some people, namely the mathematical asses, could not cross this bridge, could not get
over the Pones Asinorum, and thus enter the remainder of Euclid's elements.
So this was a barrier for some folks.
Let me jump ahead a few more to Proposition 1.8.
This is the side-side-side congruent scheme, SSS.
If you have two triangles, ABC, DEF, they both have a side A, they both have a side B, they
both have a side C, so we have three sides of one respectively equal to three sides of
the other, then these triangles are congruent, identical in all respects.
So now he's got two congruent schemes to work with.
But he's going to use this one in Proposition 1.11.
I'm going to actually give you this proof.
I think this typifies what Euclid is up to.
Proposition 1.11, he says he wants to show you how to draw a straight line at right angles
to a given straight line from a given point on it.
So my picture would be this.
I have a straight line, there's a point D on it.
I want to construct a perpendicular upward at that point.
Now I'm willing to believe there is a perpendicular upward from that point, but I've got to create
it.
I've got to construct it.
Well, what do you do?
Do you get out your protractor?
No.
A lot of these protractors, that's not one of the allowable tools, nor can you use your
cool software program on the computer.
You've got to use compass and straight edge.
So Euclid has to create this perpendicular with compass and straight edge and prove it
is a perpendicular by the definitions that he's given.
So if you think of it that way, this is a little bit more of a challenge than you might
think.
Let's see what he does.
Euclid says, all right, there's my line and my point D. I want to put up a perpendicular
there.
He begins by taking a point A on the line somewhere other than D. So I put it to the
left of D. So he takes a point A. And now what he wants to do is construct a segment
going the other way from D to B equal in length to DA.
So he wants to sort of duplicate that distance in the other direction.
Now how would you do that?
Well, look, you could do this.
Get out your compass, put the center of D, let DA be the radius, and draw a semicircle.
Where it comes around and hits the line again, we'll call that point B. And sure enough,
since you did this with a compass and you're allowed to use compasses by posthumously 3,
DA is the radius, DB is the radius, they're equal.
And so you've constructed the segment DB equal to DA.
Now, Euclid says, on this segment AB, construct an equilateral triangle, ABC.
Can he do that?
Yes.
Remember, Proposition 11 showed you how on a given segment, you could put up an equilateral
triangle.
If you didn't like this, if you challenged Euclid, how do you know you can do this?
He would refer you back to Proposition 11.
So Proposition 111 is certainly being built upon the shoulders of Proposition 11.
He builds the equilateral triangle there.
And then finally, he draws the line CD from C, the vertex of the equilateral triangle,
down to D, that original point, and he does that by postulate 1.
You can draw a line between any two points.
So this is his picture.
And now he's going to have to prove something about this particular construction.
What he says is that triangle ADC, the one on the left, and triangle BDC, the one on
the right, are congruent.
So that's his claim, and he's got to justify it.
Why is that?
Well, look, DA and DB are equal because they're radii.
The two horizontal sides, they were radii.
He knows that AC and BC are equal because you had constructed an equilateral triangle.
Those two sides are equal.
And finally, CD is equal to itself.
It's the common side to the two triangles.
So if you look at the left and right triangle, we have equal side horizontally, equal side
oblique, equal vertical, side, side, side will give you congruence.
So indeed, triangle ADC is congruent to triangle BDC.
And that means that angle ADC must equal angle BDC, which I will call theta.
So these common angles, these are equal, theta and theta on either side.
At this point, Euclid's just about done because now he says that means CD is perpendicular
to AB.
Why is that?
Well, remember what the definition was of perpendicularity.
This is where he has to go back to his definition.
And definition 10 said that when a straight line standing on a straight line makes the
adjacent angles equal to one another, each of these angles is right, and the straight
line standing on the other is called a perpendicular to that on which it stands.
It's just what he's got here, theta on one side, theta on the other.
This is a perpendicular.
That's what he claimed.
He's constructed a perpendicular to a line at a point on it, QED, a very nice bit of
Euclidean mathematics, typifying his careful reasoning, his reliance on previous propositions
and his basic definitions and postulates.
From there, more theorems are coming.
I'm just going to mention one last one.
We'll jump ahead a few.
Proposition 120 is this.
It says in any triangle, two sides taken together in any manner are greater than the
remaining one.
This is an inequality.
Something's greater than something.
This is sometimes called the triangle inequality.
The idea is, if I draw the picture here, you've got a triangle.
Let's say the sides are AB and C. Any two of these added together is more than the third.
Let's say we'll take A plus B, those two, add up to be more than C. This would be the
triangle inequality applied to those sides.
Now, as you might guess, he proves this using that common notion five.
The whole is greater than the part, and that figures in the proof.
I'm not going to give the proof.
It's actually rather sophisticated.
Even classical times, the Epicurean philosophers criticized this proof.
They said, wait a minute, this proof isn't even necessary.
Anybody knows the two sides of a triangle are longer than the third side.
As a matter of fact, even an ass knows this, said the Epicureans.
Why bother proving this?
Here's what they meant.
If you took a donkey, and you put the donkey at one vertex of the triangle, and you put
the donkey's food at the other side, the donkey knows that it's much quicker to just
go straight alongside C than to go around by A plus B.
The donkey knows that those two sides are more than the third, so the donkey would go
straight to the food.
The Epicurean said, why even bother proving such a thing?
It's just too obvious.
Many centuries later, a Greek commentator named Proclus, who was a fan of Euclid's
elements, he wrote a treatise about Euclid's elements.
He took up Euclid's side of the argument, and Proclus said, no, no, we have to prove
this.
This is Euclid's very mission, was to prove things, even if they seem self-evident.
Here's his words.
Proclus said, yes, yes, granting that the theorem is evident to sense perception.
It is still not clear for scientific thought.
Many things have this character, for example, that fire warms.
This is clear to perception, but it is the task of science to find out how it warms.
And so maybe the triangle inequality is evident even to an ass, but why is it true?
That is Euclid's mission, and that Euclid accomplished beautifully.
Now with this, we are deep in the book one of the elements.
We're going to stop this lecture here, but I'll be back to pick up more results, including
the great Pythagorean theorem and its converse, the theory of parallels, and lots of other
things that come up later in this great masterpiece.
