In the previous lecture, I introduced Euclid's elements.
We saw his definitions, his postulates, his common notions, and took a tour through some
of the results in the first half of book one.
Such things as his side angle, side congruent scheme, his side, side, side congruent scheme,
and the triangle inequality.
What I want to do in this lecture is continue our journey through Euclid to see more results
about triangles and their extended family, the polygons, and see if we can get through
to book six for a quick tour.
Proposition 26 of book one are the remaining congruent schemes, the angle side angle and
the angle angle side congruent schemes, the ASA and the AAS as we would call them.
That gives Euclid his full complement of congruence schemes, ways to show triangles are congruent,
this is a critical feature of his geometry.
And then in Proposition 127, he changes radically because he's now for the first time going
to introduce the concept of parallels.
Remember he had defined parallels back at the beginning of book one, but he had not mentioned
them ever since.
The first 26 propositions have nothing to do with parallels.
It was as if he was holding them in the wings, but now parallels are going to come to play
an important role in his geometry.
The first place where this happens is the next proposition, Proposition 127.
Here's the diagram that comes with it.
You see line AB, line CD, a line crossing through these, transversal as it's called,
and two angles alpha and beta, these are called the alternate interior angles.
Proposition 127 says this, if alpha equals beta, then AB is parallel to CD.
If the alternate interior angles are congruent, we would say then the lines are parallel.
And so for the first time parallelism is mentioned and Euclid proves this particular theorem.
But it's not this theorem I want to focus on, it's 129, two propositions later, he addresses
the converse.
So we have the same diagram, but remember with converses we're going to interchange hypothesis
and conclusion, so 129 reads this way, if AB is parallel to CD, then alpha equals beta.
Then the alternate interior angles are the same.
This is an important landmark in the development of book one because this is the first time
Euclid uses postulate five.
Remember we saw the postulates, that fifth one was kind of wordy, kind of complicated,
and in fact Euclid avoided using it up until this proposition.
The other postulates, the common notions, he used them willy nilly, but postulate five
he was sort of holding at bay until he couldn't hold it at bay any longer, and he needed it
here in 129, and it turns out once he used it he sort of couldn't give it up because
for the whole rest of book one he uses it in every subsequent proposition except proposition
31.
So once it has hit the stage it runs pretty much center stage all the way.
Well, let me show you how he proves 129.
He's going to use, as I said, the parallel postulate five, and let me just remind you
what that says.
When a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the interior angles on the same
side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on that
side on which the angles are less than the two right angles, a real mouthful.
The picture remember was this, EF falling on lines AB and CD, and the postulate said
if alpha plus beta is less than two right angles, then AB and CD will meet to the right.
That is going to get used in his proof of proposition 129.
Now, here's how he does it, 129.
This is the theorem, remember assume the lines are parallel, AB and CD are parallel, show
that the alternate interior angles are equal.
His plan of attack is an interesting one because he's going to prove this by contradiction.
Now we haven't seen one of those before in Euclid, but he was a master of proof by contradiction,
the so-called indirect proof.
Now that works is, you assume AB is parallel to CD, but suppose that alpha is not beta,
suppose the conclusion isn't true.
If the conclusion is supposed to be that alpha is beta, Euclid assumes it isn't.
And from this, if he can derive a contradiction, then the rules of logic allow him to reject
that assumption that alpha is different from beta, and the conclusion would be, as he
wishes, alpha equals beta.
So he says, look, if alpha is not equal to beta, either alpha is bigger or smaller, and
it really doesn't matter which, the proof goes the same in either direction.
So let me just assume that alpha is smaller than beta.
That's why they're not equal.
So we assume alpha is less than beta.
Now next to beta there along the line CD, I'm going to put in angle gamma.
If alpha is less than beta, and you add gamma to both, then alpha plus gamma is certainly
less than beta plus gamma.
You've just increased both of these by gamma, the inequality remains the same.
But beta plus gamma are the two angles around a straight line, and so they sum to two right
angles.
So now we have this scenario where you have line AB, you have line CD, you have this line
cutting across, and alpha plus gamma, that is the two angles interior between the two
lines on one side of the transversal, these sum to less than two right angles.
Well, postulate five guarantees that lines AB and CD therefore must meet to the right.
That's what the postulate says happens, and so Euclid is justified in making that conclusion.
But wait a minute, the lines AB and CD were assumed to be parallel, and by applying postulate
five here, I've just concluded that they must meet.
This is a contradiction.
The one thing we know about parallels is they never meet.
And so we have reached a contradiction to the parallelism of AB and CD.
That allows me to refute the original supposition that Euclid made in this proof by contradiction.
He started out by saying suppose alpha is not beta, uh-uh, that's not true, conclusion
alpha is beta, and the indirect proof is complete.
It's a very nice argument.
It employs this proof by contradiction technique as well as the first appearance of postulate
five.
And so now he knows if you have parallel lines cut by a third, the alternate interior angles
are equal.
Now a few propositions later, he proves a very important result using this.
Proposition 132, the angles of a triangle must sum to two right angles.
Remember we mentioned that Thaley supposedly did this long, long before Euclid, but here's
a proof that we do have from Euclid's elements.
So he's got a triangle ABC, he's got to show that alpha plus beta plus gamma adds up to
exactly two right angles.
Now do you do this?
Through the point C, he says, let's start by drawing a parallel to AB.
So he constructs a parallel through C, let's call it DE, to the line AB.
And he has shown in earlier works, earlier propositions, how to do this with a compass
and straight edge.
So let's just go with him and put in that parallel.
Now DE is parallel to AB, we have lines cutting through, so I'm going to be able to employ
proposition 129 just proved.
And this Euclid does.
Now if I look at the two parallels, AB and DE, and I think of CA as being the transversal
cutting through them, I then know that angle alpha down there has as its counterpart the
equal angle DCA.
That's going to be an alpha I put it in.
Likewise DE and AB are parallel, but now I think of BC as being the transversal cutting
across, therefore angle beta will have as its equal counterpart angle BCE, so that's
going to be a beta up there, so I put that in.
So this is the way the diagram looks now.
Now what I do is look at the line DCE going straight across there.
You see there's an alpha, there's a gamma, there's a beta around one side of the line.
And that means that alpha plus beta plus gamma up there around the point C must add up to
two right angles.
The sum of the angles on one side of the line we would say is 180 degrees, the Greeks would
say two right angles.
And now the proof is done, particularly if you just forget about the alpha and beta up
high there that I put in, let me remove them.
I don't need them anymore.
Away goes the alpha, away goes the beta, and look what I got.
I still conclude alpha plus beta plus gamma is two right angles, but lo and behold those
are the three angles of the original triangle ABC, just as I had hoped the proof is done
thanks to proposition 129, this important result about parallels.
So triangles, angles sum to two right angles, one of the most important results in Euclid's
geometry.
He continues, I'm going to jump ahead to proposition 146, almost done, there's 48 propositions
in book one.
This one's an important one, he shows how on a finite straight line to construct a square
with compass and straight edge.
So you give me a line AB and he wants to put up a square there, how to construct this and
he shows how to do it.
Now this raises an issue, remember the first proposition of book one, the very first thing
he did was construct an equilateral triangle on a segment, the sort of perfect triangle,
three equal sides, three equal angles.
That was how we started book one.
Here he is doing the perfect quadrilateral, four equal sides, four equal angles, but it
takes him all the way to proposition 46 to do this.
Why didn't he do this earlier?
Why didn't he do this back near where he did the equilateral triangle?
The reason, of course, is that squares have parallel sides and you can't do this without
knowing something about how parallels behave and Euclid had put that off to the second
half of book one, therefore this wasn't an option until late in book one.
But he does it, he constructs a square on a given segment and that is going to be real
important when the next proposition comes along.
This is the biggie, proposition 147 and its companion proposition 148 form the climax
of book one.
147 particularly is important.
In right angle triangles it says the square on the side subtending the right angle is
equal to the squares on the sides containing the right angle.
Well you might not recognize that, but that's the Pythagorean theorem.
From right triangles the square on the side subtending the right angle means the square
on the hypotenuse, this equals the squares on the sides containing the right angle.
Now here's a page from an Arabic manuscript that contains a proof of the Pythagorean
theorem, proposition 147.
You can maybe see it there in the diagram, I'm going to put up a diagram in a minute,
a little larger, but the name of this picture has come down to us as Euclid's windmill
diagram.
It kind of looks like a windmill the way this proof works because he takes the right triangle,
puts squares on the legs, square on the hypotenuse, it sort of looks like the blades of a windmill
so the common term for this is the windmill proof.
Now I'm not going to give the proof from Euclid 147, it's a little bit complicated and we
already have proved the Pythagorean theorem a few lectures ago, but let me just suggest
the logical strategy that he adopts to do this great result.
He takes his right triangle, ABC, and he puts a square on the hypotenuse AB.
Now can he do this?
Yes, remember 146, the previous result, he showed you how, given a segment, to construct
the square.
So he's ready for you, he puts the square on the hypotenuse AB and while he's at it,
he puts squares on the other two legs, again, citing Proposition 146, which he has dutifully
proved.
Now the squares I put on the two legs, the square on AC and BC, I've colored in here
blue and green, and that'll be important for the strategy of his proof.
What Euclid does now is through the point C, he constructs a parallel to the left-hand
side of that square on the hypotenuse.
Or another way of thinking of it would be this, drop a perpendicular from C to line
AB and just keep going, it amounts to the same thing.
So I've drawn that line in, this line from C parallel to the left-hand side of the square
on the hypotenuse.
Then using some very interesting geometry, he shows that the area of the blue square
up there on side AC is exactly the same as the area of the rectangle formed to the left
of this line he just drew downward.
In other words, the blue area of the square is the blue area of that rectangle.
Now I'm not going to go through the argument, it involves some congruent triangles, some
interesting propositions, but he shows the blue area equals the blue area.
In an exactly analogous fashion, he shows the green area of the square on BC equals
the green area of the rectangle below, voila.
And now, says Euclid, the sum of the squares on the legs, that is the blue square up there
plus the green square up there, is going to equal the blue rectangle below plus the green
rectangle below, but look at the picture, the blue area plus the green area on below
add up to the square on the hypotenuse.
And by that subdivision proof, he establishes that blue square plus green square equals
square on the hypotenuse.
It's a very nice argument with this windmill shape formed here.
So that's Proposition 147, maybe the most famous result in Euclid's elements.
But he's not quite done with Book 1, being a good logician, he wants to tidy things
up and get the converse proved, and that's Proposition 148.
So here comes 148, it says this, suppose you have a triangle where the square on one side
is the sum of the squares on the other two, c squared equals a squared plus b squared,
does it follow that that's a right triangle?
That's the converse.
Well that's interesting, the answer is yes, it does.
This proof goes both ways, and Proposition 148 is the proof of the converse of the Pythagorean
theorem.
So let me show you how he proves this.
He begins by constructing segment cd perpendicular to ac.
So along the line ac, I want to put a perpendicular outward from the point c.
Well that's what we saw him do in Proposition 111 in a previous lecture, it's exactly what
he needed, he cites that and builds out a perpendicular cd.
And furthermore he makes it of length a, so the length of cd is exactly the same as the
length of bc.
You could do this by putting the perpendicular outward from c and then using your compass
make a circle whose radius is a, it would cut through b and it would cut around through
d and you would have achieved this result.
Next he says draw ad, this line, and call its length d, little d.
So there's the diagram that he's going to be needing to prove the converse of the Pythagorean
theorem.
Now interestingly he's going to use the Pythagorean theorem in this proof.
He cannot apply the Pythagorean theorem to the triangle on the right, triangle abc, we
don't know that's a right triangle, in fact that's the whole object of this theorem.
But the triangle on the left, triangle acd is a right triangle because you've constructed
that perpendicular there, so I can certainly apply the Pythagorean theorem to that one.
And so Proposition 147, the Pythagorean theorem is applied to right triangle acd to conclude
that d squared, the hypotenuse squared, is a squared plus b squared, the sum of the squares
on the legs.
So that's legit.
Now he says what was my hypothesis, what was my assumption in Proposition 148?
It said that c squared is a squared plus b squared, remember that's how we began this.
Look where I am, d squared is a squared plus b squared, c squared is a squared plus b squared
by assumption, so d squared equals c squared using the theorem's hypothesis.
Well if d squared equals c squared, then d equals c, this would follow.
We would say just take the square root of each of these and you get that result.
So after this little argument employing the Pythagorean theorem as well as the assumptions
in Proposition 148, he has concluded that that length d is the same as the length c.
Let me draw the picture again, there's my picture.
Watch this, the length little d there, I'm going to change to what it equals to c.
So there I made the change and now this is what the picture looks like.
Well at this point Euclid says that those two triangles left and right are congruent.
Triangle a, b, c and triangle a, d, c are congruent, why?
Well look, they both have a side c, they both have a side a, they share a side b, side,
side, side, that congruent scheme comes into play.
These triangles are congruent, which means they are equal in all respects, which means
angle b, c, a, the angle of my original triangle equals its counterpart, angle d, c, a, but
angle d, c, a was constructed to be a right angle, remember, hence angle b, c, a is a
right angle and that means triangle a, b, c with which we began is a right triangle.
That's what the converse of the Pythagorean theorem called for, Euclid did it.
It's a very nice argument, a good way to end book one.
So we've got that great first book of Euclid out of the way.
Let me jump to book three, which is about circles.
This is his result, his book about circles.
Now you say we already did circles, we've drawn circles all the time and it's true he's employed
postulate three to draw circles, but the circles were in the service of theorems about triangles.
Now he wants to just study circles all by themselves and let me just mention one result
from here, the first proposition, proposition three one, he shows you how to find the center
of a given circle.
Now you might say why would I need to do this?
If I have to make a circle there is a center, I put my compass there, I get my radius, I
draw it, I know where the center is, why must I find the center of the circle?
And I think of it this way, suppose you did that, you drew your circle and then you left
the room, the circle was still on the board, you erased the center and somebody else comes
in, can they recover that center, can they figure out where it was?
And yes you can and Euclid gives a very nice proof how that is done.
So there's this result and many other results that show up about circles in book three.
Book four is about constructing regular polygons.
Now a polygon of course is a figure with many sides, many straight lines of size, but a
regular polygon, we need to kind of remember what that means.
Polygon is regular if all of its angles have the same size, the same measure and all of
its sides have the same length.
So it's a perfectly symmetric, beautiful polygon, it's regular.
All the angles are equal, all the sides are equal.
This would have appealed very much to the Greek sense of aesthetics, this kind of symmetry
and we've already seen a few of these.
An equilateral triangle is an example of a regular three-sided polygon and Euclid shows
us how to make this, remember in proposition one-one, he had all constructed an equilateral
triangle on a segment.
A square is a regular quadrilateral, regular four-sided figure, four equal sides, four
equal angles and Euclid had showed us how to do this in proposition one-forty-six.
So we've already seen a couple of regular polygons, but in book four he wants to expand
the repertoire.
Proposition eleven of book four, he shows you how to construct a regular pentagon.
He starts with a circle in which by a lot of sophisticated constructions he figures
out how to inscribe a regular pentagon, five equal sides, five equal angles.
This is not trivial, if you think it's easy, try it.
This takes a bit of doing to try to create a regular pentagon, but he does, with the
Euclidean tools, compass and straight edge.
So that's pretty impressive, but the most impressive result I think is the last proposition
of book four, where he shows you how to construct a regular pentadecagon.
Pentadec is five, deca is ten, a pentadecagon is a fifteen-sided polygon.
He can show you how, with a compass and straight edge, you can construct a regular polygon
with fifteen equal sides, fifteen equal angles.
And let me show you how he does this, let me just give you a sense of this, because this
is quite the climax of book four.
He starts with a circle and picks a point, A, to be the, a vertex.
Now starting at A, using that as a vertex, he shows you how to inscribe within the circle
an equilateral triangle.
So there it is, that's already something he could do, he could do triangles, he puts
in a triangle.
And let me let C be the point on the circle where that first side of the triangle ends.
So AC is the side of the equilateral triangle.
Now he says, also starting at A, inscribe within the circle a regular pentagon.
And remember he could do these two, he could do pentagons, he'd already done that.
So there's a perfect five-sided figure.
And let me let B be the place where the second vertex of the pentagon is, down around the
corner there.
So then we have these two points, B and C, singled out along the circle.
Now what Euclid says is, the arc from A around to B is exactly two-fifths of the circumference,
two-fifths of the way around, because it's two of those five equal sides.
Meanwhile, the arc from A to C is exactly one-third of the circumference, because that's
along one side of the equilateral triangle, that's exactly one-third of the way around.
What he wants to know is, how much of the way around is that little arc from B to C?
Well, that arc from B to C is exactly two-fifths, which is the arc from A to B, minus one-third
the arc from A to C. So the little arc from B to C is exactly two-fifths minus one-third
of the circumference, exactly.
But what's two-fifths minus a third?
Well, you get your common denominator of 15, and that will be six-fifths minus five-fifths,
one-fifth, the arc from B to C is exactly one-fifteenth of the way around.
And so what you do is, you take out your compass, you figure out that length from B to C, you
could draw a little straight segment there if you wanted, use your compass, copy that,
and you can copy it exactly 15 times, and you'll go right around and come back to where
you started from.
You will have made a regular pentadecagon.
It was a brilliant piece of reasoning.
Believe it or not, this whole question of constructing regular polygons will come back
thousands of years later at the end of the 18th century in the work of Carl Friedrich
Gauss, who looks back into Euclid and finds something that Euclid had missed.
And when we get to that, many, many lectures down the road will be constructing regular
polygons again.
This is one of those things that what's old is new again.
Well, let me jump to book six, where Euclid is talking about similar figures.
Now, you remember, similar figures are those with the same shape, but not necessarily the
same size.
You think of them as enlargements of one another.
So I've drawn these two triangles here, and they seem to have the same shape, but they're
not the same size.
So these are going to be similar.
And what Euclid proves in Proposition Four of book six is that if triangles have their
corresponding angles equal, then their corresponding sides are proportional.
They will be similar.
They will have their corresponding sides proportional.
So all you need to do for similar triangles is show that the angles are the same, one
to one.
This angle equals that.
This equals that.
And the sides will be proportional.
So in my picture, the angles in D are the same of these two triangles, and hence A is
to B, that ratio is the same as C to D.
The proportionality means that they're not the same lengths, A and B aren't the same
lengths of C and D, but their ratios are the same.
And that's why similarity is so important.
If you've studied trigonometry, you know that trigonometry is based almost entirely on
the Pythagorean theorem and similar triangles.
Well, Euclid has now gotten the concept of similarity out there.
He's proved that in triangles to show they're similar, all you need to do is show that their
angles are the same.
And then he proves one result, which I'm going to look at, that is an important one involving
similar triangles and is something we're going to need later in the course.
So this would be a good time to take a look at it.
It's proposition eight of book six.
There Euclid says in a right triangle, so a particular kind of triangle, the altitude
to the hypotenuse, creates two smaller right triangles, each similar to one another, and
as a matter of fact, each similar to the original triangle you started with.
So let me show you how this works.
We have a big right triangle, A, B, C.
So there it is.
And let's suppose that the angle at A is called alpha, the angle at C here is called beta.
What I'm going to do is draw the perpendicular from B downward, hitting the hypotenuse at
D. And I claim that in so doing, the triangle to the left of that vertical line, triangle
A, D, B, is similar to the one to the right of the vertical line, triangle B, D, C. That's
pretty easy to do by just tracking down the angles and showing that the two triangles
have exactly the same angles.
Nothing we notice is from the original right triangle, triangle A, B, C, we know that the
angle alpha plus the angle beta plus that right angle up at the top has to be two right
angles.
Any triangles, it's three angles, add up to two right angles.
If I subtract the right angle from each, I know that alpha plus beta, therefore, must
be one right angle, famous result about right triangles.
Well, look at triangle A, D, B, the triangle to the left of the dotted line.
It has a right angle in it, it has an alpha in it, because alpha plus beta is a right
angle, the other angle there has to be beta.
And so I can fill in angle A, B, D up there as a beta.
While we're at it, look at angle D, B, C, the one right next to the beta I just filled
in.
Well, that's the right angle minus beta, we'll fill in that angle D, B, C, that must
be an alpha.
And so this is how the picture has to break down for right triangles.
If the two angles are alpha, beta, so are those two angles up top.
And that means the triangles are similar because they have the same angles.
Each of the triangles, A, D, B, B, D, C, and for that matter, the original triangle have
an alpha angle, a beta angle, and a right angle.
And so they're similar.
And I can use that in the following sense.
If I have my right triangle here, I've drawn the perpendicular downward, let's suppose
it splits the hypotenuse.
This perpendicular splits the hypotenuse into two chunks, two pieces, one of which is of
length X and the other of which is of length Y.
So here comes the altitude down from the right angle to the hypotenuse, splitting the hypotenuse
into X and Y. And suppose the altitude has height H, then I've just shown that the two
triangles, the blue one on the right, the green one on the left, are similar.
They're not the same size, but they're the same shape.
And by the similarity, a proportionality follows that's going to be real important.
Namely, in the green triangle, the long leg X is to the short leg H, in exactly the same
ratio as in the blue triangle, the long leg H is to the short leg Y.
If you then cross multiply this equation, X over H equals H over Y, cross multiply,
you'll get that H squared is X, Y, a famous result about perpendicular to the hypotenuse
in a right triangle.
And we'll see this again later in the course.
Well, with that, I'm done with book six.
Interestingly, in the next book, book seven, Euclid is going to change entirely.
We're going to go off in a completely different direction.
It's really quite amazing and quite beautiful as he takes up the phenomenal subject of number
theory.
Stay tuned.
