This is his result, his book about circles.
Now you say we already did circles, we've drawn circles all the time and it's true he's employed
postulate three to draw circles, but the circles were in the service of theorems about triangles.
Now he wants to just study circles all by themselves and let me just mention one result
from here, the first proposition, proposition three one, he shows you how to find the center
of a given circle.
Now you might say why would I need to do this?
If I have to make a circle there is a center, I put my compass there, I get my radius, I
draw it, I know where the center is, why must I find the center of the circle?
And I think of it this way, suppose you did that, you drew your circle and then you left
the room, the circle was still on the board, you erased the center and somebody else comes
in, can they recover that center, can they figure out where it was?
And yes you can and Euclid gives a very nice proof how that is done.
So there's this result and many other results that show up about circles in book three.
Book four is about constructing regular polygons.
Now a polygon of course is a figure with many sides, many straight lines of size, but a
regular polygon, we need to kind of remember what that means.
Polygon is regular if all of its angles have the same size, the same measure and all of
its sides have the same length.
So it's a perfectly symmetric, beautiful polygon, it's regular.
All the angles are equal, all the sides are equal.
This would have appealed very much to the Greek sense of aesthetics, this kind of symmetry
and we've already seen a few of these.
An equilateral triangle is an example of a regular three-sided polygon and Euclid shows
us how to make this, remember in proposition one-one, he had all constructed an equilateral
triangle on a segment.
A square is a regular quadrilateral, regular four-sided figure, four equal sides, four
equal angles and Euclid had showed us how to do this in proposition one-forty-six.
So we've already seen a couple of regular polygons, but in book four he wants to expand
the repertoire.
Proposition eleven of book four, he shows you how to construct a regular pentagon.
He starts with a circle in which by a lot of sophisticated constructions he figures
out how to inscribe a regular pentagon, five equal sides, five equal angles.
This is not trivial, if you think it's easy, try it.
This takes a bit of doing to try to create a regular pentagon, but he does, with the
Euclidean tools, compass and straight edge.
So that's pretty impressive, but the most impressive result I think is the last proposition
of book four, where he shows you how to construct a regular pentadecagon.
Pentadec is five, deca is ten, a pentadecagon is a fifteen-sided polygon.
He can show you how, with a compass and straight edge, you can construct a regular polygon
with fifteen equal sides, fifteen equal angles.
And let me show you how he does this, let me just give you a sense of this, because this
