He's going to use, as I said, the parallel postulate five, and let me just remind you
what that says.
When a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the interior angles on the same
side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on that
side on which the angles are less than the two right angles, a real mouthful.
The picture remember was this, EF falling on lines AB and CD, and the postulate said
if alpha plus beta is less than two right angles, then AB and CD will meet to the right.
That is going to get used in his proof of proposition 129.
Now, here's how he does it, 129.
This is the theorem, remember assume the lines are parallel, AB and CD are parallel, show
that the alternate interior angles are equal.
His plan of attack is an interesting one because he's going to prove this by contradiction.
Now we haven't seen one of those before in Euclid, but he was a master of proof by contradiction,
the so-called indirect proof.
Now that works is, you assume AB is parallel to CD, but suppose that alpha is not beta,
suppose the conclusion isn't true.
If the conclusion is supposed to be that alpha is beta, Euclid assumes it isn't.
And from this, if he can derive a contradiction, then the rules of logic allow him to reject
that assumption that alpha is different from beta, and the conclusion would be, as he
wishes, alpha equals beta.
So he says, look, if alpha is not equal to beta, either alpha is bigger or smaller, and
it really doesn't matter which, the proof goes the same in either direction.
So let me just assume that alpha is smaller than beta.
That's why they're not equal.
So we assume alpha is less than beta.
Now next to beta there along the line CD, I'm going to put in angle gamma.
If alpha is less than beta, and you add gamma to both, then alpha plus gamma is certainly
less than beta plus gamma.
You've just increased both of these by gamma, the inequality remains the same.
But beta plus gamma are the two angles around a straight line, and so they sum to two right
angles.
So now we have this scenario where you have line AB, you have line CD, you have this line
cutting across, and alpha plus gamma, that is the two angles interior between the two
lines on one side of the transversal, these sum to less than two right angles.
Well, postulate five guarantees that lines AB and CD therefore must meet to the right.
That's what the postulate says happens, and so Euclid is justified in making that conclusion.
But wait a minute, the lines AB and CD were assumed to be parallel, and by applying postulate
five here, I've just concluded that they must meet.
This is a contradiction.
The one thing we know about parallels is they never meet.
And so we have reached a contradiction to the parallelism of AB and CD.
That allows me to refute the original supposition that Euclid made in this proof by contradiction.
