In the previous lecture, I introduced Euclid's elements.
We saw his definitions, his postulates, his common notions, and took a tour through some
of the results in the first half of book one.
Such things as his side angle, side congruent scheme, his side, side, side congruent scheme,
and the triangle inequality.
What I want to do in this lecture is continue our journey through Euclid to see more results
about triangles and their extended family, the polygons, and see if we can get through
to book six for a quick tour.
Proposition 26 of book one are the remaining congruent schemes, the angle side angle and
the angle angle side congruent schemes, the ASA and the AAS as we would call them.
That gives Euclid his full complement of congruence schemes, ways to show triangles are congruent,
this is a critical feature of his geometry.
And then in Proposition 127, he changes radically because he's now for the first time going
to introduce the concept of parallels.
Remember he had defined parallels back at the beginning of book one, but he had not mentioned
them ever since.
The first 26 propositions have nothing to do with parallels.
It was as if he was holding them in the wings, but now parallels are going to come to play
an important role in his geometry.
The first place where this happens is the next proposition, Proposition 127.
Here's the diagram that comes with it.
You see line AB, line CD, a line crossing through these, transversal as it's called,
and two angles alpha and beta, these are called the alternate interior angles.
Proposition 127 says this, if alpha equals beta, then AB is parallel to CD.
If the alternate interior angles are congruent, we would say then the lines are parallel.
And so for the first time parallelism is mentioned and Euclid proves this particular theorem.
But it's not this theorem I want to focus on, it's 129, two propositions later, he addresses
the converse.
So we have the same diagram, but remember with converses we're going to interchange hypothesis
and conclusion, so 129 reads this way, if AB is parallel to CD, then alpha equals beta.
Then the alternate interior angles are the same.
This is an important landmark in the development of book one because this is the first time
Euclid uses postulate five.
Remember we saw the postulates, that fifth one was kind of wordy, kind of complicated,
and in fact Euclid avoided using it up until this proposition.
The other postulates, the common notions, he used them willy nilly, but postulate five
he was sort of holding at bay until he couldn't hold it at bay any longer, and he needed it
here in 129, and it turns out once he used it he sort of couldn't give it up because
for the whole rest of book one he uses it in every subsequent proposition except proposition
31.
So once it has hit the stage it runs pretty much center stage all the way.
Well, let me show you how he proves 129.
