He started out by saying suppose alpha is not beta, uh-uh, that's not true, conclusion
alpha is beta, and the indirect proof is complete.
It's a very nice argument.
It employs this proof by contradiction technique as well as the first appearance of postulate
five.
And so now he knows if you have parallel lines cut by a third, the alternate interior angles
are equal.
Now a few propositions later, he proves a very important result using this.
Proposition 132, the angles of a triangle must sum to two right angles.
Remember we mentioned that Thaley supposedly did this long, long before Euclid, but here's
a proof that we do have from Euclid's elements.
So he's got a triangle ABC, he's got to show that alpha plus beta plus gamma adds up to
exactly two right angles.
Now do you do this?
Through the point C, he says, let's start by drawing a parallel to AB.
So he constructs a parallel through C, let's call it DE, to the line AB.
And he has shown in earlier works, earlier propositions, how to do this with a compass
and straight edge.
So let's just go with him and put in that parallel.
Now DE is parallel to AB, we have lines cutting through, so I'm going to be able to employ
proposition 129 just proved.
And this Euclid does.
Now if I look at the two parallels, AB and DE, and I think of CA as being the transversal
cutting through them, I then know that angle alpha down there has as its counterpart the
equal angle DCA.
That's going to be an alpha I put it in.
Likewise DE and AB are parallel, but now I think of BC as being the transversal cutting
across, therefore angle beta will have as its equal counterpart angle BCE, so that's
going to be a beta up there, so I put that in.
So this is the way the diagram looks now.
Now what I do is look at the line DCE going straight across there.
You see there's an alpha, there's a gamma, there's a beta around one side of the line.
And that means that alpha plus beta plus gamma up there around the point C must add up to
two right angles.
The sum of the angles on one side of the line we would say is 180 degrees, the Greeks would
say two right angles.
And now the proof is done, particularly if you just forget about the alpha and beta up
high there that I put in, let me remove them.
I don't need them anymore.
Away goes the alpha, away goes the beta, and look what I got.
I still conclude alpha plus beta plus gamma is two right angles, but lo and behold those
are the three angles of the original triangle ABC, just as I had hoped the proof is done
