Well that's what we saw him do in Proposition 111 in a previous lecture, it's exactly what
he needed, he cites that and builds out a perpendicular cd.
And furthermore he makes it of length a, so the length of cd is exactly the same as the
length of bc.
You could do this by putting the perpendicular outward from c and then using your compass
make a circle whose radius is a, it would cut through b and it would cut around through
d and you would have achieved this result.
Next he says draw ad, this line, and call its length d, little d.
So there's the diagram that he's going to be needing to prove the converse of the Pythagorean
theorem.
Now interestingly he's going to use the Pythagorean theorem in this proof.
He cannot apply the Pythagorean theorem to the triangle on the right, triangle abc, we
don't know that's a right triangle, in fact that's the whole object of this theorem.
But the triangle on the left, triangle acd is a right triangle because you've constructed
that perpendicular there, so I can certainly apply the Pythagorean theorem to that one.
And so Proposition 147, the Pythagorean theorem is applied to right triangle acd to conclude
that d squared, the hypotenuse squared, is a squared plus b squared, the sum of the squares
on the legs.
So that's legit.
Now he says what was my hypothesis, what was my assumption in Proposition 148?
It said that c squared is a squared plus b squared, remember that's how we began this.
Look where I am, d squared is a squared plus b squared, c squared is a squared plus b squared
by assumption, so d squared equals c squared using the theorem's hypothesis.
Well if d squared equals c squared, then d equals c, this would follow.
We would say just take the square root of each of these and you get that result.
So after this little argument employing the Pythagorean theorem as well as the assumptions
in Proposition 148, he has concluded that that length d is the same as the length c.
Let me draw the picture again, there's my picture.
Watch this, the length little d there, I'm going to change to what it equals to c.
So there I made the change and now this is what the picture looks like.
Well at this point Euclid says that those two triangles left and right are congruent.
Triangle a, b, c and triangle a, d, c are congruent, why?
Well look, they both have a side c, they both have a side a, they share a side b, side,
side, side, that congruent scheme comes into play.
These triangles are congruent, which means they are equal in all respects, which means
angle b, c, a, the angle of my original triangle equals its counterpart, angle d, c, a, but
angle d, c, a was constructed to be a right angle, remember, hence angle b, c, a is a
right angle and that means triangle a, b, c with which we began is a right triangle.
That's what the converse of the Pythagorean theorem called for, Euclid did it.
It's a very nice argument, a good way to end book one.
So we've got that great first book of Euclid out of the way.
Let me jump to book three, which is about circles.
