is quite the climax of book four.
He starts with a circle and picks a point, A, to be the, a vertex.
Now starting at A, using that as a vertex, he shows you how to inscribe within the circle
an equilateral triangle.
So there it is, that's already something he could do, he could do triangles, he puts
in a triangle.
And let me let C be the point on the circle where that first side of the triangle ends.
So AC is the side of the equilateral triangle.
Now he says, also starting at A, inscribe within the circle a regular pentagon.
And remember he could do these two, he could do pentagons, he'd already done that.
So there's a perfect five-sided figure.
And let me let B be the place where the second vertex of the pentagon is, down around the
corner there.
So then we have these two points, B and C, singled out along the circle.
Now what Euclid says is, the arc from A around to B is exactly two-fifths of the circumference,
two-fifths of the way around, because it's two of those five equal sides.
Meanwhile, the arc from A to C is exactly one-third of the circumference, because that's
along one side of the equilateral triangle, that's exactly one-third of the way around.
What he wants to know is, how much of the way around is that little arc from B to C?
Well, that arc from B to C is exactly two-fifths, which is the arc from A to B, minus one-third
the arc from A to C. So the little arc from B to C is exactly two-fifths minus one-third
of the circumference, exactly.
But what's two-fifths minus a third?
Well, you get your common denominator of 15, and that will be six-fifths minus five-fifths,
one-fifth, the arc from B to C is exactly one-fifteenth of the way around.
And so what you do is, you take out your compass, you figure out that length from B to C, you
could draw a little straight segment there if you wanted, use your compass, copy that,
and you can copy it exactly 15 times, and you'll go right around and come back to where
you started from.
You will have made a regular pentadecagon.
It was a brilliant piece of reasoning.
Believe it or not, this whole question of constructing regular polygons will come back
thousands of years later at the end of the 18th century in the work of Carl Friedrich
Gauss, who looks back into Euclid and finds something that Euclid had missed.
And when we get to that, many, many lectures down the road will be constructing regular
polygons again.
This is one of those things that what's old is new again.
Well, let me jump to book six, where Euclid is talking about similar figures.
Now, you remember, similar figures are those with the same shape, but not necessarily the
same size.
You think of them as enlargements of one another.
So I've drawn these two triangles here, and they seem to have the same shape, but they're
