be one right angle, famous result about right triangles.
Well, look at triangle A, D, B, the triangle to the left of the dotted line.
It has a right angle in it, it has an alpha in it, because alpha plus beta is a right
angle, the other angle there has to be beta.
And so I can fill in angle A, B, D up there as a beta.
While we're at it, look at angle D, B, C, the one right next to the beta I just filled
in.
Well, that's the right angle minus beta, we'll fill in that angle D, B, C, that must
be an alpha.
And so this is how the picture has to break down for right triangles.
If the two angles are alpha, beta, so are those two angles up top.
And that means the triangles are similar because they have the same angles.
Each of the triangles, A, D, B, B, D, C, and for that matter, the original triangle have
an alpha angle, a beta angle, and a right angle.
And so they're similar.
And I can use that in the following sense.
If I have my right triangle here, I've drawn the perpendicular downward, let's suppose
it splits the hypotenuse.
This perpendicular splits the hypotenuse into two chunks, two pieces, one of which is of
length X and the other of which is of length Y.
So here comes the altitude down from the right angle to the hypotenuse, splitting the hypotenuse
into X and Y. And suppose the altitude has height H, then I've just shown that the two
triangles, the blue one on the right, the green one on the left, are similar.
They're not the same size, but they're the same shape.
And by the similarity, a proportionality follows that's going to be real important.
Namely, in the green triangle, the long leg X is to the short leg H, in exactly the same
ratio as in the blue triangle, the long leg H is to the short leg Y.
If you then cross multiply this equation, X over H equals H over Y, cross multiply,
you'll get that H squared is X, Y, a famous result about perpendicular to the hypotenuse
in a right triangle.
And we'll see this again later in the course.
Well, with that, I'm done with book six.
Interestingly, in the next book, book seven, Euclid is going to change entirely.
We're going to go off in a completely different direction.
It's really quite amazing and quite beautiful as he takes up the phenomenal subject of number
theory.
Stay tuned.
