Now can he do this?
Yes, remember 146, the previous result, he showed you how, given a segment, to construct
the square.
So he's ready for you, he puts the square on the hypotenuse AB and while he's at it,
he puts squares on the other two legs, again, citing Proposition 146, which he has dutifully
proved.
Now the squares I put on the two legs, the square on AC and BC, I've colored in here
blue and green, and that'll be important for the strategy of his proof.
What Euclid does now is through the point C, he constructs a parallel to the left-hand
side of that square on the hypotenuse.
Or another way of thinking of it would be this, drop a perpendicular from C to line
AB and just keep going, it amounts to the same thing.
So I've drawn that line in, this line from C parallel to the left-hand side of the square
on the hypotenuse.
Then using some very interesting geometry, he shows that the area of the blue square
up there on side AC is exactly the same as the area of the rectangle formed to the left
of this line he just drew downward.
In other words, the blue area of the square is the blue area of that rectangle.
Now I'm not going to go through the argument, it involves some congruent triangles, some
interesting propositions, but he shows the blue area equals the blue area.
In an exactly analogous fashion, he shows the green area of the square on BC equals
the green area of the rectangle below, voila.
And now, says Euclid, the sum of the squares on the legs, that is the blue square up there
plus the green square up there, is going to equal the blue rectangle below plus the green
rectangle below, but look at the picture, the blue area plus the green area on below
add up to the square on the hypotenuse.
And by that subdivision proof, he establishes that blue square plus green square equals
square on the hypotenuse.
It's a very nice argument with this windmill shape formed here.
So that's Proposition 147, maybe the most famous result in Euclid's elements.
But he's not quite done with Book 1, being a good logician, he wants to tidy things
up and get the converse proved, and that's Proposition 148.
So here comes 148, it says this, suppose you have a triangle where the square on one side
is the sum of the squares on the other two, c squared equals a squared plus b squared,
does it follow that that's a right triangle?
That's the converse.
Well that's interesting, the answer is yes, it does.
This proof goes both ways, and Proposition 148 is the proof of the converse of the Pythagorean
theorem.
So let me show you how he proves this.
He begins by constructing segment cd perpendicular to ac.
So along the line ac, I want to put a perpendicular outward from the point c.
