thanks to proposition 129, this important result about parallels.
So triangles, angles sum to two right angles, one of the most important results in Euclid's
geometry.
He continues, I'm going to jump ahead to proposition 146, almost done, there's 48 propositions
in book one.
This one's an important one, he shows how on a finite straight line to construct a square
with compass and straight edge.
So you give me a line AB and he wants to put up a square there, how to construct this and
he shows how to do it.
Now this raises an issue, remember the first proposition of book one, the very first thing
he did was construct an equilateral triangle on a segment, the sort of perfect triangle,
three equal sides, three equal angles.
That was how we started book one.
Here he is doing the perfect quadrilateral, four equal sides, four equal angles, but it
takes him all the way to proposition 46 to do this.
Why didn't he do this earlier?
Why didn't he do this back near where he did the equilateral triangle?
The reason, of course, is that squares have parallel sides and you can't do this without
knowing something about how parallels behave and Euclid had put that off to the second
half of book one, therefore this wasn't an option until late in book one.
But he does it, he constructs a square on a given segment and that is going to be real
important when the next proposition comes along.
This is the biggie, proposition 147 and its companion proposition 148 form the climax
of book one.
147 particularly is important.
In right angle triangles it says the square on the side subtending the right angle is
equal to the squares on the sides containing the right angle.
Well you might not recognize that, but that's the Pythagorean theorem.
From right triangles the square on the side subtending the right angle means the square
on the hypotenuse, this equals the squares on the sides containing the right angle.
Now here's a page from an Arabic manuscript that contains a proof of the Pythagorean
theorem, proposition 147.
You can maybe see it there in the diagram, I'm going to put up a diagram in a minute,
a little larger, but the name of this picture has come down to us as Euclid's windmill
diagram.
It kind of looks like a windmill the way this proof works because he takes the right triangle,
puts squares on the legs, square on the hypotenuse, it sort of looks like the blades of a windmill
so the common term for this is the windmill proof.
Now I'm not going to give the proof from Euclid 147, it's a little bit complicated and we
already have proved the Pythagorean theorem a few lectures ago, but let me just suggest
the logical strategy that he adopts to do this great result.
He takes his right triangle, ABC, and he puts a square on the hypotenuse AB.
