not the same size.
So these are going to be similar.
And what Euclid proves in Proposition Four of book six is that if triangles have their
corresponding angles equal, then their corresponding sides are proportional.
They will be similar.
They will have their corresponding sides proportional.
So all you need to do for similar triangles is show that the angles are the same, one
to one.
This angle equals that.
This equals that.
And the sides will be proportional.
So in my picture, the angles in D are the same of these two triangles, and hence A is
to B, that ratio is the same as C to D.
The proportionality means that they're not the same lengths, A and B aren't the same
lengths of C and D, but their ratios are the same.
And that's why similarity is so important.
If you've studied trigonometry, you know that trigonometry is based almost entirely on
the Pythagorean theorem and similar triangles.
Well, Euclid has now gotten the concept of similarity out there.
He's proved that in triangles to show they're similar, all you need to do is show that their
angles are the same.
And then he proves one result, which I'm going to look at, that is an important one involving
similar triangles and is something we're going to need later in the course.
So this would be a good time to take a look at it.
It's proposition eight of book six.
There Euclid says in a right triangle, so a particular kind of triangle, the altitude
to the hypotenuse, creates two smaller right triangles, each similar to one another, and
as a matter of fact, each similar to the original triangle you started with.
So let me show you how this works.
We have a big right triangle, A, B, C.
So there it is.
And let's suppose that the angle at A is called alpha, the angle at C here is called beta.
What I'm going to do is draw the perpendicular from B downward, hitting the hypotenuse at
D. And I claim that in so doing, the triangle to the left of that vertical line, triangle
A, D, B, is similar to the one to the right of the vertical line, triangle B, D, C. That's
pretty easy to do by just tracking down the angles and showing that the two triangles
have exactly the same angles.
Nothing we notice is from the original right triangle, triangle A, B, C, we know that the
angle alpha plus the angle beta plus that right angle up at the top has to be two right
angles.
Any triangles, it's three angles, add up to two right angles.
If I subtract the right angle from each, I know that alpha plus beta, therefore, must
