many skewbs.
Why?
Here's the proof.
One to the sixth is a skewb because any sixth power is, well one to the sixth is one, sure.
Two to the sixth, which is 64, is a skewb.
Three to the sixth, which is 729, is a skewb.
Four to the sixth, five to the sixth, six to the sixth, they're all going to be skewbs
and there's infinitely many of these, so voila, there's infinitely many skewbs.
Okay, now why am I doing all this?
Just to show you, that's the easy way to prove there's infinitely many of something.
You just get a list, you get a pattern and just spin them out one after the other.
Euclid doesn't do this.
In his proof of Proposition 20 and Book 9, he doesn't go about it this way because he
didn't have a pattern that generated primes, nor has anyone else found one.
The proof that there's infinitely many primes is considerably more sophisticated, considerably
more subtle, and it has to be, and yet Euclid did it back in Book 9.
His statement was this, he didn't actually say there's infinitely many primes, he said
prime numbers are more than any assigned multitude of prime numbers, which sounds a little bit
confusing, but here's what he means.
No finite collection of primes, that's my assigned multitude.
No finite collection of primes contains all of them.
So if you give me 10,000 primes, they're not all there.
You give me 10 million primes, they're not all there.
We can see that that means there's infinitely many primes.
So this is often called Euclid's proof that there's infinitely many primes.
It's actually his proof that any finite batch of primes can be augmented.
You can find more primes than you already have.
So let me show you how he does this.
Great there.
He says let's take a finite collection of primes.
Let me call them A, B, C, D, up to E. Now there might be 15 there, there might be 15 million
there, I don't know, it's a finite batch, and they're all primes.
And remember now, his object is to show that there's a prime we missed.
That batch does not contain them all, there's some more primes somewhere, and he's going
to have to show where they are, but he doesn't have a nice easy pattern like the skews.
Here's what he says.
I'm going to define a number capital N as follows, multiply all these primes that you've
got, A times B times C, all the way up to E. Now there's finitely many of them, maybe
there's a thousand of them, so this is going to be a gigantic number if you multiply and
mull together, but you can do that because there's only finitely many.
And then add one.
So N is the product of all the primes you've got on the table, A times B times C, up to
E plus one.
