If P divides evenly into N, and P divides evenly into the product from A to B to C up
to E, it divides evenly into the difference of the two.
If a number divides into each of two numbers, it divides into the difference.
A hundred is divisible by five, eighty-five is divisible by five, and the difference between
them, fifteen, is divisible by five.
You can make a dollar out of nickels, a hundred cents out of nickels.
You can make eighty-five cents out of nickels, and you can make the difference, fifteen cents
out of nickels, five divides into those numbers.
So if P divides evenly into N, and it divides evenly into A times B times C up to E, it
divides evenly into the difference between them.
But what's the difference between N and the product of all the original primes?
One.
Remember, N was just one more than that product.
So P would have to divide evenly into one.
But wait a minute, P is a prime.
It can't divide evenly into one because the smallest prime is two.
Remember, the first number you hit is two.
One is a unit, one is not a prime, a prime can't be one, the first prime you hit is two,
so the prime P cannot divide into one.
Therefore, P, in case two, is a different prime than what was on the original list.
If it's a new prime, we have augmented the supply.
And what Euclid then says is, in either case, he has found the prime, not among the original
batch.
The original batch does not exhaust them all.
No finite collection of primes contains all the primes.
There's infinitely many, and that's his proof.
Now you can illustrate this, you can actually see this proof working here, and so let me
do a numerical example to show this in action.
Suppose our original batch of primes, our original collection, what do you call our
finite multitude, were two, three, and five.
There's a prime.
What would we do?
We'd create this number N, which is two times three times five, you multiply them all together
and add one.
Well that's 31.
And that's a prime already, and it's way bigger than the two and the three and the five.
That's what case one was about.
We've created a new prime, 31, not among the originals, two, three, and five, as in
case one, because their product plus one was a prime.
On the other hand, what if the original primes, the original finite multitude, was three, five,
and seven?
Multiply those together and add one to create your number N, three times five times seven
plus one is 106.
