It's a prime.
And what Euclid's argument showed was this always has to happen.
With any composite, as you come down the chain, the process stops, you've got the prime divisor.
And that's what he claimed.
Any composite number has a prime divisor of 7,844,067, has the prime divisor of 3.
So that's a major result.
Now even bigger is in Book 9, when Euclid proves there are infinitely many primes.
This is one of the greatest proofs in all of mathematics, and we'll see it in a minute.
But let me just alert you or preview what's coming.
He's going to have to prove that there's infinitely many primes.
You never run out of these things.
Let me contrast what he's going to do, which we'll see in a minute, with a proof that goes
much more easily to show there's infinitely many of something.
And for this purpose, I'm going to introduce the notion of a skewb, which isn't a serious
notion, but it'll serve my purposes.
So here's my definition.
A whole number is a skewb if it is simultaneously a perfect square, like 25, and a perfect skewb
like 8, 2 times 2 times 2 is 8.
So a number that is both a perfect square and a perfect skewb will be called a skewb.
Now bear with me on this.
Here's an example.
1, pretty trivial.
1 is equal to 1 times 1, so it's a square, and it's equal to 1 times 1 times 1, so it's
a skewb.
64, that's a skewb, because it's 8 times 8, it's a square, and it's 4 times 4 times 4,
it's a skewb.
And 729, that might not be so obvious, but you can try it out.
It's 27 times 27, so it's 27 squared, and it is 9 times 9 times 9, 9 cubed.
So there's some examples of these things, these skewbs.
Now suppose I was trying to prove there's infinitely many of these skewbs.
Remember what we're ultimately going to show is how Euclid shows there's infinitely many
primes, but I'm working with skewbs.
Here's what I observe in order to do that.
For any whole number, n, n to the sixth, n times n times n times n times n, is a skewb,
n times itself, 6 times y, oh look, n to the sixth can be written as something squared.
What would have to be squared to get n to the sixth?
n cubed would have to be squared.
n cubed times n cubed, there's three n's times three n's, six n's all together.
On the other hand, n to the sixth is also something cubed.
What is it cubed?
It's n squared cubed, n squared times n squared times n squared, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, there.
So any sixth power is a skewb because it's a square and it's a cube.
Well with that background, I can now easily prove the theorem that there are infinitely
