Okay, now, two cases appear.
Case one, Euclid says, suppose N itself is a prime, this new number you've created.
Maybe it's a prime, maybe it is.
If so, it's certainly a new prime that isn't in the original batch, because look at it,
it's way bigger than A or B or C up to E individually, and remember you've multiplied
all those original guys together, so you get a much bigger number, and then just for
good measure, you add one.
So N is way bigger than A and B and C and E. So if it's prime, it's a new prime that
wasn't on the list, and you've just augmented your supply.
So that's case one.
Case two is a little trickier.
Maybe N isn't prime, it doesn't have to be.
What if it isn't?
And this number N, A times B times C, up to E, plus one is composite.
I still have to find a new prime, not on the original list.
Where do you find it?
Euclid now says, if N is composite, it has a prime divisor.
By the proposition I proved a minute ago, proposition 31 of book seven.
Any composite has a prime divisor.
If N is composite, sure enough, it must have a prime divisor, which I'm going to call P
prime.
So I cite the earlier result, Euclid, yet again building on his previous results, this
number N, if composite, has a prime divisor P. Now, Euclid says P is not one of the original
primes.
Remember, we're trying to augment the batch of primes from A to E. He says P is a new
one.
It's not there.
It can't be.
And why not?
Well, how about this?
Suppose it were.
Suppose this number P that you've just created as a prime divisor of N. Suppose it were one
of the originals, A or B or C, somewhere in that batch.
If it were, then when I multiplied all the primes together, A times B times C, somewhere
along the line, I'd hit P as one of those primes up to E. In that product, P would obviously
divide evenly into that product, because it's actually one of the factors.
It's one of the terms there.
So if P were in the original list, the prime P would divide evenly into that product, A
times B times C up to E. But I just said P was also known to be a prime divisor of N.
That's what we, that's where it came from.
It was a prime divisor of N. So P would divide evenly into N, which is the product of all
the original primes, A times B times C up to E, plus one.
Okay, dramatic conclusion is coming.
