only five of these.
Only five of these can ever exist.
The five regular solids, it's just sometimes called the platonic solids because Plato had
discussed these.
The platonic solids are these.
There is the tetrahedron, as it's called.
Four equilateral triangles is the faces in this triangular pyramid.
There is the cube, six faces, each of which is a square, a regular four-sided figure.
There's the octahedron, eight faces, each of which is an equilateral triangle, perfectly
symmetric.
There is the dodecahedron, 12 faces, each of which is a regular pentagon, and there
is the icosahedron, 20 faces, each of which is an equilateral triangle.
These are the regular solids, and what Euclid proves in proposition 18 of book 13, which
is the last proposition in Euclid's elements, he proves that there can only be these five.
No other regular solids can exist.
These bodies, which would so much appeal to the Greek sense of symmetry and beauty, are
limited in number to these five.
So with that, Euclid's elements comes to an end.
Now, I hope you've enjoyed this three lecture survey of this work.
I'm going to end with a couple of testimonials, two Euclid's elements.
One of them is from the math historian, Ivor Thomas.
It's a little bit long, but let me read this to you.
Thomas said this, a feature which cannot fail to impress a modern mathematician is the perfection
of form in the work of the great Greek geometers.
This perfection, which is another expression of the same genius that gave us the Parthenon
and the plays of Sophocles, is found equally in the proof of individual propositions and
in the ordering of those separate propositions into books.
It reaches its height, perhaps, in the elements of Euclid.
I would certainly agree with this, except for the perhaps part.
I think it certainly reaches this height.
I hope I've managed to show you the proof of the individual propositions, or at least
the few of them, and how these were so beautifully ordered in Euclid's elements.
So Thomas is saying that Euclid's elements is like the Parthenon in theorems, if you will.
I might twist that around and say the Parthenon is like Euclid's elements in stone.
In any event, it's a great legacy of Greek thinking.
While end with a quotation from a great Islamic mathematician, Jamal ibn Al-Kifty, who looked
at Euclid's elements and found much, much to his liking, Al-Kifty wrote many, many centuries
after Euclid had lived that, nay, there was no one, even of later date, who did not walk
in his footsteps.
Now Kifty is saying what I think is demonstrably true, we are all the disciples of Euclid.
