In our previous two lectures, we've surveyed the first six books of Euclid's Elements,
where he does his playing geometry.
Now there's a big change.
In books 7, 8, and 9, Euclid investigates number theory.
A lot of people that have heard of Euclid's Elements aren't aware that it's a great
number theoretic text as well as being a great geometry text.
Now, number theory is the study of the properties of the whole numbers, the counting numbers
like 5, 11, and 28.
It seems like the simplest sort of mathematical entities.
As a matter of fact, number theory is one of the hardest subjects in all of mathematics.
And its first great early incarnation is in Euclid's Elements.
Now, because he's going to a whole different subject, he's got to give new definitions.
He's got to start off with number theoretic definitions, and let me just share a few of
these with you.
His first is this.
He says, a unit is that by virtue of which each of the things that exist is called one.
I think most of us agree that's pretty confusing.
What in the world does that mean?
For our purposes, let's just say one, the number one, is a unit.
Actually, I shouldn't call it the number one.
To Euclid, one isn't a number.
It's a unit.
And definition two says a number is a multitude composed of units.
So for Euclid, the first number, the smallest number is two.
One is something else, a unit.
In Proposition 2 of Book 7, Euclid proves the Euclidean algorithm.
He introduces and proves this is a method for finding the greatest common divisor of
two numbers, the GCD as it's called, the greatest number that divides into both.
So if I wanted the GCD of 12 and 20, what I'm asking is what's the biggest number that
commonly divides into both 12 and 20?
That's easy.
That's four.
You don't need any special algorithm for that.
But if I said what's the GCD of 110,207 and 2,295,820, you're lost.
How in the world do you do this?
How do you find the greatest common divisor of those two giant numbers?
Well, Euclid shows you.
It's called the Euclidean algorithm.
It's central to all number theoretic books even to this day.
If you pick up any of modern number theory books right away, they're going to be proving
and using Euclid's algorithm from so long ago.
By the way, the answer is the GCD is 191, and I did that with Euclid's algorithm.
He then defines a prime number.
