Well that's not a prime.
So now we're in case two.
So 106 has a prime divisor.
Two divides, is a prime that divides evenly into 106, and it's not among the originals.
The originals were three, five, and seven in this example B, and the prime I created
that divided into 106 is not among these.
It can't be.
That's what Euclid proves in case two.
So either way, whether this number N is prime or not, he shows you where to get a new prime,
not in your original list.
That's the proof of the infinitude of primes.
G. H. Hardy, a 20th century mathematician of great note, looked at this argument from
Euclid and said, his proof of the infinitude of primes is as fresh and significant as when
it was discovered.
Two thousand years have not written a wrinkle upon it.
This proof to Hardy is just as good as it ever was, and I would have to agree.
People use this proof as a kind of litmus test for someone's mathematical sense of aesthetics.
If you looked at this proof and you say, nah, it doesn't interest me, then maybe you're
just not cut out for math.
But the people that like math will look at this proof of the infinitude of primes done
in this sort of indirect fashion and be just enthralled.
They're the people that should become mathematicians.
You know, I've always struck how different this is from that skewb proof where it was
so easy to find the infinitude of skewbs.
You didn't have that option.
Euclid wasn't blessed like that, but he did it anyway using his great powers of logic.
Well, that is in book nine.
Remember seven, eight, and nine were his books on number theory.
Then as he finishes up through the remaining books, he changes gears again.
Book ten is about something called quadratic surds.
These are rather complicated expressions such as the square root of two plus the square
root of three, square roots embedded within square roots.
And he goes to a great deal of trouble to prove lots of theorems about these.
Books 11 and 12, he ventures into the realm of solid geometry, three-dimensional geometry,
and proves things about solid figures.
And then in book 13, he addresses the regular solids as they are called.
A regular solid is something like a cube.
It is a solid body, so it's three-dimensional.
Its faces are themselves regular polygons, as he addressed in book four, and all the
space angles are equal.
So cube is an example of a regular solid.
It's a beautifully symmetric three-dimensional body.
Now what Euclid does in book 13 is address the regular solids and proves that there are
