In this lecture and the next, we'll meet Archimedes, who is universally acknowledged as the foremost
of the Greek mathematicians.
If I were building a mathematical Mount Rushmore, he'd be there alongside Newton, Euler, and
Gauss.
We'll meet them in later lectures.
Now we want to meet Archimedes.
In this lecture, I want to talk about his life, his works, his personality, and his tragic,
even iconic death.
In the next lecture, we'll actually look at one of his great theorems, where he determines
the area of a circle.
It's a piece of reasoning that's absolutely beautiful.
So we'll see Archimedes in action in the next lecture.
But for now, it's time to look at his life.
Archimedes was born in 287 BC in Syracuse, a city on the island of Sicily.
He's still there in the shadow of Mount Etna.
He apparently lived most all of his life in Syracuse, although there's some evidence
he might have studied at Alexandria.
Remember Alexandria?
The great library was there, the school of mathematics that Euclid had founded.
We think he might have had some contact with that because there is correspondence that
remains in which he writes to the mathematicians at Alexandria, and they seem to know him.
So perhaps he spent some time studying there.
But the fact is that most of his long life was spent in Syracuse.
We know a lot about him as a person due to Plutarch's lives.
Remember Plutarch wrote this massive treatise about the lives of famous Greeks and Romans.
Archimedes was not the subject of any one of these lives, but he figures as a supporting
character in Plutarch's life of Marcellus.
And a lot of the quotations I present in this lecture will be coming from Plutarch.
So Plutarch tells us something about Archimedes as a person, and let me quote a passage.
According to Plutarch, Archimedes would forget his food and neglect his person to that degree
that when he was occasionally carried by absolute violence to bathe or have his body anointed,
he used to trace geometrical figures in the ashes of the fire and diagrams in the oil
on his body, being in a state of entire preoccupation with his love and delight in science.
