the year 212 BC, recall at this time Rome was expanding its borders, Rome was growing,
they had attacked Carthage, they had attacked Greece, and now they were looking at the island
of Sicily and in particular the city of Syracuse.
The Roman general assigned to capture Syracuse was named Marcellus, and of course it was
he that Plutarch was writing about whenever Archimedes gets into the story.
So Marcellus sends troops by land and ships by sea to capture Syracuse, which was right
on the coast, figuring that one way or the other he was going to get over the walls,
get inside, capture the city for the glory of Rome.
However, inside Syracuse was old Archimedes, and he was given the job of trying to defend
his walled city against both the land and sea attacks that were coming from the Romans.
And so Archimedes began creating these devilish weapons of war to keep the Romans out.
Plutarch said all of their Roman efforts were as it would seem, but trifles for Archimedes
and his machines, his armament.
So here come the Romans on the land side, and what happens?
According to Plutarch, when Archimedes began to ply his engines, he at once shot against
the land forces all sorts of missile weapons and immense masses of stone that came down
with incredible noise and violence against which no man could stand.
So the army is marching to the walls, and here come stones and arrows and all sorts of
things from Archimedes, wonderful machines, and the Romans ran away.
So now Marcellus needs another strategy.
So let's send the navy in from the other side.
Well, that didn't work either, because in the meantime, huge poles were thrust out from
the walls over the ships, sunk some by the great weights they let down from on high.
Apparently, the boats would be under the wall, and this big arm would come out with a big
stone on it and just sink the ship, or Plutarch says that other times this claw would come
out over the wall that Archimedes had somehow invented, and it would go down and grab the
ship and then pick it up and shake all the sailors off into the water, which was terrible.
So now the navy had been thwarted as well.
The Romans were not getting anywhere against Archimedes and his weapons.
According to Plutarch, when such terror seized upon the Romans, if they did but see a little
rope or piece of wood from the wall, they turned their backs and fled.
They were just terrified of what was next, what else was coming over this wall.
Plutarch says the Romans, seeing that indefinite mischief overwhelmed them from no visible
