In this lecture and the next, we'll meet Archimedes, who is universally acknowledged as the foremost
of the Greek mathematicians.
If I were building a mathematical Mount Rushmore, he'd be there alongside Newton, Euler, and
Gauss.
We'll meet them in later lectures.
Now we want to meet Archimedes.
In this lecture, I want to talk about his life, his works, his personality, and his tragic,
even iconic death.
In the next lecture, we'll actually look at one of his great theorems, where he determines
the area of a circle.
It's a piece of reasoning that's absolutely beautiful.
So we'll see Archimedes in action in the next lecture.
But for now, it's time to look at his life.
Archimedes was born in 287 BC in Syracuse, a city on the island of Sicily.
He's still there in the shadow of Mount Etna.
He apparently lived most all of his life in Syracuse, although there's some evidence
he might have studied at Alexandria.
Remember Alexandria?
The great library was there, the school of mathematics that Euclid had founded.
We think he might have had some contact with that because there is correspondence that
remains in which he writes to the mathematicians at Alexandria, and they seem to know him.
So perhaps he spent some time studying there.
But the fact is that most of his long life was spent in Syracuse.
We know a lot about him as a person due to Plutarch's lives.
Remember Plutarch wrote this massive treatise about the lives of famous Greeks and Romans.
Archimedes was not the subject of any one of these lives, but he figures as a supporting
character in Plutarch's life of Marcellus.
And a lot of the quotations I present in this lecture will be coming from Plutarch.
So Plutarch tells us something about Archimedes as a person, and let me quote a passage.
According to Plutarch, Archimedes would forget his food and neglect his person to that degree
that when he was occasionally carried by absolute violence to bathe or have his body anointed,
he used to trace geometrical figures in the ashes of the fire and diagrams in the oil
on his body, being in a state of entire preoccupation with his love and delight in science.
So Plutarch here is portraying an absent-minded mathematician.
He forgot to eat, he didn't bathe very much, and he was always being distracted by geometrical
diagrams.
Archimedes maybe wasn't the first absent-minded mathematician, but I can guarantee you he
wasn't the last.
A famous story involving Archimedes has to do with the crown of King Heron.
Heron was the king of Syracuse, the monarch and Archimedes' hometown, and the way the
story goes, he had given his goldsmith some gold to make a crown, a royal crown.
The goldsmith had returned a crown, but the king was suspicious that the goldsmith might
have substituted a lesser alloy for gold.
The challenge to Archimedes was to figure out if this crown was pure gold, Archimedes
couldn't melt the crown down or anything, he had to use it intact and figure out how
to determine its composition.
The story goes Archimedes one day was in the bath, one of those rare occasions apparently
when he did this, and as he lowered himself into the water, the water sloshed out of the
bath.
He realized that in this fashion by lowering the crown into the water, he could eventually
calculate the density of the crown, compare it to the density of gold, and see if in fact
there had been a substitution made.
At this point Archimedes, according to Vitruvius, later writer, moved with the light, left out
of the pool, and going home naked, cried aloud that he had found exactly what he was seeking,
for as he ran he shouted in Greek, Eureka, Eureka, so says Vitruvius.
And here's an artist's rendition of that moment.
Two things are notable here, one is, even though a lot of us have great moments where
we discover things, we usually don't forget to put on our toga, Archimedes was so smitten
with this that he was running around without his clothes on, but secondly this was the
first Eureka moment, a term that has entered the language as a moment of great discovery
and excitement, so there we have it, something from Archimedes.
According to tradition, he would work in, for his diagrams and calculations, he would
work on a sand tray that he carried around with him, a tray with sand in it, he would
smooth it out and then using a stick draw his geometrical diagrams, it was sort of the
laptop computer of its time I guess, and this is where he would do his scratch work, not
having scratch paper as we do.
This is very difficult, imagine trying to do your mathematics on a sand tray, there's
all kinds of things that can happen, the wind could blow away your proof or something, it's
amazing he did all that he did with his sand tray, but here's a picture of Archimedes working
in the sand.
He contributed a whole lot to mechanics, to our understanding of mechanics, he studied
the basic machines like pulleys and levers and screws, just as an example is his famous
statement, give me a place to stand and I will move the earth, and what he's getting
at there is he understood the principle of the lever, the fulcrum, if you had a long enough
arm and you push down you could lift a very great weight, even the earth should you have
a long enough arm to do that.
And his studies of the screw, the machine screw led to the Archimedean water screw for
pumping fluids, now this is a cylinder, a closed cylinder with a spiral inside, and as you
turn the crank the spiral turns and the water rises from a lower to a higher point, this
is still used, this is called the Archimedean water screw, a very nice application.
We have an awful lot of surviving works from Archimedes, we're actually quite fortunate
in that regard that so many early mathematicians their works are lost or contaminated, we have
quite a number of Archimedes works that are still around, let me mention a few of these,
one is a work called On Floating Bodies, this seems to be his work on hydrostatics probably
inspired by the story of the crown, he did a work called On Spirals, he was very much
intrigued with spirals and there's a spiral spinning line that's still around called the
spiral of Archimedes, and he wrote a book called Quadrature of the Parabola, now this
requires a little explanation, a parabola is a curve, we think of it as being the graph
of a quadratic equation, y equals x squared will graph to a parabola, the Greeks didn't
have equations, they thought of the parabola as a conic section, that is if you took a
cone and sliced through it with a plane exactly parallel to one of the sides, it would slice
out one of these parabolas, so that's what a parabola was to the conic section, quadrature
means finding area, so what he was doing here in this book was finding the area under a
parabola, the area under such a curve, now that's not a trivial question at all, nowadays
we do areas by integral calculus, and if you look in this book, quadrature of a parabola
you can see Archimedes anticipating integral calculus, it's not quite there yet, he doesn't
have the notation, he doesn't have the symbolism, but boy is he close, here's somebody who was
ahead of his time, not just by decades or centuries, but by millennia, so that is a
great work indeed, but then I want to mention two in particular, two of his works that are
at the top of the heap, one of them is called measurement of a circle, it's a very short
work, only has three propositions in it, but two of them are real classics, the first is
this, proposition one in measurement of a circle, he asserts that the area of any circle is
equal to a right angle triangle in which one of the sides about the right angle is equal
to the radius, and the other to the circumference of the circle, now this might sound rather
confusing and complicated, this is actually his determination of the area of a circle,
this will be the proposition we prove in the next lecture, so I'll say no more about it
for now, but we'll be back, proposition three, the last proposition in measurement of a circle
says that the ratio of the circumference of any circle to its diameter is less than three
and one seventh, but greater than three and ten seventy firsts, now you recall that the
ratio of the circumference of a circle, the distance around to the diameter, the distance
across is a constant, any two circles have that same ratio, whether it's a big circle
with a big diameter, or a small circle with a small one, the ratio is the same, and that
ratio of circumference to diameter we now denote by pi, that's what pi is, the Greeks
didn't use that, even though that's a Greek letter, they didn't use that symbol, but
they would always talk about the ratio of circumference to diameter, so what this is
saying is c over d, circumference to diameter is pi, and if you just cross multiply that
c is equal to pi d, there's that famous formula from high school, so whenever Archimedes is
talking here about the ratio of circumference to the diameter falling between three and
one seventh and three and ten seventy firsts, what we can see that he's doing is saying
that pi, this constant, lands between three and ten seventy first below, three and one
seventh above, now if you get out a calculator and figure this out as a decimal, what this
means is he has nailed down pi to two decimal places, 3.14, he didn't express it as 3.14,
the Greeks didn't have the decimal system, they had fractions, and so the fractional
expression that he gave would be good enough, but we can see this as sort of a two place
calculation of pi, it's a major advance in geometry, now how did he do this, he did it
by approximating the circle's circumference by the perimeters of inscribed and circumscribed
regular ninety six gons, here's what he did, he took a circle, he wants that circumference
and he put inside it a regular hexagon, regular six sided figure, he could tell the perimeter
of the hexagon, which isn't the circumference of the circle, it's a little too small, but
then he used a mathematical technique that allowed him, if he knew the perimeter of the
hexagon, to double the number of sides to a twelve sided gond, a dodeca gond, and figure
out that perimeter, well a twelve sided figure inside the circle is a little closer to the
circle, then he doubled from twelve to twenty four, doubled from twenty four to forty eight,
from forty eight to ninety six, by the time you have a regular ninety six sided polygon
inside the circle, it's pretty close to the circle, and its perimeter is very close
to the circle's circumference, but it's a little on the small side, he did the same
on the other side, he circumscribed a hexagon, then a twelve gond, then a twenty four, forty
eight and ninety six gond, and now is sort of zooming in from the outside on the circle's
circumference, using that to get his upper estimate, and so by doing this he has managed
to come out with a very accurate estimate of pi so long ago, this technique of doing
this by putting circles in, circumscribed, I mean circumscribed and inscribed polygons
to approximate the circle is called the classical method for approximating pi due to Archimedes.
Now the other great work I want to mention is called On the Sphere and the Cylinder,
and this was really his masterpiece, there he found the volume and the surface area of
a sphere, this is a very sophisticated problem, the volume of a sphere, that's hard, the surface
area, that's hard, nowadays we do these with integral calculus, Archimedes didn't have
that technique and yet he found these results, the big statement of his great result there,
his great theorem is this, and let me read this to you, he says if a cylinder is circumscribed
about a sphere, the cylinder is half as large again as the sphere in volume, and half as
large again as the sphere in surface area, so again we get one of these very wordy kind
of descriptions, at this point you're saying why didn't they just give us a formula for
this, for the surface and the volume of the sphere, well they didn't have algebra, as
I've said many times the Greeks were limited with their tools, at least it would seem to
us, and so if you want to describe a result you have to put it in words, and this was
his description of his great result, when I see one of these I have to ask myself, is
he right, this doesn't look like what I know to be the volume and the surface of a sphere,
is it right, when you ask this question of Archimedes the answer is always yes, he's
always right, it just doesn't maybe sound like it, it takes a little bit of work to
see what he's getting at, so let me show you what this really is saying, this result,
first of all he tells us he's taking a sphere and circumscribing a cylinder about it, so
here's the picture you usually see, there's the sphere, and when you circumscribe a cylinder
that means that you're going to take a cylinder whose radius is exactly the radius of the
sphere, so on the vertical sides of the cylinder it just grazes the sphere, meanwhile its height,
the cylinder's height is the sphere's diameter, so that the circle on the top of the cylinder
touches the top of the sphere, the circle at the bottom of the cylinder touches the bottom,
and that's what it means to circumscribe a cylinder about a sphere, well now what Archimedes
is saying is that the cylinder is half again the sphere in volume and in surface, what
an amazing fact, let's check these out individually, the volume of the cylinder, let's do the
volumes first, the cylindrical volume, now you remember how to find the volume of a cylinder,
you take the area of the base which is a circle times the height, so we usually write that
v sub c the volume of a cylinder is pi r squared the area of the base times h the height, so
that's the cylindrical volume, but this isn't any old cylinder, this is a cylinder whose
height is the diameter of the sphere as it goes from top to bottom, in other words it's
twice the radius, so if I want to modify this formula I'm going to say that the volume
of the cylinder in this case is pi r squared times not h but 2r, if you multiply that out
you get 2 pi r cubed, so the cylinder in question here has volume 2 pi r cubed, now what does
Archimedes say about this, he says this is half again the volume of the sphere in his
sort of verbal description of his result, now what's that mean, here's what he's saying,
the volume of the cylinder is the volume of the sphere plus half the volume of the sphere
again, it's one and a half spheres, you can see it's bigger, he says it's exactly one
and a half of these, now if I know this add together v of s plus half of v of s I get
three halves of v of s, and then if you cross multiply this I'm trying to figure out what
is the volume of the sphere according to Archimedes, you cross multiply and v sub s will be two
thirds of v sub c, is that three halves flips over, so what he's saying is the volume of
the sphere is two thirds the volume of the cylinder but up above we saw the volume of
the cylinder was 2 pi r cubed, and so what he's telling us in our notation is that the
volume of the sphere is two thirds of 2 pi r cubed which is four thirds pi r cubed, is
that right, you bet, do we do it as Archimedes did, no, we do it with calculus, it's a nice
calculus problem but he's spot on, how about the surface, this seems to me even harder,
how in the world do you figure out the surface area of the sphere, well he says it's half
again the surface, he said the surface of the cylinder is half again the surface of
the sphere, so let's see what that's going to tell me, what's the surface area of the
cylinder, if you're going to paint the cylinder what are you going to do, you've got to paint
the circle on top, the circle on the bottom and then the lateral surface of the cylinder
the distance round, so the surface area of the cylinder is the lateral surface plus the
top and bottom circle, now you might remember the formula for the lateral surface of the
cylinder, what you do is you imagine sort of snipping the cylinder up the side and opening
it out, it has height h, it has width, the circumference of the original circle 2 pi
r, so the lateral surface of the cylinder is 2 pi r h, meanwhile there's a pi r squared
circle on the top, a pi r squared on the bottom, so this is the sum that will give me the total
surface area of the cylinder, 2 pi r h plus pi r squared plus pi r squared, but again this
isn't just any old h, the h is 2 r, so my cylindrical surface, s sub c is 2 pi r times
2 r, add those 2 pi r squared together, you get a 2 pi r squared, start collecting terms,
you end up with 4 pi r squared from the first spot plus 2 pi r squared all together, 6 pi
r squared, so that's the surface of the cylinder, that's how much paint you need to paint the
cylinder, now remember what Archimedes said is that this is half again the surface of
the sphere, so that's going to generate a formula for the surface of the sphere in this fashion,
you say the surface of the cylinder is the surface of the sphere plus half the surface
of the sphere, as we saw in the previous example that's going to end up being 3 halves of the
surface of the sphere, cross multiply, flip this over, you get that the surface of the
sphere is two thirds of the surface of the cylinder, but we just said that the surface
of the cylinder is 6 pi r squared, so the surface of the sphere is two thirds of that,
which is 4 pi r squared, is that right, you bet, how do we do it, we do it with calculus,
so Archimedes is right on the money, it's really quite an impressive result, in fact
he stated it in a slightly different fashion, which I like, he said the surface of any sphere
is 4 times its greatest circle, that's almost poetry you know there, the surface of any
sphere is 4 times its greatest circle, and what's he mean by that, well if you wanted
the surface say of a basketball, there's a sphere, what's the surface area, how much
paint would you need to paint that, he says slice through this so as to get the greatest
circle, which you know if this were the earth you'd slice it right through at the equator,
so I slice through there, and then imagine pulling that greatest circle out, and putting
it flat, and taking a second, and a third, and a fourth, and what he has proved is the
surface of the sphere, that's this curved surface in three dimensions, is exactly the
sum of those four flat circles, that's quite amazing, not kind of equal to four of them,
but exactly equal to four, the surface of the sphere is 4 pi r squared, that's Archimedes.
Now he says at some point that these properties were all along naturally inherent in the figures
referred to, he didn't create these, they were always part of the spheres he said, but
remained unknown to those who were before my time engaged in the study of geometry, these
properties were always there, but it took Archimedes to see them, so it was an amazing
mathematical legacy, well in the time that remains let me tell you about his death, which
is a famous story that mathematicians revere, this occurs during the siege of Syracuse in
the year 212 BC, recall at this time Rome was expanding its borders, Rome was growing,
they had attacked Carthage, they had attacked Greece, and now they were looking at the island
of Sicily and in particular the city of Syracuse.
The Roman general assigned to capture Syracuse was named Marcellus, and of course it was
he that Plutarch was writing about whenever Archimedes gets into the story.
So Marcellus sends troops by land and ships by sea to capture Syracuse, which was right
on the coast, figuring that one way or the other he was going to get over the walls,
get inside, capture the city for the glory of Rome.
However, inside Syracuse was old Archimedes, and he was given the job of trying to defend
his walled city against both the land and sea attacks that were coming from the Romans.
And so Archimedes began creating these devilish weapons of war to keep the Romans out.
Plutarch said all of their Roman efforts were as it would seem, but trifles for Archimedes
and his machines, his armament.
So here come the Romans on the land side, and what happens?
According to Plutarch, when Archimedes began to ply his engines, he at once shot against
the land forces all sorts of missile weapons and immense masses of stone that came down
with incredible noise and violence against which no man could stand.
So the army is marching to the walls, and here come stones and arrows and all sorts of
things from Archimedes, wonderful machines, and the Romans ran away.
So now Marcellus needs another strategy.
So let's send the navy in from the other side.
Well, that didn't work either, because in the meantime, huge poles were thrust out from
the walls over the ships, sunk some by the great weights they let down from on high.
Apparently, the boats would be under the wall, and this big arm would come out with a big
stone on it and just sink the ship, or Plutarch says that other times this claw would come
out over the wall that Archimedes had somehow invented, and it would go down and grab the
ship and then pick it up and shake all the sailors off into the water, which was terrible.
So now the navy had been thwarted as well.
The Romans were not getting anywhere against Archimedes and his weapons.
According to Plutarch, when such terror seized upon the Romans, if they did but see a little
rope or piece of wood from the wall, they turned their backs and fled.
They were just terrified of what was next, what else was coming over this wall.
Plutarch says the Romans, seeing that indefinite mischief overwhelmed them from no visible
means, began to think they were fighting with the gods.
And so Archimedes was at least initially successful in keeping the Romans out.
And who knows how long this would have gone, but as the story goes, there was a festival
day at one point when the people in Syracuse, the guards, started drinking a little too much,
let down their vigilance, and the Romans broke in.
They got into the walled city.
So now they're running around through Syracuse.
Archimedes is in there, but he's not paying attention.
He's working on a math problem.
And Plutarch says that Archimedes having fixed his mind upon working out some problem never
noticed the incursions of the Romans, nor that the city was taken.
And so he's busily working on his math problem.
Here come the Romans to attack.
And a soldier unexpectedly coming up to him commanded Archimedes to follow to Marcellus.
So the soldier finds Archimedes and says, you're coming with me back to the general.
Marcellus would have loved to have had Archimedes on his side to invent all these weapons of
war for the Romans.
Here's a mosaic from classical times that shows the scene.
You see the centurion there.
You see Archimedes.
He's actually working on his sand tray, as he did.
And the centurion is saying, come with me back to Marcellus.
Well, according to the story, Archimedes declined to do this before he had worked out his
problem to a demonstration.
No, no, he says, I'm not going with you.
I've got to finish my proof.
Wrong answer, because then the soldier enraged, drew his sword, and ran him through.
And so Archimedes was slain because he wouldn't stop doing his math.
Here's an artist's rendition of this.
Now ever since, mathematicians have talked about this as the great mathematical death.
I mean, what a way to go.
Here you are working on your problem.
You won't give it up until you get your proof, and OK, that costs you your life.
And this story has intrigued people for generations.
There's a little more to it.
Plutarch said that Archimedes is said to have requested his friends and relations that when
he was dead, they would place over his tomb a sphere contained in a cylinder.
So what he asked was, is his memorial the very diagram of the sphere within the cylinder
that had led him to this great result, his real masterpiece, and pretty clearly he saw
it that way as well, that was to be his memorial.
Well then the story goes a few centuries later when Cicero, the Roman orator, is down in
Sicily visiting, and he tells us that amid a jumble of brambles and bushes, I found,
said Cicero, a small column that emerged a little from the bushes, it was surmounted
by a sphere in a cylinder.
So according to Cicero, as he was rooting around in the brambles near Syracuse, he found
the tomb of Archimedes with that very symbol atop.
Then what Cicero said is that he cleaned out the brambles, he tidied up the area, and you
can see this as a kind of homage to the great Archimedes, and perhaps even an apology from
the Roman Cicero to the Greek Archimedes, because after all by then Greek civilization
had been brought under the heel of the Romans, and would never again be quite what it once
had been.
Well, let me finish this with a few words from Plutarch on Archimedes.
Plutarch says, it is not possible to find, in all geometry, more difficult and intricate
questions or more simple and lucid explanations.
No amount of investigation of yours would succeed in attaining the proof, and yet one
scene you immediately believe you would have discovered it by so smooth and so rapid a
path he leads you to the conclusion desired.
According to Plutarch, Archimedes works were next to impossible to imagine you doing, you
never have gotten it until you see how he does it, and then you say, well, yeah, I didn't
figure that out.
Well, no, you wouldn't have figured it out, because you weren't Archimedes.
But Archimedes left behind this wonderful legacy of great results that seemed almost
superhuman.
That's why he's on my Mount Rushmore.
In the next lecture, I'm going to show you one of these results, and you'll see whether
you believe that he smoothly and rapidly led you on a path to the conclusion desired.
