So Plutarch here is portraying an absent-minded mathematician.
He forgot to eat, he didn't bathe very much, and he was always being distracted by geometrical
diagrams.
Archimedes maybe wasn't the first absent-minded mathematician, but I can guarantee you he
wasn't the last.
A famous story involving Archimedes has to do with the crown of King Heron.
Heron was the king of Syracuse, the monarch and Archimedes' hometown, and the way the
story goes, he had given his goldsmith some gold to make a crown, a royal crown.
The goldsmith had returned a crown, but the king was suspicious that the goldsmith might
have substituted a lesser alloy for gold.
The challenge to Archimedes was to figure out if this crown was pure gold, Archimedes
couldn't melt the crown down or anything, he had to use it intact and figure out how
to determine its composition.
The story goes Archimedes one day was in the bath, one of those rare occasions apparently
when he did this, and as he lowered himself into the water, the water sloshed out of the
bath.
He realized that in this fashion by lowering the crown into the water, he could eventually
calculate the density of the crown, compare it to the density of gold, and see if in fact
there had been a substitution made.
At this point Archimedes, according to Vitruvius, later writer, moved with the light, left out
of the pool, and going home naked, cried aloud that he had found exactly what he was seeking,
for as he ran he shouted in Greek, Eureka, Eureka, so says Vitruvius.
And here's an artist's rendition of that moment.
Two things are notable here, one is, even though a lot of us have great moments where
we discover things, we usually don't forget to put on our toga, Archimedes was so smitten
with this that he was running around without his clothes on, but secondly this was the
first Eureka moment, a term that has entered the language as a moment of great discovery
and excitement, so there we have it, something from Archimedes.
According to tradition, he would work in, for his diagrams and calculations, he would
work on a sand tray that he carried around with him, a tray with sand in it, he would
smooth it out and then using a stick draw his geometrical diagrams, it was sort of the
laptop computer of its time I guess, and this is where he would do his scratch work, not
having scratch paper as we do.
