And this story has intrigued people for generations.
There's a little more to it.
Plutarch said that Archimedes is said to have requested his friends and relations that when
he was dead, they would place over his tomb a sphere contained in a cylinder.
So what he asked was, is his memorial the very diagram of the sphere within the cylinder
that had led him to this great result, his real masterpiece, and pretty clearly he saw
it that way as well, that was to be his memorial.
Well then the story goes a few centuries later when Cicero, the Roman orator, is down in
Sicily visiting, and he tells us that amid a jumble of brambles and bushes, I found,
said Cicero, a small column that emerged a little from the bushes, it was surmounted
by a sphere in a cylinder.
So according to Cicero, as he was rooting around in the brambles near Syracuse, he found
the tomb of Archimedes with that very symbol atop.
Then what Cicero said is that he cleaned out the brambles, he tidied up the area, and you
can see this as a kind of homage to the great Archimedes, and perhaps even an apology from
the Roman Cicero to the Greek Archimedes, because after all by then Greek civilization
had been brought under the heel of the Romans, and would never again be quite what it once
had been.
Well, let me finish this with a few words from Plutarch on Archimedes.
Plutarch says, it is not possible to find, in all geometry, more difficult and intricate
questions or more simple and lucid explanations.
No amount of investigation of yours would succeed in attaining the proof, and yet one
scene you immediately believe you would have discovered it by so smooth and so rapid a
path he leads you to the conclusion desired.
According to Plutarch, Archimedes works were next to impossible to imagine you doing, you
never have gotten it until you see how he does it, and then you say, well, yeah, I didn't
figure that out.
Well, no, you wouldn't have figured it out, because you weren't Archimedes.
But Archimedes left behind this wonderful legacy of great results that seemed almost
superhuman.
That's why he's on my Mount Rushmore.
In the next lecture, I'm going to show you one of these results, and you'll see whether
you believe that he smoothly and rapidly led you on a path to the conclusion desired.
