The circle had radius r.
The triangle was this very special one with one side r and base c, the circumference.
Well, here comes a surprise.
How do you prove that the circle equals the triangle?
He does it in a most strange fashion.
He does it using what we'll call double reductio odd absurdum.
Now, reductio odd absurdum, reduction to an absurdity, that's the sort of Latin term
for contradiction.
So he's going to show that this circle equals this triangle by double contradiction.
It's a real surprise for the readers the first time they see this.
They wonder why he's doing this.
Just hang on, because this is beautiful stuff.
So double reductio.
What he does first is, in case one, remember he's going to end up getting two contradictions
here.
First case, suppose the area of the circle is bigger than the area of the triangle.
Now, that's not what he wants to show.
He wants to show the area of the circle equals the triangle, but let's suppose, for the sake
of argument, that the circle is larger.
So let me draw a picture like that.
Here's the circle.
I've drawn it really large, and there's the triangle with sides R and C, and my picture
makes it pretty clear that the circle is bigger.
So this is what the kind of thing he's considering in this case.
All right, now Archimedes says, let's inscribe within the circle, inscribe within the circle,
a square, and then an octagon, and then a 16-gon, and so on, using his second lemma,
until he gets the area of the circle bigger than the area of this inscribed polygon, which
in turn is bigger than the triangle.
So I'm going to say a word about it, but let me show you the picture of how this could
work.
I've put an octagon in there, but it might take more than eight sides.
It might take 800 sides, or who knows what.
In any event, the area of the circle is bigger than the area of the polygon inscribed within
it, which is bigger than the triangle.
Now, can he do this?
Is this legit?
Yeah.
Because remember what the second lemma said, that if you give me the area of the circle,
I can make the area of the inscribed polygon as close as I want, as close as you want.
How close do I want it?
I want it to be closer to the circle's area than that of the triangle.
Remember, the circle was bigger than the triangle, so there was some gap.
The triangle's down here, the circle's up here.
I can do my inscribed polygon so they get as close as I want.
All I need is to make sure the polygon is closer to the circle's area than was the triangle,
as my picture indicates.
So, he's exploited that second lemma.
Okay.
Now what?
Well, look at that circle with the inscribed polygon.
Let's take a look at the apotheon.
Now, you've got to remember, what's that?
Oh, yeah.
The line from the center perpendicularly out to one of the sides of the polygon.
And then there's the radius, which is the distance from the center out to one of the
vertices.
So, I've drawn in the radius here, there comes the apotheon.
So, you can see the two lines going out from the center, the apotheon perpendicular to
