Can you evaluate the integral from 0
to r of the square root of r squared minus x squared dx?
You can do this if you know calculus.
You spend weeks and weeks and weeks doing things like this.
Let me just quickly tell you what happens here.
This comes out to be the anti-derivative is 1 half r
squared times the arc sine of x over r plus 1 half x times
the square root of r squared minus x squared.
And then the calculus, of course,
teaches you to evaluate this between 0 and r.
If I put in r for x, I end up having
to know the arc sine of 1, which is pi over 2.
Everything else cancels out until I get 1 half r
squared times pi over 2.
And the shaded area, therefore, is 1 fourth of pi r squared.
And you finish up by saying that the shaded area is
pi r squared over 4.
Therefore, the whole area of the circle
is 4 of those 4 times pi r squared over 4 is pi r squared.
Now, the details of this aren't so important.
But what's important is that this is a direct attack
on the problem.
I didn't have to eliminate the other candidates.
I went straight at it and got the area of the circle
is pi r squared.
That's what calculus does.
That's why calculus is such a great advance over what came
before.
It gives you this direct assault on problems like this
and so many others.
And it's got another advantage.
What I showed you there, this calculus derivation
in the circular area, is just a bunch of steps.
You just follow the rules from one to the other,
and you can do it.
You don't have to be brilliant like Archimedes
and figure out the roundabout way to do this.
Calculus turns all of us into little Archimedes
who can do these very difficult problems.
So calculus sort of sold itself.
It made a name for itself by arguments
like this that could turn a complicated problem
into a simple one.
But Archimedes was certainly great in spite of the fact
that he was centuries before calculus.
And I'll leave you with a quotation from Voltaire
celebrating the great Archimedes.
Voltaire, in the 18th century, wrote these true words.
Archimedes had at least as much imagination as Homer.
Archimedes was really great.
