But what's this got to do with the formula
that I know for the area of a circle?
It doesn't look like it.
I don't learn it this way.
Well, that's easy to fix.
Look, the area of the triangle, we said, is 1 half cr,
1 half base times height.
But c wasn't just anything, remember.
It was the circumference of the circle.
So c is the circle's circumference.
Now, we've seen that c over d is pi.
So the circumference is pi times the diameter.
But the diameter is 2r.
So c is 2 pi r, famous formula.
Stick that in there where the c is.
And you'll see that what he's telling us
is the area of the circle is 1 half 2 pi r times r.
Cancel the 2s.
Ah, the area of the circle is pi r squared.
That's Archimedes' result in our language.
So if you ever see that area of the circle's pi r squared,
where'd it come from?
Right here, Archimedes' measurement of the circle.
Well, let me conclude with how a modern mathematician
would do this.
How would we determine the area of a circle today?
And in particular, how can we avoid this roundabout method
of double reductioid absurdum by sort of doing it
by eliminating the other cases?
Is there a direct attack and a direct assault
on circular area?
And there is, but it's going to take integral calculus.
Again, we see Archimedes ahead of everybody
as he's sort of anticipating integral calculus.
Now, if you don't know calculus,
just hang on for a minute, because I
want to make a point here about this derivation.
But if you do, you'll recognize some of the symbols.
Let me just show you how this works.
I take a circle.
I would insert the axes.
The origin is there.
Let's say the circle is going to have radius r.
So that's r units out to one end of the radius, r units up.
And if you're doing this with calculus,
you then need the equation of that circular arc, which
you can determine in a pre-calculus course
to be y equals the square root of r squared minus x squared.
Then the calculus argument would say,
let's go after the area of that blue region.
That's sort of the upper quadrant,
a quarter of the circle.
Let's figure that out.
Calculus says that the shaded area is an integral.
It's the integral from 0 to r of y dx.
But y, we said, is the square root of r squared minus x squared.
So the problem as a calculus problem
gets converted to this thing.
