Maybe my verbal description isn't as good, but I can show you this and you can believe
it.
Let's suppose we have a circle, there we go.
Now I'm going to inscribe within it a square.
So I have my blue circle in which I'm putting a square.
Now notice the difference between these two areas is that excess blue around the outside.
And there's kind of a lot of it, right, I didn't, I'm not very accurate here.
My square doesn't fill up the circle very well.
But now what I'm going to do is take twice as many sides, go to an octagon.
You can actually do this with a compass and straight edge, if you wonder how to do it.
You would take the side of the square, you would bisect it, and then put up a perpendicular
and where it hits the circle, you now draw two sides where you had previously one.
So instead of four, you get to eight.
And that process can be repeated to get to the 16 and the 32 and all that.
Anyway, in my picture, there's my circle.
Now I'm putting in an octagon and notice there's still an excess of blue over white.
The circle's a little bigger, but the difference is much smaller.
And what Archimedes needed was the fact that we can make that blue ring on the outside
as small as we want by just repeatedly doubling the number of sides by exhausting the circle
from within.
So if I want the inscribed polygon to be within one half a square inch of the circle, I can
do it by taking enough sides.
If I want it to be within one one millionth of a square inch of the circle, I can do it
by taking enough sides.
I can make the polygon as close as I want to the circle.
Now if you've seen calculus, this certainly sounds like the notion of limits.
What we would say in modern language is the limit of the areas of these polygons is the
area of the circle.
It is approaching it as closely as we want.
One thing we should note though, it never gets there.
There's no polygon whose area is exactly the area of the circle from the inside because
polygons always have straight sides, even if there's millions of them, whereas the circle
is round.
So it's not going to ever reach it, but the important thing is we get as close as we
want.
So the picture I think shows that.
Now let me show it from the other side.
How about the circumscribed approach?
There's my circle.
I'm going to circumscribe about it a square.
So there's the circle and I put the blue square around it.
Now obviously there's excess blue, it's much more area in the square than the circle.
All that blue stuff is the excess.
But now if I go from the square to the octagon, I will see the picture look like this.
There's the circle.
There's the octagon.
Much less excess blue.
I've gotten closer to the circle's area.
Do it again and go to a 16-gon closer yet, 32-gon closer yet.
We have a limiting process going on from the outside.
And so what Archimedes needs is that no matter how small a gap you can make the polygon be
it inscribed or circumscribed within that gap to the circle's area.
All right, those are the preliminaries.
Here we go.
Now we're ready.
The lemmas are out of the way.
Let's see how he does this.
So the proposition, remember, was that the area of the circle equals the area of the triangle.
