And he does.
And here's how.
If the circle's smaller than the triangle,
let me draw the picture where the circle is little
and the triangle is big.
So I make it look like the circle's certainly
smaller than the triangle.
It's that same triangle, r and c, being its dimensions.
And now what Archimedes does is exploit the second lemma
and says that we're going to circumscribe
about the circle of square, then an octagon, then
a regular 16-gon, until the area of the circle
is less than the area of the polygon,
is less than the area of the triangle.
And my picture would show this polygon
surrounding the circle, whose area is certainly
bigger than the circles, but smaller than the triangles.
And here we go again with this lemma.
Remember, the circular area is here.
We said the triangle's bigger than the circle.
And what I want to do is take a polygon surrounding
the circle, circumscribe, until its area gets so close
to the circles that it's less than that level at the triangle.
And that's what we've got.
So that is legitimate via the second lemma.
Back to the circle on the polygon.
Let me draw the radius of the circle, r,
and compare it to the apotheon, as we did in case one.
Now, in this case, the radius goes
from the center perpendicular to the side of the polygon.
It's exactly the same as the apotheon.
You see, in this case, since we're circumscribed,
the radius goes out to the circle.
The apotheon goes out to the polygon,
but it's going out the same distance.
So in this case, h is r.
We don't get an inequality in this case.
But we do when we compare the perimeter of the polygon
to the circumference of the circle, which is bigger.
Again, if you had to take the journey around the polygon
or around the circle, which is the farther walk,
well, because we're circumscribed this time,
the polygonal perimeter is more than the circular circumference.
So p is bigger than c.
All right, from that, we deduce that the area of that polygon
by Archimedes' first lemma is 1 half perimeter times apotheon.
There, that comes again.
But the perimeter, we said, is bigger than c.
The apotheon, h, is equal to r.
So 1 half pH is bigger than 1 half cr.
And 1 half cr is the area of the triangle,
as we saw earlier, 1 half cr.
And now, again, a contradiction is staring you in the face.
Can you see it?
In the line above, we said the area of the polygon
is less than the area of the triangle.
In the line below, we said the area of the polygon
is more than the area of the triangle.
