In the previous lecture, we met Archimedes, a great thinker.
In this lecture, I want to look at a great theorem that he contributed.
We want to look over his shoulder as he determines the area of a circle, one of the most amazing
proofs I know.
Before we get to this, let me say that this lecture, more than any of its predecessors,
is highly mathematical.
The whole lecture, in fact, is going to be devoted essentially to this one proof.
So it's going to be a bit challenging, but here's my pledge.
I will try to break it down into easy-to-follow steps, and the hope is that by the end, you
will understand that you will be able to appreciate this genius who's working before us over whose
shoulder we are looking.
So that's the object.
Let's begin.
The issue, as I said in the previous lecture, is addressed by Archimedes in his work, Measurement
of a Circle, from about 225 B.C.
And it's the first proposition there that I want to look at, and I'll show you that to
you one more time.
Here's what it says.
The area of any circle is equal to a right-angled triangle in which one of the sides about
the right angle is equal to the radius and the other to the circumference of the circle.
It's like a very strange statement here.
What's going on here with all these words?
Well, what he's really saying is that a circular area is the same as that of a particular triangle.
So imagine we have a circle.
Here it is, radius R, and he says, let's build a right triangle.
It's going to have a right angle in it.
There it is.
One of the sides about the right angle is R, the radius, and the other is the circumference
of the circle.
So if you imagined snipping the circle and straightening it out, that's going to be the
other side.
So we have a circle.
We have a triangle.
He says they're equal in area.
Now this strategy is something that the Greeks generally, and our comedies particularly,
would employ.
You want to compare a complicated figure to a simpler one.
We saw this in the last lecture.
Remember when he was looking at the surface area of a sphere, complicated, he says that's
four times the greatest circle within.
Circles are simpler than spheres.
So the complicated spherical surface is cast in terms of the simpler circles.
Or he talked about the volume of the sphere, complicated, and compared it to the volume
of a cylinder, simpler.
So to here, the circle this time is the complicated figure.
He says it's going to equal this triangle, and triangles are much easier than circles.
So this is the way the Greeks would do this, compare the complicated to the simple.
Now I say the triangle simple, but maybe we better stop and make sure we believe that.
What's the area of a triangle?
If I'm going to say the area of the circle equals the area of the triangle, I better
be sure I'm on top of triangles.
Well, that's not hard.
This shows up, guess where, Euclid's elements.
So you thought you were done with Euclid.
He's back again.
He always is.
This is Proposition 41 of Book 1 where Euclid proves this proposition.
He says if a parallelogram have the same base with a triangle and be in the same parallels,
