parallelogram is double of the triangle.
Now again, it's not a formula, but it's a sort of wordy statement, but let's see what
he's getting at.
See, we can unpack this and see what's up.
There's a triangle.
Let's say its height is h, its base is b.
And what Euclid is saying is put it within a parallelogram so that the triangle and the
parallelogram have the same parallels and the same height.
And in this case, I'll just put it inside a rectangle.
There's a nice simple parallelogram.
So the triangle and the rectangle fall within the same horizontal parallels and they have
the same base.
So according to Euclid, Book 1, Proposition 41, the area of that rectangle is double the
triangle, two triangles.
Well the area of the rectangle, that's easy, base times height, so that's two triangles.
And so divide everything by two and what this proposition is saying is the area of a triangle
is one half base times height.
So there's a famous formula we all know, triangular area is half the base times the height.
Where did it come from?
Well if I were asked that, I'd say it comes from Euclid's elements.
But as you can see, it wasn't exactly expressed this way.
Again, the limitations of the Greeks, not having algebra, they had to give you a verbal
statement but you can rather easily see that's what Euclid really was getting at.
Okay so areas of triangles we know.
So back to that one Archimedes was looking at.
Remember he said the circle equals that triangle.
One side is the radius, one side is the circumference.
So what is the area of the triangle?
It's one half base times height.
For that particular triangle, he's talking about the base is C, the circumference, and
the height is R. So the triangle in question has area one half C times R.
And that'll be important to remember as we walk through this proof.
Well now to proceed further, Archimedes needed a pair of preliminary results.
Two things he has to establish, they're not the proof but there are going to be tools
needed in the proof.
Sometimes in mathematics these are called lemmas, L-E-M-M-A, a lemma is something you
prove because you're going to need it later.
And we have two lemmas if you will for this argument.
So let's take a look at these.
The first one involves regular polygons.
We've encountered them before, remember polygons are regular, if all their sides are the same
length, all their angles are the same.
So they're these beautiful symmetrical polygons.
What Archimedes is trying to do in this first lemma is figure out the area of this thing
based on other measurements.
And in particular he wants to introduce something called the apothem.
Now the apothem, that might be a term you're not familiar with, but it is the perpendicular
distance from the center of the polygon to any of the sides.
So what you'd have to do first is find the center of this regular polygon, you could
just draw two diagonals and where they cross will be the center.
And then you go out perpendicularly to any side because of the regularity you have the
symmetry that you can go any direction you want and that length will be the apothem.
So in my picture I've drawn my perpendicular from the center upward and that length is
h.
So the apothem is going to figure in this.
The other thing he's going to need is the perimeter.
Now that is much more familiar, the perimeter of a regular polygon is just the distance
around.
