If you were taking a stroll around the polygon that's how far you would travel.
And so what he is seeking is an expression for the area of the regular polygon in terms
of these two quantities, the apothem, the perpendicular distance out to any side and
the perimeter the distance around.
Now the Greeks knew this, I don't know if modern people are familiar with this but let
me show you what this formula is.
There is my regular polygon, I've drawn in the apothem h and the way to derive this
formula is to draw from that center two lines to two adjacent vertices.
So let me do that there, two dotted lines there that form a little triangle thus formed.
The height of this triangle is h and the base of the triangle, the horizontal side, let
me call that x.
So I've put in a little wedge if you will, a little triangular wedge inside my regular
polygon.
The area of that triangle, well we just saw that from Euclid, the area is one half base
times height, it's going to be one half x times h.
So that's the area of that particular triangle.
Now what you do is you draw other lines emanating from the center to the other vertices.
So there's a second and a third and a fourth, I have an octagon here so I'm going to have
eight of these but it could be any number.
So you've put in lots of little wedges and the bases of each of these triangles thus
formed are the same, x, x, x all the way around because it's a regular polygon, all their
bases are equal.
And so this picture is sort of the decomposition of the regular polygon into the various little
triangles and now what you say is the area of the whole polygon all the way around is
just the sum of the triangular wedges shooting out from the center.
But each of those is the same as this one we did up above, one half xh plus a one half
xh plus a one half xh all the way around until you get to the end, how many ever there are.
So that's the area of my regular polygon and now what I'm going to do is factor out
a one half, every single term in that expression has a one half, I'm going to pull the one
half out to the left and I'm going to factor out an h, every single expression has an apotheon
in it, an h in it, I'm going to factor that out to the right.
And when I do that I'm going to be left with this expression, one half the quantity x plus
x plus x plus x, finally times h, one half out one side h out the other and all those
x's added up in between.
But wait a minute, if you add up all those x's, xxx, you're just going around the polygon
and so the sum in the middle and the parenthesis is just the perimeter.
And so there is the first result we're going to need, the area of a regular polygon, if
I want to put it in words, is one half the product of the perimeter times the apotheon.
So we'll see Archimedes using this in a minute.
But there's another preliminary result he's going to need and it is a little more wordy,
let me state it this way, given a circle you can inscribe within it a square and then double
the number of sides and get a regular octagon.
And then double the number of sides and get a regular 16 gone and continue until the difference
between the circles area and that of the inscribed polygon is as small as we wish.
You can put within a circle a square, 8 gone, 16 gone, as it sort of fills up the circle
from within, you can make the difference between the circular area and the polygonal area as
small as you like.
And you can do the same with circumscribed polygons.
You can put a polygon around the circle, say a square around the circle, then an 8 gone,
an octagon, a 16 gone and sort of approach it from outside in and make the difference
between them in area as small as you wish.
Now this idea is sometimes called the method of exhaustion.
You're exhausting the circle from within, you're exhausting it from without.
And this predates Archimedes.
This was due to a Greek mathematician named Eudoxus from around 370 BC.
Eudoxus introduced the method of exhaustion, which is quite sophisticated, but Archimedes
was the real person that exploited it so nicely.
Now I want to show you a picture of what it is he's saying here.
