the side, the radius out to the corner, the radius of the circle in which this polygon
is inscribed.
Now, look at the picture.
These aren't the same length.
One is shorter, one is longer.
Clearly, the apotheon is shorter than the radius.
Actually, if you look at that little triangle that appeared there, the radius is the hypotenuse
of the right triangle, and the apotheon is a leg, and the hypotenuse is longer than any
leg.
So, what I have observed is, h is less than r.
The apotheon is shorter than the radius.
Okay.
Store that information.
Now, how about let's compare the perimeter of the polygon in there to the circumference
of the circle.
Which is shorter?
Walk around the polygon or walk around the circle, which would be the shorter journey.
Well, since it's inscribed, since your polygon's inside the circle, p, the perimeter of the
polygon, is less than c, the circumference of the circle.
From that, we make this conclusion.
The area of the polygon, remember our committee's first preliminary, it's one-half perimeter
times apotheon.
One-half pH.
So there we're going to explain that.
But wait a minute.
h is less than r, we just said, p is less than c, so one-half pH is less than one-half
cr.
Now, at this point, you're thinking, you know, where's this going?
Is he adrift?
Is there an end to this?
Yes, it's very close, actually.
In fact, it's staring you in the face.
There is a contradiction right in front of you.
I don't know if you see it, but let me show you where this is.
There's trouble here, logical trouble.
Look at the line above, that the area of the polygon is greater than the area of the triangle.
Let me put a circle there.
But what I just showed was the area of the polygon, which is less than one-half cr, which
was the area of the triangle, is less than the area of the triangle.
Look at these two lines.
The area of the polygon is more than the area of the triangle.
The area of the polygon is less than the area of the triangle.
That can't be.
That is a logical contradiction and impossibility.
So what we conclude is by jumping into case one
and deducing all of this, we've reached a contradiction.
Case one is impossible.
Throw it out.
Can't be.
Remember what case one said?
The circle is more than the triangle.
We've just eliminated that.
That's one contradiction.
All right, case two.
Archimedes says, all right, maybe the circle's
smaller than the triangle.
Now, he doesn't want this either.
He's hoping to eliminate this option as well.
