that column is moving toward 336 over 2l.
Seems right.
Now let me put in the equal sign and let's look at the column on the left.
What I see there is x2, x3, x4.
Where are they going?
Well, the original group, x1, x2, x3, x4 is going to l.
If I sort of start at x2, it's still going to l.
x2, x3, x4 are headed toward l.
So the limit on the left side is l.
And thus I have this equation that has emerged by imagining what happens
as you let n go to infinity, as you take more and more terms.
Where is this all headed?
And what I've concluded is it's headed to the expression that l,
whatever that limit is, has to be l over 2 plus 336 over 2l.
Okay, so the end is near.
What I will do is take that equation,
l is equal to l over 2 plus 336 over 2l,
and figure out what l is.
Remember, that was the object.
What is this limit?
Where are these x's going?
So you just solve this as an algebraic expression.
I will bring the l over 2 to the left.
So I'll now have l minus l over 2 is 336 over 2l.
Of course, on the left, l minus l over 2 is l over 2.
So now I have l over 2 is 336 over 2l.
Trying to solve this equation for l.
Cross multiply, and you'll get 2l squared is twice 336.
Trying to solve this for l.
How about we cancel the 2's out of there?
They're gone.
So l squared is 336.
So once l, it's the square root of 336.
These x's have to be going to l,
and we just figured out what l has to be,
the square root of 336.
Heron was right.
This works, and that's why.
It's really quite a nice piece of mathematics.
Now, if you want the general idea,
suppose you want the square root of a.
It doesn't have to be 336.
And you say xn is your approximation
at any stage of the square root of a.
Then what Heron's technique says,
the next approximation will be,
we could write it as x sub n plus 1.
The next one up is xn over 2 plus a.
You always put the thing you're taking the square root of
in the numerator over the double
of your previous estimate over 2xn.
And so the pattern that I have generated
is just exactly this.
xn plus 1 is xn over 2 plus a over 2xn.
And sure enough, as n goes to infinity,
the very same reasoning shows
that those xn's will go to the square root of a.
So this is Heron's square root approximation scheme.
