Well, if you look at the sides there, I'm going to get a z.
Across the bottom, I'm going to get 2y,
and I'm going to go back up and get z.
So I got to take z plus 2y plus z over 2.
Well, that's going to be 2y plus 2z over 2.
You divide out, you just get z plus y.
So the semi-perimeter of the big triangle z plus y.
With that in mind, I can do Heron's formula.
The area of the big triangle, there it is again,
the square root of s times s minus a times s minus b times s minus c.
We just have to carefully insert all the variables here.
s, the semi-perimeter, is z plus y.
Then I got to take that semi-perimeter minus 1 on the side.
So how about z plus y minus z?
Then I got to take z plus y minus 2y,
and then I've got to take z plus y minus the other z.
So that's the pieces of Heron's formula.
Simplify this.
The first parentheses, z plus y, I'll leave that alone.
But look at the second one.
z plus y minus z.
Now, z plus y minus z, that's just a y.
The next one, z plus y minus 2y, is z minus y.
And the last one, z plus y minus z, is a y again.
And so the area of this triangle is the square root of z plus y
times y times z minus y times y.
Multiply the y's together, you get a y squared.
Multiply the z plus y z minus y together,
you get z squared minus y squared.
That's the area of the triangle with Heron.
And now we cash in on all this by equating the two results.
Remember, we found the area of the triangle the ordinary way.
We got it to be xy.
We found it with Heron, and we got it to be the square root of z squared
minus y squared times y squared.
Square both sides of this.
And simplify.
The square on the left is x squared y squared.
The square on the right, the square root disappears,
and you just get z squared minus y squared times y squared.
I see something.
Cancel the y squareds.
And I have x squared equals z squared minus y squared.
Move the y squared over, and you get x squared plus y squared is z squared.
There's the Pythagorean theorem proved as a consequence of Heron's formula.
Ta-da.
Well, with that, we're going to have to end our journey through Greek mathematics.
It's kind of a sad departure.
I love their work.
I'm so impressed with what they could do, how deep they pushed mathematics,
how expertly they advanced the subject, and with such limited tools
without many of the modern mathematical results that we take for granted.
But they did it.
They left a legacy in mathematics that's unsurpassed, the Greeks.
