This will be my last lecture on a Greek mathematician, and for this one I've chosen Heron of Alexandria.
I want to tell you about his work and particularly about his amazing formula for triangular area.
Heron is often called Heron of Alexandria. That's where he worked.
That's that same place which had been so prominent in the history of mathematics where Euclid had been Heron eventually was.
Strangely, we know very little about him. Even though he was much later than Archimedes, we know much less about Heron.
Maybe that's because he didn't have the privilege of being killed by a Roman soldier, but in any event his life is kind of obscure.
We don't even know his dates very well to within decades, but he's often placed at around the year 75.
So let's say we'll go with that for Heron.
Now, I should say that you might see him in the literature called Hero.
So sometimes you'll see references to the mathematician Hero of Alexandria and Hero's formula.
And in case you do, I want to explain what that's about. A friend of mine of Greek extraction explained this.
The Greeks had a famous philosopher named Platon, but Platon, when his name got Latinized, became Plato.
The end disappeared. The very same phenomenon occurred with Heron.
Heron was the Greek mathematician when his name got Latinized. The end dropped off and he became Hero.
So to be consistent, I should either talk about Platon and Heron or about Plato and Hero, but I'm going to talk about Plato and Heron.
Go with that.
I will say this, however. I'm glad that this phenomenon ended, that they stopped dropping the end.
Or otherwise Newton would have become Newton, and that would definitely not have worked.
Well, in any case, what were Heron's achievements?
Well, he had many. They were often of an applied nature rather than a theoretical one.
For instance, he is credited with inventing the Aola pile.
What's that? It's a proto-steam engine.
It was a device, here's a conception of what this looked like.
It was a globe filled with water. You would put heat under it until the water started to boil,
and then there were these two nozzles extending in different directions, and as the water boiled,
the steam would expand, blow out the nozzles, and turn this thing.
And so as you lit the fire under it, eventually it would start spinning very rapidly with steam shooting out.
So it's kind of a little steam engine. Heron apparently did not see that this could be put to great use
and all sorts of things, but at least he invented this. It was a kind of applied science.
He also showed people how to drill a tunnel from both sides of a mountain at once and meet in the middle.
Now, there's an application for you. How in the world do you do this?
And they actually did this in classical times using Heron's directions.
You know, nowadays we're not surprised when they dig the tunnel and it goes from Britain and it goes from France
and they meet exactly somewhere under the English Channel, but we're not talking about the modern world.
Heron didn't have lasers and GPS systems or anything of the sort,
but he had geometry and a brilliant mind, and he explained how to dig such tunnels.
And as I say, they actually did this, so that's neat.
His great work is called the Metrica, and this is where you find the two results I particularly want to tell you about.
This means measurement, and so he was interesting in measuring things, which of course is a good thing to do in applied mathematics.
Interestingly, this complete work was only discovered by somebody named Arshune in Istanbul in a library in the year 1896,
so that this is not something that had been around for thousands of years.
It had been lost and then finally rediscovered just at the end of the 19th century.
Now, there had been references in other works about Greek mathematics that told us essentially what Heron had done,
but it's interesting that the complete work took this long to be uncovered.
It makes you wonder what other great works might be out there in some dusty library somewhere.
But in any case, Heron gave us the Metrica in which appeared his two works I want to talk about,
his square root approximation, how to approximate square roots,
and Heron's formula for triangular area, the star result, the main result of this lecture.
Well, let me start with his square root approximation.
Suppose you want the square root of 336.
Now, in fact, suppose I challenged you to find the square root of 336,
and you immediately pull out your calculator, but no calculators.
You might pull out your table of logarithms, no logarithms.
I'll give you nothing but a stack of paper and a pencil, or maybe a stack of papyrus if we want to be in the spirit of Heron.
How do you do something like this?
How do you come out within a square root approximation without all these advances of logarithms
or calculators or other things that we're so accustomed to?
Well, Heron showed how to do this. This is a really slick argument.
So let me show you how to do the square root of 336 a la Heron.
He says, first of all, you need an estimate. You need a first guess.
And so let me take 18 as my first guess for the square root of 336.
I'm not right, but it's not a bad first guess because if you square 18, 18 times 18 is 324.
Well, that's not 336, but you're in the ballpark.
So that seems like a first guess, a good place to start.
Then Heron's technique shows you how to get a better guess from your first guess.
And he says, as your second estimate, use x2, I will call it, my second estimate,
as x1, my first estimate, divided by 2 plus 336, the number whose square root we seek,
divided by 2 times x1.
So I'm taking my previous estimate over 2 plus 336 divided by the double of my previous estimate.
All right, let's try that. That would be 18 over 2.
Remember, my first guess was 18. So 18 over 2 plus 336 over 2 times 18.
So that's 9, 18 over 2.
And 336 over 2 times 18 is 336 over 36.
And you can divide top and bottom by 12, and you get 28 thirds.
So what I would then decide is my next estimate is 9 plus 28 thirds.
So if you get a common denominator there, you get 55 thirds as my second estimate, as a fraction,
which of course is all the Greeks had to go on.
If you wanted to break it off as to a whole number plus a piece, it turns out to be 18 and 1 third.
So there's your second estimate, 55 thirds, or 18 and 1 third.
So you've sort of refined the first estimate of 18 upward a little bit to 18 and 1 third.
Well, then Heron says, let's get another estimate, a next estimate.
What do you do? We'll call it x3.
And what I will do is take x2, my previous estimate, over 2 plus 336 over twice x2.
Exactly the same process I just did to go from first estimate to second.
I repeat that to go from second estimate to third.
Now, what's going to happen here?
Well, remember, if x3 is x2 over 2 plus 336 over 2x2, we said x2 was 55 thirds from the previous one.
So it's 55 thirds over 2 plus 336 over twice 55 thirds.
Now, the fractions here are a little bit nasty.
You'd have to simplify these and get a common denominator.
But, you know, you're sitting there in the room with your big stack of papyrus.
You can do this by hand.
And when you do, it turns out to be 6049 over 330.
And at that point, I'm going to stop.
I'm saying, good enough, that's my estimate.
If you break it off, you get 18 plus 109 over 330.
That's going to be my estimate of the square root of 336.
So, there it is, estimate the square root of 336 is roughly, I think, 6049 over 330.
And then the question is, well, there's two questions.
Is this any good?
And if it is, why does this work?
What's going on here?
Let me address both of these.
Is this approximation any good?
Is the square root of 336 somewhere near 6049 over 330?
Well, one way to see it would be to square 6049 over 330.
After all, if that's the square root of 336, and I square it, I should get 336, or pretty close.
Well, if you square this, you get 36,590,401 over 108,900.
If I divide this out, this turns out to be 336 plus a little more.
How much?
One over 108,900.
That's awfully close to coming out right where I wanted it, 336.
That's a heck of an approximation.
But if you don't like that, let's convert these to decimals.
Not something the Greeks could have done, but we can.
Heron's estimate of 6049 over 330 converts out as a decimal 18.33030303 forever.
Now, if I get out my calculator and be very non-heronian, but very modern, and punch in the square root of 336,
I get 18.33030278.
If I round this to six places, they're the same.
I am within six places in accuracy.
And it took me two steps in this approximation scheme with Heron.
I guessed x1 is 18.
I refined it once.
I refined it twice.
I got six place accuracy.
That's pretty impressive.
That's Heron's scheme.
Now, the question is, why?
Why does this work?
Can you explain this?
Can you justify this reasoning?
And yes, you can.
Now, it's going to require me to delve into the modern notation of limits,
but bear with me and you can see why this actually works.
Remember what he did?
He said x1 was his first guess.
x2 was x1 over 2 plus 336 over 2x1.
Then x3 was x2 over 2 plus 336 over 2x2.
And x4, if I had gone further, would have been x3 over 2 plus 336 over 2x3,
and on and on and on.
And we just would continue this.
The assertion is, as you do this, your approximations,
x1, x2, x3, x4, should be going to the square root of 336 for some reason.
For a reason, I'm going to show you.
Now, here's what I'm going to say.
Suppose, as n gets bigger and bigger, we usually write it this way,
as n goes to infinity, these x's are going to some limit, which I will call l.
So if I look at x1, then x2, then x3, then x4, and see where they're headed,
they're kind of converging to some limit, l, and I've got to figure out what l is.
Now, if Heron's right, l is the square root of 336.
That's what these things should be tending to.
But that's not at all clear that that's going to work.
So let me show you why, in fact, l is the square root of 336.
So let me put up on the screen here again the steps.
There's x2, there's x1 over 2, plus 336 over 2x1, there's x3, there's x4, on we go.
And remember what we said, that as n gets bigger and bigger,
these xn's are approaching some limit, l, whose identity I need to determine.
What is l?
Here's how you reason it.
Let me look, first of all, at the column just to the right of the equal sign.
So you see that there's x1 over 2, x2 over 2, x3 over 2,
and I want to know where are those heading?
Where are they going?
Well, if x1, x2, x3 are marching to l,
x1 over 2, x2 over 2, x3 over 2, etc., are marching to l over 2.
They're just half of the original terms.
So that limit would be l over 2.
So I'm going to say that that column has to be going to l over 2.
Then we're going to add to it the far right column.
Now where are those going?
Well, I've got 336 over 2x1, then below it, 336 over 2x2,
336 over 2x3.
Where are those headed?
Well, if the x1, x2, x3 are going to l,
that column is moving toward 336 over 2l.
Seems right.
Now let me put in the equal sign and let's look at the column on the left.
What I see there is x2, x3, x4.
Where are they going?
Well, the original group, x1, x2, x3, x4 is going to l.
If I sort of start at x2, it's still going to l.
x2, x3, x4 are headed toward l.
So the limit on the left side is l.
And thus I have this equation that has emerged by imagining what happens
as you let n go to infinity, as you take more and more terms.
Where is this all headed?
And what I've concluded is it's headed to the expression that l,
whatever that limit is, has to be l over 2 plus 336 over 2l.
Okay, so the end is near.
What I will do is take that equation,
l is equal to l over 2 plus 336 over 2l,
and figure out what l is.
Remember, that was the object.
What is this limit?
Where are these x's going?
So you just solve this as an algebraic expression.
I will bring the l over 2 to the left.
So I'll now have l minus l over 2 is 336 over 2l.
Of course, on the left, l minus l over 2 is l over 2.
So now I have l over 2 is 336 over 2l.
Trying to solve this equation for l.
Cross multiply, and you'll get 2l squared is twice 336.
Trying to solve this for l.
How about we cancel the 2's out of there?
They're gone.
So l squared is 336.
So once l, it's the square root of 336.
These x's have to be going to l,
and we just figured out what l has to be,
the square root of 336.
Heron was right.
This works, and that's why.
It's really quite a nice piece of mathematics.
Now, if you want the general idea,
suppose you want the square root of a.
It doesn't have to be 336.
And you say xn is your approximation
at any stage of the square root of a.
Then what Heron's technique says,
the next approximation will be,
we could write it as x sub n plus 1.
The next one up is xn over 2 plus a.
You always put the thing you're taking the square root of
in the numerator over the double
of your previous estimate over 2xn.
And so the pattern that I have generated
is just exactly this.
xn plus 1 is xn over 2 plus a over 2xn.
And sure enough, as n goes to infinity,
the very same reasoning shows
that those xn's will go to the square root of a.
So this is Heron's square root approximation scheme.
Now you can come out of the room with your papyrus.
You've got a way to figure out the square roots by hand.
Well, that's the one result that is in the matrica
that I wanted to mention.
But the even greater one is Heron's formula
for triangular area.
Now, you might say,
why do I need a formula for triangular area?
We've already seen this.
If you have a triangle with base b and height h,
we saw Euclid gave us the formula
that the area of the triangle is 1 half bh.
Why do I need another formula?
It seems like I got this one nailed down.
Ah, no, no, says Heron.
What if you don't have h?
What if you don't know the altitude of your triangle?
For instance, suppose I had this triangle,
five meters on one side,
eight meters on the other,
11 meters across the bottom.
And I want to know its area.
Maybe for tax purposes.
The tax collector's coming.
I've got to know how much area this is.
The formula that the area of a triangle
is 1 half base times height
will do me no good at all here
because I don't have the altitude.
I need some other approach.
And yet, I observe this.
There is an answer.
There is a unique answer.
There is only one area this triangle could have.
And that's because of congruence.
If you had another triangle
that had a side five, a side eight,
and a side 11,
those two triangles would be congruent
by side, side, side from Euclid,
book one, proposition eight.
And what congruence means is
the triangles are identical,
absolutely the same.
They have the same angles,
the same sides,
and the same areas.
And so any other triangle with these dimensions
has the very same area.
The trouble is, I don't know what it is.
I've got to find it.
And that's what Heron's formula will give me.
So, what does Heron do?
How does he give this area?
He says, let's suppose a triangle
has sides A, B, and C,
just arbitrary sides.
I want to figure out the area
knowing the three sides only.
First thing you do is you find
what's called the semi-perimeter.
Now, the perimeter of a triangle
of sides A, B, and C
is just A plus B plus C.
You just go around.
The semi-perimeter is half of that.
So, you take half the perimeter
and you call that S, the semi-perimeter.
A plus B plus C over two.
And then Heron's formula says
the area of the triangle is,
get ready, the square root of S
times S minus A times S minus B
times S minus C.
That can't be right.
I remember the first time I saw this,
I was ninth grade.
We had been studying areas of triangles.
We had just seen the area of the triangles
one-half base times height.
And there was a footnote.
And it said this.
It said, the area of a triangle
can also be found as the square root of S
times S minus A times S minus B
times S minus C.
And I said, that must be a typo
that can't possibly be it.
That's so complicated.
The area of a triangle
surely isn't that sophisticated.
But in fact, that was right.
They didn't show me why it was true
back in ninth grade.
But I later saw that, in fact,
this is right.
This is Heron's formula.
And it's quite amazing.
It's my favorite result from geometry,
just because it's so implausible.
Well, let's go back to our triangle
and see how this works.
Triangle 5, 8, and 11.
So we're back in Heron's day.
We got to figure out the area of that
for the tax collector who's coming around.
What you do first is find the semi-perimeter.
So that's half the perimeter.
So A plus B plus C is 5 plus 8 plus 11.
You divide that by 2.
You get 24 over 2 or 12.
So half the perimeter is 12.
And then Heron's formula says
the area of a triangle is the square root of S
times S minus A times S minus B times S minus C.
S is 12, the semi-perimeter.
A, B, and C are the three sides, 5, 8, and 11.
So you substitute, and you'll get, according to Heron,
the area of the triangle is the square root of 12
times 12 minus 5 times 12 minus 8 times 12 minus 11.
Okay, so you figure this out.
This will be 12 times 12 minus 5, which is 7,
times 12 minus 8, which is 4,
times 12 minus 11 is 1.
You multiply all this together
and you see the area of the triangle is the square root
of 12 times 7 times 4 times 1,
which is the square root of 336.
Now, wouldn't it be nice if I could find
the square root of 336?
Well, Heron could.
That was my previous example.
This is why he needed to approximate square roots
in the metrica, because he runs into them
right here with the area of the triangle.
And so Heron would get to work and show us,
rather quickly, that the square root of 336
is about 6049 over 330.
That would be his area for the tax collector's purposes.
It's a wonderful, wonderful result.
Now, suppose I had this thing.
Suppose I had a quadrilateral, a four-sided figure
that was 10 yards by 17 yards by 25 yards by 24 yards.
I need the area of this.
How do I find this?
Well, actually, there is no unique answer here.
For a quadrilateral, knowing the four sides
is not enough to nail down the area.
I assume you know that.
But if not, just imagine a square,
maybe 5 by 5 by 5 by 5.
It has area 25.
If you were to tilt it,
you'd still have 5 by 5 by 5 by 5
in a thin-looking diamond, which has much less area.
So just knowing the sides of a four-sided figure
does not determine the area.
You need more information.
Three-sided figure, if you know the three sides,
the areas are set by side, side, side.
Four sides, all bets are off.
So if this was my plot of land,
and I walked around 10 yards and 17 yards
and 25 yards and 24 yards, I'm not quite done.
But what I do then is you walk the diagonal.
So I march along that way,
and let's say that came out to be 26 yards.
So now I have the four sides of my quadrilateral
plus a diagonal.
Now I can find the area,
and you do it by just applying Heron's formula
to the triangle that's formed on the left,
whose area is A1, and the one on the right,
whose area is A2.
So let's figure this out.
That triangle on the left has area A1.
I'm going to figure it out via Heron's formula.
I first have to do the semi-parameter.
So there's 10 plus 24 plus 26 over 2.
That comes out to be 60 over 2 is 30.
So the semi-parameter is 30,
and hence A1, the area of the triangle on the left,
is the square root of S times S minus A times S minus B times S minus C.
That'll be the square root of 30.
That was S.
30 minus 10 is 20.
30 minus 24 is 6.
And 30 minus 26 is 4.
So I'm going to have to multiply 30 times 20 times 6 times 4.
Multiply all those together, and you get 14,400.
Take the square root of that,
and I don't need Heron's approximation scheme
because this one comes out perfectly, 120.
Exactly.
So the area of the left-hand triangle is 120.
How about the area of the right-hand triangle?
Well, same thing.
We know three sides.
We first have to figure out the semi-parameter.
17 plus 25 plus 26 over 2 turns out to be 34.
And now you apply Heron's formula for the area,
the square root of S, which is 34, times 34 minus 17,
which is 17, times 34 minus 25, which is 9,
times 34 minus 26, which is 8.
So I got to take the square root of that product.
You multiply it all out.
You get 41,616.
And I don't need an approximation for that either
because the square root of 41,616 is 204.
How amazing.
They came out evenly.
Well, I actually made it out that way.
Well, now I'm done because the area of the quadrilateral
is A1 plus A2.
A1 was 120.
A2 was 204.
Bingo.
324 is the area of that four-sided figure.
And you can imagine if you had a five-sided figure
or a six-sided figure or any polygon,
you just put in enough diagonals
to break it up into some triangles
and apply Heron's formula repeatedly.
Add them up and you got it.
So this is a very useful piece of mathematics.
Now, I'm not going to prove this right now.
We don't have much time.
And actually, Heron's proof is rather complicated.
It's a sophisticated geometry.
I've shown you here the diagram that accompanies it.
You can see the triangle there, ABC.
He sticks a circle inside of it,
draws all these lines all over the place.
It's a sophisticated, complicated piece of geometry.
So we're not going to prove Heron's formula here,
but hang on.
When we get to Isaac Newton,
he had a proof of Heron's formula,
much simpler, and that I will show you.
So you just need to wait a bit
and you'll see Newton's proof of Heron's formula.
Fortunately, it's not Newton's proof of Heron's formula,
but we'll see that.
Okay, I'm not proving it,
but I do want to just show you one last thing
before we leave this great result.
Heron's formula, if you accept this, if you have it,
implies the Pythagorean theorem as a consequence.
Now, we've seen the Pythagorean theorem proved
with the Chinese diagram
with a little cockeyed square within a square.
And I mentioned that Euclid proved the Pythagorean theorem
with the windmill.
Here comes another derivation,
this time using Heron's formula.
So I will be given a right triangle ABC.
There it is.
And let's say the sides are x, y, and z,
and I want to show that z squared is x squared plus y squared.
The Pythagorean theorem, I want to show follows.
Here's what I'll do.
I will extend BC leftward to a point d,
which is exactly y units long,
so that from b to c is the same as from d to c.
They both have length y.
And then I'll draw AD, that line.
I say that line AD will also have length z
because I have two copies of my triangle left and right.
Those two triangles are congruent,
the one on the left, the one on the right, by side angle side.
So the third sides are both z.
So there's the triangle we're going to be looking at.
Now, I want to first find the area of the big guy,
triangle ABD, by the usual formula.
Okay, so the usual formula for area of triangle ABD
is one-half base times height.
The base is 2y, and the height is x.
So, easy enough.
The area of that triangle is one-half 2y times x.
And a little bit of algebra there will reduce that to xy.
So the area of triangle ABD is xy,
and we'll store that information for a minute
and attack the area in a different fashion.
So there's the triangle again, triangle ABD.
Now let's find the area with Heron's formula.
Same triangle, ABD, different attack, different approach.
All right, Heron's formula.
What do I need to do first is find the semi-perimeter.
So I have to take half of the perimeter
around the outside of the big triangle ABD.
Well, if you look at the sides there, I'm going to get a z.
Across the bottom, I'm going to get 2y,
and I'm going to go back up and get z.
So I got to take z plus 2y plus z over 2.
Well, that's going to be 2y plus 2z over 2.
You divide out, you just get z plus y.
So the semi-perimeter of the big triangle z plus y.
With that in mind, I can do Heron's formula.
The area of the big triangle, there it is again,
the square root of s times s minus a times s minus b times s minus c.
We just have to carefully insert all the variables here.
s, the semi-perimeter, is z plus y.
Then I got to take that semi-perimeter minus 1 on the side.
So how about z plus y minus z?
Then I got to take z plus y minus 2y,
and then I've got to take z plus y minus the other z.
So that's the pieces of Heron's formula.
Simplify this.
The first parentheses, z plus y, I'll leave that alone.
But look at the second one.
z plus y minus z.
Now, z plus y minus z, that's just a y.
The next one, z plus y minus 2y, is z minus y.
And the last one, z plus y minus z, is a y again.
And so the area of this triangle is the square root of z plus y
times y times z minus y times y.
Multiply the y's together, you get a y squared.
Multiply the z plus y z minus y together,
you get z squared minus y squared.
That's the area of the triangle with Heron.
And now we cash in on all this by equating the two results.
Remember, we found the area of the triangle the ordinary way.
We got it to be xy.
We found it with Heron, and we got it to be the square root of z squared
minus y squared times y squared.
Square both sides of this.
And simplify.
The square on the left is x squared y squared.
The square on the right, the square root disappears,
and you just get z squared minus y squared times y squared.
I see something.
Cancel the y squareds.
And I have x squared equals z squared minus y squared.
Move the y squared over, and you get x squared plus y squared is z squared.
There's the Pythagorean theorem proved as a consequence of Heron's formula.
Ta-da.
Well, with that, we're going to have to end our journey through Greek mathematics.
It's kind of a sad departure.
I love their work.
I'm so impressed with what they could do, how deep they pushed mathematics,
how expertly they advanced the subject, and with such limited tools
without many of the modern mathematical results that we take for granted.
But they did it.
They left a legacy in mathematics that's unsurpassed, the Greeks.
