draws all these lines all over the place.
It's a sophisticated, complicated piece of geometry.
So we're not going to prove Heron's formula here,
but hang on.
When we get to Isaac Newton,
he had a proof of Heron's formula,
much simpler, and that I will show you.
So you just need to wait a bit
and you'll see Newton's proof of Heron's formula.
Fortunately, it's not Newton's proof of Heron's formula,
but we'll see that.
Okay, I'm not proving it,
but I do want to just show you one last thing
before we leave this great result.
Heron's formula, if you accept this, if you have it,
implies the Pythagorean theorem as a consequence.
Now, we've seen the Pythagorean theorem proved
with the Chinese diagram
with a little cockeyed square within a square.
And I mentioned that Euclid proved the Pythagorean theorem
with the windmill.
Here comes another derivation,
this time using Heron's formula.
So I will be given a right triangle ABC.
There it is.
And let's say the sides are x, y, and z,
and I want to show that z squared is x squared plus y squared.
The Pythagorean theorem, I want to show follows.
Here's what I'll do.
I will extend BC leftward to a point d,
which is exactly y units long,
so that from b to c is the same as from d to c.
They both have length y.
And then I'll draw AD, that line.
I say that line AD will also have length z
because I have two copies of my triangle left and right.
Those two triangles are congruent,
the one on the left, the one on the right, by side angle side.
So the third sides are both z.
So there's the triangle we're going to be looking at.
Now, I want to first find the area of the big guy,
triangle ABD, by the usual formula.
Okay, so the usual formula for area of triangle ABD
is one-half base times height.
The base is 2y, and the height is x.
So, easy enough.
The area of that triangle is one-half 2y times x.
And a little bit of algebra there will reduce that to xy.
So the area of triangle ABD is xy,
and we'll store that information for a minute
and attack the area in a different fashion.
So there's the triangle again, triangle ABD.
Now let's find the area with Heron's formula.
Same triangle, ABD, different attack, different approach.
All right, Heron's formula.
What do I need to do first is find the semi-perimeter.
So I have to take half of the perimeter
around the outside of the big triangle ABD.
