This will be my last lecture on a Greek mathematician, and for this one I've chosen Heron of Alexandria.
I want to tell you about his work and particularly about his amazing formula for triangular area.
Heron is often called Heron of Alexandria. That's where he worked.
That's that same place which had been so prominent in the history of mathematics where Euclid had been Heron eventually was.
Strangely, we know very little about him. Even though he was much later than Archimedes, we know much less about Heron.
Maybe that's because he didn't have the privilege of being killed by a Roman soldier, but in any event his life is kind of obscure.
We don't even know his dates very well to within decades, but he's often placed at around the year 75.
So let's say we'll go with that for Heron.
Now, I should say that you might see him in the literature called Hero.
So sometimes you'll see references to the mathematician Hero of Alexandria and Hero's formula.
And in case you do, I want to explain what that's about. A friend of mine of Greek extraction explained this.
The Greeks had a famous philosopher named Platon, but Platon, when his name got Latinized, became Plato.
The end disappeared. The very same phenomenon occurred with Heron.
Heron was the Greek mathematician when his name got Latinized. The end dropped off and he became Hero.
So to be consistent, I should either talk about Platon and Heron or about Plato and Hero, but I'm going to talk about Plato and Heron.
Go with that.
I will say this, however. I'm glad that this phenomenon ended, that they stopped dropping the end.
Or otherwise Newton would have become Newton, and that would definitely not have worked.
Well, in any case, what were Heron's achievements?
Well, he had many. They were often of an applied nature rather than a theoretical one.
For instance, he is credited with inventing the Aola pile.
What's that? It's a proto-steam engine.
It was a device, here's a conception of what this looked like.
It was a globe filled with water. You would put heat under it until the water started to boil,
and then there were these two nozzles extending in different directions, and as the water boiled,
the steam would expand, blow out the nozzles, and turn this thing.
And so as you lit the fire under it, eventually it would start spinning very rapidly with steam shooting out.
So it's kind of a little steam engine. Heron apparently did not see that this could be put to great use
and all sorts of things, but at least he invented this. It was a kind of applied science.
He also showed people how to drill a tunnel from both sides of a mountain at once and meet in the middle.
Now, there's an application for you. How in the world do you do this?
And they actually did this in classical times using Heron's directions.
You know, nowadays we're not surprised when they dig the tunnel and it goes from Britain and it goes from France
and they meet exactly somewhere under the English Channel, but we're not talking about the modern world.
Heron didn't have lasers and GPS systems or anything of the sort,
but he had geometry and a brilliant mind, and he explained how to dig such tunnels.
And as I say, they actually did this, so that's neat.
His great work is called the Metrica, and this is where you find the two results I particularly want to tell you about.
This means measurement, and so he was interesting in measuring things, which of course is a good thing to do in applied mathematics.
Interestingly, this complete work was only discovered by somebody named Arshune in Istanbul in a library in the year 1896,
so that this is not something that had been around for thousands of years.
It had been lost and then finally rediscovered just at the end of the 19th century.
Now, there had been references in other works about Greek mathematics that told us essentially what Heron had done,
but it's interesting that the complete work took this long to be uncovered.
It makes you wonder what other great works might be out there in some dusty library somewhere.
But in any case, Heron gave us the Metrica in which appeared his two works I want to talk about,
his square root approximation, how to approximate square roots,
and Heron's formula for triangular area, the star result, the main result of this lecture.
Well, let me start with his square root approximation.
Suppose you want the square root of 336.
Now, in fact, suppose I challenged you to find the square root of 336,
and you immediately pull out your calculator, but no calculators.
You might pull out your table of logarithms, no logarithms.
I'll give you nothing but a stack of paper and a pencil, or maybe a stack of papyrus if we want to be in the spirit of Heron.
How do you do something like this?
How do you come out within a square root approximation without all these advances of logarithms
or calculators or other things that we're so accustomed to?
Well, Heron showed how to do this. This is a really slick argument.
