Now, what I want to do is put a circle through the three vertices. I want to circumscribe a
circle about this triangle. Can you do it? Yes. How do we know Euclid? In book four,
proposition five, Euclid shows you how to circumscribe a circle about any triangle. What you do is
you bisect each of the three sides and then draw perpendiculars upward from there. They meet in
a point. That point will be the center of your circumscribed circle. You make the distance from
that point to any vertex, be a radius, draw the circle, bingo, it goes through all three points.
So any triangle can be put inside a circle. Not any quadrilateral can. So there's the special
quadrilaterals, the sickly quadrilaterals, but what it turns out is any triangle is a sickly
triangle. So I put a circle through these points. And now what I'm going to do is imagine the triangle
A, B, C, as if it were a quadrilateral, A, B, C, D, except D is the same point as C. So suppose
it's got four vertices, it just happens the two of them land on top of each other. C is equal to D.
That's what it means by a degenerate case. The four sides degenerate down into three.
Now watch what happens to Brahma Gupta now. The sides will have length A, B, C, and that
extra side has length zero. D is zero because C and D are in the same spot. So one of the sides
is of length zero. When we go to the semi-parameter of the quadrilateral, which is really a triangle,
we will add A plus B plus C plus D over two, but D is nothing, zero. So it just amounts to
adding A plus B plus C over two. In other words, the semi-parameter of the quadrilateral is just
the semi-parameter of the triangle. And now you look at Brahma Gupta's formula, which was that
the area of the triangle, when thought of as a quadrilateral, is the square root of S minus A
times S minus B times S minus C times S minus D, but S minus D is nothing but S minus zero.
In other words, it's just S. And so Brahma Gupta tells me the triangle has area, the square root
of S minus A times S minus B times S minus C times S, and that really should look familiar
because that's Heron's form. So Brahma Gupta's formula yields Herons.
Okay, the Indians also gave us a fabulous numeral system. We still use it. The numerals
in a base 10 system appeared around the year 500. You find them on temples carved on temple
walls in India. And soon thereafter, the zero appeared. And so you can look on one of these
ancient temples and you see, oh, there's a three. You know, there's a seven. I recognize it. And
