So whenever you talk about the Euclidean algorithm or a computer algorithm,
you are paying homage, in a certain sense, to Al-Qarizmi. That's what happened to his name.
Now, Al-Qarizmi, through a process he called restoring and comparing,
could solve linear first-degree and quadratic second-degree equations.
And he did this by transferring them into one of six forms. Now, it seems to us,
if I have to solve linear and quadratic equations, it's two forms, linear and quadratic.
The Islamic mathematicians broke this into six forms because negative numbers,
what we call negative numbers, were forbidden. They were not unknown. They were not considered
legitimate. So if you wanted to solve an equation, it could not have a negative in it.
That required some gyrations, some fancy footwork, to move things around and thus get six forms.
Let me show you the six forms. One type of equation Al-Qarizmi could solve is what he
called squares equal to roots. Now, what's that? How would we write that? Well, squares mean something
like ax squared, a bunch of squares. The root, the square root of x squared is an x, so there's a
bunch of x's. So we would convert this, squares equal roots to ax squared equals bx. So if you
wanted to solve an equation like that, you go to one chapter. But another chapter would be squares
equal to numbers. This is approached differently. Now, what's that going to be? We would write it as
ax squared, some squares, equals c, a number. So that's a different kind of equation. One is roots
equal to numbers. Well, roots would be some x's equal to some numbers. We would write that as bx
equals c, a linear equation. One would be squares and roots equal to numbers. So that would be ax
squared plus bx equals c, a quadratic equation. Squares and roots equals c numbers. But you also
better handle squares and numbers equal roots, ax squared, squares plus c, numbers equals roots bx.
And one more, roots and numbers equal to squares. So that would be bx plus c equals ax squared.
Six different treatments. And we think, boy, that seems like an awful lot of extra work, but
negative numbers could thus be avoided. So for instance, if we had to solve this quadratic,
3x squared minus 5x equals negative 2, we'd be fine with it. The negatives wouldn't bother us.
But if negatives are not allowed, you can't deal with this. This wouldn't have been something
Al Corvizmi would have worked with. Rather, you'd move things around and write it as 3x squared
