We've taken our tour of Greek mathematics, we've met Thales and Pythagoras, Euclid and
Archimedes and Heron, but now it's time to move beyond the classical era and take a look
at some of the mathematics of Islam and particularly the work of Al Quarizmi. Let me give you some
dates. The year 476 Rome fell. This is the date traditionally attached to the end of the Roman
Empire and in 529 Plato's Academy in Athens was closed. This great center of learning for so
many centuries was shut and this marks as well as anything the end of the classical era of Greek
and Roman scholarship. In the year 641 the library at Alexandria burned. No one quite knows how this
happened. It was a great conflagration and so much was lost and I think modern classes wish they
could get in a time machine and go back to 640 and rescue all these documents because we just
don't know what burned up in 641. Well this brings us to the golden age of Islamic science,
scholarship and mathematics usually set between the 8th and 13th centuries. This is the time
period when Islam had grown from its origins and spread across North Africa into Spain,
into Sicily and then spread eastward to India. In this glorious civilization there was a center,
an intellectual center at a place called the House of Wisdom in Baghdad. Baghdad of course in
modern day Iraq. Now the House of Wisdom was like a great university. It was the successor to the
Pythagorean Brotherhood in southern Italy that we talked about to the library at Alexandria in
Egypt. Now the center of mathematics moves to Baghdad to the House of Wisdom. Islamic mathematics I
will say went off in three important directions. Let me address each of these separately. One thing
they did was they studied and translated the great Greek texts. They had imported many of these
back to Baghdad. They read them, turned them into Arabic and found them as fascinating as we all do.
They revered Euclid's elements, they revered Archimedes and there was another text that they
liked quite a lot. This was Ptolemy's work. We haven't mentioned him but he was a Greek
astronomer, Claudius Ptolemy and he had written a great treatise on astronomy called the Syntaxis
Mathematica in Latin of course. This one back to Baghdad was translated in the year 827 and the
Arabic scientists thought this was quite impressive. It was in a sense the astronomical
counterpart of Euclid's elements. It was great. In fact they called it Al Majiste, the greatest.
This was the greatest astronomical treatise they knew. When this Arabic translation goes back to
