plus 2 equals 5x. There's no negatives in that. And now you'd look up the chapter he has on
squares and numbers equal to roots, which is what this is, some squares plus 2 numbers equals 5
roots. And you'd see how to solve it that way. So another one of those strange surprises from
the history of mathematics. Now, I want to give an example of Al Corvizmi in action
while he actually solves a quadratic equation. And I hope this will be illuminating because
it's really quite an impressive piece of work. Here's the problem he gives. What must be the square
which, when increased by 10 of its own roots, amounts to 39? It's expressed verbally. Remember,
algebraic notation is still far in the future. So Al Corvizmi is doing all this verbally,
even as the Greeks had to do their geometry verbally. So this is his problem. And here comes
his solution. Here's what he says to do. And I'll read this to you. It's a bit long, but it's
illuminating. He said, you have the number of roots, which in this case yields 5. Sure,
there were 10 roots. Half of those is 5. This you multiply by itself. The product is 25. Add this
to 39. The sum is 64. Now take the root of this, which is 8, and subtract from it half the number
of roots, which is 5. The remainder is 3. This is the root of the square which you sought.
Well, like so much of this old mathematics, you've got to dig through this to see what
in the world he's doing. And the best way to do that is to look at this geometrically.
So here's the problem again. What must be the square which, when increased by 10 of its own
roots amounts to 39? We would write it this way. x squared, there's the square. I increase it by 10
of its own roots, so I add 10x to it. And this should be 39. So you can see that what he's solving
in our notation is x squared plus 10x equals 39. Now how can we approach this as a geometry problem
to see what he's up to? Well, let me take a square. And let's say it's x by x. So its area is x squared.
So the area of that square is the x squared. Now remember what he says to do. You have the
number of roots, which in this case yields 5. So we've got the 10 roots, the 10x's. So what I'm
going to do is sort of augment this square by going over 5 units and going down x units,
and there's a blue rectangle there. It's 5 units across x units down, so its area is 5x.
So there's half the roots over there. Then you do the same thing below. I drop down from
the square 5 units, go across x units, and there's another 5x. So if you look at the picture as it
