the Renaissance Europe and is turned back into Latin they needed to translate Al Majiste and it
became the Al Majiste. Nowadays we talk about Ptolemy's great work, the Al Majiste, but Ptolemy
never called it that. That's what happens when the language sort of goes around in a circle. The
Al Majiste was a work preserved and studied by the Islamic mathematicians. Second thing they did was
absorb Indian mathematics. Remember the Islamic Empire had extended all the way to the Indian
subcontinent. They met the Indian mathematicians. There was a great tradition of Indian mathematics
that had been flourishing. Islam was in well position because it was close to Europe and the
Greek tradition, but also contacted the Indian one. The Indian mathematicians did trigonometry.
They're often considered the founders of that subject. They did arithmetic and equation solving
and they gave us a wonderful numeral system. Let me talk a bit about their mathematics and
show you something called Brahmagupta's formula, an Indian mathematician from the 7th century.
This should ring a bell in some ways. Brahmagupta is looking at a quadrilateral ABCD, a four-sided
figure that's inscribed in a circle. Such a thing is called a cyclic quadrilateral,
a quadrilateral in a circle. Here's a circle and there's quadrilateral ABCD.
I should point out not every quadrilateral can be inscribed in a circle. If you imagine a diamond,
a very long, narrow, four-sided figure, no circle can go through all four of those vertices.
They're not properly positioned. Brahmagupta is talking about very special kinds of quadrilaterals,
those that can be inscribed in a circle. Let's say the length of the sides of this quadrilateral,
ABCD. You go around, there's the sides. He wants to find the area of this inscribed quadrilateral,
of this cyclic quadrilateral. First, he's going to find the semi-perimeter.
This is where bells should be ringing. The semi-perimeter is the perimeter, A plus B plus
C plus D, four sides now, over two. Then Brahmagupta shows that the area of the
cyclic quadrilateral is given by this formula, the square root of S minus A times S minus B
times S minus C times S minus D. That certainly harks back to Heron.
In fact, you can think of Heron's formula as nothing but a degenerate case of Brahmagupta's,
a special case of Brahmagupta's in this sense. Let me show you how you can get Heron's result
from Brahmagupta's. Suppose I'm given a triangle, triangle ABC. Okay, so there it is.
