minus 4ac over 4a squared. And now in our road to solving this, I take the square root of each
side. The square root of x plus b over 2a squared is just x plus b over 2a. You just get rid of the
square there. On the right, I got to take the square root of the top and the square root of the
bottom. The square root of the 4a squared I write as 2a. The square root on the top, that's where
I'll put the plus or minus. Again, we realize you can use either plus or minus the square root to
insert there. So let's do as they always do and put the plus or minus up there. So I end up with
plus or minus b squared minus 4ac over 2a. That's x plus b over 2a. Finally, you take the plus b
over 2a to the other side and you get x is minus b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus
4ac over 2a, the famous quadratic formula. This is the most famous, the most useful formula in algebra.
This will solve any quadratic equation for you. All you got to do is spot the a, b, and c. Stick
the numbers in here. If there's two solutions, this will find them. If there's one solution,
this will find it. If there's no real solutions, this will tell you that. And in fact, this even
works if you want to enter the realm of complex numbers. This is an all-purpose, wonderful
formula for solving second-degree equations. Is it from Alcorismi? Well, not exactly. He wouldn't
have expressed it this way. But the strategy he employed of completing the square is exactly what
you need in order to get this. Well, there are other great Islamic mathematicians of note
who came after Alcorismi. One of them is Tabet Ibn-Qura. I mentioned him because we'll see
him again. He was a great number theorist. And later in the course, we'll see a result that he
stumbled upon. And then it was forgotten. It was not transferred to Europe. And people were
retracing his steps many centuries later. And another mathematician of note was Omar Qayyam,
1048 to 1131. Yes, this is the same Omar Qayyam who is the author. We know him for his work on
the Rubiot. Famous author. People aren't so aware that he was also a very good mathematician.
What he did was he tried to take a look, not at second-degree equations as Alcorismi had done,
but third-degree equations, the so-called cubic equations, to see if there was any way to solve
cubics. And he gave a technique, a geometrical technique, that would provide some sort of idea
of the solution of a third-degree equation. But it wasn't as clean as an algebraic solution
of the sort that I've shown you for the quadratic. Nevertheless, it was a step in the right direction
