the square. Why is it called that? Look at the picture. That's exactly what he did. He filled
in little green square in the corner from which the solution of the quadratic equation became
simple. So the technique of completing the square, we can trace back to alkyrismy.
We now would apply this to the generic quadratic equation, and I want to just do that because
I'm going to need to solve quadratics later in the course. So as we would think of this,
with all of our modern algebraic notation, we would write ax squared plus bx plus c is zero.
If there's negatives here, I don't care. Let's say we'll be very modern in our approach to this.
We just want to make a general formula for the solution of the second degree,
the quadratic equation. Now, how do we do this? When we want to complete the square,
we're taking our q from alkyrismy. We're going to do the algebra. Here's what you do. You first
of all divide everything by a. So instead of ax squared plus bx plus c, you're going to have
x squared plus b over ax plus c over a is zero. And then what I've done is moved the c over a
to the right, so it shows up there as negative c over a. So there's my equation, x squared plus
b over ax is equal to minus c over a, and now you have to complete the square. What you're doing
algebraically is what he was doing geometrically. I want to add something to both sides of this
that'll turn the left side into a perfect square. Now, you can fiddle around with this for a while,
but what you have to add to turn the left side into a perfect square is b squared over 4a squared.
And then that left side, x squared plus b over ax plus b squared over 4a squared will be the square
of something. Well, if I add it to the left, I better add the same thing to the right. So over
there, I will put b squared over 4a squared as well. And then if you look at that right side,
you probably want to get a common denominator minus c over a plus b squared over 4a squared.
Collect that all over 4a squared. It will require you to turn the first fraction into minus 4ac
over 4a squared plus b squared over 4a squared. Turn it around and you get b squared minus 4ac
over 4a squared, which might start to look familiar. Okay, so the next thing you say is the
left-hand expression, x squared plus b over ax plus b squared over 4a squared is just the
square of something. It is a perfect square. We have completed the square. It's actually the square
of the quantity x plus b over 2a. The right side, I don't do anything to, it's still b squared
