toward solving third-degree equations. Well, Islamic works eventually found their way back to Europe
through the Islamic Empire, particularly in through Spain and Sicily. And they helped to revive
mathematical learning in the 12th century in Europe. As the Renaissance is getting going,
what's happened is these works have come back from the Arab world into Europe, filtered up into the
early universities, and started the return toward the Renaissance toward a knowledge base in Europe
that had been lost for so many centuries. Alcorismi's work, in particular, was translated into Latin.
That's where the word algebra came from. In 1140, someone named Robert of Chester translated it,
and just for good measure, in 1170, Gerardo of Cremona did. So Alcorismi's work is available,
and it's a big hit in the mathematics of the time. People were reading this to learn about
how to solve equations. A math historian named Carl Boyer has surveyed the history of math
and decided on the greatest textbooks of various eras. Here's his list. He says,
the greatest textbook of classical times is Euclid's elements. Well, that was a no-brainer.
That was easy. He said, the greatest textbook of modern time is Euler's Introductio in
Annelissen Infinitorum. This is a great work. We'll talk about it when we get to Euler. This
is from the 18th century. This is where Euler introduces functions, which become so important
in modern mathematics. But according to Boyer, the greatest work of medieval times, the greatest
math text of that middle period, is Alcorismi's algebra. And it's pretty hard to argue with that.
This was a real masterpiece. Where we're going from here is back
to Renaissance Europe and back to one of the questions raised by Alcorismi's work. Yeah,
we can solve second-degree equations. How about third-degree? How about an algebraic solution
for cubics? Is this possible? The Arabs couldn't do it. The Italian mathematicians of the 16th
century, in what is the weirdest story I know from the history of mathematics, figured out how.
And that will be the subject of our next lecture.
