there's a zero. Now, the Islamic mathematicians, whenever they encountered the Indians, loved
this base 10 numeral system and brought it back with them to Baghdad and to the Islamic world.
They called them the Hindu numbers, as indeed they were. But then when these numbers got transferred
back to Europe, the Europeans called them the Hindu Arabic numeral system, which we still do.
But in fact, they're the Hindu numbers. The Arabs had just transferred them back to Europe.
So the Islamic mathematicians studied and translated the Greek works and they studied
and absorbed the Indian works. But they were more than just conveyors of past work. They were also
original creative mathematicians in their own right. And in particular, the Islamic mathematicians
are known for their advances in equation solving. The name that comes up most in this regard is
Muhammad ibn Musa al-Qarizmi, whose dates are roughly 780 to 850. He was the great master of
equation solving. Here's an image of him. Some artists imagine this is what he looked like.
Al-Qarizmi's origins are not quite clear. He might have been Persian. He might have been Uzbek.
But eventually he gravitates to the House of Wisdom in Baghdad and is a major scholar there,
working not only in mathematics, but in geography and in astronomy and in astrology.
In those days, astronomy and astrology were sort of linked, unlike the present.
Now, Al-Qarizmi wrote two important books. One was on the calculation with Hindu numerals.
That's the translation of it. And when this was put into Latin, this is how these
Hindu-Arabic numerals were introduced into Europe around the year 1200.
So, from Al-Qarizmi, these ideas get back to Europe. His other great work has, in its title,
the words Hissab al-Jabbar wal Mukhabala. This is a work on equation solving.
When this gets translated back into Latin, they had to do something with these words.
In particular, they had to make something out of al-Jabbar. How do we write this in Latin?
How do we Latinize al-Jabbar? Well, it turned into algebra.
And so this word that is so pervasive in all of modern mathematics, algebra, is really the
Latinization of part of the title of Al-Qarizmi's equation solving book.
But actually, Al-Qarizmi himself got Latinized because his name,
whenever it was brought back and garbled a bit, turned into algorithm.
