We would write it more symbolically, AX cubed plus BX squared plus CX equals D.
Or actually, in the modern version of this, we bring everything to the one side,
and we would write AX cubed plus BX squared plus CX plus D equals zero.
For us, the A's, B's, C's and D's could be positive or negative.
The folks back in the 15th century were always insisting on positives.
But let's say we'll go with that as the structure of the general cubic equation.
Now, what was the challenge?
What were they after?
They wanted a solution by radicals, it was called, or an algebraic solution of the cubic.
And here's what that is.
A solution by radicals is a formula which gives the exact solution to the cubic,
exact, not approximate, and uses only the coefficients of the cubic equation
and the algebraic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and root extraction.
And the formula that solves your equation has to be built from those components.
Have we ever seen this before?
Sure. With the quadratic equation we have.
In the last lecture, we looked at the quadratic equation AX squared plus BX plus C equals zero, second degree.
And by completing the square, we cranked out the so-called quadratic formula.
The solution to that quadratic equation famously is X equals minus B plus or minus the square root of B squared minus 4AC over 2A.
That is the algebraic solution of the quadratic.
It's a solution by radicals because look at the formula.
It has in it ABC, the coefficients, and they're added, subtracted, multiplied, divided, and square rooted.
And that's exactly what they were seeking for the third degree equation.
Could they find an analogous formula for cubics?
That was the challenge.
Well, not too deep into the 16th century, somebody did at least partially solve this.
His name was Cipione Delfero of Bologna.
And Delfero found a solution for what's called the depressed cubic.
It's not the general cubic, a somewhat more restricted form.
He wrote it, cube plus roots equals number.
We would write it, X cubed plus MX equals n.
Cube plus roots equals number.
Now, notice what's missing here is the X squared term.
There is no quadratic term in this.
That's why it's called depressed.
It has nothing to do with its mood.
It's just that it's lost its next highest term.
So it was this that Delfero learned how to solve.
He found the secret.
