They're essentially rehashes of what Al-Qarizmi had done.
But then we get to chapter 11, the big one, where something new hits the stage.
It's titled On the Cube and Roots Equal to the Number,
which we would write x cubed plus mx equals n.
This is where he tells the world how to solve the depressed cubic.
Now, he begins this chapter with a little preface, and this is kind of interesting.
He says, Scipio Faro of Bologna, well my 30 years ago,
discovered this rule and handed it on to Antonio Fiori of Venice,
whose contest with Nicolo Tartaglia of Brescia gave Nicolo occasion to discover it.
He, Tartaglia, gave it to me in response to my entreaties, although withholding the demonstration.
So Cardano was upfront about it there.
He didn't claim that he had discovered this for himself,
and he did give credit to Tartaglia in this little preface
and kind of recounted the amazing tale of the discovery of the solution to the depressed cubic.
Well, Tartaglia read this R's Magna and went ballistic.
He said, Cardano, you had promised as a gentleman and on your faith as a true Christian
not to reveal my secret, and here it is in print in the R's Magna.
Cardano would have responded, no, I wasn't revealing your secret,
it was that other guy's secret, even though it was the same secret,
but Tartaglia wasn't having it, and so he challenged Cardano to a contest.
Here we go again, another contest.
Well, Cardano declined. He did not want to engage in a contest,
but his protege, Ferrari, said, I'll take up the challenge for my mentor.
Ferrari accepted the challenge from Tartaglia.
Now, Ferrari was brilliant, but he was also one tough cookie.
He was missing fingers on one of his hands because of a duel in which he had been,
and he was always getting in the fights.
When he and Tartaglia met for their public challenge,
Ferrari was vicious in his comments against Tartaglia.
His mathematics was better than Tartaglia's, and he vanquished.
He thrashed Tartaglia in the contest.
It is said that Tartaglia was lucky to escape with his life.
So Tartaglia runs away and sort of disappears into history
as all the fame and glory resides with Cardano and the R's Magna.
So, what is this rule? What was the great discovery?
How do you solve the depressed cubic x cubed plus mx equals n?
Let me show you what Cardano wrote.
This was the statement that he gives in chapter 11 of the R's Magna,
and I'll read it. It's rather convoluted, but we'll see this again in more algebraic form.
