But just to give a sense of how complicated this is
and how difficult it was to work in a pre-symbolic algebraic world,
here's how you do it.
According to Cardano, you cube one-third the coefficient of x.
Add to it the square of one-half the constant,
and take the square root of the whole.
You will duplicate this, and to one of the two, you add one-half of the number you already squared,
and from the other, you subtract one-half of the same,
and then subtracting the cube root of the first from the cube root of the second,
the remainder, which is left, is the value of x.
Well, we can make no sense of this in this form, but trust me, this is right.
We'll see that in the next lecture.
Well, it has been said that the 16th century produced three great scientific works.
One of them was Vesalius' treatise on the human body in 1543,
sort of opens up the realm of medicine.
One of them was Copernicus' day revolutionibus in 1543, also same year, interestingly,
which of course gives us the Copernican system of astronomy,
placing the sun at the center with the earth traveling around it.
So we have a great work in medicine, we have a great work in astronomy,
and the third major scientific work from the century is Cardano's Ars Magna of 1545.
So Cardano lands on the list of the great masterpieces,
and notice the three dates are almost exactly the same in the 1540s, kind of interesting.
Well, Cardano was very proud of the Ars Magna.
This was one of his great works, he was like a proud parent of this thing.
And at the end, the very last line of the Ars Magna, referring to the book, he writes this,
rather touching sentiment, he said,
written in five years, may it last as many thousands.
Well, the jury's still out whether it will last 5,000 years,
but hey, we're still looking at it now in this course, so it's still around.
What I want to do in the next lecture is see what all the fuss is about.
What was this solution of the cubic equation by a formula?
How do you do it? What was his discovery?
And I think you'll see this is really one mathematical gem.
