He wrote about metoposcopy, which is telling the future by looking at the lines on people's faces,
and many, many other things.
He wrote well over 100 books in his lifetime on this wide array of subjects.
He had a son named Giambattista Cardano, in whom he placed his hopes.
Giambattista, as he grew up, was heading in his father's footsteps to become a physician,
and hopefully one with equal fame throughout the world.
But then trouble strikes.
Cardano tells us that on December 20th, 1557,
my bed suddenly seemed to tremble, and with it the whole bed chamber.
Things were shaking.
Things were moving.
He took this to be a bad omen, one of these omens in which he put so much faith.
Something bad was going to happen that day.
Well, what happened that day was he learned from a messenger that his son was going to get married.
Cardano disapproved.
The omen was against this.
Something bad was going to come of this.
He called the new wife a wild woman.
And that seems to be somewhat true, because in their years of marriage, although she had children,
Giambattista's wife told Giambattista that they weren't his.
The friction grew.
Finally, Giambattista, Cardano, could take it no longer.
And so Cardano's son baked his wife an arsenic cake.
He fed it to her.
She took a few bites and died.
So Cardano's son murdered his wife for her infidelity.
Giambattista, Cardano was arrested, tried, convicted, and on April 10th, 1560,
Giambattista, Cardano, Cardano's beloved son was executed for murder.
Cardano writes, this was my supreme, my crowning misfortune.
His life could go no lower than this.
His beloved son executed as a common murderer.
Well, it actually did go lower than that.
In 1570, Cardano was jailed for heresy.
He had cast horoscopes all his life, done astrology,
but at this point he cast the horoscope of Jesus.
This did not go over too well with the church, and they threw him in jail.
So he had committed sacrilege there, I guess.
So now what?
Well, it turns out somehow in the remaining years he had, he rehabilitated himself.
