He got out of jail.
He got in good with the pope.
And he lived with his beloved grandson, had a few happy years remaining in his life,
and boasted that even then he had 14 good teeth.
So Cardano, quite a guy, he died finally on September 20th, 1576,
leaving behind quite a lot of good stories.
Well, back to the solution of the cubic.
When we last left Cardano, he was going to see Tartalia begging for the secret,
how do you solve the depressed cubic?
Tartalia resists, but Cardano was very persuasive.
And eventually Cardano says, all right, I will make an oath.
Here's what Cardano says to Tartalia.
I swear to you, by the sacred gospel, and on my faith as a gentleman,
not only never to publish your discoveries,
but I also promise and pledge my faith as a true Christian to put them down in cipher
so that after my death no one shall be able to understand them.
Please, if you give me this, I promise I'll never tell anyone.
I just need to know, says Cardano.
And finally, Tartalia relents, and in 1539 he gives the secret of the depressed cubic to Cardano
based on this promise of secrecy.
Right away, Tartalia's regretting this, but he's given it away.
Okay, the story continues.
A new character enters.
Ludovico Ferrari.
According to Cardano, one day the birds were chirping very nicely,
and he took this as a good omen.
Oh, something good's going to happen today.
Who should show up at his door but a youngster named Ludovico Ferrari?
And Cardano, based on the omen, takes Ferrari in.
Well, it turns out Ferrari is brilliant.
And Cardano starts teaching him things like mathematics,
and pretty soon they are working together as a team, you know, team Cardano, if you will,
working on great algebraic ideas.
So Cardano and Ferrari make a very powerful twosome.
Soon thereafter, Cardano discovers how to solve the general cubic equation.
That would be one that does have the quadratic term in it.
So it's not depressed, it's general.
It's what we've seen already as AX cubed plus BX squared plus CX plus D equals zero.
This was an advance.
