We now move to Renaissance Italy.
I want to tell the story of the solution of the cubic equation.
In this lecture, I want to recount the tale and introduce the bizarre set of characters.
In the next lecture, I want to show you the mathematics behind the algebraic solution of the cubic.
So, here we go. 15th century.
The Renaissance is up and running.
Classical knowledge has been brought back to Europe.
They're reading Aristotle. They're reading Alcorbizmi.
The universities are thriving at Padua and Bologna.
A particularly important date in the 15th century is 1450, when Gutenberg invents the printing press.
Now, books are widely available.
They can be published, read by far more people than were ever able to do so in the past.
This is one of the great inventions of human history.
Within three decades, the first mathematics book is printed.
On the printing press, guess what it was? Euclid's Elements in 1482.
And a bit later, we have Columbus in 1492, discovering the New World.
Now, this was an amazing time.
This is when the Europeans had absorbed the learning of the past, and now we're starting to push the frontier.
You know, they weren't just reliant upon reading Aristotle or reading Plato.
They could do things on their own. There was a sense of excitement.
And Columbus's discovery embodied that.
They now knew there was a world across the Atlantic that Aristotle had not known of.
So, who knows what was possible? Who knows what sort of progress could happen?
Well, my story begins in 1494 when Luca Paccioli published the Summa dei Arithmetica,
a mathematics book involving arithmetic and algebra.
Luca Paccioli is famous not only for that, for his mathematical achievement,
but he was the inventor of double-entry bookkeeping.
So, he is well-known among accountants everywhere.
In his book, he describes how to solve first-degree equations, second-degree equations,
borrowing freely from alquarismi.
And then he gets to the third-degree equation, the cubic.
And he noted that the solution of the cubic equation was, at that point, impossible.
Nobody could do it.
In a sense, this was a pessimistic assessment of the situation,
but perhaps also maybe a challenge to this coming century.
Let's see if we can push the frontier and solve the cubic.
Now, what is the cubic equation?
Well, they would have said it's something like this.
Cubes plus squares plus roots equals number.
We would write it more symbolically, AX cubed plus BX squared plus CX equals D.
Or actually, in the modern version of this, we bring everything to the one side,
and we would write AX cubed plus BX squared plus CX plus D equals zero.
For us, the A's, B's, C's and D's could be positive or negative.
The folks back in the 15th century were always insisting on positives.
But let's say we'll go with that as the structure of the general cubic equation.
Now, what was the challenge?
What were they after?
They wanted a solution by radicals, it was called, or an algebraic solution of the cubic.
And here's what that is.
A solution by radicals is a formula which gives the exact solution to the cubic,
exact, not approximate, and uses only the coefficients of the cubic equation
and the algebraic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and root extraction.
And the formula that solves your equation has to be built from those components.
Have we ever seen this before?
Sure. With the quadratic equation we have.
In the last lecture, we looked at the quadratic equation AX squared plus BX plus C equals zero, second degree.
And by completing the square, we cranked out the so-called quadratic formula.
The solution to that quadratic equation famously is X equals minus B plus or minus the square root of B squared minus 4AC over 2A.
That is the algebraic solution of the quadratic.
It's a solution by radicals because look at the formula.
It has in it ABC, the coefficients, and they're added, subtracted, multiplied, divided, and square rooted.
And that's exactly what they were seeking for the third degree equation.
Could they find an analogous formula for cubics?
That was the challenge.
Well, not too deep into the 16th century, somebody did at least partially solve this.
His name was Cipione Delfero of Bologna.
And Delfero found a solution for what's called the depressed cubic.
It's not the general cubic, a somewhat more restricted form.
He wrote it, cube plus roots equals number.
We would write it, X cubed plus MX equals n.
Cube plus roots equals number.
Now, notice what's missing here is the X squared term.
There is no quadratic term in this.
That's why it's called depressed.
It has nothing to do with its mood.
It's just that it's lost its next highest term.
So it was this that Delfero learned how to solve.
He found the secret.
And so we would imagine that he immediately told the world, right?
No, he did not.
He kept it to himself.
To a modern scholar, this is quite amazing.
Here you have this extraordinary discovery.
Why don't you share it?
But there was a reason for this.
In Italy at this time, scholars could be challenged by other people to contests
to prove their scholarly worth.
At any moment, somebody could come out of the woodwork and challenge you.
If you took them up on the challenge, there would be a public contest
in which the two scholars would go head to head,
and whoever won might actually take the job from whoever lost.
So your job was on the line, your reputation was on the line at all points.
Therefore, if you discovered something that nobody else knew,
it was in your best interest to keep it to yourself
rather than to share it with a wider audience
because you never know when you might need it to meet a challenge.
So Delfero, who has solved the cubic, keeps it to himself.
Now, he does this right up until his death,
at which point on his deathbed,
he imparts the secret to one of his students named Antonio Fiori.
So Delfero passes the secret of the depressed cubic to Fiori.
Fiori says, ah, I'm going to challenge the greatest mathematician
in Italy at the time, whose name was Fontana.
I'm going to challenge him, and I'm going to use my knowledge
of the depressed cubic to unseat him from his position to destroy his reputation.
So Fiori is going after this fellow, Niccolò Fontana of Brescia.
Fontana had a nickname, and it was Tertaglia, the stammerer, as it translates.
The reason for this was that as a boy, Fontana had been attacked by French soldiers.
Someone had slashed him as they raided his hometown right across the face,
destroying his palate, his tongue.
He was not able to speak very well as a consequence.
In fact, he almost died.
It was said that only because a dog came along and licked his wounds did he survive.
But in any case, he acquired the nickname Tertaglia, the stammerer.
He was a very great mathematician, and Fiori challenged him to this contest.
Now, what happened was this.
Each mathematician would give the other a list of problems.
You'd have a certain amount of time to solve them, and then in public you would reveal the solutions.
So Tertaglia gives Fiori a bunch of problems of various sorts.
Fiori gives Tertaglia 30 problems, and they're all the same.
They are solutions of depressed cubics.
Well, Tertaglia looks at the challenge, and he realizes he's either going to get none of these right,
or he too is going to have to discover the secret, and he can get them all right.
And so in what looks like sort of a Hollywood story, the clock is ticking,
and Tertaglia is hastening to try to figure out how to solve the depressed cubic in order to do this challenge.
Well, amazingly, he does it.
In fact, he tells us on February 13th, 1535, Tertaglia independently discovers the solution of the depressed cubic.
It was the same solution that Delfero had found and passed along to Fiori.
With the solution in hand, Tertaglia gets all the problems right that he'd been challenged with.
His opponent, Fiori, doesn't do very well on his part.
Tertaglia vanquishes his opponent. Tertaglia remains preeminent.
Well, at this point, a fellow named Gerolamo Cardano learns about this challenge.
Here's about it and says to himself, boy, I'd like to know how to solve the depressed cubic.
And so Cardano, here's a picture of him, Cardano goes to see Tertaglia and begs him,
tell me the secret, Tertaglia, how do you solve the depressed cubic?
And Tertaglia is very skeptical about giving away such a marvelous piece of mathematics.
Let me pause the story there and jump back and talk a little bit about Cardano.
Cardano introduced you to this person who, in my regard, is the most bizarre character in the whole history of mathematics,
and then we'll pick up the tale in a minute.
We know a lot about Cardano because he wrote an autobiography, Davita Propria Liber, The Book of My Life,
in which he tells us about his strange and rich life.
He tells us, for instance, that he was illegitimate,
which in those days meant certain professions were restricted, his status was quite low,
and he had to fight his way up to the top from those lowly beginnings.
He tells us all about his health.
This autobiography is full of a litany of his maladies.
He tells us about his pimples, his boils, his flexes, his digestion, his impotence.
More than we want to know, this is what they today call TMI, too much information,
but it's just festooned throughout this book.
He tells us about a way he had of feeling good.
He said, I considered that pleasure consisted in relief following severe pain.
Therefore, he said, I have hit upon a plan of biting my lips, of twisting my fingers,
of pinching the skin and the tender muscles of my left arm, until the tears come,
because when he then stopped, he had pleasure.
The pain was gone.
It sounds like that old joke about the person that hit himself on the head with a hammer
because it felt so good when he stopped, except this wasn't a joke.
This is how Cardano lived.
He believed in trinkets, amulets, portents.
He believed in guardian angels.
He wrote this.
He said, attendant or guardian spirits are recorded as having favored certain men constantly.
Socrates, Plotinus, Sinicius, Dio, Flavius Josephus, and I include myself,
all to be sure lived happily, save Socrates and me.
Well, it was one thing to believe in guardian angels.
It was another thing to converse with them.
And in fact, Cardano would regularly be seen talking to his guardian angel,
and the public was somewhat suspicious of his sanity, I think.
In addition, he gambled big time.
In fact, he wrote it the first treatise ever on probability,
called the book on games of chance.
And in the whole history of probability, this is where it started,
as he's giving the rules and the strategies for winning in various gambling situations.
He gambled a lot.
He said, I gambled at chess and dice for many years, and not only every year,
but I say it with shame every day.
And he cheated.
That got him into all sorts of scrapes.
So, you know, quite a lusty character, but also a Renaissance man.
He became one of Europe's foremost physicians.
He was a doctor who was very good, and his reputation extended well beyond his hometown,
all across Europe.
For instance, he treated the pope.
Now, that was about as illustrious a patient as any physician could have.
The pope would call Cardano in for treatment.
And even more amazingly, he treated the Archbishop of Scotland.
Now, somehow his reputation reached Scotland.
The Scottish Archbishop demanded that Cardano treat him, and Cardano went to Scotland to do so.
If you think about travel in the 16th century, that was a major journey.
And yet, because of his fame, he was called to that task.
He also was a prolific writer on a wide variety of subjects.
Cardano wrote on medicine.
He wrote on mathematics.
He wrote on religion.
He wrote about astrology.
He wrote about metoposcopy, which is telling the future by looking at the lines on people's faces,
and many, many other things.
He wrote well over 100 books in his lifetime on this wide array of subjects.
He had a son named Giambattista Cardano, in whom he placed his hopes.
Giambattista, as he grew up, was heading in his father's footsteps to become a physician,
and hopefully one with equal fame throughout the world.
But then trouble strikes.
Cardano tells us that on December 20th, 1557,
my bed suddenly seemed to tremble, and with it the whole bed chamber.
Things were shaking.
Things were moving.
He took this to be a bad omen, one of these omens in which he put so much faith.
Something bad was going to happen that day.
Well, what happened that day was he learned from a messenger that his son was going to get married.
Cardano disapproved.
The omen was against this.
Something bad was going to come of this.
He called the new wife a wild woman.
And that seems to be somewhat true, because in their years of marriage, although she had children,
Giambattista's wife told Giambattista that they weren't his.
The friction grew.
Finally, Giambattista, Cardano, could take it no longer.
And so Cardano's son baked his wife an arsenic cake.
He fed it to her.
She took a few bites and died.
So Cardano's son murdered his wife for her infidelity.
Giambattista, Cardano was arrested, tried, convicted, and on April 10th, 1560,
Giambattista, Cardano, Cardano's beloved son was executed for murder.
Cardano writes, this was my supreme, my crowning misfortune.
His life could go no lower than this.
His beloved son executed as a common murderer.
Well, it actually did go lower than that.
In 1570, Cardano was jailed for heresy.
He had cast horoscopes all his life, done astrology,
but at this point he cast the horoscope of Jesus.
This did not go over too well with the church, and they threw him in jail.
So he had committed sacrilege there, I guess.
So now what?
Well, it turns out somehow in the remaining years he had, he rehabilitated himself.
He got out of jail.
He got in good with the pope.
And he lived with his beloved grandson, had a few happy years remaining in his life,
and boasted that even then he had 14 good teeth.
So Cardano, quite a guy, he died finally on September 20th, 1576,
leaving behind quite a lot of good stories.
Well, back to the solution of the cubic.
When we last left Cardano, he was going to see Tartalia begging for the secret,
how do you solve the depressed cubic?
Tartalia resists, but Cardano was very persuasive.
And eventually Cardano says, all right, I will make an oath.
Here's what Cardano says to Tartalia.
I swear to you, by the sacred gospel, and on my faith as a gentleman,
not only never to publish your discoveries,
but I also promise and pledge my faith as a true Christian to put them down in cipher
so that after my death no one shall be able to understand them.
Please, if you give me this, I promise I'll never tell anyone.
I just need to know, says Cardano.
And finally, Tartalia relents, and in 1539 he gives the secret of the depressed cubic to Cardano
based on this promise of secrecy.
Right away, Tartalia's regretting this, but he's given it away.
Okay, the story continues.
A new character enters.
Ludovico Ferrari.
According to Cardano, one day the birds were chirping very nicely,
and he took this as a good omen.
Oh, something good's going to happen today.
Who should show up at his door but a youngster named Ludovico Ferrari?
And Cardano, based on the omen, takes Ferrari in.
Well, it turns out Ferrari is brilliant.
And Cardano starts teaching him things like mathematics,
and pretty soon they are working together as a team, you know, team Cardano, if you will,
working on great algebraic ideas.
So Cardano and Ferrari make a very powerful twosome.
Soon thereafter, Cardano discovers how to solve the general cubic equation.
That would be one that does have the quadratic term in it.
So it's not depressed, it's general.
It's what we've seen already as AX cubed plus BX squared plus CX plus D equals zero.
This was an advance.
And then, even more astounding, his young protege Ferrari discovers how to solve the quartic equation,
the fourth degree equation, which we would write as AX to the fourth plus BX cubed plus CX squared
plus DX plus E equals zero.
So algebra was really expanding here.
These were two great advances.
However, here was the snag.
Both of these solutions rested upon the ability to solve the depressed cubic.
What Cardano would do to solve the general cubic was to reduce it to the depressed cubic,
and what Ferrari would do to solve the general quartic would be to reduce it to a cubic,
and then that would require the depressed cubic.
But the depressed cubic was the very thing that Cardano had gotten from Tartaglia,
and he was not allowed to share with the world.
He was not allowed to publish.
So it was a roadblock to his publishing any of these great discoveries.
So what did he do?
Well, remember the story, how this all unfurled?
Delfero had first discovered the solution of the depressed cubic and given it to Fiori.
Then Tartaglia from the necessity of the contest with Fiori had discovered it himself
and had given it to Cardano.
Cardano had promised not to reveal Tartaglia's secret,
but he had never made such a promise to Delfero, who was long dead.
And so in 1543, Cardano went to the family of Delfero, the original discoverer,
saw Delfero's papers and saw how Delfero had solved the depressed cubic.
Now, the fact is it was the same way that Tartaglia had,
but Cardano wasn't going to reveal Tartaglia's secret.
He was going to reveal Delfero's, and that wasn't a secret at all.
And so Cardano writes up the great algebraic discoveries and publishes them in his book,
The R's Magna in 1545.
And this is where the world learns how to solve cubic equations, The R's Magna.
The book begins with this opening sentence.
Cardano acknowledges there that this art originated with Muhammad.
Now, R's Magna, of course, translates to the great art.
This book was about the art was algebra.
And who was Muhammad, he's referring to?
The art originated with Muhammad.
Ah, that was Muhammad Musa ibn Al-Qarizmi, whom we have met as the founder of algebra.
So Cardano begins by giving credit to Al-Qarizmi.
The first few chapters of The R's Magna are handling the first-degree equations
and the second-degree equations.
They're essentially rehashes of what Al-Qarizmi had done.
But then we get to chapter 11, the big one, where something new hits the stage.
It's titled On the Cube and Roots Equal to the Number,
which we would write x cubed plus mx equals n.
This is where he tells the world how to solve the depressed cubic.
Now, he begins this chapter with a little preface, and this is kind of interesting.
He says, Scipio Faro of Bologna, well my 30 years ago,
discovered this rule and handed it on to Antonio Fiori of Venice,
whose contest with Nicolo Tartaglia of Brescia gave Nicolo occasion to discover it.
He, Tartaglia, gave it to me in response to my entreaties, although withholding the demonstration.
So Cardano was upfront about it there.
He didn't claim that he had discovered this for himself,
and he did give credit to Tartaglia in this little preface
and kind of recounted the amazing tale of the discovery of the solution to the depressed cubic.
Well, Tartaglia read this R's Magna and went ballistic.
He said, Cardano, you had promised as a gentleman and on your faith as a true Christian
not to reveal my secret, and here it is in print in the R's Magna.
Cardano would have responded, no, I wasn't revealing your secret,
it was that other guy's secret, even though it was the same secret,
but Tartaglia wasn't having it, and so he challenged Cardano to a contest.
Here we go again, another contest.
Well, Cardano declined. He did not want to engage in a contest,
but his protege, Ferrari, said, I'll take up the challenge for my mentor.
Ferrari accepted the challenge from Tartaglia.
Now, Ferrari was brilliant, but he was also one tough cookie.
He was missing fingers on one of his hands because of a duel in which he had been,
and he was always getting in the fights.
When he and Tartaglia met for their public challenge,
Ferrari was vicious in his comments against Tartaglia.
His mathematics was better than Tartaglia's, and he vanquished.
He thrashed Tartaglia in the contest.
It is said that Tartaglia was lucky to escape with his life.
So Tartaglia runs away and sort of disappears into history
as all the fame and glory resides with Cardano and the R's Magna.
So, what is this rule? What was the great discovery?
How do you solve the depressed cubic x cubed plus mx equals n?
Let me show you what Cardano wrote.
This was the statement that he gives in chapter 11 of the R's Magna,
and I'll read it. It's rather convoluted, but we'll see this again in more algebraic form.
But just to give a sense of how complicated this is
and how difficult it was to work in a pre-symbolic algebraic world,
here's how you do it.
According to Cardano, you cube one-third the coefficient of x.
Add to it the square of one-half the constant,
and take the square root of the whole.
You will duplicate this, and to one of the two, you add one-half of the number you already squared,
and from the other, you subtract one-half of the same,
and then subtracting the cube root of the first from the cube root of the second,
the remainder, which is left, is the value of x.
Well, we can make no sense of this in this form, but trust me, this is right.
We'll see that in the next lecture.
Well, it has been said that the 16th century produced three great scientific works.
One of them was Vesalius' treatise on the human body in 1543,
sort of opens up the realm of medicine.
One of them was Copernicus' day revolutionibus in 1543, also same year, interestingly,
which of course gives us the Copernican system of astronomy,
placing the sun at the center with the earth traveling around it.
So we have a great work in medicine, we have a great work in astronomy,
and the third major scientific work from the century is Cardano's Ars Magna of 1545.
So Cardano lands on the list of the great masterpieces,
and notice the three dates are almost exactly the same in the 1540s, kind of interesting.
Well, Cardano was very proud of the Ars Magna.
This was one of his great works, he was like a proud parent of this thing.
And at the end, the very last line of the Ars Magna, referring to the book, he writes this,
rather touching sentiment, he said,
written in five years, may it last as many thousands.
Well, the jury's still out whether it will last 5,000 years,
but hey, we're still looking at it now in this course, so it's still around.
What I want to do in the next lecture is see what all the fuss is about.
What was this solution of the cubic equation by a formula?
How do you do it? What was his discovery?
And I think you'll see this is really one mathematical gem.
