And then, even more astounding, his young protege Ferrari discovers how to solve the quartic equation,
the fourth degree equation, which we would write as AX to the fourth plus BX cubed plus CX squared
plus DX plus E equals zero.
So algebra was really expanding here.
These were two great advances.
However, here was the snag.
Both of these solutions rested upon the ability to solve the depressed cubic.
What Cardano would do to solve the general cubic was to reduce it to the depressed cubic,
and what Ferrari would do to solve the general quartic would be to reduce it to a cubic,
and then that would require the depressed cubic.
But the depressed cubic was the very thing that Cardano had gotten from Tartaglia,
and he was not allowed to share with the world.
He was not allowed to publish.
So it was a roadblock to his publishing any of these great discoveries.
So what did he do?
Well, remember the story, how this all unfurled?
Delfero had first discovered the solution of the depressed cubic and given it to Fiori.
Then Tartaglia from the necessity of the contest with Fiori had discovered it himself
and had given it to Cardano.
Cardano had promised not to reveal Tartaglia's secret,
but he had never made such a promise to Delfero, who was long dead.
And so in 1543, Cardano went to the family of Delfero, the original discoverer,
saw Delfero's papers and saw how Delfero had solved the depressed cubic.
Now, the fact is it was the same way that Tartaglia had,
but Cardano wasn't going to reveal Tartaglia's secret.
He was going to reveal Delfero's, and that wasn't a secret at all.
And so Cardano writes up the great algebraic discoveries and publishes them in his book,
The R's Magna in 1545.
And this is where the world learns how to solve cubic equations, The R's Magna.
The book begins with this opening sentence.
Cardano acknowledges there that this art originated with Muhammad.
Now, R's Magna, of course, translates to the great art.
This book was about the art was algebra.
And who was Muhammad, he's referring to?
The art originated with Muhammad.
Ah, that was Muhammad Musa ibn Al-Qarizmi, whom we have met as the founder of algebra.
So Cardano begins by giving credit to Al-Qarizmi.
The first few chapters of The R's Magna are handling the first-degree equations
and the second-degree equations.
