You'd have a certain amount of time to solve them, and then in public you would reveal the solutions.
So Tertaglia gives Fiori a bunch of problems of various sorts.
Fiori gives Tertaglia 30 problems, and they're all the same.
They are solutions of depressed cubics.
Well, Tertaglia looks at the challenge, and he realizes he's either going to get none of these right,
or he too is going to have to discover the secret, and he can get them all right.
And so in what looks like sort of a Hollywood story, the clock is ticking,
and Tertaglia is hastening to try to figure out how to solve the depressed cubic in order to do this challenge.
Well, amazingly, he does it.
In fact, he tells us on February 13th, 1535, Tertaglia independently discovers the solution of the depressed cubic.
It was the same solution that Delfero had found and passed along to Fiori.
With the solution in hand, Tertaglia gets all the problems right that he'd been challenged with.
His opponent, Fiori, doesn't do very well on his part.
Tertaglia vanquishes his opponent. Tertaglia remains preeminent.
Well, at this point, a fellow named Gerolamo Cardano learns about this challenge.
Here's about it and says to himself, boy, I'd like to know how to solve the depressed cubic.
And so Cardano, here's a picture of him, Cardano goes to see Tertaglia and begs him,
tell me the secret, Tertaglia, how do you solve the depressed cubic?
And Tertaglia is very skeptical about giving away such a marvelous piece of mathematics.
Let me pause the story there and jump back and talk a little bit about Cardano.
Cardano introduced you to this person who, in my regard, is the most bizarre character in the whole history of mathematics,
and then we'll pick up the tale in a minute.
We know a lot about Cardano because he wrote an autobiography, Davita Propria Liber, The Book of My Life,
in which he tells us about his strange and rich life.
He tells us, for instance, that he was illegitimate,
which in those days meant certain professions were restricted, his status was quite low,
and he had to fight his way up to the top from those lowly beginnings.
He tells us all about his health.
This autobiography is full of a litany of his maladies.
He tells us about his pimples, his boils, his flexes, his digestion, his impotence.
More than we want to know, this is what they today call TMI, too much information,
but it's just festooned throughout this book.
He tells us about a way he had of feeling good.
He said, I considered that pleasure consisted in relief following severe pain.
Therefore, he said, I have hit upon a plan of biting my lips, of twisting my fingers,
of pinching the skin and the tender muscles of my left arm, until the tears come,
because when he then stopped, he had pleasure.
The pain was gone.
It sounds like that old joke about the person that hit himself on the head with a hammer
