And so we would imagine that he immediately told the world, right?
No, he did not.
He kept it to himself.
To a modern scholar, this is quite amazing.
Here you have this extraordinary discovery.
Why don't you share it?
But there was a reason for this.
In Italy at this time, scholars could be challenged by other people to contests
to prove their scholarly worth.
At any moment, somebody could come out of the woodwork and challenge you.
If you took them up on the challenge, there would be a public contest
in which the two scholars would go head to head,
and whoever won might actually take the job from whoever lost.
So your job was on the line, your reputation was on the line at all points.
Therefore, if you discovered something that nobody else knew,
it was in your best interest to keep it to yourself
rather than to share it with a wider audience
because you never know when you might need it to meet a challenge.
So Delfero, who has solved the cubic, keeps it to himself.
Now, he does this right up until his death,
at which point on his deathbed,
he imparts the secret to one of his students named Antonio Fiori.
So Delfero passes the secret of the depressed cubic to Fiori.
Fiori says, ah, I'm going to challenge the greatest mathematician
in Italy at the time, whose name was Fontana.
I'm going to challenge him, and I'm going to use my knowledge
of the depressed cubic to unseat him from his position to destroy his reputation.
So Fiori is going after this fellow, Niccolò Fontana of Brescia.
Fontana had a nickname, and it was Tertaglia, the stammerer, as it translates.
The reason for this was that as a boy, Fontana had been attacked by French soldiers.
Someone had slashed him as they raided his hometown right across the face,
destroying his palate, his tongue.
He was not able to speak very well as a consequence.
In fact, he almost died.
It was said that only because a dog came along and licked his wounds did he survive.
But in any case, he acquired the nickname Tertaglia, the stammerer.
He was a very great mathematician, and Fiori challenged him to this contest.
Now, what happened was this.
Each mathematician would give the other a list of problems.
