We now move to Renaissance Italy.
I want to tell the story of the solution of the cubic equation.
In this lecture, I want to recount the tale and introduce the bizarre set of characters.
In the next lecture, I want to show you the mathematics behind the algebraic solution of the cubic.
So, here we go. 15th century.
The Renaissance is up and running.
Classical knowledge has been brought back to Europe.
They're reading Aristotle. They're reading Alcorbizmi.
The universities are thriving at Padua and Bologna.
A particularly important date in the 15th century is 1450, when Gutenberg invents the printing press.
Now, books are widely available.
They can be published, read by far more people than were ever able to do so in the past.
This is one of the great inventions of human history.
Within three decades, the first mathematics book is printed.
On the printing press, guess what it was? Euclid's Elements in 1482.
And a bit later, we have Columbus in 1492, discovering the New World.
Now, this was an amazing time.
This is when the Europeans had absorbed the learning of the past, and now we're starting to push the frontier.
You know, they weren't just reliant upon reading Aristotle or reading Plato.
They could do things on their own. There was a sense of excitement.
And Columbus's discovery embodied that.
They now knew there was a world across the Atlantic that Aristotle had not known of.
So, who knows what was possible? Who knows what sort of progress could happen?
Well, my story begins in 1494 when Luca Paccioli published the Summa dei Arithmetica,
a mathematics book involving arithmetic and algebra.
Luca Paccioli is famous not only for that, for his mathematical achievement,
but he was the inventor of double-entry bookkeeping.
So, he is well-known among accountants everywhere.
In his book, he describes how to solve first-degree equations, second-degree equations,
borrowing freely from alquarismi.
And then he gets to the third-degree equation, the cubic.
And he noted that the solution of the cubic equation was, at that point, impossible.
Nobody could do it.
In a sense, this was a pessimistic assessment of the situation,
but perhaps also maybe a challenge to this coming century.
Let's see if we can push the frontier and solve the cubic.
Now, what is the cubic equation?
Well, they would have said it's something like this.
Cubes plus squares plus roots equals number.
