And one more thing, let me move everything over to the left.
And so here's the equation I got to do.
This is what it's all going to come down to.
Can I solve t to the sixth?
That's what t cubed times t cubed will be, t to the sixth will be 6t's, minus 56t cubed
minus 512 is zero.
That's the ball game.
Can we solve this?
Well, gee, my first thought is this is worse.
If you think about it, we started trying to solve a cubic, a third-degree equation.
That's a sixth-degree equation.
It seems like I've made life worse.
It's a sixth-degree equation in t.
But, and here's the real thing, here's the key to unlocking the whole problem.
Yes, it's sixth-degree in t, but it's second-degree in t cubed.
It's quadratic in t cubed.
By which I mean, I could write that as the quantity t cubed squared, that's t to the
sixth, minus 56 times the quantity t cubed minus 512 equals zero.
And you know what that looks like?
That looks like a quadratic equation.
In fact, it looks just like y squared minus 56y minus 512 is zero if you let y play the
role of t cubed.
So I've reduced the problem to solving that second-degree equation, but that's the exact
second-degree equation I solved at the beginning of this lecture.
I had an x in instead of a y, but it was the same one.
And if you look back, you see that we used the quadratic formula to figure out what y
is.
Now y is t cubed, but numerically, y came out to be 64 or negative 8.
And so using the quadratic formula in the course of solving the third-degree equation,
I decided that t cubed is 64 or negative 8.
Now you only need one of these two solutions, so how about we'll use that t cubed is 64.
Now all we got to do is back up the chain and we can do it, we're done.
If t cubed is 64, then t is the cube root of 64, which is 4.
So now we've nailed that down, I know what t is.
U, I better figure out what u is.
Well remember we saw somewhere up the line that u was 24 over 3t, which we reduced to
8 over t, but I now know that t is 4, so u is 8 over 4, u is 2.
And now the dramatic conclusion, x is what we wanted, the solution of our cubic, x is
t minus u.
I've just said that t is 4, u is 2, so x, the solution of the cubic that we started
with, x cubed plus 24x is 56, would be x equals t minus u equals 4 minus 2 equals 2.
That is how you do it.
That's the solution of the depressed cubic.
It's quite a journey, quite a workout, but it's kind of neat.
