of 33, but that's y, what's x, x is what I want, well look up above, x is y plus 5,
so x, you just add 5 on, and there's your solution to the cubic, a solution by radicals.
So even a non-depressed cubic can be solved via this process that Cardano discovered.
All of this appears in chapter 11 of Ars Magna, the chapter he called cubes and roots equal
to number, okay, x cubed plus mx equal n. But remember in those days they had to avoid
negatives, and so the example I just gave you that had a negative in it wouldn't have
been legit in the 16th century, he had to do different chapters, each chapter would handle
cases in order to avoid negatives, there was over a dozen different chapters to handle all
the different possibilities for the cubic that we can do in a single expression because we're
nervous about negatives. So the example I just showed you, x cubed minus 15x squared
plus 81x equals 165 would not have been there, rather you'd have to look in chapter 18 which
tells you how to do cube and roots equal to square and number, and sort of move this around
a little bit and you'll see that this could be reduced to x cubed plus 81x cube and roots,
bring the minus 15x squared over to the other side equals square and number, and in chapter
18 you'd see how to do that one. Well Cardano's Ars Magna continues to chapter 39 where we
find Ferrari's solution of the quartic, remember Ferrari had shown how to solve a fourth degree
equation, and Cardano introduces this with his nice statement, he said there is another
rule more noble than the preceding, it is Ludovico Ferrari's who gave it to me at my request,
through it we have all the solutions for equations of the fourth power, so Ars Magna
solves the fourth degree. How? He reduces it to a third degree, the third degree is reduced
to a depressed cubic and away we go, so everything gets reduced down. It leaves one question
hanging, what about the fifth degree, what about the quintic equation, ax to the fifth
plus bx to the fourth plus cx cubed plus dx squared plus ex plus f equals zero. How do
you do the fifth degree? I know what I'd guess, I bet you'd reduce the fifth degree to a fourth
degree, the fourth degree to a third degree and solve it that way, but nobody could. People
tried this in the 16th century, the fifth degree was a roadblock, in the 17th, in the
18th, nobody could get anywhere until the question was answered by Niels Abel in the 19th
century, an Norwegian mathematician who showed that the solution by radicals of the general
quintic equation, fifth degree equation or any higher degree equation is impossible. Can't
be, there are no formulas for fifth degree or higher. It's a very strange turn of events,
you can solve the cubic, you can solve the quartic, after that algebra fails. And so
I'll leave you with this thought that we sort of have verified the pessimism of Luca Pacioli,
remember way back in the beginning of this story, Pacioli said you couldn't do a cubic,
he was wrong, you could do the cubic. This pessimism was unfounded, you could do the quartic,
but you can't do the quintic or any higher, at that point algebra fails us.
