It has that same flavor as a depressed cubic.
But the cubic we really wanted was x cubed plus 24x is 56.
That's what we're trying to solve.
So now I look at these two depressed cubics.
They both have an x cubed in them.
In one case, I have three t u times x, below I have 24 times x.
On the right, I have t cubed minus u cubed, in general, but the 56 in the specific case,
that suggests I should equate these, let the coefficient three t u be 24, let t cubed
minus u cubed be 56.
What I have now done is found two equations in two unknowns, t and u.
And if you remember your high school algebra, you can solve two equations in two unknowns.
And that's what I'm going to have to do.
Suppose I could do that.
Suppose I could figure out what t is and what u is.
Then up above, I said x is t minus u, I can subtract those, and I would have figured
out what x is.
So that's the strategy, that's where we're headed.
I now have those two equations, three t u is 24, and t cubed minus u cubed is 56, and
I've got to solve these simultaneously.
Now the way you do that is, you find you solve one equation for one letter and substitute
that back into the other.
So let's look at that top equation.
Three t u is 24, that tells me that u, let's solve that for u, is 24 over three t.
Just bring the three t underneath on the right.
But 24 over three is eight, so this is just eight over t.
So that's what u is, u is eight over t.
Go back to the second equation, t cubed minus u cubed is 56, u is eight over t, stick it
in there.
And so you'll get t cubed minus eight over t, the quantity cubed is 56.
If you cubed that eight over t, you'll end up with t cubed minus 512 over t cubed is
56.
Now this is a landmark on the road to the solution, we're not quite there yet, but
notice what I've got now, one equation, one unknown, t.
If I can figure out what t is, I can go back and figure out what u is, I can go back up
the line and figure out what x is, which is what the object is here.
So now we just have to solve that equation.
Now that's still not quite there yet.
You know, one of the troubles is it's got a t cube in the bottom.
You don't want a variable in the denominator.
So I'm going to multiply both sides of this by t cubed.
And then when I distribute across, I can cancel out that t cube in the bottom.
So when I do that, I get t cubed times t cubed is t to the sixth.
I get t cubed times minus 512 over t cubed is just minus 512.
And on the right side, I get 56t cubed.
