In the previous lecture, I told the story of the solution of the cubic, and we met quite
a cast of strange but great thinkers.
This lecture is the great theorem that they were working on.
How is it that you solve a third-degree equation by a formula?
Now I should say at the outset that there's a lot of math in this lecture.
The whole lecture will be devoted to solving the cubic.
It'll be dripping with symbols, there's probably more formulas per square foot than
in any other lecture in the course.
So I'm going to try to go slowly, spell it all out.
Some people might want to have a pad and paper by their sides to follow along with
it.
It's challenging, but I think it's worth it, because A, this is a brilliant piece of
work.
This is mathematical artistry, and B, you might never have seen it done.
A lot of people aren't aware that there's a formula to solve third-degree equations.
We'll see it, we'll see where it comes from.
We'll follow Cardano in his description of this.
Well, before we start, given how challenging this is going to be, we need a little warm-up
here.
So let me warm-up by looking at a second-degree equation.
Remember we have seen the quadratic formula, which allows us to solve any second-degree
equation of the form ax squared plus bx plus c equals zero, and all you've got to do is
substitute the coefficients a, b, and c into that marvelous formula that says x is equal
to negative b plus or minus the square root of b square minus 4ac over 2a.
It is an analog of that that we're seeking for the third-degree equation.
Well, let me actually solve a particular quadratic.
So here comes, just to make sure we see how this all works, there's one.
X squared minus 56x minus 512 is zero.
So we want to solve this with the formula.
Now I'm also going to let you in on a secret.
I'm going to need this a little later in the lecture.
This isn't just an arbitrary quadratic.
I have a reason for looking at this particular one, as you'll see in a few minutes.
But anyway, there we go.
X squared minus 56x minus 512 equals zero.
We want to solve this with the quadratic formula.
Well, I look at the formula.
I know x is negative b.
Now remember, the a, b, and c are the coefficients.
So in my quadratic, the a is 1 because there's 1x squared.
The b is negative 56.
That's how many x's there are.
The c is negative 512.
So I just have to put those in there.
