Look at the front.
Right here facing front, there's this slab standing there.
The base is A, B. The height is the whole height of the cube, and it's u units thick.
It's facing us on the front.
It's this big slab.
Its volume would be t minus u times t times u, the product of the three dimensions.
So let me put it in the form t u times t minus u.
So that's the front facing slab.
But there's another slab on the right side that is exactly the same dimensions.
You see it.
It goes along the base D, E. It rises all the way to the top.
So it's t minus u by t and u thickness.
I'm going to add that volume in.
That's exactly what I just did.
So I'm going to get another t u times t minus u.
Let's just put a two there and make this as two t u times t minus u.
But I'm still not done.
There's still some pieces left.
Now, where are they?
Look on the front here.
There's that little shaded cube in the lower front corner.
Everything on top of it is a block.
I don't have that yet.
Its dimensions are u by u by t minus u.
So its volume is u squared times t minus u.
And there's one more piece.
If you look at that shaded cube in the upper back, it's resting upon a pedestal there below
it.
I need that volume.
And if you look at the dimensions, it's t minus u by t minus u by u.
So the volume there would be u times t minus u squared.
And I think I've collected all the pieces now.
There they are.
Well now what we want to do is do a little algebra on this.
Here's what I'll do.
I'll write down the u cube that started it and the t minus u cubed.
Leave those alone.
But the next three terms, the two t u times t minus u plus the u squared times t minus
u plus the u times the t minus u squared.
Notice each of those has in it the t minus u expression.
It's common to all three of those last terms.
So let me factor out t minus u from those three.
When I do that, the first term will remain a two t u, which I'll put in the square brackets.
When I pull the t minus u out of the second term, I'll be left with a u squared in the
