In the previous lecture, I told the story of the solution of the cubic, and we met quite
a cast of strange but great thinkers.
This lecture is the great theorem that they were working on.
How is it that you solve a third-degree equation by a formula?
Now I should say at the outset that there's a lot of math in this lecture.
The whole lecture will be devoted to solving the cubic.
It'll be dripping with symbols, there's probably more formulas per square foot than
in any other lecture in the course.
So I'm going to try to go slowly, spell it all out.
Some people might want to have a pad and paper by their sides to follow along with
it.
It's challenging, but I think it's worth it, because A, this is a brilliant piece of
work.
This is mathematical artistry, and B, you might never have seen it done.
A lot of people aren't aware that there's a formula to solve third-degree equations.
We'll see it, we'll see where it comes from.
We'll follow Cardano in his description of this.
Well, before we start, given how challenging this is going to be, we need a little warm-up
here.
So let me warm-up by looking at a second-degree equation.
Remember we have seen the quadratic formula, which allows us to solve any second-degree
equation of the form ax squared plus bx plus c equals zero, and all you've got to do is
substitute the coefficients a, b, and c into that marvelous formula that says x is equal
to negative b plus or minus the square root of b square minus 4ac over 2a.
It is an analog of that that we're seeking for the third-degree equation.
Well, let me actually solve a particular quadratic.
So here comes, just to make sure we see how this all works, there's one.
X squared minus 56x minus 512 is zero.
So we want to solve this with the formula.
Now I'm also going to let you in on a secret.
I'm going to need this a little later in the lecture.
This isn't just an arbitrary quadratic.
I have a reason for looking at this particular one, as you'll see in a few minutes.
But anyway, there we go.
X squared minus 56x minus 512 equals zero.
We want to solve this with the quadratic formula.
Well, I look at the formula.
I know x is negative b.
Now remember, the a, b, and c are the coefficients.
So in my quadratic, the a is 1 because there's 1x squared.
The b is negative 56.
That's how many x's there are.
The c is negative 512.
So I just have to put those in there.
So x is negative b negative negative 56 plus or minus the square root of negative 56 squared
minus 4 times a, which is 1, times c, which is minus 512.
All of this over 2a, which is 2 times 1.
So you'd start doing the simplifications.
The minus minus 56 is 56 plus or minus the square root.
Now minus 56 squared is 3,136.
And the minus 4 times the 1 times the minus 512 is 2048.
So that's under the radical.
All of this is over 2.
You add up the terms under the radical and you get 5,184.
And then when you take the square root of that,
you'll find that x is 56 plus or minus the square root of 5184 over 2.
But the square root of 5184 is 72, exactly.
So you get 56 plus or minus 72 over 2.
When you add them, you get 128 over 2.
When you subtract them, you get negative 16 over 2.
And so after all of this, you get that x is either 64, 128 over 2, or negative 8.
There's actually two solutions to this quadratic.
As I say, keep these in mind.
We'll see them again.
Well, that's the quadratic.
How about the cubic?
How about the third degree equation?
And we're about to plunge in.
Let me just say that, as you might expect, this is going to be harder.
It's more sophisticated.
But it's kind of incredible to see how this is done.
Now, remember what we're doing.
We're going to follow Cardano in chapter 11 of ours, Magna, in which he first
addresses just the depressed cubic, the sort of restricted sort, x cubed plus mx
is n.
Now, rather than do that general cubic with an m and an n in it, how about just
to make things a little easier, I will put specific numbers in those slots.
So instead of x cubed plus mx equals n, how about we'll pick this one, x cubed
plus 24x equals 56.
It's not going to be quite the generic general solution.
But all the steps I do here can be replicated with m's and n's.
It just makes it even more complicated looking.
So I think this one with the numbers n will make it a much more accessible kind
of derivation.
So we're going to go after just that one, x cubed plus 24x equals 56.
Now this is a cubic equation.
And so Cardano, interestingly, begins with a cube, an actual three-dimensional cube.
Remember when we saw Al Quarizmi solving a second degree equation, he completed the
square and he was looking at a two-dimensional square.
Well, you go up to a third-degree equation, you go up a dimension.
And so Cardano is looking at a literal cube.
And let's say it's t by t by t.
So I've drawn a picture there of a cube, t units high, t units across, t units deep.
The volume of this is what we're going to try to track down.
Well, the volume of a t by t by t cubed is obviously just t cubed.
So that's easy enough.
Well, Cardano has to do something more sophisticated than that, and he sure does when he subdivides
the cube in a kind of interesting and it turns out to be very valuable fashion.
So here's a picture of my subdivided cube.
What I'm doing is slicing this cube up in the various pieces.
It's the same cube, but it's now been broken up into the pieces you see.
Now, the cube is still t units high, t units across the bottom, t units deep.
That's the same cube.
But you see down in the lower front corner, there's a little piece that's shaded.
That's a little cube that's u units by u units by u units.
And we're going to have to worry about what the t and the u are.
We'll get to that in a bit.
But let's just suppose that that little cube down there is u by u by u.
Now, if the whole base of the cube is t units, and I put that little chunk there that's u,
that means the other piece, which is labeled AB in the diagram, would have to be t minus
u units.
And likewise, going back on the right side, if I have a little chunk of u units, the remainder
of that, which is labeled DE, is t minus u units.
So these are the dimensions of this subdivision of this cube.
Now, what Cardano has to do is find the volume of the cube again by adding up all the little
pieces into which it has been broken.
So we're going to go after the volume of the cube once more, but this time by collecting
all the little blocks and pieces you see before you.
So we have to do this methodically.
Here we go.
First of all, let me get that little cube in the lower front corner.
What's its volume?
Well, it's u by u by u, so that's u cubed.
Let me next get that big shaded cube in the upper back corner.
You can see it there.
It's a little darker.
We're going to get its volume.
Now, let's see.
It's t minus u one way by t minus u, the other way by t minus u in the third dimension.
So it's a cube whose volume is t minus u, the quantity cube.
All right.
What else do we have here?
Look at the front.
Right here facing front, there's this slab standing there.
The base is A, B. The height is the whole height of the cube, and it's u units thick.
It's facing us on the front.
It's this big slab.
Its volume would be t minus u times t times u, the product of the three dimensions.
So let me put it in the form t u times t minus u.
So that's the front facing slab.
But there's another slab on the right side that is exactly the same dimensions.
You see it.
It goes along the base D, E. It rises all the way to the top.
So it's t minus u by t and u thickness.
I'm going to add that volume in.
That's exactly what I just did.
So I'm going to get another t u times t minus u.
Let's just put a two there and make this as two t u times t minus u.
But I'm still not done.
There's still some pieces left.
Now, where are they?
Look on the front here.
There's that little shaded cube in the lower front corner.
Everything on top of it is a block.
I don't have that yet.
Its dimensions are u by u by t minus u.
So its volume is u squared times t minus u.
And there's one more piece.
If you look at that shaded cube in the upper back, it's resting upon a pedestal there below
it.
I need that volume.
And if you look at the dimensions, it's t minus u by t minus u by u.
So the volume there would be u times t minus u squared.
And I think I've collected all the pieces now.
There they are.
Well now what we want to do is do a little algebra on this.
Here's what I'll do.
I'll write down the u cube that started it and the t minus u cubed.
Leave those alone.
But the next three terms, the two t u times t minus u plus the u squared times t minus
u plus the u times the t minus u squared.
Notice each of those has in it the t minus u expression.
It's common to all three of those last terms.
So let me factor out t minus u from those three.
When I do that, the first term will remain a two t u, which I'll put in the square brackets.
When I pull the t minus u out of the second term, I'll be left with a u squared in the
square brackets.
And when I pull a t minus u out of the third term, I'm left with a u times t minus u.
And so this expression on the screen is the volume of the cube.
But we also know the volume of the cube quite simply is t cubed.
And so I'll set those equal.
We've done the volume of the cube both as one big cube and as all these little pieces.
Now for some reason this is going to get us somewhere.
It's still not at all clear where this is going.
Here's the equation.
u cubed plus t minus u, the quantity cubed plus the quantity t minus u square bracket
two t u plus u squared plus u times per end t minus u is t cubed.
What are we going to do with this?
Here's what we'll do.
On the right side is that t cubed.
On the left side, it starts off with a u cubed.
Let me move the u cubed over to the other side.
So the u cubed goes to the right and now on the right I have t cubed minus u cubed.
In terms of what's left on the left side, it starts with that t minus u cubed.
And then there's this next expression.
But look in the square brackets there.
I see in the midst of that u times t minus u, let me multiply that out.
So that'll give me, I'll have plus t minus u times square bracket the two t u plus the
u squared plus another t u when the u hits the t and then minus a u squared when the
u hits the minus u.
Well, that seems to cry out for something to be done in those square brackets.
I have a u squared, I have a minus u squared, they cancel.
And now we're getting things a little simpler because inside the square brackets there's
a two t u plus a t u, well that's three t u and that's all that's there.
And so I'm finally reaching a point where I can take a deep breath here.
Let me clean this up and say that what I've got then is that t minus u cubed, the first
expression, plus the square bracket term three t u times its multiplier t minus u is equal
to on the right side t cubed minus u cubed.
That's important, I'm going to call that star, I want to refer to that in a minute.
All right, so what?
What is the point of all this?
Well, here's the critical thing.
This is the sort of thing that Cardano would have seen.
That has the structure of the equation we're trying to solve.
Remember, we're trying to solve x cubed plus 24x is 56, something cubed plus 24 times the
something equals 56.
If you look at equation star, you see a mirror image of that if I would have let t minus
u be x.
So in that equation star, take out the t minus u, put in the x, and star will become x cubed
plus three t u times x equals t cubed minus u cubed.
It has that same flavor as a depressed cubic.
But the cubic we really wanted was x cubed plus 24x is 56.
That's what we're trying to solve.
So now I look at these two depressed cubics.
They both have an x cubed in them.
In one case, I have three t u times x, below I have 24 times x.
On the right, I have t cubed minus u cubed, in general, but the 56 in the specific case,
that suggests I should equate these, let the coefficient three t u be 24, let t cubed
minus u cubed be 56.
What I have now done is found two equations in two unknowns, t and u.
And if you remember your high school algebra, you can solve two equations in two unknowns.
And that's what I'm going to have to do.
Suppose I could do that.
Suppose I could figure out what t is and what u is.
Then up above, I said x is t minus u, I can subtract those, and I would have figured
out what x is.
So that's the strategy, that's where we're headed.
I now have those two equations, three t u is 24, and t cubed minus u cubed is 56, and
I've got to solve these simultaneously.
Now the way you do that is, you find you solve one equation for one letter and substitute
that back into the other.
So let's look at that top equation.
Three t u is 24, that tells me that u, let's solve that for u, is 24 over three t.
Just bring the three t underneath on the right.
But 24 over three is eight, so this is just eight over t.
So that's what u is, u is eight over t.
Go back to the second equation, t cubed minus u cubed is 56, u is eight over t, stick it
in there.
And so you'll get t cubed minus eight over t, the quantity cubed is 56.
If you cubed that eight over t, you'll end up with t cubed minus 512 over t cubed is
56.
Now this is a landmark on the road to the solution, we're not quite there yet, but
notice what I've got now, one equation, one unknown, t.
If I can figure out what t is, I can go back and figure out what u is, I can go back up
the line and figure out what x is, which is what the object is here.
So now we just have to solve that equation.
Now that's still not quite there yet.
You know, one of the troubles is it's got a t cube in the bottom.
You don't want a variable in the denominator.
So I'm going to multiply both sides of this by t cubed.
And then when I distribute across, I can cancel out that t cube in the bottom.
So when I do that, I get t cubed times t cubed is t to the sixth.
I get t cubed times minus 512 over t cubed is just minus 512.
And on the right side, I get 56t cubed.
And one more thing, let me move everything over to the left.
And so here's the equation I got to do.
This is what it's all going to come down to.
Can I solve t to the sixth?
That's what t cubed times t cubed will be, t to the sixth will be 6t's, minus 56t cubed
minus 512 is zero.
That's the ball game.
Can we solve this?
Well, gee, my first thought is this is worse.
If you think about it, we started trying to solve a cubic, a third-degree equation.
That's a sixth-degree equation.
It seems like I've made life worse.
It's a sixth-degree equation in t.
But, and here's the real thing, here's the key to unlocking the whole problem.
Yes, it's sixth-degree in t, but it's second-degree in t cubed.
It's quadratic in t cubed.
By which I mean, I could write that as the quantity t cubed squared, that's t to the
sixth, minus 56 times the quantity t cubed minus 512 equals zero.
And you know what that looks like?
That looks like a quadratic equation.
In fact, it looks just like y squared minus 56y minus 512 is zero if you let y play the
role of t cubed.
So I've reduced the problem to solving that second-degree equation, but that's the exact
second-degree equation I solved at the beginning of this lecture.
I had an x in instead of a y, but it was the same one.
And if you look back, you see that we used the quadratic formula to figure out what y
is.
Now y is t cubed, but numerically, y came out to be 64 or negative 8.
And so using the quadratic formula in the course of solving the third-degree equation,
I decided that t cubed is 64 or negative 8.
Now you only need one of these two solutions, so how about we'll use that t cubed is 64.
Now all we got to do is back up the chain and we can do it, we're done.
If t cubed is 64, then t is the cube root of 64, which is 4.
So now we've nailed that down, I know what t is.
U, I better figure out what u is.
Well remember we saw somewhere up the line that u was 24 over 3t, which we reduced to
8 over t, but I now know that t is 4, so u is 8 over 4, u is 2.
And now the dramatic conclusion, x is what we wanted, the solution of our cubic, x is
t minus u.
I've just said that t is 4, u is 2, so x, the solution of the cubic that we started
with, x cubed plus 24x is 56, would be x equals t minus u equals 4 minus 2 equals 2.
That is how you do it.
That's the solution of the depressed cubic.
It's quite a journey, quite a workout, but it's kind of neat.
First thing I better do here before we proceed is check it.
Is this right?
I better be sure, so you always want to check your answer.
X is 2 is my candidate for the solution, so if x is 2, I'll stick it into x cubed plus
24x.
That'll be 2 cubed plus 24 times 2, 8 plus 48, 56, yes.
So that's encouraging, it checks.
Now what you want to do in general is look at the depressed cubic x cubed plus mx equals
n.
This is the generic cubic, it doesn't have the 24 and the 56 in it, this is any cubic,
any depressed cubic, and you do the same thing.
You take the cube, t by t by t, you break it up into the little pieces, you get those
equations spinning out, you let x be t minus u, you solve for t, you solve for u, and eventually
you get a general formula, the cubic equation, and I will show it to you, this is what comes
out when you do it with the m's and n's.
X turns out to be this giant formula, the cube root of n over 2 plus the square root
of n squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27 minus the cube root of negative n over 2 plus the
square root of n squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27.
In my previous lecture, I read to you Cardano's solution for the depressed cubic, it was a
big paragraph with lots of complicated words in it.
If you translate that verbal description into symbols, you get exactly this, this is what
Cardano gave us as his solution.
And notice one other thing, this is a solution by radicals, it's just what we wanted because
all I need to know is m and n, the coefficients of my cubic, I stick them into this formula
which involves the m and the n added, subtracted, multiplied, divided, square rooted, and cube
rooted, all of which are allowable algebraic operations and I'll get the solution.
Well, let me check this in this sense, let me return to the example I just did, x cubed
plus 24x equals 56, and try this formula out on that particular example, I know what the
answer should be, it should be 2, we did it, we derived it from scratch, let me now just
try to derive it from the formula.
So I would first identify that m is 24, remember the pattern is x cubed plus mx is n, so the
m is the 24 and the n is the 56, and I just have to stick those numbers into this massive
looking equation.
So I'm going to do that, but I see one way to streamline this a little bit, if you look
at the solution for x, there's a cube root in the midst of which there's a square root
of n squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27, and then there's another cube root, subtracted
from it, but it has that same square root underneath.
So maybe I'll just do that square root all by itself, and then we'll go back and plug
in the numbers, so what I will say is let's first just figure out the square root of n
squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27, n is 56, so I put in the square root of 56 squared
over 4, m was 24, so I add to it 24 cubed over 27, you multiply this out and you get
the square root of 784 plus 512, which comes out to be the square root of 1296, which is
a perfect square, out comes 36.
So in the solution where I see the square root of n squared over 4 plus m cubed over
27 in both spots, I'm just going to stick in 36.
And now I can quickly run to the end, I'm trying to solve x cubed plus 24x is 56, I've
got my cubic formula, I put in the numbers, I get the cube root of n over 2, which is
56 over 2, plus that square root I just did, which we said turned out to be 36, minus the
cube root of minus n over 2, minus 56 halves, plus that same square root 36.
Well 56 over 2 is 28, so I'm now down to the cube root of 28 plus 36, minus the cube root
of minus 28 plus 36, 28 and 36 is 64, so I've got the cube root of 64, minus 28 plus 36
is 8, minus the cube root of 8, the cube root of 64 is 4, the cube root of 8 is 2, finally
I get x is equal to 4 minus 2, which is 2, which is correct.
So the formula works in a case where I sort of knew what the answer was ahead of time.
But the formula works for others that aren't quite as nifty, that one all worked out, everything
was a perfect square. Let me show you one where it's not quite as pleasant, x cubed
plus 6x equals 10, m is 6, n is 10, you go to the cubic formula, I'll read it once more,
but this will be the last time, the cube root of n over 2 plus the square root of n
squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27, minus the cube root of negative n over 2 plus the
square root of n squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27.
You can sort of see at this point why they don't teach this in schools, it's hard enough
to remember the quadratic formula, let alone this one.
But anyway, if you stick in the m's and n's, you get a big blizzard of square roots and
cube roots, and when you simplify it, it comes down to be the cube root of 5 plus the square
root of 33 minus the cube root of negative 5 plus the square root of 33, and this can't
be simplified further, that's it. Square root of 33 is not something that reduces, so there's
your solution by radicals. Now you could punch this in and get an approximate solution as
a decimal, 1.30271, it comes out to be, but that's just an approximation, that's not
what they were looking for in the 16th century, they were looking for the line above, they
were looking for the solution by radicals.
Okay, now, a couple of questions remain, what if the cubic isn't depressed? What if you
had a cubic that has the square term in it, like generally ax cubed plus bx squared plus
cx plus d is zero? Cardano discovered how to approach this, and what he did was he depressed
it. If it wasn't depressed, make it so, and his great discovery was how to do this, how
to turn any cubic into a depressed cubic, he says you just make a substitution. You replace
x by y minus b over 3a, where the a's and b's are the coefficients of your general cubic.
So let me do an example of this, let me show you how this works. Let's suppose I have this
cubic, x cubed minus 15x squared plus 81x is 165, that is not depressed. The a is one,
the coefficient of x cubed, the b is negative 15, and so Cardano says let x equal y minus
b over 3a, that is y minus negative 15 over 3 times 1, well minus minus 15 is 15, 15 over
3 is 5, so he says let x be y plus 5. When I go back to the cubic, I let x be y plus
5, stick it into x cubed minus 15x squared plus 81x equals 165, and you'll get of course
y plus 5 cubed minus 15 times y plus 5 squared plus 81 times y plus 5 equals 165. You multiply
all this out, collect the terms, and this turns into a depressed cubic. It always does,
that's what Cardano showed, this always will have to happen. In fact, the depressed cubic
it turns into is y cubed plus 6y is 10, that's the one we just did. I had x's in it, but
now I got y's in it, I know what the solution is by the formula y is equal to the cube root
of 5 plus the square root of 33 minus the cube root of negative 5 plus the square root
of 33, but that's y, what's x, x is what I want, well look up above, x is y plus 5,
so x, you just add 5 on, and there's your solution to the cubic, a solution by radicals.
So even a non-depressed cubic can be solved via this process that Cardano discovered.
All of this appears in chapter 11 of Ars Magna, the chapter he called cubes and roots equal
to number, okay, x cubed plus mx equal n. But remember in those days they had to avoid
negatives, and so the example I just gave you that had a negative in it wouldn't have
been legit in the 16th century, he had to do different chapters, each chapter would handle
cases in order to avoid negatives, there was over a dozen different chapters to handle all
the different possibilities for the cubic that we can do in a single expression because we're
nervous about negatives. So the example I just showed you, x cubed minus 15x squared
plus 81x equals 165 would not have been there, rather you'd have to look in chapter 18 which
tells you how to do cube and roots equal to square and number, and sort of move this around
a little bit and you'll see that this could be reduced to x cubed plus 81x cube and roots,
bring the minus 15x squared over to the other side equals square and number, and in chapter
18 you'd see how to do that one. Well Cardano's Ars Magna continues to chapter 39 where we
find Ferrari's solution of the quartic, remember Ferrari had shown how to solve a fourth degree
equation, and Cardano introduces this with his nice statement, he said there is another
rule more noble than the preceding, it is Ludovico Ferrari's who gave it to me at my request,
through it we have all the solutions for equations of the fourth power, so Ars Magna
solves the fourth degree. How? He reduces it to a third degree, the third degree is reduced
to a depressed cubic and away we go, so everything gets reduced down. It leaves one question
hanging, what about the fifth degree, what about the quintic equation, ax to the fifth
plus bx to the fourth plus cx cubed plus dx squared plus ex plus f equals zero. How do
you do the fifth degree? I know what I'd guess, I bet you'd reduce the fifth degree to a fourth
degree, the fourth degree to a third degree and solve it that way, but nobody could. People
tried this in the 16th century, the fifth degree was a roadblock, in the 17th, in the
18th, nobody could get anywhere until the question was answered by Niels Abel in the 19th
century, an Norwegian mathematician who showed that the solution by radicals of the general
quintic equation, fifth degree equation or any higher degree equation is impossible. Can't
be, there are no formulas for fifth degree or higher. It's a very strange turn of events,
you can solve the cubic, you can solve the quartic, after that algebra fails. And so
I'll leave you with this thought that we sort of have verified the pessimism of Luca Pacioli,
remember way back in the beginning of this story, Pacioli said you couldn't do a cubic,
he was wrong, you could do the cubic. This pessimism was unfounded, you could do the quartic,
but you can't do the quintic or any higher, at that point algebra fails us.
