square brackets.
And when I pull a t minus u out of the third term, I'm left with a u times t minus u.
And so this expression on the screen is the volume of the cube.
But we also know the volume of the cube quite simply is t cubed.
And so I'll set those equal.
We've done the volume of the cube both as one big cube and as all these little pieces.
Now for some reason this is going to get us somewhere.
It's still not at all clear where this is going.
Here's the equation.
u cubed plus t minus u, the quantity cubed plus the quantity t minus u square bracket
two t u plus u squared plus u times per end t minus u is t cubed.
What are we going to do with this?
Here's what we'll do.
On the right side is that t cubed.
On the left side, it starts off with a u cubed.
Let me move the u cubed over to the other side.
So the u cubed goes to the right and now on the right I have t cubed minus u cubed.
In terms of what's left on the left side, it starts with that t minus u cubed.
And then there's this next expression.
But look in the square brackets there.
I see in the midst of that u times t minus u, let me multiply that out.
So that'll give me, I'll have plus t minus u times square bracket the two t u plus the
u squared plus another t u when the u hits the t and then minus a u squared when the
u hits the minus u.
Well, that seems to cry out for something to be done in those square brackets.
I have a u squared, I have a minus u squared, they cancel.
And now we're getting things a little simpler because inside the square brackets there's
a two t u plus a t u, well that's three t u and that's all that's there.
And so I'm finally reaching a point where I can take a deep breath here.
Let me clean this up and say that what I've got then is that t minus u cubed, the first
expression, plus the square bracket term three t u times its multiplier t minus u is equal
to on the right side t cubed minus u cubed.
That's important, I'm going to call that star, I want to refer to that in a minute.
All right, so what?
What is the point of all this?
Well, here's the critical thing.
This is the sort of thing that Cardano would have seen.
That has the structure of the equation we're trying to solve.
Remember, we're trying to solve x cubed plus 24x is 56, something cubed plus 24 times the
something equals 56.
If you look at equation star, you see a mirror image of that if I would have let t minus
u be x.
So in that equation star, take out the t minus u, put in the x, and star will become x cubed
plus three t u times x equals t cubed minus u cubed.
