First thing I better do here before we proceed is check it.
Is this right?
I better be sure, so you always want to check your answer.
X is 2 is my candidate for the solution, so if x is 2, I'll stick it into x cubed plus
24x.
That'll be 2 cubed plus 24 times 2, 8 plus 48, 56, yes.
So that's encouraging, it checks.
Now what you want to do in general is look at the depressed cubic x cubed plus mx equals
n.
This is the generic cubic, it doesn't have the 24 and the 56 in it, this is any cubic,
any depressed cubic, and you do the same thing.
You take the cube, t by t by t, you break it up into the little pieces, you get those
equations spinning out, you let x be t minus u, you solve for t, you solve for u, and eventually
you get a general formula, the cubic equation, and I will show it to you, this is what comes
out when you do it with the m's and n's.
X turns out to be this giant formula, the cube root of n over 2 plus the square root
of n squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27 minus the cube root of negative n over 2 plus the
square root of n squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27.
In my previous lecture, I read to you Cardano's solution for the depressed cubic, it was a
big paragraph with lots of complicated words in it.
If you translate that verbal description into symbols, you get exactly this, this is what
Cardano gave us as his solution.
And notice one other thing, this is a solution by radicals, it's just what we wanted because
all I need to know is m and n, the coefficients of my cubic, I stick them into this formula
which involves the m and the n added, subtracted, multiplied, divided, square rooted, and cube
rooted, all of which are allowable algebraic operations and I'll get the solution.
Well, let me check this in this sense, let me return to the example I just did, x cubed
plus 24x equals 56, and try this formula out on that particular example, I know what the
answer should be, it should be 2, we did it, we derived it from scratch, let me now just
try to derive it from the formula.
So I would first identify that m is 24, remember the pattern is x cubed plus mx is n, so the
m is the 24 and the n is the 56, and I just have to stick those numbers into this massive
looking equation.
So I'm going to do that, but I see one way to streamline this a little bit, if you look
at the solution for x, there's a cube root in the midst of which there's a square root
of n squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27, and then there's another cube root, subtracted
from it, but it has that same square root underneath.
So maybe I'll just do that square root all by itself, and then we'll go back and plug
in the numbers, so what I will say is let's first just figure out the square root of n
squared over 4 plus m cubed over 27, n is 56, so I put in the square root of 56 squared
over 4, m was 24, so I add to it 24 cubed over 27, you multiply this out and you get
the square root of 784 plus 512, which comes out to be the square root of 1296, which is
a perfect square, out comes 36.
So in the solution where I see the square root of n squared over 4 plus m cubed over
