square and he was looking at a two-dimensional square.
Well, you go up to a third-degree equation, you go up a dimension.
And so Cardano is looking at a literal cube.
And let's say it's t by t by t.
So I've drawn a picture there of a cube, t units high, t units across, t units deep.
The volume of this is what we're going to try to track down.
Well, the volume of a t by t by t cubed is obviously just t cubed.
So that's easy enough.
Well, Cardano has to do something more sophisticated than that, and he sure does when he subdivides
the cube in a kind of interesting and it turns out to be very valuable fashion.
So here's a picture of my subdivided cube.
What I'm doing is slicing this cube up in the various pieces.
It's the same cube, but it's now been broken up into the pieces you see.
Now, the cube is still t units high, t units across the bottom, t units deep.
That's the same cube.
But you see down in the lower front corner, there's a little piece that's shaded.
That's a little cube that's u units by u units by u units.
And we're going to have to worry about what the t and the u are.
We'll get to that in a bit.
But let's just suppose that that little cube down there is u by u by u.
Now, if the whole base of the cube is t units, and I put that little chunk there that's u,
that means the other piece, which is labeled AB in the diagram, would have to be t minus
u units.
And likewise, going back on the right side, if I have a little chunk of u units, the remainder
of that, which is labeled DE, is t minus u units.
So these are the dimensions of this subdivision of this cube.
Now, what Cardano has to do is find the volume of the cube again by adding up all the little
pieces into which it has been broken.
So we're going to go after the volume of the cube once more, but this time by collecting
all the little blocks and pieces you see before you.
So we have to do this methodically.
Here we go.
First of all, let me get that little cube in the lower front corner.
What's its volume?
Well, it's u by u by u, so that's u cubed.
Let me next get that big shaded cube in the upper back corner.
You can see it there.
It's a little darker.
We're going to get its volume.
Now, let's see.
It's t minus u one way by t minus u, the other way by t minus u in the third dimension.
So it's a cube whose volume is t minus u, the quantity cube.
All right.
What else do we have here?
