We've done battle with the cubic equation, whose solution was the great achievement of
the 16th century.
Now it's time to move on to the next, to the 17th century, which is sometimes called
the heroic century in mathematics.
That's because the 17th century contributed so many ideas, which are now fundamental to
our mathematical world.
Ideas that you encounter in school, ideas that are still being studied and researched
to this day.
It was the century when mathematics became modern.
I want to introduce you to a cast of characters from at least the first half of the century
in this lecture.
Perhaps first though, we should just see what was going on elsewhere in the world early
in the 17th century.
Well, there's a couple of pretty substantial achievements.
In 1601, Shakespeare wrote Hamlet.
In 1607, the British formed their first settlement in Jamestown in the New World.
In 1609, Galileo turned his telescope on the heavens in the process confirming Copernicus'
theory that the sun was the center of the solar system and discovering many other wonderful
heavenly things as well.
So it was an exciting time, as it was in mathematics.
Now my first character from the heroic century is actually someone that lived most of his
life prior to that.
It was François Viet.
Here's a dashing looking fellow.
This is Viet.
And his great achievements were just at the end of the 16th, just before the 17th.
You know, these centuries don't divide perfectly in terms of ideas.
I'm going to slosh him over into the 17th century.
The Devinere Viet did lots of things.
One of them was he cracked the Spanish cipher.
The Spanish army had a code, a cipher, in which they would encrypt important messages.
The French couldn't break the code.
They got a copy of one of these messages.
They gave it to Viet.
And with his great mathematical and logical ability, he broke the cipher.
He was one of the first code breakers, therefore.
But it's not for that that we're remembering him.
Rather, in his book, The Analytic Art, published in 1591, almost, but not quite, in the 17th
century, Viet gave us a more modern algebraic notation.
Remember, as we've seen all these people solving equations, from Alcorizmi to Cardano, what
they really were doing was working with words.
They had to express their equations in words.
I've shared with you some of the very complicated verbiage that comes out of this, where you're
trying to solve an equation and you have to express it verbally.
It's hard enough to do with all of our modern symbols.
But obviously, mathematics was going to get stuck unless somebody came up with a more
efficient way of expressing these things.
And Viet was the first to at least move us in that direction.
In the Analytic Art, you would find something like this.
He would write D in R minus D in E equabitur A quad.
So this is an expression from Viet.
Now it's not modern.
It doesn't look exactly modern.
But notice, we have some letters playing the roles of what used to be called roots and squares
and cubes.
It's getting there.
Now, if you wanted to translate this particular expression into modern symbolism, what he's
saying is D in R means D times R minus D in E. Well, that would mean minus D times E.
Equabitur, you can guess that that's equals, and A quad is a squared, as in quadratic.
So this is D times R minus D times E equals A squared.
It wasn't perfectly modern, but algebraic notation was at least on its way.
I'll show you in a few minutes the person that really modernized the notation so that
when we look at it, we can read it.
We can see what was being said algebraically, but that's coming a little later on.
Another great invention from this time, and now we finally are properly in the 17th century,
was logarithms.
You probably remember studying logarithms in school.
One of the great, great discoveries of this century or any.
Logarithms were discovered and developed by two people.
One was John Napier, a nobleman from Scotland, nurse's picture.
And one was Henry Briggs from England, who was not a nobleman.
In fact, I couldn't find a picture of Henry Briggs, though I might.
So I asked for a picture of some English Henry from about this time, and they gave me that
one.
Henry VIII.
Well, wait a minute.
That's not Henry Briggs.
That Henry wasn't particularly good at mathematics, and he was a very unkind man.
Henry Briggs was very good at mathematics and was very nice.
He went and visited Napier, and the two of them refined the idea of logarithms in a very
impressive fashion.
They created what are called the common or Briggsian logarithms.
These are the ones you remember from school.
The log base 10, the common log, the Briggsian log, the base 10 log of 10 is 1.
The log base 10 of 100 is 2 because 100 is 10 squared.
The log base 10 of 1,000 is 3 because 1,000 is 10 cubed.
The logarithm is the exponent.
You must raise 10 to to get the number.
This is the idea of a common log or a Briggsian logarithm.
Now those are easy, but what about the log base 10 of 5?
What number do you raise 10 to to get 5?
It's going to be some fractional number.
It's not going to be very obvious what that is.
It has to be calculated, and it has to be calculated with an enormous amount of tedium,
enormous amount of effort.
Briggs took it upon himself to do this.
He published in 1624 something called the arithmetica logarithmica, which is a table
of logarithms which he had calculated painstakingly over the years.
It must have been one of the most grueling computations ever done because his table of
logarithms were done to 14-place accuracy, which seems like overkill to me.
But finally, he did this.
He presents the world with these log tables, and then people can use logarithms to expedite
their calculations.
If you remember the way this works, instead of having to multiply two numbers, you can
just add their logarithms and use the tables.
Adding is a lot easier than multiplying.
It simplifies that.
Instead of taking the cube root of a number, you can just take a third of its logarithm,
and taking a third of a number is a lot easier than taking a cube root.
This simplifies the kind of computational procedures radically.
Logrithms were a fabulous time saver.
In fact, it was Laplace, the 18th century mathematician who wrote that logarithms, by
shortening the labors, doubled the life of the astronomer.
Astronomers who had to spend so much time with their calculations could go so much faster
with logarithms that they essentially doubled their careers.
So logarithms, that's a big achievement of the century.
Another big achievement came from this fellow, Rene Descartes.
Very famous, we've hit a name everybody knows, Descartes.
He was certainly a philosopher, famous for his philosophical writings.
Probably chief among these was his discourse on the method of 1637.
This is often viewed as the philosophical underpinnings of the scientific revolution
that's on its way.
So Descartes is probably regarded by most people as a philosopher.
True, but we want to also claim him because he was also a very substantial mathematician.
One of the things he did mathematically was attach an appendix to his discourse on the
method which was called geometry.
And in this, he gives us the first published account of what we now call analytic geometry.
The idea that you will take geometry in the plane and superimpose a grid and apply algebra
to the geometric figures, apply the geometry to the algebraic equations.
You're going to connect algebra and geometry in what has to be the most glorious marriage
in the history of mathematics.
These two meet up, create analytic geometry, Descartes tells us about it in his 1637 geometry.
He tells us, I shall not hesitate to introduce these arithmetical terms into geometry for
the sake of greater clearness.
And indeed, where would mathematics be without our axes, without our functions, our curves
graphed within them?
In fact, we call this now the Cartesian plane, the geometrical plane with the axes imposed,
of course, named after Descartes.
He also gave us the modern algebraic notation.
I mentioned that someone produced notation finally that looks modern.
It was Descartes.
And let me give you an excerpt.
Here is a sample from Descartes' writing in which he has a formula.
He's writing in French, this is not in Latin, which is kind of interesting.
If you read what he's saying, he's looking at, he has an equation up there at the top
or an expression that has a z cubed and a funny little symbol that looks like a fish,
and then minus pz plus q.
And he's talking about a rule which Cardano had attributed to someone named Scipio Farias
and gives a root to that equation as follows, and that's the big expression along the bottom.
Well, if you look at this, you can begin to see things.
This looks kind of familiar.
Let me examine this a little more carefully here.
That little fish-like symbol up on the top line, that is how Descartes would write equal.
So okay, on that front, he wasn't exactly modern yet, but that is the equal sign.
It took out another century or perhaps a little less before the common equal sign became the standard.
So whenever he has z cubed little fish symbol minus pz plus q, what he's really saying is
he's looking at z cubed equals minus pz plus q, and if I bring the minus pz over,
what he's really looking at is z cubed plus pz equals q.
Well, that should look familiar. That's a depressed cubic.
Instead of m and n, as I was talking about in the previous lecture, we have p and q,
and instead of x, I have z, but that's no big deal.
That's the depressed cubic, and that's why he's introducing the name Cardan in his expression,
which of course is Cardano, who got the rule from someone named Scipio Farias.
Well, that's Scipione del Ferro, and the rule itself is across the bottom.
And if you look at that expression on the bottom, that's the solution to the cubic.
Now, it takes a little bit of translation. For instance,
both of those radicals have a radical and then a c period.
Well, what's that? Well, that means cube root. He took the root with a c for the cube,
so he didn't yet have the little 3 up there that we write, but that's not a big deal.
What else do we notice if we look at his equation? Well, here's his expression.
You see this thing, a plus sign with a line through it. A plus with a line through it.
What's that? Well, that's a minus. They didn't, for some reason,
Descartes hadn't used a minus, but he just lined out the plus.
Okay, so you see, for instance, between the two cube roots,
there's a plus sign with a minus. If you remember the solution to the cubic,
sure enough, there's supposed to be a minus there.
One other thing that's a little strange is you see q, q.
You see that appearing twice in this expression. What's that? Well, that's q squared.
Now, it's kind of interesting in the 17th century, they didn't tend to write q square.
They would write q q. They'd write q twice. But once you got to q cubed,
they didn't write q q q. They really wrote q with an exponent 3. You'll see a p cubed
at the very last expression up on the screen. So, for cubes and higher power,
they used the exponents. For squares, they just copied the letter twice. And I guess the reason
was that you didn't save any space, particularly in your printing, to have q q as opposed to q
squared. It still took two spaces, but q to the fifth only took two spaces where q q q q q
would certainly start to fill up the line. In any case, when I look at Descartes, I see
familiar looking mathematics. Finally, we have an algebra that we're familiar with.
Descartes' writing is regarded as being particularly opaque, particularly hard to follow.
He himself seemed to take pride in this for some reason. He said,
I have omitted a number of things that might have made it clearer. But I did this intentionally
and would not have done it otherwise. So, here's a textbook author bragging that he's made his
book hard to follow. Descartes argued that only by making the reader struggle with the reader
truly learn the material. And so, it was his goal, his job, to make it hard to follow.
Modern textbook writers, I would argue, should not follow that advice. In fact, we're told that Newton,
later in the century, tried to read Descartes. His Newton's biographer said that Newton took
Descartes' geometry in hand, though he had been told it would be very difficult. Newton plunged in.
He could get through one page and he got stuck. So, then Newton said he'd go back to the beginning.
And this time, he could get through two pages before he got stuck. And then he went back to
the beginning and he got a little further before he got stuck. And he went back to the beginning
and eventually, he says, Newton, he got it. He mastered it. But it took all these starts. And
this was Newton. If Newton had trouble with Descartes, look out. We're all in big difficulty here.
But anyway, Descartes had given us analytic geometry and modern algebraic notation.
The next mathematician I want to talk about is another Frenchman, Blaise Pascal. Pascal was also
known for something other than his mathematics. He was a prodigy who was great at all sorts of things,
science, philosophy, theology. He was, you know, way ahead of his years, even as a young person.
At age 19, he invented a calculating machine, a mechanical calculating machine, now called the
Pascaline. Here's a picture of a recreation of this. Now, of course, our calculators are made
out of silicon, chips and wires and plastic. In those days, a calculating machine had to be made
out of wood and metal, had to have cranks and gears. It was quite a complicated device. But Pascal's
supposedly could add and subtract. You put the number in, turn some dials, and get the summer
difference. So this was a great mechanical advance. Pascal is known as a theologian. He wrote the
Ponce in the 1650s, a book about his thoughts about theological matters. This is still being
read. This is a work that has survived, even as Descartes' discourse has survived. He was a
physicist. Pascal worked on things like fluids, barometers, the hydraulic press.
He was also a hypochondriac. Poor Pascal was always sick. He was always complaining about his health.
Now, he actually died young, so he might have had some legitimate reasons for those complaints.
But you would expect he would have had an even more glorious career had his health been more robust.
But it's in mathematics, of course, that we want to look at his contributions. And there he worked in
probability theory. He was one of the first people who started to turn probability into a mathematical
science. I had mentioned Cardano had written a book on how to gamble, which was the first, at least,
brush with probability theory. But Pascal's interests were a little more ethereal, a little more
ethereal, a little more theoretical. He worked on the quadrature of the cycloid. Now, this was a
real important hot area in the 17th century. Quadrature, I had mentioned in an earlier lecture,
means the area under a curve. And the curve he's talking about here is the cycloid. Now,
if you don't know a cycloid, we're going to have to meet this. Let me tell you what this is.
Suppose you have a horizontal line and a circle upon it. Think of a bicycle wheel going down the
street. And you take a look at one point on the wheel on the circle. For instance, on a bicycle,
it would be the valve where you put the air in. So just keep your eye on that valve as the bicycle
moves. So the valve will rise and fall and rise and fall and form these arches as the bicycle
goes down the street. There's a picture here showing the path traced by a point on the circle
as the circle rolls along. That curve, those arches are called the cycloid arches, the cycloidal curve.
This became a very important curve in the 17th century. People kept coming back to it,
exploring it, investigating it, and finding strange and wonderful uses of it.
Cycloids are quite important. And it was Pascal who sort of elevated this to such an important
position in mathematics. These were called mechanical curves, curves that could be created
by something moving along. He also gave us Pascal's Triangle. And I guess in mathematics,
he's probably best known for that. Pascal's Triangle is an array of numbers. I have it up here.
It's got one in the top. The next row is a one and a one. And then you have a one, two, one,
and a one, three, three, one, and a one, four, six, four, one, and so on as you move down
through the triangle. Now you probably know the rule for this, to figure out what any number is,
you add up the two numbers, the one up above and to the left, the one above and to the right.
And they generate the next number down. So if I look at the bottom row there,
there's a 15. Where did that come from? Well, it came from the two numbers above five plus 10.
So five plus 10 is 15. So that generates this triangle. Now, is it just a pretty array of
numbers? No, it has a use. It has a use in expanding binomials. So if I took a plus b,
a binomial, two terms, and cubed it, so you multiply a plus b times a plus b and you get an
answer and then you multiply it once more by a plus b, you get a cubed plus 3a squared b plus
3ab squared plus b cubed. Now you can see what's happening there. The a's exponents are going down,
a cubed squared a constant. The b's are going up, but the real trick is figuring out those
coefficients. And they're one, three, three, one as you read across. Well, that's just exactly
row three of Pascal's Triangle. What they're giving you are the coefficients that you would get
when expanding binomials. So if I wanted a plus b to the fifth, and I didn't feel like multiplying
that out five times, I don't have to. I just go to row five, I see the coefficients one, five,
ten, ten, five, one, and I fill in the powers of a and b and I get the expansion. A to the fifth
plus 5a to the fourth b plus 10a cubed b squared plus 10a squared b cubed plus 5ab to the fourth
plus b to the fifth. That's it. Much more easy, much easier to do just by looking across that row.
So this is called Pascal's Triangle. Now, truth to tell, Pascal wasn't the first person to discover
this. This same array shows up in Viet's analytic art from 1591. And truth to tell, it actually shows
up in ancient Chinese mathematics. So they were on to this well before Pascal, but his name got
associated with it. Well, my last mathematician from the heroic century is the greatest of them,
Pierre de Fermat. He makes up the third of the triumvirate French mathematicians, Descartes,
Pascal, Fermat. He was a very great mathematician indeed. His actual job, however, was to be a
magistrate in Toulouse in France. This is a minor legal official. He was supposed to be working
in the courts, and apparently he didn't work very hard because he sure had a lot of time
to do mathematics. And he did. He did some great stuff. One thing he did was he corresponded with
Pascal on probability. Remember, I said Pascal had helped develop the theory of probability?
He did so in conjunction with Fermat. They would write letters back and forth,
asking each other questions, elaborating on their theories, and these letters formed the basis
of probability theory. So it's not just Pascal, but sort of you could say the Pascal-Fermat
correspondence is what got probability going. So that's pretty important. He created an analytic
geometry of his own before that of Descartes. Remember, Descartes published analytic geometry,
but actually Fermat had done this long before, but he hadn't published it. And so Descartes gets
his in print, and we have the Cartesian plane. Had Fermat done his and published his earlier,
we might have had the Fermadian plane or something. But it was the same idea, that same very fruitful
marriage of algebra and geometry. Fermat foreshadowed both differential and integral calculus.
Now there's a pretty big achievement. Calculus was kind of almost ready to hatch,
almost ready to appear. And Fermat has work where you can see him sort of getting real close to
differential calculus, getting real close to integral calculus. He could find slopes, which is
what differential calculus is about. He could find areas, which is what integral calculus is about.
He didn't quite get there. He's not the creator of calculus, but he was real close.
But his main achievement, that for which we remember him most clearly, is his work in number
theory. We've seen number theory before, back in the time of Euclid. Euclid was a great number
theorist. Fermat was a great, great number theorist. He did much with number theory, pushed the frontier
greatly. I want to just show you one of his results and mention another from this rich mathematical
field. Here's the one I'm going to show you. It's called the Fermat factorization scheme.
This is very clever. It's very simple, but it's very clever.
Suppose I ask you to factor a whole number, because that's what number theory is about,
into a product of two smaller pieces. And I gave you 24. Can you write 24 as the product of two
smaller pieces? Well, sure. That's easy. Four times six. Eight times three, if you want. There's
lots of ways to do it. So that's not very hard, and it isn't. But what if I give you this number
and ask you to factor it? 1,940,249. Factor that into the product of two things.
Hurry up. Hurry up. Well, what would you do? It would be very complicated. I don't know what
the factors are. It's not obvious. It would be nice to have a technique, a scheme that would
efficiently and quickly give me the factors. That's what Fermat describes. It's very slick.
Let me show you. He says, if you want to factor a number N, capital N, here's what you do.
You let A be the largest whole number that's greater than or equal to the square root of N.
And then you start looking at these differences. You look at A squared minus N. You look at A
plus 1 squared minus N. That's the next number up, squared minus N. You look at the next number up,
A plus 2 squared minus N, and you keep going. So you look at A squared minus N, and then all the
bigger numbers minus N. And Fermat says, suppose at some point when you take the square of a number
minus N, you get a square. Suppose the difference at some point is a perfect square. In other words,
you'd have, I don't know, say you climb all the way up to C. So you have C squared minus N,
and it turns out to be B squared. If you get to that stage, then you just do a little rearranging.
N would be C squared minus B squared. But C squared minus B squared is a difference of squares.
You can factor it algebraically into C minus B times C plus B, and then the numbers that will
go in there will provide the factorization of N. Let me illustrate it by factoring my monster number
1,940,249. Let's see this get factored. According to Fermat's scheme, what you do first is take
the square root of 1,940,249, and that's 1392 and change. And what you do is you go up to the next
bigger number, so 1393. Then you take 1393 squared minus your number, 1,940,249. You go up to the
next one, you get 1394 squared minus your number, 1395 squared minus your number, and keep going
until you get a perfect square as the result. Now in my case, that first difference turned
out to be 200. 1393 squared minus my number is 200. That's not a perfect square. The next one
turned out to be 2987. Not a perfect square. But the next one, 1395 squared minus my number,
turned out to be 5776, which lo and behold is 76 squared. That's all the further I gotta go,
because now I see that 1395 squared minus 1,940,249 is 76 squared. Move this around,
and you'll get that 1,940,249 is there for 1395 squared minus 76 squared. That's a difference
of squares. That factors into 1395 minus 76 times 1395 plus 76. You add and subtract here,
and you see that it's 1319 times 1471. That's how to factor 1,940,249 with Fermat's little trick,
and notice it only took three tries to do it. So wow, you can factor that on your third try.
That's nice. Well, the other result of Fermat is motivated by the fact that sometimes two
squares add up to be a square, as we know. Three squared plus four squared is five squared.
Five squared is 25. You can sort of break it down into two squares. Fermat said it is impossible to
do this with higher powers. He said it's impossible to divide a cube into two cubes, or a fourth power
into two fourth powers, or generally any power beyond the square into two like powers. I have found a
remarkable demonstration, but this margin is too narrow to contain it. He was writing this in the
margin. He said you can't split a cube up into two cubes, nor a fourth power into two fourths, nor any
higher power, and he had approved, but he couldn't quite fit it in. What he's saying in our notation
is if n is bigger than 2, there are no whole numbers a, b, and c, so that a to the n plus b to the n
is c to the n. For squares you can do it, but not for any higher n. This result has come to be known
as Fermat's last theorem. It was a tantalizing problem for mathematicians, in part because he
claimed he had a solution, you know, rats. He just couldn't quite get it in the margin. Maybe somebody
could find it. Nobody could in the 17th century, nor the 18th, nor the 19th, and indeed this wasn't
solved until the year 1995 by Andrew Wiles with an assist from Richard Taylor. Fermat was right,
but the proof that they found was hundreds of pages long. It would not have fit in the margin.
Well, I'll end this lecture with a quotation from Fermat, where he was looking back over his work,
and I think quite proud of what he had done. He wrote this, perhaps posterity will be grateful to me
for having shown that the ancients did not know everything. That kind of captures the excitement
of the era, the excitement of the heroic century.
