You see this thing, a plus sign with a line through it. A plus with a line through it.
What's that? Well, that's a minus. They didn't, for some reason,
Descartes hadn't used a minus, but he just lined out the plus.
Okay, so you see, for instance, between the two cube roots,
there's a plus sign with a minus. If you remember the solution to the cubic,
sure enough, there's supposed to be a minus there.
One other thing that's a little strange is you see q, q.
You see that appearing twice in this expression. What's that? Well, that's q squared.
Now, it's kind of interesting in the 17th century, they didn't tend to write q square.
They would write q q. They'd write q twice. But once you got to q cubed,
they didn't write q q q. They really wrote q with an exponent 3. You'll see a p cubed
at the very last expression up on the screen. So, for cubes and higher power,
they used the exponents. For squares, they just copied the letter twice. And I guess the reason
was that you didn't save any space, particularly in your printing, to have q q as opposed to q
squared. It still took two spaces, but q to the fifth only took two spaces where q q q q q
would certainly start to fill up the line. In any case, when I look at Descartes, I see
familiar looking mathematics. Finally, we have an algebra that we're familiar with.
Descartes' writing is regarded as being particularly opaque, particularly hard to follow.
He himself seemed to take pride in this for some reason. He said,
I have omitted a number of things that might have made it clearer. But I did this intentionally
and would not have done it otherwise. So, here's a textbook author bragging that he's made his
book hard to follow. Descartes argued that only by making the reader struggle with the reader
truly learn the material. And so, it was his goal, his job, to make it hard to follow.
Modern textbook writers, I would argue, should not follow that advice. In fact, we're told that Newton,
later in the century, tried to read Descartes. His Newton's biographer said that Newton took
Descartes' geometry in hand, though he had been told it would be very difficult. Newton plunged in.
He could get through one page and he got stuck. So, then Newton said he'd go back to the beginning.
And this time, he could get through two pages before he got stuck. And then he went back to
the beginning and he got a little further before he got stuck. And he went back to the beginning
and eventually, he says, Newton, he got it. He mastered it. But it took all these starts. And
this was Newton. If Newton had trouble with Descartes, look out. We're all in big difficulty here.
But anyway, Descartes had given us analytic geometry and modern algebraic notation.
The next mathematician I want to talk about is another Frenchman, Blaise Pascal. Pascal was also
known for something other than his mathematics. He was a prodigy who was great at all sorts of things,
