their calculations.
If you remember the way this works, instead of having to multiply two numbers, you can
just add their logarithms and use the tables.
Adding is a lot easier than multiplying.
It simplifies that.
Instead of taking the cube root of a number, you can just take a third of its logarithm,
and taking a third of a number is a lot easier than taking a cube root.
This simplifies the kind of computational procedures radically.
Logrithms were a fabulous time saver.
In fact, it was Laplace, the 18th century mathematician who wrote that logarithms, by
shortening the labors, doubled the life of the astronomer.
Astronomers who had to spend so much time with their calculations could go so much faster
with logarithms that they essentially doubled their careers.
So logarithms, that's a big achievement of the century.
Another big achievement came from this fellow, Rene Descartes.
Very famous, we've hit a name everybody knows, Descartes.
He was certainly a philosopher, famous for his philosophical writings.
Probably chief among these was his discourse on the method of 1637.
This is often viewed as the philosophical underpinnings of the scientific revolution
that's on its way.
So Descartes is probably regarded by most people as a philosopher.
True, but we want to also claim him because he was also a very substantial mathematician.
One of the things he did mathematically was attach an appendix to his discourse on the
method which was called geometry.
And in this, he gives us the first published account of what we now call analytic geometry.
The idea that you will take geometry in the plane and superimpose a grid and apply algebra
to the geometric figures, apply the geometry to the algebraic equations.
You're going to connect algebra and geometry in what has to be the most glorious marriage
in the history of mathematics.
These two meet up, create analytic geometry, Descartes tells us about it in his 1637 geometry.
He tells us, I shall not hesitate to introduce these arithmetical terms into geometry for
the sake of greater clearness.
And indeed, where would mathematics be without our axes, without our functions, our curves
graphed within them?
