his in print, and we have the Cartesian plane. Had Fermat done his and published his earlier,
we might have had the Fermadian plane or something. But it was the same idea, that same very fruitful
marriage of algebra and geometry. Fermat foreshadowed both differential and integral calculus.
Now there's a pretty big achievement. Calculus was kind of almost ready to hatch,
almost ready to appear. And Fermat has work where you can see him sort of getting real close to
differential calculus, getting real close to integral calculus. He could find slopes, which is
what differential calculus is about. He could find areas, which is what integral calculus is about.
He didn't quite get there. He's not the creator of calculus, but he was real close.
But his main achievement, that for which we remember him most clearly, is his work in number
theory. We've seen number theory before, back in the time of Euclid. Euclid was a great number
theorist. Fermat was a great, great number theorist. He did much with number theory, pushed the frontier
greatly. I want to just show you one of his results and mention another from this rich mathematical
field. Here's the one I'm going to show you. It's called the Fermat factorization scheme.
This is very clever. It's very simple, but it's very clever.
Suppose I ask you to factor a whole number, because that's what number theory is about,
into a product of two smaller pieces. And I gave you 24. Can you write 24 as the product of two
smaller pieces? Well, sure. That's easy. Four times six. Eight times three, if you want. There's
lots of ways to do it. So that's not very hard, and it isn't. But what if I give you this number
and ask you to factor it? 1,940,249. Factor that into the product of two things.
Hurry up. Hurry up. Well, what would you do? It would be very complicated. I don't know what
the factors are. It's not obvious. It would be nice to have a technique, a scheme that would
efficiently and quickly give me the factors. That's what Fermat describes. It's very slick.
Let me show you. He says, if you want to factor a number N, capital N, here's what you do.
You let A be the largest whole number that's greater than or equal to the square root of N.
And then you start looking at these differences. You look at A squared minus N. You look at A
plus 1 squared minus N. That's the next number up, squared minus N. You look at the next number up,
A plus 2 squared minus N, and you keep going. So you look at A squared minus N, and then all the
bigger numbers minus N. And Fermat says, suppose at some point when you take the square of a number
minus N, you get a square. Suppose the difference at some point is a perfect square. In other words,
you'd have, I don't know, say you climb all the way up to C. So you have C squared minus N,
and it turns out to be B squared. If you get to that stage, then you just do a little rearranging.
N would be C squared minus B squared. But C squared minus B squared is a difference of squares.
You can factor it algebraically into C minus B times C plus B, and then the numbers that will
go in there will provide the factorization of N. Let me illustrate it by factoring my monster number
