And with his great mathematical and logical ability, he broke the cipher.
He was one of the first code breakers, therefore.
But it's not for that that we're remembering him.
Rather, in his book, The Analytic Art, published in 1591, almost, but not quite, in the 17th
century, Viet gave us a more modern algebraic notation.
Remember, as we've seen all these people solving equations, from Alcorizmi to Cardano, what
they really were doing was working with words.
They had to express their equations in words.
I've shared with you some of the very complicated verbiage that comes out of this, where you're
trying to solve an equation and you have to express it verbally.
It's hard enough to do with all of our modern symbols.
But obviously, mathematics was going to get stuck unless somebody came up with a more
efficient way of expressing these things.
And Viet was the first to at least move us in that direction.
In the Analytic Art, you would find something like this.
He would write D in R minus D in E equabitur A quad.
So this is an expression from Viet.
Now it's not modern.
It doesn't look exactly modern.
But notice, we have some letters playing the roles of what used to be called roots and squares
and cubes.
It's getting there.
Now, if you wanted to translate this particular expression into modern symbolism, what he's
saying is D in R means D times R minus D in E. Well, that would mean minus D times E.
Equabitur, you can guess that that's equals, and A quad is a squared, as in quadratic.
So this is D times R minus D times E equals A squared.
It wasn't perfectly modern, but algebraic notation was at least on its way.
I'll show you in a few minutes the person that really modernized the notation so that
when we look at it, we can read it.
We can see what was being said algebraically, but that's coming a little later on.
Another great invention from this time, and now we finally are properly in the 17th century,
was logarithms.
You probably remember studying logarithms in school.
One of the great, great discoveries of this century or any.
