science, philosophy, theology. He was, you know, way ahead of his years, even as a young person.
At age 19, he invented a calculating machine, a mechanical calculating machine, now called the
Pascaline. Here's a picture of a recreation of this. Now, of course, our calculators are made
out of silicon, chips and wires and plastic. In those days, a calculating machine had to be made
out of wood and metal, had to have cranks and gears. It was quite a complicated device. But Pascal's
supposedly could add and subtract. You put the number in, turn some dials, and get the summer
difference. So this was a great mechanical advance. Pascal is known as a theologian. He wrote the
Ponce in the 1650s, a book about his thoughts about theological matters. This is still being
read. This is a work that has survived, even as Descartes' discourse has survived. He was a
physicist. Pascal worked on things like fluids, barometers, the hydraulic press.
He was also a hypochondriac. Poor Pascal was always sick. He was always complaining about his health.
Now, he actually died young, so he might have had some legitimate reasons for those complaints.
But you would expect he would have had an even more glorious career had his health been more robust.
But it's in mathematics, of course, that we want to look at his contributions. And there he worked in
probability theory. He was one of the first people who started to turn probability into a mathematical
science. I had mentioned Cardano had written a book on how to gamble, which was the first, at least,
brush with probability theory. But Pascal's interests were a little more ethereal, a little more
ethereal, a little more theoretical. He worked on the quadrature of the cycloid. Now, this was a
real important hot area in the 17th century. Quadrature, I had mentioned in an earlier lecture,
means the area under a curve. And the curve he's talking about here is the cycloid. Now,
if you don't know a cycloid, we're going to have to meet this. Let me tell you what this is.
Suppose you have a horizontal line and a circle upon it. Think of a bicycle wheel going down the
street. And you take a look at one point on the wheel on the circle. For instance, on a bicycle,
it would be the valve where you put the air in. So just keep your eye on that valve as the bicycle
moves. So the valve will rise and fall and rise and fall and form these arches as the bicycle
goes down the street. There's a picture here showing the path traced by a point on the circle
as the circle rolls along. That curve, those arches are called the cycloid arches, the cycloidal curve.
This became a very important curve in the 17th century. People kept coming back to it,
exploring it, investigating it, and finding strange and wonderful uses of it.
Cycloids are quite important. And it was Pascal who sort of elevated this to such an important
position in mathematics. These were called mechanical curves, curves that could be created
by something moving along. He also gave us Pascal's Triangle. And I guess in mathematics,
he's probably best known for that. Pascal's Triangle is an array of numbers. I have it up here.
It's got one in the top. The next row is a one and a one. And then you have a one, two, one,
