and a one, three, three, one, and a one, four, six, four, one, and so on as you move down
through the triangle. Now you probably know the rule for this, to figure out what any number is,
you add up the two numbers, the one up above and to the left, the one above and to the right.
And they generate the next number down. So if I look at the bottom row there,
there's a 15. Where did that come from? Well, it came from the two numbers above five plus 10.
So five plus 10 is 15. So that generates this triangle. Now, is it just a pretty array of
numbers? No, it has a use. It has a use in expanding binomials. So if I took a plus b,
a binomial, two terms, and cubed it, so you multiply a plus b times a plus b and you get an
answer and then you multiply it once more by a plus b, you get a cubed plus 3a squared b plus
3ab squared plus b cubed. Now you can see what's happening there. The a's exponents are going down,
a cubed squared a constant. The b's are going up, but the real trick is figuring out those
coefficients. And they're one, three, three, one as you read across. Well, that's just exactly
row three of Pascal's Triangle. What they're giving you are the coefficients that you would get
when expanding binomials. So if I wanted a plus b to the fifth, and I didn't feel like multiplying
that out five times, I don't have to. I just go to row five, I see the coefficients one, five,
ten, ten, five, one, and I fill in the powers of a and b and I get the expansion. A to the fifth
plus 5a to the fourth b plus 10a cubed b squared plus 10a squared b cubed plus 5ab to the fourth
plus b to the fifth. That's it. Much more easy, much easier to do just by looking across that row.
So this is called Pascal's Triangle. Now, truth to tell, Pascal wasn't the first person to discover
this. This same array shows up in Viet's analytic art from 1591. And truth to tell, it actually shows
up in ancient Chinese mathematics. So they were on to this well before Pascal, but his name got
associated with it. Well, my last mathematician from the heroic century is the greatest of them,
Pierre de Fermat. He makes up the third of the triumvirate French mathematicians, Descartes,
Pascal, Fermat. He was a very great mathematician indeed. His actual job, however, was to be a
magistrate in Toulouse in France. This is a minor legal official. He was supposed to be working
in the courts, and apparently he didn't work very hard because he sure had a lot of time
to do mathematics. And he did. He did some great stuff. One thing he did was he corresponded with
Pascal on probability. Remember, I said Pascal had helped develop the theory of probability?
He did so in conjunction with Fermat. They would write letters back and forth,
asking each other questions, elaborating on their theories, and these letters formed the basis
of probability theory. So it's not just Pascal, but sort of you could say the Pascal-Fermat
correspondence is what got probability going. So that's pretty important. He created an analytic
geometry of his own before that of Descartes. Remember, Descartes published analytic geometry,
but actually Fermat had done this long before, but he hadn't published it. And so Descartes gets
