In fact, we call this now the Cartesian plane, the geometrical plane with the axes imposed,
of course, named after Descartes.
He also gave us the modern algebraic notation.
I mentioned that someone produced notation finally that looks modern.
It was Descartes.
And let me give you an excerpt.
Here is a sample from Descartes' writing in which he has a formula.
He's writing in French, this is not in Latin, which is kind of interesting.
If you read what he's saying, he's looking at, he has an equation up there at the top
or an expression that has a z cubed and a funny little symbol that looks like a fish,
and then minus pz plus q.
And he's talking about a rule which Cardano had attributed to someone named Scipio Farias
and gives a root to that equation as follows, and that's the big expression along the bottom.
Well, if you look at this, you can begin to see things.
This looks kind of familiar.
Let me examine this a little more carefully here.
That little fish-like symbol up on the top line, that is how Descartes would write equal.
So okay, on that front, he wasn't exactly modern yet, but that is the equal sign.
It took out another century or perhaps a little less before the common equal sign became the standard.
So whenever he has z cubed little fish symbol minus pz plus q, what he's really saying is
he's looking at z cubed equals minus pz plus q, and if I bring the minus pz over,
what he's really looking at is z cubed plus pz equals q.
Well, that should look familiar. That's a depressed cubic.
Instead of m and n, as I was talking about in the previous lecture, we have p and q,
and instead of x, I have z, but that's no big deal.
That's the depressed cubic, and that's why he's introducing the name Cardan in his expression,
which of course is Cardano, who got the rule from someone named Scipio Farias.
Well, that's Scipione del Ferro, and the rule itself is across the bottom.
And if you look at that expression on the bottom, that's the solution to the cubic.
Now, it takes a little bit of translation. For instance,
both of those radicals have a radical and then a c period.
Well, what's that? Well, that means cube root. He took the root with a c for the cube,
so he didn't yet have the little 3 up there that we write, but that's not a big deal.
What else do we notice if we look at his equation? Well, here's his expression.
