He says when he rubbed his eye with the bodkin, the circles would grow bright, but if he left
the bodkin still and didn't move them, they'd kind of fade away.
So how does the average student study light?
They stick a knife behind his eye.
No, do not do this at home.
This is dangerous, but this is how you do it if you're passionate about learning.
This is what Newton did.
Now, I can't prove it, but my hunch is about this time his cat grew queasy.
In 1665 through 67, the miraculous years, the plague struck Cambridge, and Newton had
to go home to Woolstorpe.
The university was closed for health reasons.
While there, he later tells us he was outside and he saw an apple fall from a tree.
And he said there's some force pulling that apple to earth, mightn't that force extend
out into space.
He wrote later, I began to think of gravity extending to the orb of the moon, and I deduced
that the forces which keep the planets in their orbs must be reciprocally as the squares
of their distances from the centers about which they revolve.
And thereby compared the force required to keep the moon in her orb with the force of
gravity at the surface of the earth and found them to agree pretty nearly.
There's Newton hatching the idea of universal gravitation.
He tells us that in those days, I was in the prime of my age for invention and minded mathematics
and philosophy more than at any time since.
Did he ever?
What he was doing here was charting the course of modern science and doing it single-handedly
as an isolated student.
His biographer Richard Westfall writes this description of Newton during these incredible
years.
He said, Newtons was a virtuoso performance that would have left the mathematicians of
Europe breathless in admiration.
As it happened, only one mathematician in Europe, Isaac Barrow, even knew that Newton
existed.
It's kind of a chilling thought that here was the greatest scientist alive working completely
unknown and only Barrow, his mentor, even knew he was there.
As far as his personality, one of his contemporaries remembered, I never knew him to take any recreation
or pastime, either in riding out to take the air, walking, bowling or any other exercise
whatever, thinking all hours lost that were not spent in his studies.
No time for exercise.
You gotta work, you gotta think.
And it was said that he very rarely went to dine in the hall and then if he had not been
minded would go very carelessly with shoes down at the heels, stockings untied and his
head scarcely combed.
So here's the absent-minded professor finally being told you better go eat something and
he forgot to tie his shoes or comb his hair.
