He suddenly cannot get out of bed, he doesn't answer mail.
This most active, energetic of scholars seems to be suffering from lethargy.
What's this?
Well, nobody's certain, but there's a theory about what was going on with Isaac at this
time, and that is based on his alchemy work.
When he was doing his alchemy, in order to tell whether his chemicals were pure, he would
taste them.
So he gets a new shipment of mercury in, and he wants to see if the mercury is any good,
so he eats it.
Well, this is not good.
This can affect your brain, and it's possible he was poisoning himself with his chemicals,
and thus experienced this period of mental derangement.
Now, if you think it's strange that he would eat chemicals, remember, this is the same guy
that put the bodkin behind his eyeball, so eating chemicals was nothing for him.
Fortunately, he gets over his period of mental derangement.
And in 1696, and another dramatic change, he becomes warden of the Mint.
He becomes a government official.
The Mint, of course, deals with the money supply in Britain.
The Mint was in the Tower of London, and so Newton went, moved to London, and he would
go to work in the Tower, overseeing what was called the Great Recoinage, as they were
minting new coins for Britain, working with the people in the Tower, working with the
bankers in the City of London, working with the government, running the Mint, and apparently
he was really good at this.
He was a very good warden of the Mint, very efficient, the coins got minted.
Great guy.
Also, while there, he was responsible for taking care of counterfeiters.
As warden of the Mint, you were responsible for prosecuting counterfeiters, and this he
did with Great Zeal.
There was a famous case in 1699, a very well-known debonair counterfeiter named William Chaloner
ran afoul of Newton.
Chaloner was caught, Newton oversaw the prosecution, which led to a conviction for counterfeiting,
and Chaloner was hanged, and Newton was quite happy with his outcome.
You didn't want to cross him at the Mint.
In 1703, Newton is made president of the Royal Society.
This is kind of interesting.
The Royal Society, where he had run into Robert Hook so many years before, now he was running
the show, and he remained in the Royal Society as president for the rest of his life.
In 1704, he publishes his optics, his other great work on light and color.
In 1705, Newton is knighted by Queen Anne.
She comes up to Cambridge, knights him at his old alma mater, and he's now Sir Isaac.
Living in London, running the Mint, running the Royal Society, very famous, actually he
gets very rich along the way, leading a life that he would never have anticipated as that
solitary young scholar decades before.
