In my previous lecture, I talked about mathematics from the 17th century, the heroic century,
and we met people like Descartes and Fermat.
In this lecture, we're going to meet the heroic century's greatest hero, Isaac Newton.
Let me begin with a picture.
This is Newton.
This portrait is sometimes called Newton in his own hair because he wasn't wearing a
wig.
This is actually what he looked like.
I want to trace his life and tell you about his character in this lecture.
Later lectures will look at some of his actual mathematical work.
Newton was born in 1642 in Woolsthorpe, England, a small town in Lincolnshire, north of Cambridge,
far north of London.
His life started very precariously.
His father died before Newton was born, so he had no father to help raise him.
More seriously, perhaps, he was dangerously premature.
He came way too soon.
It was said that the infant Newton was so tiny he could be put into a quart pot.
In the 17th century, that was almost certainly a death sentence.
The little Isaac was a tough kid, and he survived and lived a very long life.
Those who knew him remembered as a child he was a sober, silent, thinking lad, not particularly
gregarious, but very smart.
He didn't seem to be cut out for business, he didn't seem to be cut out for farming.
What do you do with such a person?
You send him to university.
In 1661, Isaac Newton enters Trinity College, Cambridge.
Today, Cambridge is one of the great institutions in the world, certainly.
What he found in 1661, however, was not quite that.
In that time, Cambridge was still teaching the medieval curriculum.
He would still be worried about translating Aristotle from Greek and working on Latin
sentences and things of that sort.
You weren't paying attention to the modern inventions of science and the modern discoveries
of mathematics that were taking place on the continent.
That just hadn't penetrated yet.
Fortunately, it was also the case that the people at Cambridge didn't much care what
the students studied, what they did.
They could pretty much go off on their own.
This is what Newton decided to do.
He had a mentor, a fellow named Isaac Barrow, who was the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics
at Cambridge.
Barrow wasn't Newton's teacher in any formal sense, but he would direct Newton to read
that, to read Descartes, to look at this particular mathematical result.
Very soon, Newton, working alone, zooms to the forefront.
The years 1665 to 1667 were called his Annie Marabales, his miraculous years, when he's
working at a fever pitch, pursuing his mathematics and science, pushing the frontiers beyond
what anybody had ever done before.
Just a few examples.
What did he do during these miraculous years?
Well, he discovered the generalized binomial theorem.
This becomes his entree into higher mathematics, and I'm going to talk about this in the next
lecture.
What else?
He discovers something he calls flexions.
Well, we know it by the name of differential calculus, not bad for an unknown student.
He discovers inverse flexions, ah, integral calculus.
He discovers properties of the laws of motion.
He works on optics.
He does all of these things that are just phenomenal while working alone at this fever
pitch in his rooms at Trinity.
There are descriptions from the time of Isaac sitting at his desk, writing away in the evening,
and the candles are high.
Someone comes back and sees him in the morning.
He hasn't moved.
He's still writing, but the candles have burned low.
He forgot to sleep.
He forgot to eat.
It was said that his cat grew fat, eating Isaac's untouched meals.
Rarely, maybe never, did somebody devote themselves so passionately to learning and research.
And if you don't believe me on this passion, let me show you a page here from Newton's
notebook from the time.
He was studying here the properties of light and color and vision.
And at that time, these were all sort of one subject.
Nowadays, we sort of take light and color and put them into physics, and vision shows
up in biology, but he was studying these as a unit.
And he wanted to see how the eye worked vis-à-vis images, and so what he tells us in this notebook
passage is, I took a bodkin.
A bodkin is a sharp little stick.
Think of a nail file, a little knife.
So I took a bodkin, he said, and put it betwixt my eye, and the bone as near to the back
side of my eye as I could.
So to see how the eye works, he's taken this knife and stuck it behind his eye.
And in that page I'm showing you, there's a picture of his hand with a knife and the
eye.
He tells us that he made the curvature of his eye, A, B, C, D, E, F, and he has dutifully
labeled this, A, B, C, D, E, F, and you see the eyeball, distended.
And then he said when he pressed this bodkin, he saw these white, dark, and colored circles,
R, S, and T. And if you look at the picture out there are these little circles.
He says when he rubbed his eye with the bodkin, the circles would grow bright, but if he left
the bodkin still and didn't move them, they'd kind of fade away.
So how does the average student study light?
They stick a knife behind his eye.
No, do not do this at home.
This is dangerous, but this is how you do it if you're passionate about learning.
This is what Newton did.
Now, I can't prove it, but my hunch is about this time his cat grew queasy.
In 1665 through 67, the miraculous years, the plague struck Cambridge, and Newton had
to go home to Woolstorpe.
The university was closed for health reasons.
While there, he later tells us he was outside and he saw an apple fall from a tree.
And he said there's some force pulling that apple to earth, mightn't that force extend
out into space.
He wrote later, I began to think of gravity extending to the orb of the moon, and I deduced
that the forces which keep the planets in their orbs must be reciprocally as the squares
of their distances from the centers about which they revolve.
And thereby compared the force required to keep the moon in her orb with the force of
gravity at the surface of the earth and found them to agree pretty nearly.
There's Newton hatching the idea of universal gravitation.
He tells us that in those days, I was in the prime of my age for invention and minded mathematics
and philosophy more than at any time since.
Did he ever?
What he was doing here was charting the course of modern science and doing it single-handedly
as an isolated student.
His biographer Richard Westfall writes this description of Newton during these incredible
years.
He said, Newtons was a virtuoso performance that would have left the mathematicians of
Europe breathless in admiration.
As it happened, only one mathematician in Europe, Isaac Barrow, even knew that Newton
existed.
It's kind of a chilling thought that here was the greatest scientist alive working completely
unknown and only Barrow, his mentor, even knew he was there.
As far as his personality, one of his contemporaries remembered, I never knew him to take any recreation
or pastime, either in riding out to take the air, walking, bowling or any other exercise
whatever, thinking all hours lost that were not spent in his studies.
No time for exercise.
You gotta work, you gotta think.
And it was said that he very rarely went to dine in the hall and then if he had not been
minded would go very carelessly with shoes down at the heels, stockings untied and his
head scarcely combed.
So here's the absent-minded professor finally being told you better go eat something and
he forgot to tie his shoes or comb his hair.
This was Newton and it's too bad because the hall mentioned in that passage is this.
This is the dining hall at Trinity.
It's a beautiful building.
It sits on Trinity Great Court which is probably the most glorious academic setting in the
world.
Newton should have gone through there, gone to the hall more often and enjoyed the scenery.
We're told also that he was humorless.
He was very sober.
A friend, a colleague who had known him for decades, was asked once, did you ever see
Isaac Newton laugh?
And the friend thought about it and said once, one time, Isaac Newton laughed.
Well, the obvious question is what made him laugh?
What made Newton laugh for this one and only time?
And their friend reported that someone asked him if there were any value to be had from
reading Euclid's elements.
That got a chuckle out of Isaac, otherwise sober all the time.
Newton was in no hurry to share his great discoveries with others.
You know, he's writing all these incredible things.
He's just putting them in his desk, not publishing, not rushing them out into the academic world.
And he once said, I see not what there is desirable in public esteem where I am able
to acquire and maintain it.
It would perhaps increase my acquaintance, the thing which I chiefly study to decline.
He didn't want to publish.
He didn't want to share this because then it would have made acquaintances and that
would have got them all embroiled in social activities, all of which would deprive him
of the time for his precious studies.
In 1669, Newton was appointed Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge.
Now this is a major upset.
Remember, he's not published anything.
He was unknown.
And now he gets one of the plum jobs in England, the Lucasian Professor.
How did this happen?
Well, it turned out that the Lucasian Professor previously was, as I've said, Isaac Barrow.
And Barrow was off the court, off to London to take a promotion.
So he was leaving the chair.
But he knew Newton, and he knew how good Newton was, and he recommended that this unknown
Newton fill the Lucasian chair.
Barrow said, Newton was a fellow of our college and very young, but of an extraordinary genius
in proficiency in these things.
And on Barrow's recommendation, Newton became Lucasian Professor.
As such, he had very few responsibilities, but one of them was he had to give a lecture
every once in a while, a public lecture.
And apparently, he was really bad at this.
A contemporary remembers, so few went to hear him, and fewer yet understood him, that oftentimes
he did in a manner for want of hearers, read to the walls.
Newton was just speaking to an empty room.
Now that's kind of amazing.
You know, today, if you knew Isaac Newton was speaking on campus, you'd go, just to
hear him.
Then, when they had that opportunity, nobody went.
Newton invented, about this time, the reflecting telescope.
Here's yet another of his many, many achievements.
Now if you know telescopes, you know there are two types.
There's the refractor, which is a tube with a lens at the far end, like a spyglass.
And then there's the reflector, which has, it's open at the far end, but has a mirror
at the base that magnifies the objects.
The latter kind, the reflecting telescope, is the one that all the big telescopes are,
the Hubble and other telescopes around the world.
It's much more efficient to put a heavy mirror at the base.
This is Newton's invention, and here's a drawing of it that he did.
He was actually very good at making these things.
He was very good with his hands, and he ground the lens just right and made this neat little
reflecting telescope.
And he then sent it down to the Royal Society in London in 1671.
Now the Royal Society was the great scientific body in England.
And this is where all the hot shots were, here comes the reflecting telescope from Newton.
They loved it.
They thought this was an incredible invention, and they made Newton a member of the Royal
Society.
And so for the first time, he's sort of getting out.
He's sort of sharing some of his discoveries.
Looks like the beginning of a glorious career.
But wait a minute.
The next year, in 1672, Newton sent down some of his optical papers to the Royal Society,
in which he's describing his theories of light and color.
And at this point, he gets criticism.
Robert Hook was at the Royal Society then.
If you know physics, you might have heard of Hook's law, that's Hook.
And Hook objected to Newton's optical theories.
He had issues, and he criticized it.
Now what's supposed to happen in science is you put forth a theory, and somebody might
critique you.
Now you have a rebuttal, and they have a rebuttal, and you try to refine your differences and
build a theory that everyone can embrace.
So it was now the ball was in Newton's court, and he was supposed to respond.
He doesn't.
He says, more or less, OK, you don't like my paper, Mr. Hook.
I'm not sending you anything else.
He withdraws from this.
He once wrote, there is nothing which I desire to avoid more than contention, nor any kind
of contention more than one in print.
He was not going to get into a battle with Hook or anybody over his science.
Newton was confident that he was right.
He wasn't going to argue with these lowly people with the rural society.
And so what happens is there is a long period where he more or less abandons mathematics
and science and devotes his time to alchemy and theology.
For much of the 1670s and 80s, he's working in a completely different arena.
Now alchemy, as you know, is this sort of protochemistry.
It was this attempt to turn base materials into gold.
And Newton built a little laboratory to work on this.
He built little furnaces.
He got chemicals, and he was trying to make gold out of other things.
He wrote a million words on alchemy.
It said he knew more about alchemy than anybody ever.
And none of this has survived, none of this is of any particular interest to anyone.
It is, I think we would regard it, a waste of Newton's time.
Likewise, he studied theology.
He studied the Bible.
He read it carefully.
He was looking for kind of clues in one book to help him understand another.
He would do things like calculate the size of the Ark of the Covenant using his mathematics.
And he was trying to discover prophecies of the future.
He wrote a book called Observations on the Prophecies of Daniel.
Like his alchemy, this is not read anymore.
Nobody much cares.
Unlike Pascal, whose Ponce is still read in theology, Newton's theology is just sort
of drivel.
And we can look at this and say, why did you spend all this time on these tangential issues
when you could have been advancing math and science in a way that only Newton did?
But that's the story.
Well, finally, in 1684, Edmund Halley was up in Cambridge.
He was talking to Newton, and he begins to get a sense of what it was that Newton had
in that desk, some of these great scientific ideas.
And Halley says to Newton, more or less, you've got to publish this.
You simply can't sit on this any longer.
This is earth shaking stuff.
Come on, Newton, you've got to publish.
And so at Halley's urging, and indeed with some of Halley's funding, Newton publishes
his mechanics.
So finally, the world is going to see Newton in action.
That comes in 1687 in his great work, the Principia Mathematica.
Here's the title page, the Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, 1687.
This is Newton's mechanics.
This is where he puts his laws of motion, the laws of gravity he describes, the system
of the world.
He does this in a very Euclidean fashion.
He begins with his definitions, his axioms, and then he starts deducing propositions.
It certainly looks familiar to a reader of Euclid, whom he so much admired.
But he doesn't put in here his calculus, his fluctuations.
That's not part of the book.
And so he's writing a very important physics tome, but not a very important mathematical
one.
It's been said that Newton's Principia is the greatest science book ever written.
And that might well be true.
If it has any rival, it would be Darwin's Origin of Species from centuries later.
And it's interesting that Darwin also was an alum of Cambridge University, so there
must be something in the water up there.
In any case, with the publication of the Principia, Newton is now famous, whether he wanted to
be or not, this put him on the front page, and his life changes.
And it changes in some very strange and unexpected ways.
In 1689, he is elected to parliament.
Now, this seems such a surprise to us, because for us, politicians are very gregarious.
They shake hands.
They kiss babies.
Newton, of course, did not do anything like that.
What's going on here?
How did he get into parliament?
The answer is that in 1688, the year before, Britain had experienced the Glorious Revolution.
At that time, the Catholic King, James II, had been driven from the throne, and the Protestants,
William and Mary, had taken over.
Newton was a dedicated anti-Catholic.
He was glad to see James go, and he wanted to support the new monarchs, William and Mary,
and thus stood for election to parliament, to represent Cambridge, and won.
He went down to London and served a term in parliament.
His government career was apparently not very good, and he didn't do anything particularly
notable.
But he sort of got out, you know, finally, Isaac is getting out into society, and in
fact, he sort of liked it.
He met John Locke, the great philosopher.
He met Samuel Peeps, the diarist, and he sort of finally was getting away from this isolated
life at Cambridge.
In 1692-94, he suffers his period of mental derangement.
He suddenly cannot get out of bed, he doesn't answer mail.
This most active, energetic of scholars seems to be suffering from lethargy.
What's this?
Well, nobody's certain, but there's a theory about what was going on with Isaac at this
time, and that is based on his alchemy work.
When he was doing his alchemy, in order to tell whether his chemicals were pure, he would
taste them.
So he gets a new shipment of mercury in, and he wants to see if the mercury is any good,
so he eats it.
Well, this is not good.
This can affect your brain, and it's possible he was poisoning himself with his chemicals,
and thus experienced this period of mental derangement.
Now, if you think it's strange that he would eat chemicals, remember, this is the same guy
that put the bodkin behind his eyeball, so eating chemicals was nothing for him.
Fortunately, he gets over his period of mental derangement.
And in 1696, and another dramatic change, he becomes warden of the Mint.
He becomes a government official.
The Mint, of course, deals with the money supply in Britain.
The Mint was in the Tower of London, and so Newton went, moved to London, and he would
go to work in the Tower, overseeing what was called the Great Recoinage, as they were
minting new coins for Britain, working with the people in the Tower, working with the
bankers in the City of London, working with the government, running the Mint, and apparently
he was really good at this.
He was a very good warden of the Mint, very efficient, the coins got minted.
Great guy.
Also, while there, he was responsible for taking care of counterfeiters.
As warden of the Mint, you were responsible for prosecuting counterfeiters, and this he
did with Great Zeal.
There was a famous case in 1699, a very well-known debonair counterfeiter named William Chaloner
ran afoul of Newton.
Chaloner was caught, Newton oversaw the prosecution, which led to a conviction for counterfeiting,
and Chaloner was hanged, and Newton was quite happy with his outcome.
You didn't want to cross him at the Mint.
In 1703, Newton is made president of the Royal Society.
This is kind of interesting.
The Royal Society, where he had run into Robert Hook so many years before, now he was running
the show, and he remained in the Royal Society as president for the rest of his life.
In 1704, he publishes his optics, his other great work on light and color.
In 1705, Newton is knighted by Queen Anne.
She comes up to Cambridge, knights him at his old alma mater, and he's now Sir Isaac.
Living in London, running the Mint, running the Royal Society, very famous, actually he
gets very rich along the way, leading a life that he would never have anticipated as that
solitary young scholar decades before.
Now he remained crotchety and contentious throughout his life, and he got into all sorts
of scholarly disputes with people.
I've already mentioned he got into a battle with Robert Hook over in the theory of optics.
Let me mention two others.
He went head to head with John Flamsteed.
Flamsteed was the astronomer royal.
He worked at Greenwich Observatory, and he and Newton locked horns over astronomical
data, and it was very bitter and very unpleasant.
And most famously, Newton went to war with Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, the great German
mathematician and philosopher who invented calculus on his own.
There was, in fact, a calculus war that erupted between Newton and his followers, and Leibniz
and his, and we'll talk about this in a later lecture.
But as to his calculus, his fluctuations, the great mathematical discovery of Newton's
life, he does not publish that until very late.
In fact, the complete treatment of Newton's fluctuations doesn't appear in print until
65 years after Newton wrote it and nearly a decade after he died.
It was actually a posthumous publication.
So boy, it would seem to me if I had discovered calculus, fluctuations, I'd have published
it right away.
It actually didn't come out until Newton was gone.
This is what it looked like when it finally hit the streets.
It's called a treatise on the method of fluctuations and infinite series with applications to the
geometry of curved lines by Sir Isaac Newton Knight.
Of course, by then, the thunder had been stolen by others who had been writing about calculus
for decades, but I'll tell more about that story when we get to the calculus wars.
Newton lived until 1727, a very long life, and when he died, he was buried in Westminster
Abbey.
Now, this, of course, is the Great Shrine of England.
This is where the British bury their hero.
There are kings and queens in there, great statesmen, great soldiers, great writers,
and Isaac Newton.
If you enter through the West Gate and look down the nave, right across the front, you'll
see something called the choir screen.
It sort of bisects the nave.
On the left side is a huge monument, and it's the monument to Newton.
Here's a picture.
And below that is Newton's grave.
You'll see there an image of Newton lounging with cherubs around him, the world above.
He's reading his Principia.
He has been enshrined in the greatest spot of all, Westminster Abbey.
Voltaire was in London for Newton's funeral, and he reported Newton's countrymen honored
him in his lifetime and buried him as though he had been a king.
Here's a mathematician buried like a king, but well deserved.
On the tomb is this inscription.
It says, mortals rejoice at so great an ornament for the human race.
The British were paying homage to their great son, Isaac Newton.
People wrote poems about him.
People carved statues of him.
He was a figure of just heroic proportions at the time.
And they were still honoring him in the 20th century on their money.
The British one pound note, when they still had a one pound note, looked like this.
I should just point out nowadays, the British have a one pound coin.
And so this is old currency.
But when they had the one pound note, on the one side was the queen, on the other side
was Isaac Newton.
There he is in his wig.
You see his reflecting telescope.
You see his volume of the Principia.
He gets on the one.
And I remember when I first saw this, I was very impressed.
The one was the most common currency in circulation.
You could put your greatest hero on the one.
So the British could have put Shakespeare on the one.
But they didn't.
They could have put Wellington.
No.
The Beatles.
No.
They put Isaac Newton their greatest hero on the one pound note.
Now it didn't hurt that he had been warden of the Mint.
I think he had the inside track there.
But in any event, that was certainly a testimonial to Newton.
Well, let me end this with a picture of a statue of Newton.
This is in the chapel at Trinity College, Cambridge.
He's holding his prism and gazing off in contemplation.
The statue was there long ago when a young student named William Wordsworth attended
Cambridge.
Wordsworth went to St. John's College, which is right next door to Trinity College.
And from his rooms, Wordsworth could see the chapel at Trinity.
And Wordsworth writes this poem.
He says, and from my pillow, looking forth by light of moon or favoring stars, I could
behold the antechamble where the statue stood of Newton with his prism and silent face,
the marble index of a mind forever voyaging through strange seas of thought alone.
Wordsworth has captured the solitary scholar, the great hero, Isaac Newton.
