working at a fever pitch, pursuing his mathematics and science, pushing the frontiers beyond
what anybody had ever done before.
Just a few examples.
What did he do during these miraculous years?
Well, he discovered the generalized binomial theorem.
This becomes his entree into higher mathematics, and I'm going to talk about this in the next
lecture.
What else?
He discovers something he calls flexions.
Well, we know it by the name of differential calculus, not bad for an unknown student.
He discovers inverse flexions, ah, integral calculus.
He discovers properties of the laws of motion.
He works on optics.
He does all of these things that are just phenomenal while working alone at this fever
pitch in his rooms at Trinity.
There are descriptions from the time of Isaac sitting at his desk, writing away in the evening,
and the candles are high.
Someone comes back and sees him in the morning.
He hasn't moved.
He's still writing, but the candles have burned low.
He forgot to sleep.
He forgot to eat.
It was said that his cat grew fat, eating Isaac's untouched meals.
Rarely, maybe never, did somebody devote themselves so passionately to learning and research.
And if you don't believe me on this passion, let me show you a page here from Newton's
notebook from the time.
He was studying here the properties of light and color and vision.
And at that time, these were all sort of one subject.
Nowadays, we sort of take light and color and put them into physics, and vision shows
up in biology, but he was studying these as a unit.
And he wanted to see how the eye worked vis-à-vis images, and so what he tells us in this notebook
passage is, I took a bodkin.
A bodkin is a sharp little stick.
Think of a nail file, a little knife.
So I took a bodkin, he said, and put it betwixt my eye, and the bone as near to the back
side of my eye as I could.
So to see how the eye works, he's taken this knife and stuck it behind his eye.
And in that page I'm showing you, there's a picture of his hand with a knife and the
eye.
He tells us that he made the curvature of his eye, A, B, C, D, E, F, and he has dutifully
labeled this, A, B, C, D, E, F, and you see the eyeball, distended.
And then he said when he pressed this bodkin, he saw these white, dark, and colored circles,
R, S, and T. And if you look at the picture out there are these little circles.
