Now he remained crotchety and contentious throughout his life, and he got into all sorts
of scholarly disputes with people.
I've already mentioned he got into a battle with Robert Hook over in the theory of optics.
Let me mention two others.
He went head to head with John Flamsteed.
Flamsteed was the astronomer royal.
He worked at Greenwich Observatory, and he and Newton locked horns over astronomical
data, and it was very bitter and very unpleasant.
And most famously, Newton went to war with Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, the great German
mathematician and philosopher who invented calculus on his own.
There was, in fact, a calculus war that erupted between Newton and his followers, and Leibniz
and his, and we'll talk about this in a later lecture.
But as to his calculus, his fluctuations, the great mathematical discovery of Newton's
life, he does not publish that until very late.
In fact, the complete treatment of Newton's fluctuations doesn't appear in print until
65 years after Newton wrote it and nearly a decade after he died.
It was actually a posthumous publication.
So boy, it would seem to me if I had discovered calculus, fluctuations, I'd have published
it right away.
It actually didn't come out until Newton was gone.
This is what it looked like when it finally hit the streets.
It's called a treatise on the method of fluctuations and infinite series with applications to the
geometry of curved lines by Sir Isaac Newton Knight.
Of course, by then, the thunder had been stolen by others who had been writing about calculus
for decades, but I'll tell more about that story when we get to the calculus wars.
Newton lived until 1727, a very long life, and when he died, he was buried in Westminster
Abbey.
Now, this, of course, is the Great Shrine of England.
This is where the British bury their hero.
There are kings and queens in there, great statesmen, great soldiers, great writers,
and Isaac Newton.
If you enter through the West Gate and look down the nave, right across the front, you'll
see something called the choir screen.
It sort of bisects the nave.
On the left side is a huge monument, and it's the monument to Newton.
Here's a picture.
And below that is Newton's grave.
You'll see there an image of Newton lounging with cherubs around him, the world above.
He's reading his Principia.
He has been enshrined in the greatest spot of all, Westminster Abbey.
Voltaire was in London for Newton's funeral, and he reported Newton's countrymen honored
him in his lifetime and buried him as though he had been a king.
Here's a mathematician buried like a king, but well deserved.
