So finally, the world is going to see Newton in action.
That comes in 1687 in his great work, the Principia Mathematica.
Here's the title page, the Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, 1687.
This is Newton's mechanics.
This is where he puts his laws of motion, the laws of gravity he describes, the system
of the world.
He does this in a very Euclidean fashion.
He begins with his definitions, his axioms, and then he starts deducing propositions.
It certainly looks familiar to a reader of Euclid, whom he so much admired.
But he doesn't put in here his calculus, his fluctuations.
That's not part of the book.
And so he's writing a very important physics tome, but not a very important mathematical
one.
It's been said that Newton's Principia is the greatest science book ever written.
And that might well be true.
If it has any rival, it would be Darwin's Origin of Species from centuries later.
And it's interesting that Darwin also was an alum of Cambridge University, so there
must be something in the water up there.
In any case, with the publication of the Principia, Newton is now famous, whether he wanted to
be or not, this put him on the front page, and his life changes.
And it changes in some very strange and unexpected ways.
In 1689, he is elected to parliament.
Now, this seems such a surprise to us, because for us, politicians are very gregarious.
They shake hands.
They kiss babies.
Newton, of course, did not do anything like that.
What's going on here?
How did he get into parliament?
The answer is that in 1688, the year before, Britain had experienced the Glorious Revolution.
At that time, the Catholic King, James II, had been driven from the throne, and the Protestants,
William and Mary, had taken over.
Newton was a dedicated anti-Catholic.
He was glad to see James go, and he wanted to support the new monarchs, William and Mary,
and thus stood for election to parliament, to represent Cambridge, and won.
He went down to London and served a term in parliament.
His government career was apparently not very good, and he didn't do anything particularly
notable.
But he sort of got out, you know, finally, Isaac is getting out into society, and in
fact, he sort of liked it.
He met John Locke, the great philosopher.
He met Samuel Peeps, the diarist, and he sort of finally was getting away from this isolated
life at Cambridge.
In 1692-94, he suffers his period of mental derangement.
