In my previous lecture, I talked about mathematics from the 17th century, the heroic century,
and we met people like Descartes and Fermat.
In this lecture, we're going to meet the heroic century's greatest hero, Isaac Newton.
Let me begin with a picture.
This is Newton.
This portrait is sometimes called Newton in his own hair because he wasn't wearing a
wig.
This is actually what he looked like.
I want to trace his life and tell you about his character in this lecture.
Later lectures will look at some of his actual mathematical work.
Newton was born in 1642 in Woolsthorpe, England, a small town in Lincolnshire, north of Cambridge,
far north of London.
His life started very precariously.
His father died before Newton was born, so he had no father to help raise him.
More seriously, perhaps, he was dangerously premature.
He came way too soon.
It was said that the infant Newton was so tiny he could be put into a quart pot.
In the 17th century, that was almost certainly a death sentence.
The little Isaac was a tough kid, and he survived and lived a very long life.
Those who knew him remembered as a child he was a sober, silent, thinking lad, not particularly
gregarious, but very smart.
He didn't seem to be cut out for business, he didn't seem to be cut out for farming.
What do you do with such a person?
You send him to university.
In 1661, Isaac Newton enters Trinity College, Cambridge.
Today, Cambridge is one of the great institutions in the world, certainly.
What he found in 1661, however, was not quite that.
In that time, Cambridge was still teaching the medieval curriculum.
He would still be worried about translating Aristotle from Greek and working on Latin
sentences and things of that sort.
You weren't paying attention to the modern inventions of science and the modern discoveries
of mathematics that were taking place on the continent.
That just hadn't penetrated yet.
Fortunately, it was also the case that the people at Cambridge didn't much care what
the students studied, what they did.
They could pretty much go off on their own.
This is what Newton decided to do.
He had a mentor, a fellow named Isaac Barrow, who was the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics
at Cambridge.
Barrow wasn't Newton's teacher in any formal sense, but he would direct Newton to read
that, to read Descartes, to look at this particular mathematical result.
Very soon, Newton, working alone, zooms to the forefront.
The years 1665 to 1667 were called his Annie Marabales, his miraculous years, when he's
