On the tomb is this inscription.
It says, mortals rejoice at so great an ornament for the human race.
The British were paying homage to their great son, Isaac Newton.
People wrote poems about him.
People carved statues of him.
He was a figure of just heroic proportions at the time.
And they were still honoring him in the 20th century on their money.
The British one pound note, when they still had a one pound note, looked like this.
I should just point out nowadays, the British have a one pound coin.
And so this is old currency.
But when they had the one pound note, on the one side was the queen, on the other side
was Isaac Newton.
There he is in his wig.
You see his reflecting telescope.
You see his volume of the Principia.
He gets on the one.
And I remember when I first saw this, I was very impressed.
The one was the most common currency in circulation.
You could put your greatest hero on the one.
So the British could have put Shakespeare on the one.
But they didn't.
They could have put Wellington.
No.
The Beatles.
No.
They put Isaac Newton their greatest hero on the one pound note.
Now it didn't hurt that he had been warden of the Mint.
I think he had the inside track there.
But in any event, that was certainly a testimonial to Newton.
Well, let me end this with a picture of a statue of Newton.
This is in the chapel at Trinity College, Cambridge.
He's holding his prism and gazing off in contemplation.
The statue was there long ago when a young student named William Wordsworth attended
Cambridge.
Wordsworth went to St. John's College, which is right next door to Trinity College.
And from his rooms, Wordsworth could see the chapel at Trinity.
And Wordsworth writes this poem.
He says, and from my pillow, looking forth by light of moon or favoring stars, I could
behold the antechamble where the statue stood of Newton with his prism and silent face,
the marble index of a mind forever voyaging through strange seas of thought alone.
Wordsworth has captured the solitary scholar, the great hero, Isaac Newton.
