A contemporary remembers, so few went to hear him, and fewer yet understood him, that oftentimes
he did in a manner for want of hearers, read to the walls.
Newton was just speaking to an empty room.
Now that's kind of amazing.
You know, today, if you knew Isaac Newton was speaking on campus, you'd go, just to
hear him.
Then, when they had that opportunity, nobody went.
Newton invented, about this time, the reflecting telescope.
Here's yet another of his many, many achievements.
Now if you know telescopes, you know there are two types.
There's the refractor, which is a tube with a lens at the far end, like a spyglass.
And then there's the reflector, which has, it's open at the far end, but has a mirror
at the base that magnifies the objects.
The latter kind, the reflecting telescope, is the one that all the big telescopes are,
the Hubble and other telescopes around the world.
It's much more efficient to put a heavy mirror at the base.
This is Newton's invention, and here's a drawing of it that he did.
He was actually very good at making these things.
He was very good with his hands, and he ground the lens just right and made this neat little
reflecting telescope.
And he then sent it down to the Royal Society in London in 1671.
Now the Royal Society was the great scientific body in England.
And this is where all the hot shots were, here comes the reflecting telescope from Newton.
They loved it.
They thought this was an incredible invention, and they made Newton a member of the Royal
Society.
And so for the first time, he's sort of getting out.
He's sort of sharing some of his discoveries.
Looks like the beginning of a glorious career.
But wait a minute.
The next year, in 1672, Newton sent down some of his optical papers to the Royal Society,
in which he's describing his theories of light and color.
And at this point, he gets criticism.
Robert Hook was at the Royal Society then.
If you know physics, you might have heard of Hook's law, that's Hook.
And Hook objected to Newton's optical theories.
He had issues, and he criticized it.
Now what's supposed to happen in science is you put forth a theory, and somebody might
critique you.
Now you have a rebuttal, and they have a rebuttal, and you try to refine your differences and
build a theory that everyone can embrace.
So it was now the ball was in Newton's court, and he was supposed to respond.
He doesn't.
