This was Newton and it's too bad because the hall mentioned in that passage is this.
This is the dining hall at Trinity.
It's a beautiful building.
It sits on Trinity Great Court which is probably the most glorious academic setting in the
world.
Newton should have gone through there, gone to the hall more often and enjoyed the scenery.
We're told also that he was humorless.
He was very sober.
A friend, a colleague who had known him for decades, was asked once, did you ever see
Isaac Newton laugh?
And the friend thought about it and said once, one time, Isaac Newton laughed.
Well, the obvious question is what made him laugh?
What made Newton laugh for this one and only time?
And their friend reported that someone asked him if there were any value to be had from
reading Euclid's elements.
That got a chuckle out of Isaac, otherwise sober all the time.
Newton was in no hurry to share his great discoveries with others.
You know, he's writing all these incredible things.
He's just putting them in his desk, not publishing, not rushing them out into the academic world.
And he once said, I see not what there is desirable in public esteem where I am able
to acquire and maintain it.
It would perhaps increase my acquaintance, the thing which I chiefly study to decline.
He didn't want to publish.
He didn't want to share this because then it would have made acquaintances and that
would have got them all embroiled in social activities, all of which would deprive him
of the time for his precious studies.
In 1669, Newton was appointed Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge.
Now this is a major upset.
Remember, he's not published anything.
He was unknown.
And now he gets one of the plum jobs in England, the Lucasian Professor.
How did this happen?
Well, it turned out that the Lucasian Professor previously was, as I've said, Isaac Barrow.
And Barrow was off the court, off to London to take a promotion.
So he was leaving the chair.
But he knew Newton, and he knew how good Newton was, and he recommended that this unknown
Newton fill the Lucasian chair.
Barrow said, Newton was a fellow of our college and very young, but of an extraordinary genius
in proficiency in these things.
And on Barrow's recommendation, Newton became Lucasian Professor.
As such, he had very few responsibilities, but one of them was he had to give a lecture
every once in a while, a public lecture.
And apparently, he was really bad at this.
