He says, more or less, OK, you don't like my paper, Mr. Hook.
I'm not sending you anything else.
He withdraws from this.
He once wrote, there is nothing which I desire to avoid more than contention, nor any kind
of contention more than one in print.
He was not going to get into a battle with Hook or anybody over his science.
Newton was confident that he was right.
He wasn't going to argue with these lowly people with the rural society.
And so what happens is there is a long period where he more or less abandons mathematics
and science and devotes his time to alchemy and theology.
For much of the 1670s and 80s, he's working in a completely different arena.
Now alchemy, as you know, is this sort of protochemistry.
It was this attempt to turn base materials into gold.
And Newton built a little laboratory to work on this.
He built little furnaces.
He got chemicals, and he was trying to make gold out of other things.
He wrote a million words on alchemy.
It said he knew more about alchemy than anybody ever.
And none of this has survived, none of this is of any particular interest to anyone.
It is, I think we would regard it, a waste of Newton's time.
Likewise, he studied theology.
He studied the Bible.
He read it carefully.
He was looking for kind of clues in one book to help him understand another.
He would do things like calculate the size of the Ark of the Covenant using his mathematics.
And he was trying to discover prophecies of the future.
He wrote a book called Observations on the Prophecies of Daniel.
Like his alchemy, this is not read anymore.
Nobody much cares.
Unlike Pascal, whose Ponce is still read in theology, Newton's theology is just sort
of drivel.
And we can look at this and say, why did you spend all this time on these tangential issues
when you could have been advancing math and science in a way that only Newton did?
But that's the story.
Well, finally, in 1684, Edmund Halley was up in Cambridge.
He was talking to Newton, and he begins to get a sense of what it was that Newton had
in that desk, some of these great scientific ideas.
And Halley says to Newton, more or less, you've got to publish this.
You simply can't sit on this any longer.
This is earth shaking stuff.
Come on, Newton, you've got to publish.
And so at Halley's urging, and indeed with some of Halley's funding, Newton publishes
his mechanics.
