again I'm at negative 5 3rds.
You'll never hit the 0, this series never stops.
And so this is an infinite series, this is the sort of thing for which Newton became
justly famous.
Well what I've just shown then is that the cube root of 1 plus x can be expanded as they
say into this infinite series 1 plus 1 3rd of x minus 1 9th of x squared plus 5 81st
of x cubed minus 10 over 243 x to the 4th, on and on it goes.
Newton says the extractions of roots are much shortened by this theorem.
He thought this was very useful for finding roots.
I think I should show you why, what's he mean?
Let's suppose somebody asks you to find the cube root of 140.
Okay, so here's one of these challenges.
Find the cube root of 140, no calculators allowed, you've got to do it by hand, imagine
you're back in the 17th century, you know how in the world would you do something like
this?
Well, you'd use Newton's generalized binomial expansion.
However, you've got to be careful here, just one little word of warning.
When I use this expansion, the value of x that I stick in this infinite series must
be small so that the terms zero in on an answer, the modern mathematicians say so that the
terms converge to something.
If you look at the series, you can see what happens.
I have 1 plus 1 3rd x and the next term has an x squared, the next term has an x cubed.
If I have a large x that I'm substituting in there and I'm squaring it and cubing it
and taking it to higher and higher powers, the whole thing could just explode on me.
That's not going to be good, that will not be what we want.
But if you put in a small x and take powers, it's actually going to start to slow down
in its growth.
Think about that, think about a half as a small x, a half squared is a fourth, smaller.
A half cubed is an eighth, smaller.
So what Newton realized was the smaller the x you put in here, the better.
In fact, x has to be smaller than 1 or this thing isn't going to work.
And that presents a problem to my little calculation of the cube root of 140.
What I would be tempted to do would be to say if I want the cube root of 1 plus x and
I'm trying to do 140, I'll just write the cube root of 1 plus 139.
1 plus 139 is 140, I would let x be 139, but that is not going to work.
If you put 139 into the series, those powers of 139 will just blow you out of the water.
The series won't head toward anything, it won't converge to the cube root of 140.
So sort of a superficial attack on this isn't going to do it for you.
Newton says you have to use artifice, his word.
It's got to be tricky.
So let me show you the trick, how you do this, getting over this hurdle of having to have
