It turns out to be 9736 over 9375, and you're multiplying by 5 on the outside of the square
brackets.
The 5 cancels into the denominator, and you're left with 9736 over 1875.
And if you turn that into a decimal, you get 5.19253.
That's my approximation of the cube root of 140 using Newton's result.
If I go to a calculator and put in the cube root of 140, what do I get?
5.19249.
I'm off by four places in 100,000.
That is extremely accurate, and I did it with just a bunch of fractions.
I could do this by hand.
Remember what Newton said, the extractions of roots are much shortened by this theorem
as they indeed are.
Apparently he loved this thing so much that he tells us I'm ashamed to tell how many places
I have carried these computations, having no other business at the time.
For then, I took really too much delight in these inventions, so he wasted a lot of time
doing cube roots and things.
All right, so that's one of his great infinite series.
I want to show you another one a little more quickly, and it involves the infinite series
expansion of the sine.
This is from 1669, the sine being a famous trigonometric ratio.
Well, I think we better review that.
We haven't seen trig yet in this course, so let's just remember what the sine is.
You have a right triangle, an angle theta that I'll put up there, and then sides A,
B, and a hypotenuse C, so we're back in the friendly confines of right triangles.
Every deals with ratios of these sides, and in particular, the sine of the angle theta
is defined to be the length of the opposite side over the hypotenuse.
So in my picture, it's B over C. So that's the sine of the angle theta, and we'll remember
that.
That's what Newton is going to want to expand.
But I need one other little fact, and that is that when measuring angles in problems
like this, indeed as we move into more advanced mathematics, we want to measure the angle
not in degrees, but in something called radians.
Now the angle will be the same, but it's the unit or the procedure by which we measure
the size of the angle, the size of the opening that is going to differ.
You know, it's sort of like if you had a length, you could measure the length in meters, you
could measure the length in feet.
It's the same length, just a different approach to measuring it.
Likewise for an angle, we could measure it in degrees.
Remember, the Greeks would measure these things in terms of how many right angles they had,
or we could use radians, and it turns out radians is the way to go for Newton's series
and indeed for calculus and beyond.
