That was all around before Newton came along.
What Newton realized was that we could use this expression in the case of the exponent
being non-integer.
And that's what I want to show you.
What you can do if that r isn't 17 or 2.
Before doing so, however, let me just introduce a notational convention.
This will just simplify the expression a little bit.
When I have something like 4 x 3 x 2 x 1, what I'm going to write is 4 exclamation point,
which is read 4 factorial.
It just abbreviates the notation, so you don't have to write 11 x 10 x 9 x 8.
You just write 11 factorial.
You can always tell when somebody doesn't know math, if they see this symbol like that
4 factorial and they think that means they're supposed to say 4 with a great deal of enthusiasm
or passion.
It's not an exclamation point that's supposed to require you to get very theatrical.
It just has a mathematical meaning.
So if I want to go after that, then I can recast my binomial expansion as 1 plus x to
the r is 1 plus rx plus r times r minus 1 over 2 factorial x squared instead of 2 times
1 plus r times r minus 1 times r minus 2 over 3 factorial x cubed.
And in that form, I want to continue the discussion.
So as I say, Newton's insight in 1664, while he's still a student at Cambridge, was that
you could use this expansion not just for whole numbers r, but for other kinds of exponents.
What he said is r could be integral or so to speak fractional, positive or negative.
So he's going to allow fractional exponents up there for r, negative exponents up there
for r.
Nobody had ever thought of that.
He said this is still going to work and it's going to be valuable.
Now perhaps before we see Newton using this, I should just review for a minute what a negative
exponent means, what a fractional exponent means.
So real quick, this will be a little review here.
So what's a negative exponent up to?
Well if I wrote something like x to the negative n, what that means is 1 over x to the positive
n.
The negative exponent means you raise the thing to the n and flip it over.
So 3 to the minus 2 is 1 over 3 squared or 1 9th.
Not everybody in Newton's day would have recognized that.
When he wrote about this, he sort of had to stop and explain what this was to people in
case they weren't up on it.
As a fractional exponent, x to the p over q, suppose the exponent is the fraction p
over q, what this means is the q-th root of x to the p-th power.
So when I write x to the p over q, the q, the denominator of that fractional exponent
