sines are flip-flopping plus minus plus minus, and if you do this, you get the sine of x.
This is from Isaac Newton, this famous series, an infinite series, notice it keeps going
forever.
He discovered this in 1669 and put it in his manuscript, the day Anna Lisi, as it was
called, which wasn't published in 1669, remember Newton didn't publish his things very rapidly,
it was published decades later, but when it was published, this is the page on which
the sine expansion appears.
So if you want to see what this looked like when it finally got in print, he was trying
to find the base from the length of the curve given, and if you look in section 45 there,
it says he's trying to find the sine, S-I-N-E of A-B.
The actual formula that he got is a few lines down where you see z minus z cubed over six
plus z to the fifth over 120, six is three factorial, 120 is five factorial, that's the
series using z instead of x.
So there it is as it appeared in print from Sir Isaac.
Now let me just use this, suppose I have that series for sine x and somebody says find the
sine of 20 degrees, you know, we're used to punching this in on a calculator maybe or
looking it up in a table, but suppose you're on your own to find the sine of 20 degrees,
I mean, somebody was on their own originally when they first did this, how do you do it?
You go to the series, you first of all say that 20 degrees is pi over nine radians, and
so you put x equals pi over nine into that series.
It's an infinite series, I'm only going to use the first three terms, so I put in pi
over nine minus pi over nine cubed over three factorial plus pi over nine to the fifth over
five factorial, I'll stop there, do the calculation and I get 0.34202 as my estimate of the sine
of 20 degrees using Newton's series.
What is the sine of 20 degrees on your calculator?
That's exactly right, 0.34202.
So this is splendid, this is how this works.
So Newton gave us infinite series, he gave us the generalized binomial expansion that
yielded that cube root of one plus x as an infinite series, he gave us the beautiful
symmetric sine series.
He was a master of this new subject, and infinite series expansions would be important for
ever in mathematics, we'll see them actually popping up in some later lectures, they are
a sign that important, new, exciting mathematics is being done.
However, let me just say in my next lecture, rather than looking to the future as Newton
was doing here, I'm going to look to the past, and I want to show you one more piece of Newton's
mathematics, I want to show you how he proved an old, old result, in fact an old friend
of ours from the days of the Greeks, how he proved Heron's formula.
