So I want to just tell you what that is, what is a radian measure.
What you want to do is find the length of the arc that the angle cuts off on the unit
circle if the angle is centered at the center of the circle.
Now that sounds pretty complicated, so let me give you a picture of how to measure an
angle in radians.
There's my angle theta, it's a certain opening.
I will let O be the vertex of the angle, and I'll put my compass there, and I will then
draw a circle of radius one.
So centered at the vertex, circle of radius one, let's say that the rays of the angle
cut across the circle at A and B, then the radian measure of the angle theta, that is
the radian measure of angle A O B, is just the length of that arc, A B. That's all you
got to do, to measure the angle, you just measure the arc length when the circle has
radius one, and that's called the radian measure.
Well, how about an example?
Suppose I need to find the radian measure of an angle of 20 degrees.
So in our familiar measurement system, we say it's a 20 degree angle, I want to convert
it to radians, what do I get?
So here's how you do it.
There's a 20 degree angle, you put O in the vertex, you draw your unit circle, that is
your circle with radius one, it hits the rays of the angle at A and B, and now my challenge
is to find the length of A B, that's going to be the radian measure.
Well, what you say is this, that's not really that hard to do, because 20 degrees is one
18th of the way around the circle, 20 degrees over the whole 360 is one 18th.
So my angle is one 18th of the way around, so my arc length, A B, is one 18th of the
circumference around.
Well, what's the circumference of this circle?
It's 2 pi R, that's the circumference of any circle, except in this case R is one, this
is the unit circle, the radius is one.
So the length of arc A B is one 18th of 2 pi times one, in other words one 18th of 2
pi, in other words pi over 9.
And so an angle with degree measure 20 degrees has radian measure pi over 9, same angle,
just a different way of measuring it.
Okay, now Newton, using his generalized binomial series and using this newly invented method
of his called inverse fluctuations, that is integral calculus, developed an infinite series
for the sine of x, I'm going to use x instead of theta here, where x is the radian measure
of the angle.
And here it is, this is Newton's sine series.
The sine of x is x minus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the fifth over 5 factorial minus
x to the seventh over 7 factorial and so on.
It's a beautiful pattern, look at that, it's very nice, the odd powers are showing up,
x, x cubed, fifth, seventh, ninth, the factorial's below them in perfect marching order, the
