Having met Isaac Newton, we should now take a look at some of his mathematics.
I'd like to devote two lectures to Newton's math, and this first one will be about his
work with Infinite Series.
Infinite Series was a hot topic in 17th century mathematics.
It was at the cutting edge of research, and Newton was at the forefront of this study.
Now I should say, what is an infinite series?
Series means sum.
An infinite series is the sum of infinitely many terms, and the question before the mathematicians
of that time was, what happened to this series?
Did it add up to something useful?
What sort of interesting properties did such series have?
I want to show you what Newton did with this.
Now in the interest of starting slow, let's start with a finite series and work our way
up.
I want to begin with a binomial.
Now a binomial means two terms.
So a binomial is something like x plus y, a plus b, something of that sort.
And let's take a look at 1 plus x, that binomial, times itself.
So 1 plus x times 1 plus x.
We know how to do this from high school algebra, whether they call it the FOIL method.
You multiply the first terms, you get 1 times 1 is 1, x times 1, the inner term, the outer
term, and the last term.
And it rather quickly comes out to be 1 plus x plus x plus x squared.
If you were to add those two x's in the middle, you get 1 plus 2x plus x squared.
So what we're saying is that 1 plus x, the quantity squared, is 1 plus 2x plus x squared.
Nothing hard about that.
But what if we had to figure out 1 plus x to the 17th power?
Now what?
That's considerably more challenging.
Well, there's a couple of options.
The worst one is to multiply 1 plus x times 1 plus x, and get an answer, and then multiply
a third time by 1 plus x, and get an answer, and a fourth, and a fifth, and all the way
up to 17 multiplications.
This would be a very dull way to spend an afternoon.
You could do it, but no, we don't want to go down that road.
Is there a shortcut?
Well we saw one a few lectures ago when we talked about Pascal's Triangle.
Where that was that array of numbers, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 3, 3, 1, where each number
in a given row is formed by adding the two numbers above it, one to the left, one to
the right.
So you generate these rows, and these numbers across the rows are exactly the coefficients
you get when you expand something like 1 plus x to the 17th.
If I wanted to do that with Pascal's Triangle then, I'd just go down to the 17th row of
the triangle, and I could read off the coefficients.
It would be great, except there's a problem there too.
Because the 17th row requires me to have the 16th row.
The 16th depends on the 15th.
And so I would actually have to build from the start all the way down to the 17th row.
That wouldn't be much fun either.
But what we'd like is a more efficient way to do this, and there's something called the
binomial expansion, which gives you an automatic way to find things like 1 plus x to the 17th.
So let me show this to you.
It's aimed at figuring out 1 plus x to the r, I will write it, where r could be 17 or
3 or whatever.
The expansion looks like this.
It starts with 1 when you multiply 1 plus x times itself r times.
All those 1's will multiply.
Then you get an r times x.
Then you get an r times r minus 1 over 2 times 1 times x squared.
That's the third term.
The x cubed term has, as its coefficient, r times r minus 1 times r minus 2 over 3 times
2 times 1.
That's how many x cubes there are.
And the pattern continues.
You can see what they're doing here.
You always march down from r, r minus 1, r minus 2, and so on.
In the bottom, you're taking 3, 2, 1.
The next term would have a 4, 3, 2, 1 in the bottom, and so on.
It's a very nice pattern.
It's called the binomial expansion.
So let's do an example with r equals 2.
Suppose I wanted to go back to my first example, 1 plus x squared, and not do it by multiplying
these out, but by using this binomial expansion.
So the r's 2, I just go to the pattern, it'll start off with 1 plus 2x, rx, plus 2 times
2 minus 1, that is 2 times 1, over 2 times 1, x squared.
The next term, think about this one, it'll be 2 in the numerator, 2 times 1 times 0 as
we descend, over 3, 2, 1, x cubed.
But that's going to be 0.
The term after that would be 2 times 1 times 0 times negative 1, over 4 times 3 times 2
times 1, but that will be 0, too.
In fact, all the rest of the terms are gone.
They all will have a 0 in them.
And all we're left with are the first three terms, 1 plus 2x, and look at the next one,
2 times 1 over 2 times 1, cancel, and so you get 1 plus 2x plus x squared as we expected.
Now let me use the same expansion for the harder problem, 1 plus x to the 17th.
Now you can see where this is going to earn its keep.
1 plus x to the 17th, I just substitute in, let r be 17, run across it, you'll get 1 plus
rx is now 17x, plus r times r minus 1 over 2 times 1, 17 times 16 over 2 times 1x squared.
The term 17, 16, 15 over 3 to 1, x cubed, 17, 16, 15, 14 over 4, 3 to 1, x to the 4th.
You can just keep going.
The pattern is quite clear.
And then all you have to do is simplify these fractions.
Now the arithmetic can be a little bit tricky, but it's not bad.
If you're paying attention, you'll get 1 plus 17x plus 136x squared plus 680x cubed, 2380x
to the 4th, on and on it goes, you're finally grind to a halt with 17x to the 16th and lastly
x to the 17th.
So this is a finite series, not an infinite one, but it's done via the binomial expansion.
And one more problem like this with my expansion, what if somebody asks you what's the coefficient
of x to the 11th in the expansion of 1 plus x to the 17th?
Because that's all they wanted to know.
If you took 1 plus x, raised it to the 17th power, how many x to the 11th would there
be?
Well, the multiplying out is not what you want to do.
The Pascal's Triangle is probably not what you want to do.
I want to use the binomial expansion.
But this time I'm just going to zero in on the x to the 11th term.
Now if you look at the formula, you can see what's going to happen.
To get an x to the 11th, you're going to have a fraction in front of it.
That'll be the coefficient.
Under it will be 11 times 10 times 9 times 8 times 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1.
And on the numerator you'd start with 17 and go down to 16, 15, 14 until you get 11 terms
up there.
So I can immediately write down what the 11th term's going to be, what the x to the 11th
term's going to be.
There it is, this big fraction with all these numbers on top and all these numbers on the
bottom.
It looks like a mess to try to multiply all this out and simplify it, but actually all
kinds of cancellations will occur.
If you look at that, you see 11, 10, 9, 8, 7 in the top, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7 in the bottom.
So right away you can lop off most of those terms.
What's left isn't too bad.
You do the work and you see that there's 12,376 x to the 11th.
All right, so that's kind of background.
That was all around before Newton came along.
What Newton realized was that we could use this expression in the case of the exponent
being non-integer.
And that's what I want to show you.
What you can do if that r isn't 17 or 2.
Before doing so, however, let me just introduce a notational convention.
This will just simplify the expression a little bit.
When I have something like 4 x 3 x 2 x 1, what I'm going to write is 4 exclamation point,
which is read 4 factorial.
It just abbreviates the notation, so you don't have to write 11 x 10 x 9 x 8.
You just write 11 factorial.
You can always tell when somebody doesn't know math, if they see this symbol like that
4 factorial and they think that means they're supposed to say 4 with a great deal of enthusiasm
or passion.
It's not an exclamation point that's supposed to require you to get very theatrical.
It just has a mathematical meaning.
So if I want to go after that, then I can recast my binomial expansion as 1 plus x to
the r is 1 plus rx plus r times r minus 1 over 2 factorial x squared instead of 2 times
1 plus r times r minus 1 times r minus 2 over 3 factorial x cubed.
And in that form, I want to continue the discussion.
So as I say, Newton's insight in 1664, while he's still a student at Cambridge, was that
you could use this expansion not just for whole numbers r, but for other kinds of exponents.
What he said is r could be integral or so to speak fractional, positive or negative.
So he's going to allow fractional exponents up there for r, negative exponents up there
for r.
Nobody had ever thought of that.
He said this is still going to work and it's going to be valuable.
Now perhaps before we see Newton using this, I should just review for a minute what a negative
exponent means, what a fractional exponent means.
So real quick, this will be a little review here.
So what's a negative exponent up to?
Well if I wrote something like x to the negative n, what that means is 1 over x to the positive
n.
The negative exponent means you raise the thing to the n and flip it over.
So 3 to the minus 2 is 1 over 3 squared or 1 9th.
Not everybody in Newton's day would have recognized that.
When he wrote about this, he sort of had to stop and explain what this was to people in
case they weren't up on it.
As a fractional exponent, x to the p over q, suppose the exponent is the fraction p
over q, what this means is the q-th root of x to the p-th power.
So when I write x to the p over q, the q, the denominator of that fractional exponent
is the root you take and the numerator, the p, is the power you raise it to.
So if I had something like 8 to the 1 3rd, this means the q-root of 8 to the first power.
And you don't need to write the first power, it just means the q-root of 8, which is 2.
So 8 to the 1 3rd is 2.
And something like 6 to the 5 halves means the 2nd root of 6 to the 5th power.
Well the 2nd root of 6 is the square root of 6.
So it means the square root of 6 to the 5th power, i.e. the square root of 6 times the
square root of 6 times the square root of 6 times the square root of 6, 5 of them.
And any 2 of them, square root of 6 times square root of 6, multiply to give you a 6.
So you can see what will happen if you get 6 times 6 is 36 square root of 6.
So with that little background then, we will look at the binomial expansion and allow fractional
or negative exponents.
This is what's called Newton's generalized binomial expansion.
He's allowing more general exponents up there than anybody had before.
So let me do an example, this is one he looked at.
Let's expand the q-root of 1 plus x.
Suppose you want to expand this out as a series.
We wouldn't actually do it with the q-root, you'd turn that into a fractional exponent.
So you'd write this as 1 plus x to the exponent 1 3rd, that would be your fraction.
And so when I use my generalized binomial series, r, the role of r will be played by
1 3rd.
So let's do it.
1 plus x to the 1 3rd will start off with 1 plus rx will become 1 3rd times x.
Next up is plus r times r minus 1 over 2 factorial x squared, but instead of r we're putting
in a 3rd.
So we have a 3rd times a 3rd minus 1 over 2 factorial x squared, then comes a 3rd times
a 3rd minus 1 times a 3rd minus 2 over 3 factorial x cubed, and on we go.
Now if you start simplifying that you'll see that you'll end up with 1 plus a 3rd of x
plus in the next expression 1 3rd times negative 2 3rds over 2 times 1 x squared because 1
3rd minus 1 is negative 2 3rds.
The next term will be 1 3rd times negative 2 3rds times negative 5 3rds over 3 times
2 times 1 x cubed because 1 3rd minus 2 is negative 5 3rds, and on it goes.
And if you then clean up the fractions, watch out for the signs, you'll get 1 plus 1 3rd
x minus 1 9th x squared plus 5 81st x cubed minus 10 over 243 x to the 4th and so on.
Now what's critical here is that this series doesn't stop.
It never quits, it keeps going, it's an infinite series.
And compare this to the one I did earlier where we had 1 plus x squared, remember as
those exponents were coming down we had 2 times 1 times 0 and that wiped out all the
rest of the terms.
Here we never get a 0 in the numerator, we skip over it.
I started off with 1 3rd and when I subtracted 1 I'm at negative 2 3rds and when I subtract
again I'm at negative 5 3rds.
You'll never hit the 0, this series never stops.
And so this is an infinite series, this is the sort of thing for which Newton became
justly famous.
Well what I've just shown then is that the cube root of 1 plus x can be expanded as they
say into this infinite series 1 plus 1 3rd of x minus 1 9th of x squared plus 5 81st
of x cubed minus 10 over 243 x to the 4th, on and on it goes.
Newton says the extractions of roots are much shortened by this theorem.
He thought this was very useful for finding roots.
I think I should show you why, what's he mean?
Let's suppose somebody asks you to find the cube root of 140.
Okay, so here's one of these challenges.
Find the cube root of 140, no calculators allowed, you've got to do it by hand, imagine
you're back in the 17th century, you know how in the world would you do something like
this?
Well, you'd use Newton's generalized binomial expansion.
However, you've got to be careful here, just one little word of warning.
When I use this expansion, the value of x that I stick in this infinite series must
be small so that the terms zero in on an answer, the modern mathematicians say so that the
terms converge to something.
If you look at the series, you can see what happens.
I have 1 plus 1 3rd x and the next term has an x squared, the next term has an x cubed.
If I have a large x that I'm substituting in there and I'm squaring it and cubing it
and taking it to higher and higher powers, the whole thing could just explode on me.
That's not going to be good, that will not be what we want.
But if you put in a small x and take powers, it's actually going to start to slow down
in its growth.
Think about that, think about a half as a small x, a half squared is a fourth, smaller.
A half cubed is an eighth, smaller.
So what Newton realized was the smaller the x you put in here, the better.
In fact, x has to be smaller than 1 or this thing isn't going to work.
And that presents a problem to my little calculation of the cube root of 140.
What I would be tempted to do would be to say if I want the cube root of 1 plus x and
I'm trying to do 140, I'll just write the cube root of 1 plus 139.
1 plus 139 is 140, I would let x be 139, but that is not going to work.
If you put 139 into the series, those powers of 139 will just blow you out of the water.
The series won't head toward anything, it won't converge to the cube root of 140.
So sort of a superficial attack on this isn't going to do it for you.
Newton says you have to use artifice, his word.
It's got to be tricky.
So let me show you the trick, how you do this, getting over this hurdle of having to have
a small x.
I'm going to think of the cube root of 140 and you ask yourself, what is a perfect cube
that's somewhere in the neighborhood of 140?
A perfect cube, some number you can take the cube root of easily, that's up there around
140.
Well, how about 125?
125 is 5 cubed.
So I'm going to write this as the cube root of 125 plus whatever I need to get up to 140,
which is 15.
So it's kind of weird, you've taken the 140 and broken it into 125 plus a 15, then under
that cube root, you factor out a 125.
So I'm going to write this as the cube root of the expression 125 times parentheses, 1
plus 15 over 125.
Now if you think we're off track here, just multiply the 125 back through the parentheses
and you'll get 125 plus 15, which is 140.
So we haven't done anything wrong yet.
That expression under the cube root is just another way to write 140, but it seems like
a rather peculiar way to do it, except for this problem in which it's exactly what you
want.
All right, next up, the cube root of the product is the product of the cube roots.
So instead of the cube root of 125 times that parenthetical, we're going to write it as
the cube root of 125 times the cube root of the parenthetical.
We break these apart into two cube roots, but the cube root of 125 is easy.
That's 5, I know that, that's why I picked 125, that one I can do.
And what you're left with beside there is the cube root of 1 plus 3, 25.
Now I can use the binomial expansion.
Now I can use Newton's result because the x is going to be 3, 25, which is small.
And if I put that into the series, it will converge very quickly to my answer.
So that's the artifice, that's the little trickery you have to employ.
Let's see what happens when we do that.
I'm going to get that the cube root of 140 is 5 times the cube root of 1 plus 3, 25.
I go to the series for the cube root, and I'll tell you what, I'm only going to take
the first four terms and stop.
The series goes on forever, but I don't have forever, so I'm just going to take the first
four terms and thus I'm going to get an approximation.
Sometimes we write a little squiggly equal sign for approximately.
So I'm going to end up with 5 times, all right, stick 3, 25 into the binomial expansion.
You'll get 1 plus a third of x will be a third of 3, 25 minus a ninth of x squared will be
minus a ninth of 3, 25 squared plus 5, 81st of 3, 25 cubed.
And I'm stopping there saying that'll be a good enough approximation.
You collect all those terms in the square brackets.
It turns out to be 9736 over 9375, and you're multiplying by 5 on the outside of the square
brackets.
The 5 cancels into the denominator, and you're left with 9736 over 1875.
And if you turn that into a decimal, you get 5.19253.
That's my approximation of the cube root of 140 using Newton's result.
If I go to a calculator and put in the cube root of 140, what do I get?
5.19249.
I'm off by four places in 100,000.
That is extremely accurate, and I did it with just a bunch of fractions.
I could do this by hand.
Remember what Newton said, the extractions of roots are much shortened by this theorem
as they indeed are.
Apparently he loved this thing so much that he tells us I'm ashamed to tell how many places
I have carried these computations, having no other business at the time.
For then, I took really too much delight in these inventions, so he wasted a lot of time
doing cube roots and things.
All right, so that's one of his great infinite series.
I want to show you another one a little more quickly, and it involves the infinite series
expansion of the sine.
This is from 1669, the sine being a famous trigonometric ratio.
Well, I think we better review that.
We haven't seen trig yet in this course, so let's just remember what the sine is.
You have a right triangle, an angle theta that I'll put up there, and then sides A,
B, and a hypotenuse C, so we're back in the friendly confines of right triangles.
Every deals with ratios of these sides, and in particular, the sine of the angle theta
is defined to be the length of the opposite side over the hypotenuse.
So in my picture, it's B over C. So that's the sine of the angle theta, and we'll remember
that.
That's what Newton is going to want to expand.
But I need one other little fact, and that is that when measuring angles in problems
like this, indeed as we move into more advanced mathematics, we want to measure the angle
not in degrees, but in something called radians.
Now the angle will be the same, but it's the unit or the procedure by which we measure
the size of the angle, the size of the opening that is going to differ.
You know, it's sort of like if you had a length, you could measure the length in meters, you
could measure the length in feet.
It's the same length, just a different approach to measuring it.
Likewise for an angle, we could measure it in degrees.
Remember, the Greeks would measure these things in terms of how many right angles they had,
or we could use radians, and it turns out radians is the way to go for Newton's series
and indeed for calculus and beyond.
So I want to just tell you what that is, what is a radian measure.
What you want to do is find the length of the arc that the angle cuts off on the unit
circle if the angle is centered at the center of the circle.
Now that sounds pretty complicated, so let me give you a picture of how to measure an
angle in radians.
There's my angle theta, it's a certain opening.
I will let O be the vertex of the angle, and I'll put my compass there, and I will then
draw a circle of radius one.
So centered at the vertex, circle of radius one, let's say that the rays of the angle
cut across the circle at A and B, then the radian measure of the angle theta, that is
the radian measure of angle A O B, is just the length of that arc, A B. That's all you
got to do, to measure the angle, you just measure the arc length when the circle has
radius one, and that's called the radian measure.
Well, how about an example?
Suppose I need to find the radian measure of an angle of 20 degrees.
So in our familiar measurement system, we say it's a 20 degree angle, I want to convert
it to radians, what do I get?
So here's how you do it.
There's a 20 degree angle, you put O in the vertex, you draw your unit circle, that is
your circle with radius one, it hits the rays of the angle at A and B, and now my challenge
is to find the length of A B, that's going to be the radian measure.
Well, what you say is this, that's not really that hard to do, because 20 degrees is one
18th of the way around the circle, 20 degrees over the whole 360 is one 18th.
So my angle is one 18th of the way around, so my arc length, A B, is one 18th of the
circumference around.
Well, what's the circumference of this circle?
It's 2 pi R, that's the circumference of any circle, except in this case R is one, this
is the unit circle, the radius is one.
So the length of arc A B is one 18th of 2 pi times one, in other words one 18th of 2
pi, in other words pi over 9.
And so an angle with degree measure 20 degrees has radian measure pi over 9, same angle,
just a different way of measuring it.
Okay, now Newton, using his generalized binomial series and using this newly invented method
of his called inverse fluctuations, that is integral calculus, developed an infinite series
for the sine of x, I'm going to use x instead of theta here, where x is the radian measure
of the angle.
And here it is, this is Newton's sine series.
The sine of x is x minus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the fifth over 5 factorial minus
x to the seventh over 7 factorial and so on.
It's a beautiful pattern, look at that, it's very nice, the odd powers are showing up,
x, x cubed, fifth, seventh, ninth, the factorial's below them in perfect marching order, the
sines are flip-flopping plus minus plus minus, and if you do this, you get the sine of x.
This is from Isaac Newton, this famous series, an infinite series, notice it keeps going
forever.
He discovered this in 1669 and put it in his manuscript, the day Anna Lisi, as it was
called, which wasn't published in 1669, remember Newton didn't publish his things very rapidly,
it was published decades later, but when it was published, this is the page on which
the sine expansion appears.
So if you want to see what this looked like when it finally got in print, he was trying
to find the base from the length of the curve given, and if you look in section 45 there,
it says he's trying to find the sine, S-I-N-E of A-B.
The actual formula that he got is a few lines down where you see z minus z cubed over six
plus z to the fifth over 120, six is three factorial, 120 is five factorial, that's the
series using z instead of x.
So there it is as it appeared in print from Sir Isaac.
Now let me just use this, suppose I have that series for sine x and somebody says find the
sine of 20 degrees, you know, we're used to punching this in on a calculator maybe or
looking it up in a table, but suppose you're on your own to find the sine of 20 degrees,
I mean, somebody was on their own originally when they first did this, how do you do it?
You go to the series, you first of all say that 20 degrees is pi over nine radians, and
so you put x equals pi over nine into that series.
It's an infinite series, I'm only going to use the first three terms, so I put in pi
over nine minus pi over nine cubed over three factorial plus pi over nine to the fifth over
five factorial, I'll stop there, do the calculation and I get 0.34202 as my estimate of the sine
of 20 degrees using Newton's series.
What is the sine of 20 degrees on your calculator?
That's exactly right, 0.34202.
So this is splendid, this is how this works.
So Newton gave us infinite series, he gave us the generalized binomial expansion that
yielded that cube root of one plus x as an infinite series, he gave us the beautiful
symmetric sine series.
He was a master of this new subject, and infinite series expansions would be important for
ever in mathematics, we'll see them actually popping up in some later lectures, they are
a sign that important, new, exciting mathematics is being done.
However, let me just say in my next lecture, rather than looking to the future as Newton
was doing here, I'm going to look to the past, and I want to show you one more piece of Newton's
mathematics, I want to show you how he proved an old, old result, in fact an old friend
of ours from the days of the Greeks, how he proved Heron's formula.
