Having met Isaac Newton, we should now take a look at some of his mathematics.
I'd like to devote two lectures to Newton's math, and this first one will be about his
work with Infinite Series.
Infinite Series was a hot topic in 17th century mathematics.
It was at the cutting edge of research, and Newton was at the forefront of this study.
Now I should say, what is an infinite series?
Series means sum.
An infinite series is the sum of infinitely many terms, and the question before the mathematicians
of that time was, what happened to this series?
Did it add up to something useful?
What sort of interesting properties did such series have?
I want to show you what Newton did with this.
Now in the interest of starting slow, let's start with a finite series and work our way
up.
I want to begin with a binomial.
Now a binomial means two terms.
So a binomial is something like x plus y, a plus b, something of that sort.
And let's take a look at 1 plus x, that binomial, times itself.
So 1 plus x times 1 plus x.
We know how to do this from high school algebra, whether they call it the FOIL method.
You multiply the first terms, you get 1 times 1 is 1, x times 1, the inner term, the outer
term, and the last term.
And it rather quickly comes out to be 1 plus x plus x plus x squared.
If you were to add those two x's in the middle, you get 1 plus 2x plus x squared.
So what we're saying is that 1 plus x, the quantity squared, is 1 plus 2x plus x squared.
Nothing hard about that.
But what if we had to figure out 1 plus x to the 17th power?
Now what?
That's considerably more challenging.
Well, there's a couple of options.
The worst one is to multiply 1 plus x times 1 plus x, and get an answer, and then multiply
a third time by 1 plus x, and get an answer, and a fourth, and a fifth, and all the way
up to 17 multiplications.
This would be a very dull way to spend an afternoon.
You could do it, but no, we don't want to go down that road.
Is there a shortcut?
Well we saw one a few lectures ago when we talked about Pascal's Triangle.
Where that was that array of numbers, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 3, 3, 1, where each number
in a given row is formed by adding the two numbers above it, one to the left, one to
the right.
So you generate these rows, and these numbers across the rows are exactly the coefficients
