M to D. Sure. And look at DC, the other part of this expression. DC is the same as MC
minus MD. And again, you can see it right there on the triangle. If I went from M to
C but then subtracted the piece from M to D, I'm left with DC. So there's where I am.
And now something important here. M, remember, was the midpoint of AC. So what is AM? AM
is B over 2, half the base. And what is MC? Well, that's B over 2 also, half the base.
So we stick those variables in, and we get, as my expression, B over 2 plus MD minus the
quantity B over 2 minus MD. The B over 2s will cancel and you'll have two MDs left here.
So C squared minus A squared over B is two MDs. Therefore, MD is C squared minus A squared
over 2B. And that's another step along the way. Trouble is, that isn't the real important
piece he's after. MD isn't the real issue. The real issue, believe it or not, from this
picture is to figure out DE. So that comes next. So here's how he's going to do that.
He's going to say, what is DE? How long is that? Well, again, looking at the diagram,
we can see that it has to do with other pieces here, other segments. Isn't it just ME minus
MD? So look up there, ME minus MD. Yeah, that would leave me with D. What's ME? Well, Newton
says that is AE minus AM. So we look at the picture once more. AE minus AM, yep, that's
ME. Meanwhile, we still have the minus MD there, tacked on the end. So we have to attack
this thing. But now all the pieces are finally going to come clear. AE, if you look at that,
was C. Remember, that's how we did that. We constructed from A over to E, C units. So
where AE is, C's going in. AM is half of the base. That's B over 2. And MD is this expression
we figured out previously, C squared minus A squared over 2B. So here comes the algebra.
Everything goes in there. We get C minus B over 2 minus C squared minus A squared over
2B. A common denominator would be called for. How about that would be 2B. And thus DE, it
turns out, is 2BC minus B squared minus C squared plus A squared over 2B, the result
of combining all those fractions over the denominator 2B. Now, we're going to store
that result for DE for just one minute. We will return. But I have one more observation
here. Newton says triangle FBE is a right triangle. Triangle FBE, the ones with the dotted
lines on it, FB and BE, that's a right triangle. Why is that? Well, here's why. Suppose you
took your compass and put the center at A and had your radius C. Well, then that drew
a circle. From A to F is C units, so F would be on the circle. From A to B is C units,
