this in the book. He says, geometrical questions may be reduced sometimes to equations. A geometrical
problem can be turned into an equation, an algebra problem. But he warned, in geometrical
affairs, they so much depend on the various positions and complex relations of lines that
they require some farther invention and artifice to bring them into algebraic terms. So geometry
problems are challenging to turn into algebra problems. He says, because of the way the
lines stack up, so you have to be careful. Need some artifice, but boy, Newton was great
with his artifice, so he could do this. Let me show you one geometry problem before we
get to the Heron. He says this, the area and perimeter of a right-angled triangle being
given to find the hypotenuse. So here is a little problem that sounds geometrical, but
he's going to make it algebraic. So you suppose we're given a right triangle whose area is
given, we'll call it A, whose perimeter is given, we'll call it P, challenge, find H,
the hypotenuse. So there's the triangle, I supposedly know its area, I know its perimeter,
I got to find its hypotenuse. This is a good problem to try at home. See if you can solve
one of Isaac's problems, he tells the answer, I'll tell you what it is, the hypotenuse is
P over 2 minus 2A over P, half the perimeter minus twice the area over the perimeter. It's
a nice exercise. He did other things here, he did things like problem 19 of the book,
he wants to show you how to surround a fish pond with a walk of given area and the same
breadth everywhere. So here's a geometry problem that again is going to turn into an algebra
problem. Imagine you have a fish pond and you have a given amount of asphalt, let's say,
so that's that given area. So you only have so many square feet of asphalt, you want to
surround the pond with a walk that's the same width all the way around. How do you do it?
He shows how to use algebra to solve that problem. So he's doing geometry via algebra.
But the problem that's particularly important for me is this one, problem 12, where he says
having the sides and base of any triangle given to find the area. Give me a triangle,
A, B, C, I'll give you the sides, A, B, and C, what's the area? Well if you look at this
you'll see what's up here. He's given you the three sides of the triangle on once the
area, what's he after? He's after Heron's formula. Here is his page of scratch work.
Here is where he did this. This is actually Newton writing the proof. You can see his
handwriting, you can see the crossings out. Let me just call your attention to a few things
