But that thing in the parentheses should look familiar. That is B minus C, the quantity
squared. B minus C, the quantity squared is B squared minus 2BC plus C squared. And so
I have A squared minus the quantity B minus C squared. Well, that's a difference of squares
again. You see it? It's that same structure, X squared minus Y squared. And you can factor
it into X plus Y times X minus Y. So I can factor A squared minus B minus C, the quantity
squared, into A plus B minus C and A minus the quantity B minus C. In other words, it'll
come out to be A plus B minus C times A minus B plus C. So back I go to H squared, DE times
2C minus DE. We had those two fractions. I just cleaned up the numerator of the left
hand one. The right hand one, 2BC plus B squared plus C squared minus A squared, that numerator
can also be repaired. So the first fraction we said broke down into A plus B minus C times
A minus B plus C over 2B. The right hand numerator, if you look at that, the 2BC plus B squared
plus C squared, those first three terms are just B plus C, the quantity squared. And so
the numerator on the right is B plus C, the quantity squared, minus A squared, lo and
behold, the difference of squares again. And so if I can put all this together in the one
gigantic fraction, the bottom will be 4B squared when I multiply the two B's together. Up on
the top I have A plus B minus C times A minus B plus C, and then I employ the difference
of squares for that upper right hand expression, and I get B plus C plus A times B plus C minus
A. That's H squared. We're almost there, except it seems like something's missing here. The
semi-parameter. We're trying to get something about Heron's formula. I don't see a semi-parameter
anywhere. Here it comes. Remember the semi-parameter was A plus B plus C over 2. If I cross multiply
that twice the semi-parameter, that is 2S, is A plus B plus C. But look at my expression
for H squared. One of those terms, the third one in the numerator, is A plus B plus C. That's
going to become 2S. How about S minus A? What's that going to be? Well, S is A plus B plus
C over 2, the semi-parameter, minus A. Put that into a fraction and you get minus A plus
B plus C over 2, cross multiply, and twice S minus A is negative A plus B plus C. There
it is. It's in that numerator for H squared. Likewise, you can show that twice S minus
B is A minus B plus C, and twice S minus C is A plus B minus C. All of those expressions
are showing up in my formula that I've developed at great cost for H squared. Here we go. Let's
revisit it. H squared, we said, has a 4B squared in the bottom. Up on top, there was an A plus
