a right triangle. Yeah, because we drew BD perpendicular. So that's a right angle. That's
a right triangle. We can invoke our old friend, the Pythagorean theorem, and conclude that
C squared is equal to H squared plus the horizontal leg AD squared. So C squared is
H squared plus AD squared, and actually I want to write it this way. C squared minus
AD squared is the H squared. The Pythagorean theorem sort of moved around a bit. Okay.
Now look on the other side. To the right of that altitude, I have a red triangle. It also
is a right triangle. The Pythagorean theorem applies just as well to it, saying that A
squared is H squared plus DC squared, or if I isolate the H squared, H squared is A squared
minus DC squared. You see, the H is common to both triangles. The H squared shows up
in both Pythagorean theorems, and I isolate it and set them equal. So now C squared minus
AD squared on the far left equals A squared minus DC squared on the far right, and I
move things around to get C squared minus A squared is AD squared minus DC squared. Now
what? Well, look at that thing on the right side. AD squared minus DC squared. That looks
familiar. You know, that's called a difference of squares. You see this in algebra. We've
actually seen it in this course already. X squared minus Y squared. You have a difference
of two squares, and you can always factor that into X plus Y times X minus Y, basic
high school algebra. Well, that's just what I'm going to do with that AD squared minus
DC squared. So let me look at that. The difference of squares that will factor into AD plus DC
times AD minus DC. Now you look at the picture and see what you can identify here. What is
AD plus DC? I'm going to look up at the picture from A to D, and then D to C is like going
from A to C. It's the whole base of the triangle. In other words, it's B. And so where AD plus
DC was, I'll put B, where AD minus DC is, I'll just leave that there for now. And so
we see that C squared minus A squared is equal to B times this expression AD minus DC, and
I'll solve for that. And I'll get that C squared minus A squared over B is AD minus DC. And
that's one of the steps along the way in this algebraic journey we're taking. All right.
There it is. C squared minus A squared over B is AD minus DC. That's where we are. Now
Newton is going to look at these two expressions, is AD and this DC, and see what we can make
of that. Now look at AD. Look at the picture. That's just AM plus MD. I mean, if I'm going
to go from A to D, I could just as well go from A to M and then the rest of the way from
