this, particularly in this sense. If I call the length of the altitude h, that perpendicular
h, and it breaks the hypotenuse AC into two pieces, one of which is x and one of which
is y, then the similarity of the triangles will allow me to build a proportion here.
So for the green triangle, I can say long leg is to short leg, that is, x is to h, as
in the blue triangle, long leg is to short leg, h is to y. And if you cross multiply
this, you get that h squared is xy. When you draw the perpendicular from the right angle
to the hypotenuse, the square of that altitude's length is the product of the two pieces of
the hypotenuse, x and y, into which the altitude splits it. That will need as well.
Okay, now we're ready. Here goes Newton's proof. Here comes the algebra. So we will
take a deep breath. There's the triangle, ABC, sides, A, B, and C. Our object is to show
that its area satisfies the wonderful result of Heron. Newton says, first thing, bisect
AC at M. So AC, we'll put the longest side, AC, down there along the bottom, and I split
it in half at M. You can do this with a compass and straight edge, so there it is. So from
A to M is B over 2, and from M to C is B over 2, because AC, that whole side there, was
of length B. Next he says, on CA extended, construct AF equal to C. So I take that line
CA, and I keep it going off to the left. And I go as far from A to a point F so that AF
is C. Now what was C? Oh, C was that side of the triangle from A to B. So what I'm saying
is that you just take CA and go out exactly as far to F as it is from A to B. Next up,
he says, go the other way. Construct AE rightward from A so that AE is also equal to C. So in
my picture, I'm going to go to the right of A to some point E so that AE is C in that
direction. So at this point, we've gone from A leftward to F, C units, and rightward to
E, C units, C being the distance from A to B. So he's building an interesting looking
picture here. A couple more steps in his construction. He says, draw BF and BE. So we draw the line
from B to F. There it is, the line from B to E. And drop BD perpendicular to AC of length
H. So we're going to drop the perpendicular from B straight down to AC. There it is, of
length H. Now that's all he needs to do. That's his whole picture. That's the construction.
It's pretty simple. It's just a matter now of finding our way through the thicket that
will appear here in terms of all the algebra that will arise. So let's begin. First thing
Newton says is, look at that. Triangle ADB. I've turned it into a blue triangle. That's
