so B would be on the circle. And from A to E is C units, so E would be as well. If I
draw in the circle, you see that angle FBE is an angle inscribed in a semicircle. But
what do we know about an angle inscribed in a semicircle? It's a right angle, and we know
that from Thales. So we go way back to our original proof. One of the early theorems in
all of mathematics is just what we need here, Thales theorem. Remember I said in my initial
lecture, I gave that old quotation that logic can be patient because it is eternal. Well,
Thales proof is eternal. We can still use it. And so triangle FBE is a right triangle.
Therefore BD is an altitude to the base, to the hypotenuse FE, and I can use the similarity
argument from Euclid to conclude that FD, that piece of the hypotenuse, is to H as H
is to DE, the other piece of the hypotenuse. And hence by cross multiplying, H squared
is DE times FD. But FD, we want to break it up. This is our last break up, I promise.
FD, if you look at the picture, is FE minus DE. FE minus DE, yep. And so H squared is
DE times the quantity FE minus DE. But FE, we can see what that is. From F to A is C.
From A to E is C. FE is 2C. And so I've reached this conclusion that H squared is DE times
the quantity 2C minus DE. There it is. But remember, we knew what DE was. We had found
that a couple steps ago. DE is 2BC minus B squared minus C squared plus A squared over
2B. So where the DE is, I put in that big monstrous fraction. Then come the parentheses
and I have 2C minus DE. So it's 2C minus that big monstrous fraction, 2BC minus B squared
minus C squared plus A squared over 2B. The first expression is fine. I'll just let that
be. But the second expression, the one in the parentheses, I need a common denominator
there to put that together into a single fraction. The denominator is 2B. That will
require a 4BC to show up in the front end. And then you get minus the 2BC minus minus
plus B squared plus C squared minus A squared. And so this is what H squared is. If you combine
that second, the terms in that second numerator, you'll just get 2BC plus B squared plus C
squared minus A squared. That's what H squared is. The denominators aren't bad, but the
numerators are in need of repair, need of work. So let me look at that left-hand numerator.
It was 2BC minus B squared minus C squared plus A squared. Okay, we can fiddle with this
a bit and write it as A squared minus the quantity B squared minus 2BC plus C squared.
If you check the minus signs through the parentheses, you'll see that's still equal.
