In this lecture, I want to show you Newton's proof of Heron's formula. We'd seen Heron's
formula earlier. We used it to find the area of a triangle and of a quadrilateral, but
we didn't prove it. At that time, I said, we'll defer the proof until later. Later has
arrived. Now, I should say that this particular argument is one that's laden with algebra.
There'll be formulas marching across the page in great abundance. So, as always, I'll try
to go very slowly, very carefully, in order to derive this formula. Nothing here is harder
than high school math. It's just high school math with a vengeance. So, let's see what
we can do with this great proof. First, I better remember what Heron's formula is. Remember
that it was a way to find the area of a triangle. If you have a triangle with sides a, b, and
c, remember the formula says you first take the semi-parameter. So, you take a plus b
plus c, the perimeter, divided in half, and then the area of the triangle is the square
root of that s times s minus a times s minus b times s minus c. This extremely implausible
result. We really need to prove this, so you believe it. It's such a strange formula for
a triangular area. Heron's original proof, which is dated at around 75, was quite complicated.
That's why I didn't do his proof. He started, of course, with the triangle, whose area you
need, and the first thing he did was inscribe a circle within it. To inscribe a circle means
the circle is tangent to the three sides of the triangle. That seems like a strange way
to begin, but that's how he did it, and how do you know you can inscribe a circle in a
triangle? Euclid, book four. He then used properties about cyclic quadrilaterals. We've
met these before. A quadrilateral is cyclic if it can be inscribed in a circle. Heron needed
special properties of these things, which we would have to have stopped and done separately
had we gone down Heron's proof. And he needed to introduce three pairs of similar triangles.
So when you take it all together, it was quite a sophisticated geometrical argument. Here's
his picture. This is the proof that Heron uses. You can see the triangle ABC. You see
he put a circle there inscribed in the middle. He drew all sorts of lines all over the place,
so it's quite cluttered with lines. And I don't know if you see it, but there's actually
a cyclic quadrilateral there someplace, a quadrilateral in a circle. It's AHCO, and there's
the circle that goes through the points. He put all this together. It was a beautiful
proof, but kind of sophisticated. So that's not the way we're doing it. We're going to
