in this page from his notes. In the upper right you see his diagram, the little triangle
he's going to use to prove this. I will reproduce this in better form on the screen, but notice
it's much simpler than that diagram that I showed you from Heron, that Newton got away
with a much simpler picture. Notice also, perhaps you can see this, at the very top
on the upper left it says propositio. So in Latin he's saying here comes the proposition.
A few lines down it says constructio. Ah, here comes the constructions he's going to
need to do his proof. And a little further down yet it says demonstratio, the demonstration,
the proof that it works, the proof that Heron's formula is true. So it's all set up, ready
to go on that one page from his notes. Okay, here's how he states the theorem. Newton
says if from half the collected sum of the sides of a given triangle, the sides are individually
subtracted, the square root of the continued product of that half and the remainders will
be the area of the triangle. It's a much strange way to state Heron's formula. I don't know
why he didn't just write down the formula. He was trying to extol the virtues of algebra,
but seemed like a great place to give this as an algebraic expression, but he chose to
write it in this prosaic form. It's kind of neat though, and if you look at it you see
what he's up to. He says to find the area of the triangle you take half the collected
sum of the sides. Well, the sum of the sides is the perimeter, half the collected sum.
He's talking about the semi perimeter there. And he says suppose these are individually,
suppose the sides of the triangle are individually subtracted from this. So we're going to take
s minus a, s minus b, s minus c, subtracting the sides from this semi perimeter. Then he
says the square root of the continued product of that half and the remainders will be the
area of the triangle. So the product of that half, s, and those remainders, s minus a,
s minus b, s minus c, that product, take the square root, you've got the area of the triangle.
So he's put it in a rather strange way, but that's it if we can prove it.
One more result before we plunge in, and this is something we saw in an earlier lecture.
This is from Euclid, Proposition 8 of Book 6. We saw that if you have a right angle triangle
ABC and you draw the altitude down to the hypotenuse, it splits the right triangle into
two right triangles that are similar to one another. We did this. The green triangle is
similar to the blue in the picture. And we're going to need this, Newton's going to need
