go to Newton's proof. Now, his proof of the same result is much more algebraic, much less
geometric. He starts with the triangle, of course, as does Heron. No need for an inscribed
circle. That's good. No need for cyclic quadrilaterals. There aren't any in Newton's proof. And
only one pair of similar triangles, and they're easy. So the geometry in Newton's argument
is much reduced from that of Heron. But there's a price to pay. If the geometry goes down,
the algebraic sophistication goes up. And as you'll see, the algebra is where the heavy
listing occurs in Newton's proof. So you win some, you lose some. The proof itself appeared
in Newton's book, The Arithmetic Universalis, published in 1707. This was his textbook on
algebra. It was actually his best-selling book in his lifetime. His other more sophisticated
books didn't actually sell very well, but this one did. It was more elementary. He promised
in the preface to let the learner proceed to exercise himself by bringing problems to
equations. So we're going to give you a problem, and we're going to bring it to an equation
and then employ the techniques of algebra. Here's a problem that he gave in this Arithmetic
Universalis. He said, if the number of oxen A eat up the meadow B in the time C, and the
number of oxen D eat up as good a piece of pasture E in the time F, and the grass grows
uniformly to find how many oxen will eat up the like pasture G in the time H. This
is a horrible problem. This is the sort of thing that gives students nightmares, right?
It's like fingernails down the blackboard. I don't know why Isaac Newton put this in
his book. It doesn't excite anybody, I don't think. He has other things in the book that
are better than this, but I just wanted to show you that horrible algebra problems go
all the way back. If you want the answer, the number of oxen is given by that horrible
formula, which I'm not even going to read. But if that problem wasn't particularly successful,
others were pretty good. Derek Whiteside says that Newton turned his attention to geometry
here and that his proof of Heron's formula, which is in this book, occurred when Newton
experienced a renewed interest in pure geometry. So at this point in his career, he was looking
back at geometry, and he devoted himself to constructing improved proofs of elementary
theorems. So what Newton said before him as a challenge was to go find an elementary theorem
like Heron's formula or some other geometrical result and give a nice proof of it using algebra.
See, this was supposed to be the book that showed the value of algebra. Newton observed
