This is where Newton's series for the sign of X appeared.
Now, Newton didn't publish this.
Remember, he was not publishing his works.
He would write them up very neatly, but occasionally he would loan them out.
Somebody would say, Professor Newton, can you show me what you're doing?
And Newton would say, well, here, you can look at this for a while.
You may not publish it.
I want it back.
But it just so happened that when Leibniz was in London, so was Newton's Day Annalisi.
And Leibniz, he asked the British people, the British mathematicians, what's hot in
mathematics here in England?
And someone said, well, you should look at this.
Newton's Day Annalisi, and he did.
And so Leibniz looks through the Newton document.
He takes notes.
Keep that in mind.
That will figure in the great war that's coming.
Leibniz goes back and he knows this fellow Newton is really good.
And so Leibniz writes a letter to Newton, introducing himself, asking about his mathematics.
And Newton responds with a letter that is now called the epistol of prior, the earlier
letter.
And Leibniz responds to that, and Newton sends a second letter, the epistol of posterior.
At which point Newton says, I've had it.
I don't need to write letters to people when he quits the correspondence.
But in this limited correspondence, you can see the two great geniuses feeling each other
out, sort of, you know, what have you got?
What have you got?
And they would share little bits of their mathematics, give little hints at calculus,
but not reveal the whole picture.
They were both playing the cards close to the vest.
In 1676, Leibniz is called back to Germany.
Along the way, he goes up to the Hague and meets Spinoza.
These two great philosophers spend an interesting afternoon of philosophical chit-chat.
Then, Leibniz consolidates his ideas on calculus, takes a while, but in 1684, he publishes a
paper on calculus.
This is the first paper ever published on the subject.
It appeared in a journal called The Acta Aruditorum, and here it is.
This is the first page ever seen in print about this subject of calculus.
It's from Leibniz, 1684.
It's called A Novo Methodus, a new method he's going to give you for some really great
mathematics.
And the title, which is in Latin, of course, translates this way, a new method for maxima
and minima, and also tangents, which is impeded neither by fractional nor irrational quantities
and a remarkable type of calculus for this.
