You can see that by getting a common denominator.
One half minus a third is surely a sixth.
The next number on the right is one twelfth.
That's a third minus a fourth.
And one twentieth is a fourth minus a fifth, and so on.
And now Leibniz looks at this series of numbers and something spectacular happens.
You have one minus a half and then plus a half.
They cancel.
Minus a third and plus a third, gone, minus a fourth plus a fourth, gone, minus a fifth
plus a fifth.
Everything's gone except that one at the front end.
And so what he could conclude is that one half of s is one.
But if one half of s is one, then s is two, and s is what he sought.
S was the sum of the series.
S is two.
In other words, one plus a third plus a sixth plus a tenth plus a fifteenth, the sum of
the reciprocals of the triangular numbers is two.
Leibniz takes this solution back to Huygens and says two.
And Huygens says, I'll help you.
Huygens was impressed.
He Leibniz passed the test.
And so Huygens becomes Leibniz's mentor.
Huygens would say, you've got to read this.
You've got to read Pascal.
Go back and read Descartes.
Try to make some progress.
He wasn't his teacher in a formal sense, any more than Isaac Barrow had been Newton's teacher
in a formal sense.
And yet they both served as guides, the seasoned older mentors.
Leibniz plunges in and with his characteristic zeal races to the frontier of knowledge.
He tells us that he was now ready to get along without help.
For I read mathematics almost as one reads tales of romance.
Reading math for Leibniz was as easy as romance novels.
And he made extraordinary progress during this period.
Remember Newton had his anti-Morobiles, his miraculous years, when he's basically charting
the course of modern science, Leibniz's miraculous years were in Paris and they were miraculous
indeed.
Here's one of the diagrams he created for one of his proofs at this time.
And I just show it to you.
It's kind of a pretty picture.
There's a circle.
There's arcs flying all over the place.
What's he doing with this?
Well he's figuring out what is now known as the Leibniz series.
