We've spent time meeting Isaac Newton, this intellectual force of nature from the 17th
century.
Now, you would be forgiven for thinking that there would be no one, no one that could go
toe-to-toe with Sir Isaac on intellectual matters, but you'd be wrong because he had
a contemporary who lived across the English Channel in Europe who was his peer.
His name was Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, and that's the subject of this lecture.
This is Leibniz.
You recall I've shown you a portrait of Newton called Newton in his own hair.
This I call Leibniz in somebody else's hair.
He's wearing a very splendid wig, as was the fashion of the time.
He was born four years after Newton, died a little bit before, but almost exactly a contemporary.
Born in Leipzig in 1646 to a scholarly family, Leibniz's father died when Leibniz was just
a boy.
His father possessed a wonderful library, and perhaps a little surprisingly, they let
the little boy, little Gottfried, roam free in the library.
And so Leibniz grew up while other kids were out playing.
He was reading books from father's library, and he made enormous progress and developed
eclectic tastes while grazing through those volumes.
By 1658, when he was 12, he had taught himself Latin.
He was writing poetry in Latin, and for good measure, he taught himself Greek as well.
He was obviously brilliant.
1662, he finished his undergraduate degree, and at age 20, he had his doctorate in law.
His training thus was in jurisprudence, and his career was not in academe.
Unlike Newton, who spent at least the first part of his career at Cambridge as a professor,
Leibniz never did that.
He was a public servant, which of course is what Newton was at the end of his day.
Leibniz has been described as a universal genius.
He was somebody who seemed to be able to master anything, to shoot to the frontier of any
subject.
It's really breathtaking, the sweep of his interests and talents.
He studied philosophy.
In fact, most people today, if they know the name Leibniz, probably say, oh, he was a great
philosopher.
Well, he was a great philosopher.
It's been said that from the 17th century, the big names in philosophy are Descartes,
Spinoza, and Leibniz.
So he certainly was a very important philosopher, although we know that he was mainly a mathematician.
He studied logic.
He was interested in symbolic logic and was always trying to refine his notation, his
symbolism, trying to convert human discourse into symbols so that an argument form could
be checked, for instance, algebraically.
He also worked in the binary system.
And although he couldn't have known it, this, of course, would become critical in the modern
computer age.
