for differentials.
d of XV, the differential of the product, is XDV plus VDX.
That's still called the product rule in calculus.
Actually, Leibniz initially thought that the differential of the product was the product
of the differentials.
He thought that d of XV should be dx times dV, which isn't right, but a lot of students
today still make that mistake.
Well, so did he initially, but he was a smart guy, and he figured out the right rule, which
is this one.
And he figured out the rule for quotients, the differential of V over Y, he said, is
plus or minus VDY minus or plus YDV over YY, where we, of course, would write Y squared
in the bottom.
So these are the rules of differentials.
If you take a modern calculus course, you spend weeks trying to get through these.
He just put them all in the second paragraph and moved on, and he gave no proofs for these.
He just said, here they are, use these rules.
They will help you in my new method to solve wonderful problems.
So needless to say, a whole lot of work was going to have to be done after this paper to
clean things up.
But there it is.
It's in print.
It exists.
Two years later in 1686, he publishes the first paper on integral calculus, the inverse
process of taking differentials, doing integrals.
Here it comes in Leibniz's 1686 paper, in which he includes the notation of the integral
sign, this squiggly thing, which he thought of as an elongated S for summation.
He's imagining that he's summing infinitely many infinitesimals.
And to indicate that, he wrote this long S, this beautiful symbol, the integral sign,
which now, more than anything, says that higher mathematics is being done.
If you see that sign, there's higher math around somewhere.
Laplace wrote that Leibniz had a very happy notation, and that notation and other symbols
that Leibniz introduced have stuck with us very happy.
From the year 1685 to 1716, Leibniz is pulled out of his mathematical work and other work
and sent on a mission to discover, write about, collect the genealogy of the house of Brunswick,
his employer in Germany.
This monarch wanted to know where he came from, what were his family roots, and Leibniz,
your job is to write a genealogy.
And this became Leibniz's focus.
He had to dig through records in various churches, various municipalities, he had to go to Italy
to do this, year after year after year he devoted to this rather minor task of collecting
genealogical records of some small monarch in Germany.
He could have been doing more math, more philosophy.
And it reminds me of the years Newton spent on his alchemy and his theology, which essentially
were wasted time.
