So for Leibniz, calculus was a set of rules, this method that he was developing that would
allow you to do these great problems.
Now, if you look at the title, it includes the words maxima and minima, so he's doing
maximum-minimum problems, and also tangents, ah, tangent problems.
If you know calculus, you know what he's doing here, maxima and tangents, that's differential
calculus.
And indeed, that's what this paper was, Leibniz's introduction to differential calculus.
Now the paper itself, I should say, was not very easy to read.
It was pretty opaque.
He must have been taking guidance from Descartes, and that he wrote it in a way that it was
very hard to follow.
And as we'll see, a few of his disciples, named the Bernoullis, had to come along later
and try to make this understandable to mere mortals like the rest of us.
But at least it was there.
The rules were there, the calculus was there, and the notation was there.
This introduces the symbol dx to be the differential of x, dx, the differential of x, by which
he meant the infinitely small amount by which x grows.
So if you have a value x, and you increase it by a teeny weeny infinitesimal amount,
that little extra piece, that differential, is called dx.
The notation has stuck.
When we write calculus today, we use dy's and dx's, Leibniz's notation.
He was very interested in getting good notation.
He believed that if the notation was well chosen, the notation could sort of carry the
problem along.
You would just push the symbols along, and the problem would almost solve itself.
And so he put a lot of time and thought into his notation.
By contrast, Newton never thought the notation mattered very much.
He thought it was the substance that was important.
His notation was inferior, and we don't use it today.
So Leibniz won the battle of the notation.
In this paper, the 1684 paper, by the end of the second paragraph, not very deep into
the paper, he's already given you all the rules of calculus you'll ever want to see.
He's shown that if A is a constant, the differential of A is zero.
So that is, in fact, true.
If a function or if a quantity is constant, there is no little change in the value of
it.
d of A is zero.
He showed that the differential of AX is A times the differential of X.
The constant A can come out.
He stated that the differential of the sum and difference is the sum and the difference
of the differentials in this expression.
d of Z minus Y plus VV, notice that, instead of V squared, VV, plus X is dZ minus dy plus
d of VV plus dx.
There's the differential rule for sums and differences, and he gave us the product rule
