We've spent time meeting Isaac Newton, this intellectual force of nature from the 17th
century.
Now, you would be forgiven for thinking that there would be no one, no one that could go
toe-to-toe with Sir Isaac on intellectual matters, but you'd be wrong because he had
a contemporary who lived across the English Channel in Europe who was his peer.
His name was Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, and that's the subject of this lecture.
This is Leibniz.
You recall I've shown you a portrait of Newton called Newton in his own hair.
This I call Leibniz in somebody else's hair.
He's wearing a very splendid wig, as was the fashion of the time.
He was born four years after Newton, died a little bit before, but almost exactly a contemporary.
Born in Leipzig in 1646 to a scholarly family, Leibniz's father died when Leibniz was just
a boy.
His father possessed a wonderful library, and perhaps a little surprisingly, they let
the little boy, little Gottfried, roam free in the library.
And so Leibniz grew up while other kids were out playing.
He was reading books from father's library, and he made enormous progress and developed
eclectic tastes while grazing through those volumes.
By 1658, when he was 12, he had taught himself Latin.
He was writing poetry in Latin, and for good measure, he taught himself Greek as well.
He was obviously brilliant.
1662, he finished his undergraduate degree, and at age 20, he had his doctorate in law.
His training thus was in jurisprudence, and his career was not in academe.
Unlike Newton, who spent at least the first part of his career at Cambridge as a professor,
Leibniz never did that.
He was a public servant, which of course is what Newton was at the end of his day.
Leibniz has been described as a universal genius.
He was somebody who seemed to be able to master anything, to shoot to the frontier of any
subject.
It's really breathtaking, the sweep of his interests and talents.
He studied philosophy.
In fact, most people today, if they know the name Leibniz, probably say, oh, he was a great
philosopher.
Well, he was a great philosopher.
It's been said that from the 17th century, the big names in philosophy are Descartes,
Spinoza, and Leibniz.
So he certainly was a very important philosopher, although we know that he was mainly a mathematician.
He studied logic.
He was interested in symbolic logic and was always trying to refine his notation, his
symbolism, trying to convert human discourse into symbols so that an argument form could
be checked, for instance, algebraically.
He also worked in the binary system.
And although he couldn't have known it, this, of course, would become critical in the modern
computer age.
He was a student of history, a great historian, and as we'll see, late in his life, he got
entangled in historical studies that essentially robbed him of much of his free time.
He studied political theory.
Mainly, he was a diplomat for much of his life, working in different courts, trying
to affect compromises.
He wanted to bring back together the Protestant and Catholic pieces of the Christian Church.
He didn't succeed in that, but he thought that was a worthy goal.
He studied philology, which is the study of language, and he was a master of language
as it was said that Leibniz was the greatest Sanskrit scholar of his time.
He studied physics, made contributions to that.
He studied engineering, applied physics.
And he was a great fan of Chinese culture, where he was, again, one of the masters of
the subject.
You know, we live in an era of specialists.
It seems to me that Leibniz's specialty was omniscience.
He seemed to know everything.
He did this in part by voraciously reading, and it was said that he was so avid a reader
that he bestowed the honor of reading on a great mass of bad books.
He'd just read everything, good or bad.
What's missing from the list, however, is mathematics.
You notice I didn't say he was, at this point at least, a great mathematician.
Ah, but that's coming.
In 1672, Leibniz is sent on a diplomatic mission to Paris.
Now he was working at the time for one of the kingdoms of Germany.
Remember, Germany back then was not a single unified state, but a bunch of little entities,
each of which had its own diplomatic corps.
Leibniz goes off to Paris, representing one of these states.
Now this was a wonderful place to be in 1672.
This was Paris under Louis XIV, Paris under the Sun King.
And scholars from all over the world would gravitate to this great city.
There were musicians, there were writers, there were scientists, there were artists.
And here comes Leibniz, whose interests are so vast, he was never happier than during
his diplomatic years in Paris.
However, he noted that he had this gap at this point in mathematics.
He wrote this.
He said, when I arrived in Paris in the year 1672, I was self-taught as regards geometry,
and indeed had little knowledge of the subject, for which I had not the patience to read through
the long series of proofs.
So he knew he was lacking mathematically.
He tried to read Descartes.
Descartes' geometry, but he found it difficult, dense, hard to follow.
Remember Newton tried to read Descartes, and he found it difficult.
Descartes has the honor, the privilege of having stumped two of the greatest geniuses
of all time, young Newton and young Leibniz.
I don't know if that's an honor he would want, but in any event, Leibniz said, nevertheless,
it seemed to me I do not know by what rash confidence in my own ability that I might
become the equal of these if I so desired.
If I really worked at it, he said, I think I could master Descartes.
I think I could master mathematics.
He knew something about his abilities.
It was just a matter of getting the right direction and jumping in.
Well, what he wanted to do was find a mentor, somebody that could guide him in his mathematical
training, and it turned out, in Paris at the time, was just a person, Christian Huygens.
Huygens was a Dutch mathematician and scientist.
He was in Paris, like so many mathematicians and scientists, and was quite famous.
Huygens had invented the pendulum clock, the clock that works with a pendulum and has a
whole lot of mathematics behind it, and he had discovered the rings of Saturn.
Huygens was the first person to explain what these strange appendages were that appeared
through the telescope when we look at Saturn.
So he was a star, and Leibniz goes to see him.
Now you can sort of imagine the meeting, the young Leibniz, not very well trained, knocking
on the door of the great Huygens and saying, Professor Huygens, will you guide me in my
mathematical training?
And I imagine Professor Huygens said, who are you?
Who is this guy?
He's a diplomat, he's not a great mathematician, why should I waste my time on him?
And so what Huygens does is he says, all right, young man, here, I will give you a challenge.
I'll give you a problem, and if you can do it, that would show me that you're worthy
of my time, and I can mentor you and lead you into mathematics.
But perhaps Huygens figured he'd never see the guy again because the problem was too
hard.
Let me show you what the problem was.
This was the challenge problem, two Leibniz from Huygens.
Huygens said, we know there are these things called the triangular numbers.
These are numbers that are shaped, you can put them into a triangular form, let's put
it that way.
You know, the square numbers can be put into little squares, fours, two and two, nine,
three, three, three, but you can also build triangular numbers.
So the first of these is one, just think of that as a kind of elementary triangle, and
then three, you can have one, two, three, one atop, two below.
The next one up is a one and a two and a three or six is a triangle.
The next one up is one, two, three, four, ten.
If you've ever gone bowling, you should recognize that shape.
The next one will be 15 and so on.
These are called the triangular numbers.
Now, suppose I ask for their sum.
What would happen if you added up one plus three plus six plus ten?
Well, obviously, that would explode to infinity.
You'd be adding up numbers that are getting ever larger.
That would be an infinite series that explodes and becomes infinite.
So that wasn't the problem.
What Huygens said was, what if we take their reciprocals, take the triangular numbers and
flip them over?
So look at one over one, which is one plus one over three plus one over six plus one
over ten plus one over 15.
Now there's an infinite series that might actually have a finite answer.
What is it, young man?
What's that sum?
And so Leibniz is sent away having to figure out the sum of this infinite series.
Now I should say that Huygens knew the answer.
This wasn't cutting edge research, but infinite series, remember, at this time we're still
not widely known and you couldn't just look this up in a book somewhere.
If you were going to figure this out, you were going to have to do some work.
But Leibniz knows no mathematics.
He's got nothing to go on except this extraordinary IQ.
So here's what he does.
He says, I will figure out what this is as follows.
I'm going to let S stand for the sum I'm seeking.
So we'll just call it something for the time being.
S is this sum one plus a third plus a sixth plus a tenth plus a fifteenth is infinite series
whose value we want.
If I can just figure out S, I'm in business.
Well, Leibniz looked at this.
You imagine he thought about it a while and he says, here's what I'll do.
Multiply everything by half both sides.
So on the one side I'll get half of S on the left.
On the other side, I march through the fractions and hit each of them with a half.
So the one times a half is a half, the third times a half is a sixth, the sixth times a
half is a twelfth, the tenth times a half is a twentieth, and so on.
So there's the series for half of S, which on the surface doesn't look any easier than
the one we started with, but it actually is.
Because Leibniz says, look, here's what I'm going to do.
You see that one half on the right side of the equal sign.
I'm not going to write it that way.
I'm going to write it as one minus one half.
Well, sure, one half is one minus one half.
That's legal.
You can do that.
You know, why he's doing it.
Hang on, but it's fine.
The next number beside it is one sixth.
Now one sixth is a half minus a third.
You can see that by getting a common denominator.
One half minus a third is surely a sixth.
The next number on the right is one twelfth.
That's a third minus a fourth.
And one twentieth is a fourth minus a fifth, and so on.
And now Leibniz looks at this series of numbers and something spectacular happens.
You have one minus a half and then plus a half.
They cancel.
Minus a third and plus a third, gone, minus a fourth plus a fourth, gone, minus a fifth
plus a fifth.
Everything's gone except that one at the front end.
And so what he could conclude is that one half of s is one.
But if one half of s is one, then s is two, and s is what he sought.
S was the sum of the series.
S is two.
In other words, one plus a third plus a sixth plus a tenth plus a fifteenth, the sum of
the reciprocals of the triangular numbers is two.
Leibniz takes this solution back to Huygens and says two.
And Huygens says, I'll help you.
Huygens was impressed.
He Leibniz passed the test.
And so Huygens becomes Leibniz's mentor.
Huygens would say, you've got to read this.
You've got to read Pascal.
Go back and read Descartes.
Try to make some progress.
He wasn't his teacher in a formal sense, any more than Isaac Barrow had been Newton's teacher
in a formal sense.
And yet they both served as guides, the seasoned older mentors.
Leibniz plunges in and with his characteristic zeal races to the frontier of knowledge.
He tells us that he was now ready to get along without help.
For I read mathematics almost as one reads tales of romance.
Reading math for Leibniz was as easy as romance novels.
And he made extraordinary progress during this period.
Remember Newton had his anti-Morobiles, his miraculous years, when he's basically charting
the course of modern science, Leibniz's miraculous years were in Paris and they were miraculous
indeed.
Here's one of the diagrams he created for one of his proofs at this time.
And I just show it to you.
It's kind of a pretty picture.
There's a circle.
There's arcs flying all over the place.
What's he doing with this?
Well he's figuring out what is now known as the Leibniz series.
It was 1674 and using that diagram and techniques which we can now see as calculus, he figured
out this series.
Another infinite series.
Here comes another one of these.
This one's very simple in its structure.
One minus a third plus a fifth minus a seventh plus a ninth minus an eleventh.
See what it is?
The odd numbers in the denominator and the signs flip-flopping.
Very, very easily grasp what the next term would be, for instance.
No question there.
But what's the value of the sum of this thing if you were to go on forever?
That's not at all obvious, but Leibniz figures it out.
And the answer is a real shocker.
The answer is pi over four.
Pi over four.
Where did the pi come from?
Where's the circle?
You guys expect pi to be affiliated with circles?
I don't see a circle.
And I just see a bunch of reciprocals of fractions.
But this is right.
And this is called the Leibniz series in his honor.
Leibniz reports that Huygens praised it very highly and said that it would be a discovery
always to be remembered among mathematicians.
And we still remember it today.
Huygens was right.
Now, in 1673 and in 1676, Leibniz made diplomatic trips to London.
He was sent from Paris to London to do something for the monarch who was paying his salary.
While there, he took with him a calculating machine that he had invented that added,
subtracted, multiplied, and divided.
We had seen that Pascal had invented a machine that could add and subtract.
This was the first four-function calculator, if you will.
Now, it was very cumbersome, it was made out of various components that didn't quite fit
right.
And Leibniz had a devil of a time getting it to work, getting to grind the gears and
crank the levers.
But it, at least in theory, worked.
And the people in London were very impressed.
And they made Leibniz a member of the Royal Society.
In London.
Now, remember, Newton was a member of the Royal Society as well, although at this point
he was up in Cambridge rather than being in London.
In 1676, on that visit to London, Leibniz saw a manuscript of Newton's Day Annalisi.
I mentioned this in the previous lecture.
This is where Newton's series for the sign of X appeared.
Now, Newton didn't publish this.
Remember, he was not publishing his works.
He would write them up very neatly, but occasionally he would loan them out.
Somebody would say, Professor Newton, can you show me what you're doing?
And Newton would say, well, here, you can look at this for a while.
You may not publish it.
I want it back.
But it just so happened that when Leibniz was in London, so was Newton's Day Annalisi.
And Leibniz, he asked the British people, the British mathematicians, what's hot in
mathematics here in England?
And someone said, well, you should look at this.
Newton's Day Annalisi, and he did.
And so Leibniz looks through the Newton document.
He takes notes.
Keep that in mind.
That will figure in the great war that's coming.
Leibniz goes back and he knows this fellow Newton is really good.
And so Leibniz writes a letter to Newton, introducing himself, asking about his mathematics.
And Newton responds with a letter that is now called the epistol of prior, the earlier
letter.
And Leibniz responds to that, and Newton sends a second letter, the epistol of posterior.
At which point Newton says, I've had it.
I don't need to write letters to people when he quits the correspondence.
But in this limited correspondence, you can see the two great geniuses feeling each other
out, sort of, you know, what have you got?
What have you got?
And they would share little bits of their mathematics, give little hints at calculus,
but not reveal the whole picture.
They were both playing the cards close to the vest.
In 1676, Leibniz is called back to Germany.
Along the way, he goes up to the Hague and meets Spinoza.
These two great philosophers spend an interesting afternoon of philosophical chit-chat.
Then, Leibniz consolidates his ideas on calculus, takes a while, but in 1684, he publishes a
paper on calculus.
This is the first paper ever published on the subject.
It appeared in a journal called The Acta Aruditorum, and here it is.
This is the first page ever seen in print about this subject of calculus.
It's from Leibniz, 1684.
It's called A Novo Methodus, a new method he's going to give you for some really great
mathematics.
And the title, which is in Latin, of course, translates this way, a new method for maxima
and minima, and also tangents, which is impeded neither by fractional nor irrational quantities
and a remarkable type of calculus for this.
So for Leibniz, calculus was a set of rules, this method that he was developing that would
allow you to do these great problems.
Now, if you look at the title, it includes the words maxima and minima, so he's doing
maximum-minimum problems, and also tangents, ah, tangent problems.
If you know calculus, you know what he's doing here, maxima and tangents, that's differential
calculus.
And indeed, that's what this paper was, Leibniz's introduction to differential calculus.
Now the paper itself, I should say, was not very easy to read.
It was pretty opaque.
He must have been taking guidance from Descartes, and that he wrote it in a way that it was
very hard to follow.
And as we'll see, a few of his disciples, named the Bernoullis, had to come along later
and try to make this understandable to mere mortals like the rest of us.
But at least it was there.
The rules were there, the calculus was there, and the notation was there.
This introduces the symbol dx to be the differential of x, dx, the differential of x, by which
he meant the infinitely small amount by which x grows.
So if you have a value x, and you increase it by a teeny weeny infinitesimal amount,
that little extra piece, that differential, is called dx.
The notation has stuck.
When we write calculus today, we use dy's and dx's, Leibniz's notation.
He was very interested in getting good notation.
He believed that if the notation was well chosen, the notation could sort of carry the
problem along.
You would just push the symbols along, and the problem would almost solve itself.
And so he put a lot of time and thought into his notation.
By contrast, Newton never thought the notation mattered very much.
He thought it was the substance that was important.
His notation was inferior, and we don't use it today.
So Leibniz won the battle of the notation.
In this paper, the 1684 paper, by the end of the second paragraph, not very deep into
the paper, he's already given you all the rules of calculus you'll ever want to see.
He's shown that if A is a constant, the differential of A is zero.
So that is, in fact, true.
If a function or if a quantity is constant, there is no little change in the value of
it.
d of A is zero.
He showed that the differential of AX is A times the differential of X.
The constant A can come out.
He stated that the differential of the sum and difference is the sum and the difference
of the differentials in this expression.
d of Z minus Y plus VV, notice that, instead of V squared, VV, plus X is dZ minus dy plus
d of VV plus dx.
There's the differential rule for sums and differences, and he gave us the product rule
for differentials.
d of XV, the differential of the product, is XDV plus VDX.
That's still called the product rule in calculus.
Actually, Leibniz initially thought that the differential of the product was the product
of the differentials.
He thought that d of XV should be dx times dV, which isn't right, but a lot of students
today still make that mistake.
Well, so did he initially, but he was a smart guy, and he figured out the right rule, which
is this one.
And he figured out the rule for quotients, the differential of V over Y, he said, is
plus or minus VDY minus or plus YDV over YY, where we, of course, would write Y squared
in the bottom.
So these are the rules of differentials.
If you take a modern calculus course, you spend weeks trying to get through these.
He just put them all in the second paragraph and moved on, and he gave no proofs for these.
He just said, here they are, use these rules.
They will help you in my new method to solve wonderful problems.
So needless to say, a whole lot of work was going to have to be done after this paper to
clean things up.
But there it is.
It's in print.
It exists.
Two years later in 1686, he publishes the first paper on integral calculus, the inverse
process of taking differentials, doing integrals.
Here it comes in Leibniz's 1686 paper, in which he includes the notation of the integral
sign, this squiggly thing, which he thought of as an elongated S for summation.
He's imagining that he's summing infinitely many infinitesimals.
And to indicate that, he wrote this long S, this beautiful symbol, the integral sign,
which now, more than anything, says that higher mathematics is being done.
If you see that sign, there's higher math around somewhere.
Laplace wrote that Leibniz had a very happy notation, and that notation and other symbols
that Leibniz introduced have stuck with us very happy.
From the year 1685 to 1716, Leibniz is pulled out of his mathematical work and other work
and sent on a mission to discover, write about, collect the genealogy of the house of Brunswick,
his employer in Germany.
This monarch wanted to know where he came from, what were his family roots, and Leibniz,
your job is to write a genealogy.
And this became Leibniz's focus.
He had to dig through records in various churches, various municipalities, he had to go to Italy
to do this, year after year after year he devoted to this rather minor task of collecting
genealogical records of some small monarch in Germany.
He could have been doing more math, more philosophy.
And it reminds me of the years Newton spent on his alchemy and his theology, which essentially
were wasted time.
We would like to have this time back and let Leibniz do some more valuable things with
it.
He never finished.
He died, he had thousands of pages of notes and all, but never delivered the goods.
He did, however, during this time, have the chance to found the Berlin Academy.
He had seen the Royal Society, this group of scholars in London, there was a Paris Academy,
he thought Berlin should have one, and so he set about founding this.
And this would play a big role in mathematics in the 18th century.
We'll see this Berlin Academy again, Leibniz was its creator.
And then, alas, for the last years of his life he got involved in the priority dispute
with Newton.
This is the battle between Newton and the British versus Leibniz and the Europeans over
who created calculus, who deserves credit for this wonderful subject.
This will be the focus of my next lecture, the calculus wars between Newton and Leibniz.
But it consumed much of his time and unfortunately was not the most glorious moment for either
Newton or Leibniz as they went to war over the calculus origins.
I should mention that in 1714, Georg Ludwig, who was the patron of Leibniz, who was the
monarch back in Germany, strangely enough, was tapped to become King George I of England.
So that, I guess what had happened was, Queen Anne had died in England without heirs.
So the British needed some monarch and they checked the genealogy and sure enough it was
Georg Ludwig over here in Germany that should come and become King George I.
Now this would have been a wonderful opportunity for George to bring with him his employee
Leibniz.
And then Leibniz would have been in London exactly when Newton was in London, Newton
was running the Moral Society, working in the Mint, and the two great geniuses finally
could have come face to face and if they had a priority dispute over calculus they
could have duked it out right there on the streets of London.
But it didn't happen that way.
Georg Ludwig said, I'm not bringing you Leibniz, you're not done yet with that genealogy.
Get to work.
And so poor Leibniz didn't get to go with the King to England.
He had to stay behind with his thankless, endless task and in fact he died in Germany in 1716.
Like Newton, who was buried in Westminster Abbey, buried like a king, remember Voltaire
said, Leibniz's funeral was a very small affair.
It was said he was buried more like a common thief than what he was, which was an icon
who should have been celebrated from one end of Germany to the other.
It was a sort of sad and unfortunate ending.
I'll leave you with an image here of the Leibniz statue at the University of Leipzig,
in his alma mater.
And you'll see, I think, a very striking comparison here.
On the one hand you have Leibniz dressed in the garb of the late 17th, early 18th century
beside him the present, the modern future that came after.
And you look at this and you can't help but think that that future was due in large part
to Godfrey and Wilhelm Leibniz.
