I don't know if that's an honor he would want, but in any event, Leibniz said, nevertheless,
it seemed to me I do not know by what rash confidence in my own ability that I might
become the equal of these if I so desired.
If I really worked at it, he said, I think I could master Descartes.
I think I could master mathematics.
He knew something about his abilities.
It was just a matter of getting the right direction and jumping in.
Well, what he wanted to do was find a mentor, somebody that could guide him in his mathematical
training, and it turned out, in Paris at the time, was just a person, Christian Huygens.
Huygens was a Dutch mathematician and scientist.
He was in Paris, like so many mathematicians and scientists, and was quite famous.
Huygens had invented the pendulum clock, the clock that works with a pendulum and has a
whole lot of mathematics behind it, and he had discovered the rings of Saturn.
Huygens was the first person to explain what these strange appendages were that appeared
through the telescope when we look at Saturn.
So he was a star, and Leibniz goes to see him.
Now you can sort of imagine the meeting, the young Leibniz, not very well trained, knocking
on the door of the great Huygens and saying, Professor Huygens, will you guide me in my
mathematical training?
And I imagine Professor Huygens said, who are you?
Who is this guy?
He's a diplomat, he's not a great mathematician, why should I waste my time on him?
And so what Huygens does is he says, all right, young man, here, I will give you a challenge.
I'll give you a problem, and if you can do it, that would show me that you're worthy
of my time, and I can mentor you and lead you into mathematics.
But perhaps Huygens figured he'd never see the guy again because the problem was too
hard.
Let me show you what the problem was.
This was the challenge problem, two Leibniz from Huygens.
Huygens said, we know there are these things called the triangular numbers.
These are numbers that are shaped, you can put them into a triangular form, let's put
it that way.
You know, the square numbers can be put into little squares, fours, two and two, nine,
three, three, three, but you can also build triangular numbers.
So the first of these is one, just think of that as a kind of elementary triangle, and
then three, you can have one, two, three, one atop, two below.
The next one up is a one and a two and a three or six is a triangle.
The next one up is one, two, three, four, ten.
If you've ever gone bowling, you should recognize that shape.
The next one will be 15 and so on.
These are called the triangular numbers.
Now, suppose I ask for their sum.
What would happen if you added up one plus three plus six plus ten?
Well, obviously, that would explode to infinity.
