We would like to have this time back and let Leibniz do some more valuable things with
it.
He never finished.
He died, he had thousands of pages of notes and all, but never delivered the goods.
He did, however, during this time, have the chance to found the Berlin Academy.
He had seen the Royal Society, this group of scholars in London, there was a Paris Academy,
he thought Berlin should have one, and so he set about founding this.
And this would play a big role in mathematics in the 18th century.
We'll see this Berlin Academy again, Leibniz was its creator.
And then, alas, for the last years of his life he got involved in the priority dispute
with Newton.
This is the battle between Newton and the British versus Leibniz and the Europeans over
who created calculus, who deserves credit for this wonderful subject.
This will be the focus of my next lecture, the calculus wars between Newton and Leibniz.
But it consumed much of his time and unfortunately was not the most glorious moment for either
Newton or Leibniz as they went to war over the calculus origins.
I should mention that in 1714, Georg Ludwig, who was the patron of Leibniz, who was the
monarch back in Germany, strangely enough, was tapped to become King George I of England.
So that, I guess what had happened was, Queen Anne had died in England without heirs.
So the British needed some monarch and they checked the genealogy and sure enough it was
Georg Ludwig over here in Germany that should come and become King George I.
Now this would have been a wonderful opportunity for George to bring with him his employee
Leibniz.
And then Leibniz would have been in London exactly when Newton was in London, Newton
was running the Moral Society, working in the Mint, and the two great geniuses finally
could have come face to face and if they had a priority dispute over calculus they
could have duked it out right there on the streets of London.
But it didn't happen that way.
Georg Ludwig said, I'm not bringing you Leibniz, you're not done yet with that genealogy.
Get to work.
And so poor Leibniz didn't get to go with the King to England.
He had to stay behind with his thankless, endless task and in fact he died in Germany in 1716.
Like Newton, who was buried in Westminster Abbey, buried like a king, remember Voltaire
said, Leibniz's funeral was a very small affair.
It was said he was buried more like a common thief than what he was, which was an icon
who should have been celebrated from one end of Germany to the other.
It was a sort of sad and unfortunate ending.
I'll leave you with an image here of the Leibniz statue at the University of Leipzig,
in his alma mater.
And you'll see, I think, a very striking comparison here.
On the one hand you have Leibniz dressed in the garb of the late 17th, early 18th century
beside him the present, the modern future that came after.
And you look at this and you can't help but think that that future was due in large part
to Godfrey and Wilhelm Leibniz.
