He was a student of history, a great historian, and as we'll see, late in his life, he got
entangled in historical studies that essentially robbed him of much of his free time.
He studied political theory.
Mainly, he was a diplomat for much of his life, working in different courts, trying
to affect compromises.
He wanted to bring back together the Protestant and Catholic pieces of the Christian Church.
He didn't succeed in that, but he thought that was a worthy goal.
He studied philology, which is the study of language, and he was a master of language
as it was said that Leibniz was the greatest Sanskrit scholar of his time.
He studied physics, made contributions to that.
He studied engineering, applied physics.
And he was a great fan of Chinese culture, where he was, again, one of the masters of
the subject.
You know, we live in an era of specialists.
It seems to me that Leibniz's specialty was omniscience.
He seemed to know everything.
He did this in part by voraciously reading, and it was said that he was so avid a reader
that he bestowed the honor of reading on a great mass of bad books.
He'd just read everything, good or bad.
What's missing from the list, however, is mathematics.
You notice I didn't say he was, at this point at least, a great mathematician.
Ah, but that's coming.
In 1672, Leibniz is sent on a diplomatic mission to Paris.
Now he was working at the time for one of the kingdoms of Germany.
Remember, Germany back then was not a single unified state, but a bunch of little entities,
each of which had its own diplomatic corps.
Leibniz goes off to Paris, representing one of these states.
Now this was a wonderful place to be in 1672.
This was Paris under Louis XIV, Paris under the Sun King.
And scholars from all over the world would gravitate to this great city.
There were musicians, there were writers, there were scientists, there were artists.
And here comes Leibniz, whose interests are so vast, he was never happier than during
his diplomatic years in Paris.
However, he noted that he had this gap at this point in mathematics.
He wrote this.
He said, when I arrived in Paris in the year 1672, I was self-taught as regards geometry,
and indeed had little knowledge of the subject, for which I had not the patience to read through
the long series of proofs.
So he knew he was lacking mathematically.
He tried to read Descartes.
Descartes' geometry, but he found it difficult, dense, hard to follow.
Remember Newton tried to read Descartes, and he found it difficult.
Descartes has the honor, the privilege of having stumped two of the greatest geniuses
of all time, young Newton and young Leibniz.
