It was 1674 and using that diagram and techniques which we can now see as calculus, he figured
out this series.
Another infinite series.
Here comes another one of these.
This one's very simple in its structure.
One minus a third plus a fifth minus a seventh plus a ninth minus an eleventh.
See what it is?
The odd numbers in the denominator and the signs flip-flopping.
Very, very easily grasp what the next term would be, for instance.
No question there.
But what's the value of the sum of this thing if you were to go on forever?
That's not at all obvious, but Leibniz figures it out.
And the answer is a real shocker.
The answer is pi over four.
Pi over four.
Where did the pi come from?
Where's the circle?
You guys expect pi to be affiliated with circles?
I don't see a circle.
And I just see a bunch of reciprocals of fractions.
But this is right.
And this is called the Leibniz series in his honor.
Leibniz reports that Huygens praised it very highly and said that it would be a discovery
always to be remembered among mathematicians.
And we still remember it today.
Huygens was right.
Now, in 1673 and in 1676, Leibniz made diplomatic trips to London.
He was sent from Paris to London to do something for the monarch who was paying his salary.
While there, he took with him a calculating machine that he had invented that added,
subtracted, multiplied, and divided.
We had seen that Pascal had invented a machine that could add and subtract.
This was the first four-function calculator, if you will.
Now, it was very cumbersome, it was made out of various components that didn't quite fit
right.
And Leibniz had a devil of a time getting it to work, getting to grind the gears and
crank the levers.
But it, at least in theory, worked.
And the people in London were very impressed.
And they made Leibniz a member of the Royal Society.
In London.
Now, remember, Newton was a member of the Royal Society as well, although at this point
he was up in Cambridge rather than being in London.
In 1676, on that visit to London, Leibniz saw a manuscript of Newton's Day Annalisi.
I mentioned this in the previous lecture.
