You'd be adding up numbers that are getting ever larger.
That would be an infinite series that explodes and becomes infinite.
So that wasn't the problem.
What Huygens said was, what if we take their reciprocals, take the triangular numbers and
flip them over?
So look at one over one, which is one plus one over three plus one over six plus one
over ten plus one over 15.
Now there's an infinite series that might actually have a finite answer.
What is it, young man?
What's that sum?
And so Leibniz is sent away having to figure out the sum of this infinite series.
Now I should say that Huygens knew the answer.
This wasn't cutting edge research, but infinite series, remember, at this time we're still
not widely known and you couldn't just look this up in a book somewhere.
If you were going to figure this out, you were going to have to do some work.
But Leibniz knows no mathematics.
He's got nothing to go on except this extraordinary IQ.
So here's what he does.
He says, I will figure out what this is as follows.
I'm going to let S stand for the sum I'm seeking.
So we'll just call it something for the time being.
S is this sum one plus a third plus a sixth plus a tenth plus a fifteenth is infinite series
whose value we want.
If I can just figure out S, I'm in business.
Well, Leibniz looked at this.
You imagine he thought about it a while and he says, here's what I'll do.
Multiply everything by half both sides.
So on the one side I'll get half of S on the left.
On the other side, I march through the fractions and hit each of them with a half.
So the one times a half is a half, the third times a half is a sixth, the sixth times a
half is a twelfth, the tenth times a half is a twentieth, and so on.
So there's the series for half of S, which on the surface doesn't look any easier than
the one we started with, but it actually is.
Because Leibniz says, look, here's what I'm going to do.
You see that one half on the right side of the equal sign.
I'm not going to write it that way.
I'm going to write it as one minus one half.
Well, sure, one half is one minus one half.
That's legal.
You can do that.
You know, why he's doing it.
Hang on, but it's fine.
The next number beside it is one sixth.
Now one sixth is a half minus a third.
