Leibniz, after all, had published first.
How do we know that Newton had it in his desk?
Maybe he just learned it from Leibniz.
So these two giant figures are going at each other pretty seriously.
And Leibniz said in 1714 that the new discoveries that were made by the help of differential
calculus, which remember was what Leibniz called it, were hidden from the followers of Newton's
method, nor could they produce anything of value, anything of real value.
Now, so Leibniz was certainly rooting for himself on this one.
The battle continued.
The war raged on until Leibniz died in 1716 and kind of lost by default, I guess.
No one else was going to be arguing for him.
So those are the wars.
What's the conclusion?
What happened?
They deserve credit for this.
I mean, calculus, arguably the greatest discovery in the history of mathematics.
How do we resolve this?
And the answer is the following.
They both deserve credit.
They both discovered it independently.
This is now clear.
Now it's true that Newton got there first.
He had worked on it first while he was a student at Cambridge.
Leibniz, however, had possession of all the rules before he went to London, before he
wrote the letters and exchanged the correspondence with Newton, before he saw the manuscript
from Newton.
We have Leibniz's notes from 1673 and 1674, and it's all there.
Even the integral sign, the DX, the differential symbol, Leibniz was on top of this.
Now it's true he saw Newton's manuscript, and it's true he took notes, but the notes
weren't about anything that looked like fluctuations or calculus.
The notes were about some of the neat infinite series work that Newton had done.
That Leibniz thought was new and wonderful, but the calculus stuff Leibniz already had.
So we're not going to have to decide.
We're going to give them both credit.
Here's some comparisons.
If you said who did it, I'm saying Newton did it, and he called it fluctuations.
I'm saying Leibniz did it, and he called it calculus.
Where was it done?
Well, Newton did it in Cambridge.
And Leibniz discovered calculus in Paris.
So if you want to do a vacation tour to the origin of calculus, there's where you want
to go.
Cambridge and Paris.
It would be a great vacation.
When was it done?
Newton comes first, 1664 to 1667, his Annie Marabalais.
Leibniz does it during his wonderful years as a diplomat in Paris a decade later.
