Well, let me get to the calculus wars.
The calculus wars, remember, developed between the British and Newton and the Europeans and
Leibniz who should get credit for calculus.
Newton read Leibniz's papers in 1684 and 86.
Newton sort of thought maybe Newton's name should appear in there somewhere, but it didn't.
Newton was a little grumpy right from the get-go.
But things heated up in 1708 when the philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London
described, quote, the arithmetic of fluctuations which Mr. Newton beyond all doubt first invented.
The same arithmetic under a different name and using a different notation was later published,
however, by Mr. Leibniz.
So this appears in the Royal Society's transactions.
Now, if you read that, it isn't an explicit charge of plagiarism, but it's close, right?
It says Newton discovered this and Leibniz sort of changed the name, changed the notation
and later published it, however.
It's rather dismissive.
It seems to be pretty clear who the Royal Society thought deserved credit.
Now, you might want to remember who was the head of the Royal Society in 1708, Newton.
Who wrote this?
Newton.
So he takes a stand.
Okay, now Leibniz reads this and he's infuriated.
He thinks he's been charged with stealing the subject.
And so he demands an investigation.
He wants his name to be cleared.
He asks the Royal Society to look into this.
Big mistake, because who's running the Royal Society?
Who's going to be his judge, Newton?
This didn't work for Leibniz.
And near the end of 1712, the Royal Society issues its verdict.
It's called the Comerqueum Epistleicum and it asserted, it concluded, that Leibniz had
had no inkling of calculus until after 1677.
Now you've got to stop and remember some dates here.
Remember Leibniz had gone to England in 1673 and in 1676 had seen Newton's De Annalisi.
Taken some notes on this document.
And then there had been those letters exchanged, the epistola prior, the epistola posterior.
All of that happened before 1677.
What the Royal Society said was, only then did Leibniz have any idea what calculus was.
Conclusion, he stole it.
He gathered the information from Newton's manuscript and from these letters and only
then did he have the subject in hand, which he then published before Newton had a chance.
That was sort of the conclusion.
Leibniz was guilty, according to the Royal Society.
Well, Leibniz wasn't going to take this.
He responds in 1713, it appears that there is room to doubt whether he knew my invention
before he had it for me.
He's responding to Newton.
Maybe Newton didn't know calculus until he read it in my paper.
