He sets up an equation.
He takes the differentials.
He sets them equal to zero.
He solves.
He gets the answer.
It's just how we do it today in differential calculus.
In fact, this is a great problem even today in differential calculus.
I like to give it to my students and see if they can do a problem from the first calculus
book.
What's the answer?
The answer is this.
The height of the cone should be two-thirds the diameter of the sphere.
This is what the calculus yields.
So you make your cone go down two-thirds the diameter of the sphere.
That will give you the maximum surface area.
It's a wonderful problem from the first calculus book.
I should mention another result from that Lobita calculus book.
In section nine, there appears what we now call Lobita's rule, which is a famous result
in differential calculus.
We call it Lobita's rule because it's in Lobita's calculus book.
But it actually wasn't his rule.
He didn't invent it.
It was made up.
It was discovered by Johann Bernoulli, who passed it along dutifully in exchange for
the money that was coming the other way.
So Bernoulli discovers this great rule, sends it to Lobita, Lobita publishes it, and it
gets called Lobita's rule.
Well, ever since, people have said, really, we should call this Bernoulli's rule.
Shouldn't we?
We want to give him credit.
He discovered it.
But the 20th century math historian, Dirk Streik, said, no, no.
He said, Streik, let the good marquee keep his elegant rule.
He paid for it.
He bought the rights, and so maybe we'll just continue to call it Lobita's rule.
Well, the Bernoullis were notoriously argumentative, combative, cantankerous, contentious.
They wanted always to have the glory aimed at them.
They resented it when the glory was going elsewhere.
I like to say that they were the kind of people that gave arrogance a bad name.
If you want to be alliterative, you can call them the brilliant but bickering Bernoulli
brothers.
They would have been really difficult people to know.
And although they like to argue with others, they particularly liked to argue with each
other.
They didn't get along very well much of the time.
You know, the older brother, Jakob, had cornered the market in the Bernoulli family on mathematical
expertise, and along comes younger brother, Johann, who's just as good.
