That's the curve it is.
We've seen this before.
Pascal had studied the cycloid.
It was this amazing curve.
Remember what it was?
If you rolled a circle along a horizontal line and followed a single point on the circle,
it would trace out these cycloidal arches.
Except what you do is you drop this below the curve, so now the cycloidal arches are
going this way, and if you roll down a cycloid from the point A to the point B, that's the
curve of quickest descent.
It's an amazing problem.
When Easter arrived, five answers had come in to Bernoulli.
So here's who could do it.
Well, Johann Bernoulli could do it.
Of course he could.
He only made the challenge because he knew the answer, so he was one.
The celebrated Leibniz sent in a solution, his hero.
Jakob Bernoulli sent in an answer, his brother.
I'm sure Johann was upset by this, but his brother did it.
Okay, three.
Lobbytel sent in a solution.
Makes you wonder if he bought it from somebody, but in any event, Lobbytel got one.
And then there was this anonymous solution that arrived from London.
Well, Johann Bernoulli was not a particularly gracious person, but he knew he'd been beaten.
He knew where this had come from, and famously he said, I recognize the lion by his paw.
I recognize Newton.
He's the solver.
He's my anonymous source.
And so Bernoulli concedes that he's been beaten in the Brachistochrone skirmish.
Newton was not quite so gracious.
Newton's response was, I do not like to be teased by foreigners about mathematical things.
So there.
Well, let me end with the two great discoverers of calculus one last time.
There they are, Newton and Leibniz looking down upon us.
And let me give you a quotation from a later mathematician named Wolfgang Boleyi.
He was talking about something else, but it fits very well our story.
Boleyi said, it seems to be true that many things have as it were an epic in which they
are discovered in several places simultaneously, just as violets appear on all sides in the
springtime.
And so it was with calculus.
