Neither Isaac Newton nor Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz ever married, and they had no children
to pass along the calculus gene.
But Leibniz had the next best thing, he had two dedicated disciples, the Bernoulli brothers
of Switzerland.
These are the Bernoullis, older brother Jakob Bernoulli, younger brother Johann, perhaps
you can see some resemblance there, I don't know, maybe in the sneer that they're giving.
The Bernoullis were known as rather hard, sharp people.
I want to introduce them to you, talk about their mathematics, and talk about Johann's
role in the calculus wars between Newton and Leibniz.
So let's first meet Jakob, older brother.
He was a very accomplished mathematician.
He investigated infinite series, this subject that keeps coming up as being so important
at this time.
He also published posthumously, in 1713, the Ars Cognectandi, the Art of Conjecturing.
This was the greatest treatise to date on probability theory.
We've seen that Cardano had written a book about probability as it related to gambling,
so he could win more at the table.
And then we saw that Fermat and Pascal had exchanged letters that helped establish the
study of probability.
But this was a real beautiful tome, the Ars Cognectandi, that pushed the boundaries of
probability theory even further.
In particular, Jakob in this work proved the law of large numbers, and if you know probability,
you know this is one of the foundational results in the theory of probability.
It says more or less that if you do an experiment over and over again, a large number of times,
the proportion of the times you'll see a success will get very close to the true probability
of that success.
So that if you flip a coin a thousand times, you're going to get pretty close to 50 percent
heads and 50 percent tails, assuming the coin is balanced.
But if you flip it a million times, you're going to get even closer to 50 percent heads
and 50 percent tails, the large number of trials starts to yield this probability.
It's a critical result, it's a theorem, and Jakob proved it.
He was very proud of that.
He also helped push for with the frontiers of calculus.
In fact, with his brother Johann, Jakob and Leibniz formed a kind of triangle who helped
refine the subject.
I had mentioned that Leibniz first published a calculus in a paper that was, the Bernoulli's
called it more an enigma than an explanation, it was hard to follow.
So Jakob and Johann Bernoulli would talk with Leibniz and they'd suggest maybe we should
change this, why don't we try it this way, and the three of them together refined the
subject into what we know it as today.
And one other thing, Jakob suggested the name, integral calculus.
Leibniz had talked about calculus differentialus and calculus sumatoris, the sumatory and the
differential calculus, and Jakob said, nah, that doesn't sound good, that's sumatoris
thing, how about integralus, calculus integralus, oh yeah, that's the name, and that's the
name that stuck.
So Jakob had quite a legacy.
So did younger brother Johann.
