Section one was on the rules of differentials, and that's where we see these rules on what's
the differential of the sum, what's the differential of the product, the kinds of things that appeared
in Leibniz's original paper, although here, Lobital proves them.
He gives reasons why these should work.
So now you've got the rules.
In section two, he uses differential calculus for finding tangent lines.
One of the great things you do with calculus.
Next section, he shows you how to use differential calculus for finding greatest and least values.
That sounds like Max Min problems.
Section four, using differential calculus for finding points of inflection.
If you've taken differential calculus, usually calculus one as it's called nowadays, chances
are this is your table of contents.
It hasn't changed much over the centuries.
We're really quite fortunate that this first book on calculus was so good, Lobital's book
really was a masterpiece, and it got the subject off to a good start.
Let me mention a result in there just to give you the flavor of this first calculus book.
This is example six from section three.
Lobital poses this problem.
Among all cones that can be inscribed in a sphere, determine that which has the greatest
convex surface.
Greatest surface?
A maximum.
We are in a Max Min problem.
What he is looking for is the greatest surface of the cone, the convex surface would be the
slanty part, not the bottom, not the circle on the bottom, but the sides.
Let me show you a picture here.
Suppose you have a sphere.
When I inscribe within it a cone, what that means is let's say we'll put the vertex of
the cone up at the top, and then the circular base of the cone will be a circle on the sphere.
You can imagine putting it in various spots.
You could put it way up near the top, for instance.
There's a picture of the cone inscribed up near the top of the sphere.
Its surface wouldn't be all that great.
It's not that big a cone.
You could lower that circle of the cone, maybe put it at the equator, and now get a cone
with the same vertex up at the top, would probably have more surface.
You could even put the circle down below the equator, such as in this picture where I have
the sphere, and my cone now sort of dips below the equator.
Or you could actually put the cone so that the vertex is at the top, and the circle where
it meets the sphere is way down at the bottom.
That would be a long, skinny cone, probably not much surface.
So what Lobita is saying is, as you move this cone around, up and down the sphere, the surface
will grow and then shrink.
How big can it be?
Where do you put this cone to get the greatest convex surface?
It is not a trivial question.
What's he do?
