What did he do?
Well, he too investigated infinite series, made good progress and raised a very important
question or two about these incredible mathematical entities.
He too pushed the frontiers of calculus and he did two other things of particular interest.
One is he mentored a young lad named Leonhardt Euler, who happened to live in Johann's hometown
of Basel, Switzerland, and young Euler would grow to become the dominant mathematician of
the 18th century in the subject of our next lecture.
And Johann Bernoulli was hired to provide calculus lectures to the Marquis de l'Hobital.
And this is a kind of curious story from the history of mathematics.
This is the multiply named Guillaume Francois Antoine de l'Hobital, a French nobleman.
And I think you've got to agree, this is the greatest wig we've seen yet.
This is a nobleman's wig.
Lobital wanted to learn about this new fangled subject called calculus he'd been hearing
about, but he needed help.
And so in 1691, Bernoulli, Johann Bernoulli, met Lobital in Paris and Lobital said, let's
let me hire you to teach me this new subject.
And by 1692, Bernoulli is lecturing Lobital on calculus, either physically lecturing him
speaking to him or sending him documents he's written.
Bernoulli would write something, mail it to Lobital, and in that way teach him the subject.
The two had an agreement, a monetary agreement.
Here was Lobital's stipulation.
He said to Bernoulli, I shall give you with pleasure a pension of 300 libra.
I ask you to give me occasionally some hours of your time to work on what I shall ask you.
But also to communicate to me your discoveries with the request not to mention them to others.
So Lobital said, you send me your works, I will send you money.
Lobital was the rich nobleman, Bernoulli was the professor, not very rich.
Just don't tell anyone what you're doing, says Lobital.
Just send it to me.
Well, Lobital takes all of this that he learns from Bernoulli and a lot of the written work
that Bernoulli has sent him and publishes in 1696 the first calculus textbook ever.
This is it.
The analysis of the infinitely small for the understanding of curved lines.
This is the title.
What this is, is a compendium of Bernoulli's writings.
Johann Bernoulli essentially had written this, but Lobital compiled it, edited it a bit,
and got it published.
And so now there is a calculus textbook.
Leibniz has published the papers on calculus in the 1680s, but now there's an actual book
in 1696.
In the preface, Lobital writes this.
He's referring here to the Bernoulli brothers and to Leibniz.
He says, I have made free use of their discoveries, and I frankly return to them whatever they
please to claim as their own.
So he's not asserting that he made all this up.
He acknowledged that he was borrowing things from Leibniz and the Bernoullis to compile
this calculus, and if they want the rights to it, they may claim them.
Here's the title page, the table of contents for the first calculus book ever.
