You know the answer, it's a well-known curve, it's not a straight line, send me your answers
by the end of the year.
So that's the challenge of the Brachistocrat.
Okay, what happens when the end of the year comes?
He's only got one solution, and it's from Leibniz, his hero.
The line that says to Johann Bernoulli, he says, you know, I think people didn't see
your problem.
You know, they might not have read that issue of the journal where he wrote it.
I think you should give people more time, you know, we've got to sort of extend this.
Students always like this, give them some more time, extend the deadline.
And so, at Leibniz's suggestion, Bernoulli restates the problem in the next issue of
the journal, and extends the deadline.
So the problem's still there, what's the curve of quickest descent?
And now, Johann says, if Easter of 1697 passes, and no one is discovered who has solved our
problem, then we shall withhold our solution from the world no longer.
Okay, so you got to Easter, and that's it.
All right, so that's published along with the problem in this second go round.
But then Johann couldn't help writing more.
So this is still in print, and he says this.
So few have solved our extraordinary problem, even among those who boast that through special
methods they have not only penetrated the deepest secrets of geometry, but also extended
its boundaries in marvelous fashion, although their golden theorems, which they imagine known
to no one, have been published by others long before.
Now, who's he talking about?
Who had his results published by others long before, but claimed that they were his golden
theorems?
That's definitely a slam against Newton.
So this is in print, Bernoulli attacks Newton right there, who hadn't submitted a solution.
And then just to be sure, Newton didn't miss this, Johann Bernoulli takes an issue of this
journal with the challenge in it, puts it in an envelope, and mails it to Newton in London.
Newton is not going to escape the challenge.
Well, now, let's hop the channel and pick up the story in England.
At this time, Newton was at the mint, working hard, he was living with his niece, and she
reports this.
She said, when the problem in 1697 was sent by Bernoulli, Sir Isaac was in the midst of
the hurry of the great recoinage, and did not come home till four from the tower, very
much tired, but did not sleep till he had solved it, which was by four in the morning.
So the old man, Newton, trudges home after a hard day at the office, finds the challenge,
reads this attack upon him, and solves it by four in the morning.
It has been said that this showed Newton was getting old, that the young Newton would have
solved it by midnight.
In any case, he gets the answer, he writes the solution down, doesn't sign it, and sends
it anonymously back to Bernoulli.
Okay, now, what is the answer here?
The answer, what is the brachistochrome?
What is the curve of quickest descent?
It's the cycloid curve.
