That undoubtedly caused some sibling rivalry, which they never really got over.
Let me tell you a story that illustrates the brilliant but bickering Bernoulli brothers.
The year is 1691, and the problem involves the challenge of the catenary curve.
Now, this requires a little bit of background.
What is that?
Suppose you took two nails and pounded them into the wall, and hung a chain from these
two nails.
You know, the chain would hang down in a shape something like this.
That shape, the shape of the hanging chain, is called the catenary.
It actually comes from the word in Latin, the word catenary means chain, comes from
the Latin root for that.
Okay, so now the issue is, what's the equation of that?
Can you use your mathematics to figure out the equation of the hanging chain, the equation
of the catenary?
Well, Jakob Bernoulli, the older brother, wanted to find this out.
He had worked on it for the better part of a year, and it stumped him.
He couldn't do it.
It's not simple.
It kind of looks like a parabola if you look at it, but it isn't.
It's way more sophisticated, and he was stuck.
So what does Jakob do?
He publishes his problem, and he says, I can't do it.
Can anybody do this problem?
So this goes out to the wider audience.
Can anybody help me figure out the equation of the hanging chain?
Well, Jakob got stuck.
He couldn't do it.
But younger brother, Johan, looks at it and gets an idea and solves it.
Of course, this was good news for younger brother Johan and bad news for older brother
Jakob.
Now, let me tell you how Johan described this.
So now this will be Johan speaking, the younger brother who could solve it and figured out
what the catenary was as he reports what happened next.
Johan says, the efforts of my brother, that is Jakob, were without success.
But for my part, says Johan, I was more fortunate.
I found the skill, and I say it without boasting, but why should I conceal the truth?
I found the skill to solve it in full.
It is true that it cost me study that robbed me of rest for an entire night.
Yikes, an entire night.
His brother had been working on this for a year.
Johan says he then ran to his brother and showed him the answer and told his brother
to stop working on it.
I've solved it.
I, Johan, have solved it.
After this, they hardly spoke to each other.
This was not a good moment.
But that's the Bernoulli's.
