But when was it published?
Well, Newton published a little piece of his fluctuations in 1704, but as we mentioned,
the full blonde version of his fluctuations wasn't published until after his death, whereas
Leibniz beat him to the punch with those 1684 and 1686 papers.
So if you're going to count priority in terms of who did it first chronologically, Newton,
who did it first in print, Leibniz, I'm going to say they both get credit.
Well, what remains then is the most famous battle in the calculus wars, and it involves
Johann Bernoulli, who came to be known as Leibniz's bulldog.
He was Leibniz's disciple, he revered Leibniz, and he was going to go to bat for his hero
Leibniz against those British that he didn't like very much, and he figures prominently
in this story of the challenge problem of the Brachistochron.
Now, here's the problem.
The year was 1696.
Johann Bernoulli had solved this problem, and now he writes it up and puts it out as
a challenge to the world.
He says, here's a new problem which mathematicians are invited to solve.
And here it is.
Here's the problem.
Assigned to a mobile particle M, the path A, M, B, along which, descending under its
own weight, the particle passes from A to B in the briefest time.
Briefest time.
Brachistochron, chronos means time, brachisto means shortest.
So we want to get from A to B, rolling a marble, say, down a ramp of some shape, fastest.
What's the one that'll get you from A to B in the briefest time?
That curve is called the Brachistochron.
That's the curve that Johann Bernoulli had brilliantly been able to discover.
He knew what it was, and now he's challenging the world to see if other people can send
him their solutions.
See who else is as good as he is.
Johann writes this.
This is still in the challenge, in the statement of the problem.
He says, to forestall hasty judgment, although the straight line A, B is indeed the shortest
between the points, it nevertheless is not the path traversed in the briefest time.
So hang on here, before you send me the straight line, that's the wrong answer.
Now initially you'd think that is the right answer, isn't it?
From A to B you'd sort of go down the straight line, because that's the shortest distance.
But if you think about it, if I let a marble go, and it's rolling down a straight line,
it's going to go kind of slowly at first, then it'll pick up speed.
It doesn't have so far to go, but it doesn't start off very fast.
Suppose you had some sort of arc instead, and you let the marble go.
It would fall almost vertically at the outset, and pick up a lot of speed, and if you did
this just right, it might actually go so fast that although it has a further distance to
travel, it might beat the marble that's rolling down the ramp to the finish line.
And in fact, Bernoulli says, the answer is not the straight line.
However, he writes, the curve A and B, whose name I shall give, if no one else has discovered
it before the end of this year, 1696, is one well-known to geometers.
So he's giving a hint.
