of those original editors of those first volumes
are now old, and yet Euler is still keeping them busy.
There's nothing like it in the history of mathematics.
He did more mathematics than anybody.
In fact, here's an interesting statistic.
After he died, he was still publishing.
There were papers in line to be published.
There were things in his desk.
There were things in his cabinet that people found.
For decades after his death, he was still publishing.
His publication count as a dead man is 228 papers.
Now, I guarantee you, no dead people published
228 papers in mathematics except Euler.
He was just phenomenal in his quantity of work.
Now, as to the quality of work, equally great.
Back in the 1980s, a journal called
The Mathematical Intelligencer
surveyed the mathematical community
and asked them for a ranking
of the most beautiful theorems of all time.
You would check off a postcard and send it in,
and they would do a poll or survey.
What are the most beautiful theorems ever?
Well, when the results were done,
Euler was responsible for three of the five
most beautiful formulas or theorems ever
and five of the top 16.
So he sort of topped the charts.
He was just amazing in the quality of his work.
Another way to measure that is this.
There's mathematical terms.
You can find on online math dictionaries.
You can put in a term.
I put in Euler to see how many mathematical terms
of note have his name attached to them.
And I hit 96 entries that came back
with Euler's name attached.
There's the Euler line, there's the Euler identity,
there's the Euler product sum formula,
there's Eulerian graphs and Eulerian functions.
96 terms in mathematics carry his name
and they don't get into the dictionary
unless they're important.
Most mathematicians have no terms named after them.
Euler has almost 100.
So that is a suggestion of the extraordinary quality
of his work.
He can hardly study a branch of mathematics
without running into some major theorem
that he gave us.
Well, he also wrote great textbooks.
He was one of the great textbook writers of all time.
One of them was the Introductio in
and Alisson Infinitorum of 1748.
I had mentioned this in an earlier lecture.
Carl Boyer had ranked the elements of Euclid
as the greatest textbook of classical times.
Alcorismes algebra is the greatest textbook of medieval times
and this, Euler's Introductio,
is the greatest textbook of modern times.
This is the book in which he introduces functions
as the critical entity of mathematical study
