Russia wanted one of these.
And so, the St. Petersburg Academy was being created
to bring scientists, writers, musicians, scholars from around the world
to reflect well on the court, on the czar, on the nation.
Now, Daniel Bernoulli was already at St. Petersburg.
He was the son of Johann Bernoulli,
and he knew Euler, and he sort of said to Euler,
come on up here, we can get a position for you, and Euler does.
So, he goes to St. Petersburg in the cold Russian sea coast,
stays there until 1741 when he goes to the Berlin Academy.
In those days, scholars would jump from academy to academy
even as sports players do now from one team to another.
He was one at Berlin.
He went there.
This was Berlin under Frederick the Great at the academy
when Euler was there, was Voltaire, Dallenbeer, people like that,
so he was mixing with some great names.
He stayed in Berlin until 1766
when he is called back to St. Petersburg
and remains there until 1783 when he died.
His lifespan from 1707 to 1783
is almost exactly the same as Benjamin Franklin's.
So, if you want a comparison on this side of the Atlantic,
think Ben Franklin living roughly the same period as Euler.
Now, Franklin's life, of course, was quite different.
He traveled the world.
He was engaged in politics.
He was engaged in science.
Euler was a little more constrained.
His whole life was spent from Basel to St. Petersburg
to Berlin to St. Petersburg,
but his intellectual journeys were every bit as amazing as Franklin's.
It would have been neat had they met, but they did not.
On the personal side, Euler was married
and he and wife, Katharina, had 13 children.
Now, you must remember, however,
in the 18th century, childhood mortality was a very serious
and heartbreaking phenomenon,
and of these 13 children, only five survived to adulthood.
So, there must have been real sorrow in the Euler household.
Euler had, by all accounts, a phenomenal memory.
Stories are that he could memorize anything.
He could memorize poems, plays, speeches.
He could memorize tables, tables of logarithms,
tables of primes.
It was much easier than having to look up a number
if you could just recall it from your memory, and this he could.
This memory would serve him well when personal calamity strikes,
namely, in the 1730s, Euler lost vision in one of his eyes.
We think now what happened was an infection got loose somehow
and went to his eye.
It not only cost him his vision, it literally destroyed the eye
so that the eye collapsed and was of no use to him.
Well, what did he do then?
He sort of gave up, he backed off his work, right?
Wrong.
He kept going.
The fact that he had lost vision in one eye did not slow him down one bit,
and he proceeds with his very active research career
until 1771 when he lost vision in the other eye.
Now, this was a cataract, and nowadays,
that's something that's easily fixed with surgery,
