In this lecture, we'll focus on Leonhardt Euler of Switzerland.
Euler was history's most prolific mathematician.
He was certainly the dominant force in 18th century mathematics,
and he's a person everyone should meet.
What I want to do in this lecture is give his biography and sketch some of his great achievements.
The next two lectures will be great theorems to accompany the great thinker
as we look at some of his mathematical achievements.
I promise the two lectures that followed this will be just spectacular in terms of what Euler did.
But first we've got to meet him.
This is Euler.
When people see this picture, their first thought is, what is he wearing?
It's certainly a curious outfit to put on when the portrait painter comes over.
It looks like he just got out of the shower, actually.
But in fact, this was a fairly standard guard for the 18th century.
What's going on here is this, that the folks back then would wear wigs and shave their heads.
And their heads would get cold when they weren't wearing the wig,
and they would wear this peculiar looking headdress just as a head warmer
if they were living in cold climbs, and Euler did.
So this was just a headwarming device,
but what's interesting is when the portrait was going to be done,
he decided to dress informally like this rather than put on the wig,
and that conforms to his basic personality, which was a kind, unassuming person.
This is Euler in informal attire.
He was born in 1707 in Basel, Switzerland.
His father was a pastor at this church,
and I'm told that if Euler were to return to life, he would recognize it.
It still looks pretty much as it did back then.
His genius was evident quite early on.
His father wanted him to become a pastor to follow in his footsteps,
but Euler's skills and talent seemed better suited to math and science.
And so in 1720, when he was 13,
it was arranged that he would study with Johann Bernoulli.
Now, we met Bernoulli in an earlier lecture.
Bernoulli was in Basel, Switzerland at the time.
Bernoulli was probably the world's greatest active mathematician,
and he was right there in Euler's home town.
So young Euler would go to see the great Bernoulli.
He later remembered this as being kind of terrifying.
Here was Bernoulli, this crusty, arrogant, towering figure.
Here comes little Euler with his week's work.
Bernoulli would criticize it, make suggestions,
send them off to do another bit of mathematical work.
At that stage, Bernoulli is obviously the master Euler of the pupil.
In not too much time, you begin to see them acting as colleagues.
And then, in not too much time beyond that,
it's Euler who's the master,
and Bernoulli is in awe of what his former student could do.
In 1722, at the age of 15,
Euler graduated from the University of Basel.
He then completed a master's degree and applied for a job there.
There was actually a position in physics open at the university in his home town.
He wanted it, and he failed to get it.
The job went to somebody else,
and it became, I think, the worst hiring choice in the history of the University of Basel.
If not any university, they turned, they passed on Euler
in favor of somebody who is now completely forgotten.
So, what does Euler do? He needs a job.
And in 1727, at the age of 20,
he takes an appointment at the St. Petersburg Academy in Russia.
Now, remember, in Europe at this time,
the big courts would be surrounded by these academies,
the Royal Society in London, the Paris Academy, the Berlin Academy.
Russia wanted one of these.
And so, the St. Petersburg Academy was being created
to bring scientists, writers, musicians, scholars from around the world
to reflect well on the court, on the czar, on the nation.
Now, Daniel Bernoulli was already at St. Petersburg.
He was the son of Johann Bernoulli,
and he knew Euler, and he sort of said to Euler,
come on up here, we can get a position for you, and Euler does.
So, he goes to St. Petersburg in the cold Russian sea coast,
stays there until 1741 when he goes to the Berlin Academy.
In those days, scholars would jump from academy to academy
even as sports players do now from one team to another.
He was one at Berlin.
He went there.
This was Berlin under Frederick the Great at the academy
when Euler was there, was Voltaire, Dallenbeer, people like that,
so he was mixing with some great names.
He stayed in Berlin until 1766
when he is called back to St. Petersburg
and remains there until 1783 when he died.
His lifespan from 1707 to 1783
is almost exactly the same as Benjamin Franklin's.
So, if you want a comparison on this side of the Atlantic,
think Ben Franklin living roughly the same period as Euler.
Now, Franklin's life, of course, was quite different.
He traveled the world.
He was engaged in politics.
He was engaged in science.
Euler was a little more constrained.
His whole life was spent from Basel to St. Petersburg
to Berlin to St. Petersburg,
but his intellectual journeys were every bit as amazing as Franklin's.
It would have been neat had they met, but they did not.
On the personal side, Euler was married
and he and wife, Katharina, had 13 children.
Now, you must remember, however,
in the 18th century, childhood mortality was a very serious
and heartbreaking phenomenon,
and of these 13 children, only five survived to adulthood.
So, there must have been real sorrow in the Euler household.
Euler had, by all accounts, a phenomenal memory.
Stories are that he could memorize anything.
He could memorize poems, plays, speeches.
He could memorize tables, tables of logarithms,
tables of primes.
It was much easier than having to look up a number
if you could just recall it from your memory, and this he could.
This memory would serve him well when personal calamity strikes,
namely, in the 1730s, Euler lost vision in one of his eyes.
We think now what happened was an infection got loose somehow
and went to his eye.
It not only cost him his vision, it literally destroyed the eye
so that the eye collapsed and was of no use to him.
Well, what did he do then?
He sort of gave up, he backed off his work, right?
Wrong.
He kept going.
The fact that he had lost vision in one eye did not slow him down one bit,
and he proceeds with his very active research career
until 1771 when he lost vision in the other eye.
Now, this was a cataract, and nowadays,
that's something that's easily fixed with surgery,
but in 1771, it was quite a serious problem.
They did try surgery on Euler,
and you don't even want to think about eye surgery in 1771.
It was painful, and it failed,
and it left Euler essentially blind.
Apparently, he could see vague shapes, but nothing more.
So, he gives up, right?
Wrong.
He keeps going, just as active as he ever was.
He did not let the blindness stop him.
And if you don't believe me, let me just note that in 1775,
as a blind man, he produced 50 papers that year,
a paper a week, and he couldn't see.
What he would do was this.
He would have a table full of scribes,
young people with their quill pens and their paper,
and he would dictate his papers,
and they would furiously write, trying to keep up with him,
trying to do this mathematics that he could see
only in his mind's eye.
But it just kept spewing out.
If a new paper came in from somebody else,
from Lagrange or Dallenbert, they'd read it to him.
And again, with this phenomenal memory of his,
he could capture it and comment and proceed further.
Euler's story, I think, is the most inspirational
in the history of mathematics.
Here he is, faced with this terrible physical ailment,
and he does not stop.
He proceeds as always.
He doesn't let it beat him.
And this makes Euler, really, the counterpart of Beethoven.
Remember, Beethoven loses his hearing,
and yet continues to produce great music.
Euler loses his vision, but continues to produce
great mathematics.
Now, his work is characterized by its remarkable quantity
and its remarkable quality, both.
He's off the scale in both of these dimensions.
Let me mention the quantity first.
His collected works are called the Opera Omnia.
These are now over six dozen volumes
and 25,000 pages of published mathematics.
What happened was, in 1911, the Swiss Academy of Science
started to publish Euler's collected works
when the first volume came out.
Now, this is a volume.
Let me show you this. It's huge.
It's a big, thick tome, hundreds of pages,
full of mathematics.
If this was the product of someone's entire life's work,
that would be quite impressive.
But this has 76 cousins just like it
that have been coming out ever since 1911.
It's now a century since the first volume came out,
and they're still coming. They're not done yet.
They're not quite sure how much mathematics Euler will eventually fill,
the volumes this will run to.
It's going to be in the vicinity of 80, 90, who knows.
It will be deep in the 21st century,
and they'll still be coming out.
I like to think that the grandchildren
of those original editors of those first volumes
are now old, and yet Euler is still keeping them busy.
There's nothing like it in the history of mathematics.
He did more mathematics than anybody.
In fact, here's an interesting statistic.
After he died, he was still publishing.
There were papers in line to be published.
There were things in his desk.
There were things in his cabinet that people found.
For decades after his death, he was still publishing.
His publication count as a dead man is 228 papers.
Now, I guarantee you, no dead people published
228 papers in mathematics except Euler.
He was just phenomenal in his quantity of work.
Now, as to the quality of work, equally great.
Back in the 1980s, a journal called
The Mathematical Intelligencer
surveyed the mathematical community
and asked them for a ranking
of the most beautiful theorems of all time.
You would check off a postcard and send it in,
and they would do a poll or survey.
What are the most beautiful theorems ever?
Well, when the results were done,
Euler was responsible for three of the five
most beautiful formulas or theorems ever
and five of the top 16.
So he sort of topped the charts.
He was just amazing in the quality of his work.
Another way to measure that is this.
There's mathematical terms.
You can find on online math dictionaries.
You can put in a term.
I put in Euler to see how many mathematical terms
of note have his name attached to them.
And I hit 96 entries that came back
with Euler's name attached.
There's the Euler line, there's the Euler identity,
there's the Euler product sum formula,
there's Eulerian graphs and Eulerian functions.
96 terms in mathematics carry his name
and they don't get into the dictionary
unless they're important.
Most mathematicians have no terms named after them.
Euler has almost 100.
So that is a suggestion of the extraordinary quality
of his work.
He can hardly study a branch of mathematics
without running into some major theorem
that he gave us.
Well, he also wrote great textbooks.
He was one of the great textbook writers of all time.
One of them was the Introductio in
and Alisson Infinitorum of 1748.
I had mentioned this in an earlier lecture.
Carl Boyer had ranked the elements of Euclid
as the greatest textbook of classical times.
Alcorismes algebra is the greatest textbook of medieval times
and this, Euler's Introductio,
is the greatest textbook of modern times.
This is the book in which he introduces functions
as the critical entity of mathematical study
and gives you the functions of importance,
the polynomial functions, the exponential functions,
the logarithmic functions, the trigonometric functions,
the inverse trigonometric functions.
If you've taken calculus or precalculus,
you might recognize these.
You say, I know these.
These are the functions we studied.
Yeah, they've been the functions we've studied
ever since Euler's Introductio.
They're the basic functions in our toolkit in mathematics.
That was a very significant work.
In the 1750s, he wrote a differential calculus text.
It became the standard.
In the 1760s, he wrote an integral calculus text.
It actually covered three fat volumes.
It became the standard.
1770, an algebra text.
This is when his eyesight was failing him.
Nonetheless, he wrote this massive treatise on algebra.
He also wrote applied math.
He had a mechanics book, very influential in the 1730s,
an optics book, and he wrote popular science.
His best-selling book ever was Letters to a German Princess,
in which Euler explained to a real German princess
to whom he sent these.
They were later collected and published,
but he was actually sending them to a young girl
and explaining science.
Why is the sky blue?
Why is it colder on top of a mountain
than at the bottom?
That sort of thing.
There are a bunch of nice essays.
They're still in print.
It's not always the case that a great research scientist
can come down to the level of popular writing.
Euler did this quite well.
Gauss said that the study of Euler's works
will remain the best school for the various fields of mathematics
and nothing will replace it.
Gauss was a very great mathematician
who much admired Euler.
And Laplace, it is said,
in response to his students' inquiries of how do I learn math,
advise them to read Euler, read Euler,
he is the master of us all.
So, very deep footprints from this 18th-century figure.
Now, in the remainder of this lecture,
I want to show you some of the things he did
just to survey some of his achievements.
There's 25,000 pages,
so we're not going to get them all in there,
but just some of the highlights.
One of them, the number E.
If you've taken calculus,
you certainly have run into this.
If you haven't taken calculus,
you probably think I should be saying the letter E,
but actually it's a number.
And here it is as it appeared in his writings.
You can see it right there in the middle of the page.
He says he's going to let the symbol E
stand for the number 2.71828, et cetera.
He carries it out to, I think, 12 places.
He loved calculating things numerically.
And he says,
which therefore denotes the base of the natural
or hyperbolic logarithm.
And sure enough, that's what E is.
It still plays that role.
It's a critical number in the calculus.
At the bottom of the page there,
you see he shows you how to calculate it.
1 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 1 times 2
plus 1 over 1 times 2 times 3,
and so on, an infinite series.
It converges very rapidly to E.
You don't have to calculate too many terms
and you get this real accurate estimate.
That's Euler's number.
If he had done nothing but give us E,
we'd remember him to this day.
But he did so much more.
And one thing he did in 1748
was give us Euler's identity.
Now, this is it in modern notation.
E, that number E, to the ix power
is cosine x plus i sine x.
Now, i is the square root of negative 1,
the imaginary constant.
This is a very weird formula.
On the left side, we have an exponential.
On the right side, we have trig functions,
sines and cosines.
There's i's flying around here.
What a strange, wonderful relationship,
which he proved.
Here's how he printed it.
E to the plus v times the square root of minus 1, he wrote.
At that time, he hadn't adopted i
for the square root of minus 1.
He had to write it out.
And then on the right side, he says,
c-o-s period v plus the square root of minus 1
times s-i-n period v.
This is because c-o-s and s-i-n were abbreviations
for cosines and sinines.
And since he was abbreviating,
he thought he'd better put the period in there.
So we now don't use the period.
Well, if you take Euler's identity
and let x equal pi in this,
you get E to the i pi equals cosine pi plus i sine pi.
And if you reduce this in terms of your trigonometry values,
your trigonometry knowledge,
it boils down to E to the i pi plus 1 equals 0.
Now, in that poll I mentioned,
the most beautiful theorems of all time,
this was number one.
This was regarded by the mathematical community
as the most beautiful theorem ever.
E to the i pi plus 1 equals 0.
It's such a peculiar relationship.
And what makes it so intriguing is
that it contains the five greatest numbers in the world.
If you were going to have a party
and you wanted to invite the five greatest numbers to your party,
whom would you invite?
Well, you'd invite 0.
0 is the additive identity.
It's the number that, when you add it to something,
leaves it unchanged.
That's a critical number, 0.
You'd invite 1.
That's the multiplicative identity.
When you multiply something by 1, it's unchanged.
That's pretty important.
You better invite E, if you want to do calculus.
You better invite pi, if you want to do geometry.
And you better invite i,
if you want to do anything with the complex realm.
So there they are, the five great constants, 0, 1,
E, i, and pi.
They're all in this one equation.
How marvelous is that?
It's like the dream team of numbers all in one equation.
Now, this is doubly amazing.
First of all, it's amazing that there is an equation
linking these five numbers.
There's no reason why there has to be.
And it's amazing that it follows so readily
from Euler's identity.
This equation is so famous that someone wrote a poem about it.
W.C. Willig wrote a poem,
which I'm now going to recite to you about this equation.
It says, Willig,
e to the i pi plus 1 equals 0
made the mathematician Euler a hero.
From the real to complex,
with our brains in great flex,
he led us with zest,
but no fear o.
That's pretty great.
Hey, what else?
There's the Euler-Polyhedral formula from 1752.
It says that v plus f equals e plus 2,
is the way you see it,
but I've got to explain what all these letters mean.
Maybe I first better say, what's a polyhedron?
It's a solid body whose faces are planes,
plane figures.
So, for instance, think of a cube.
It's a three-dimensional body whose faces are square.
Now, v is the number of vertices of the solid,
the number of corners.
f is the number of faces on the solid,
and e is the number of edges forming this.
So, for my cube, v,
how many vertices are there?
Well, there's one, two, three, four around the top,
four around the bottom.
So, v is eight.
How many faces?
Well, think of a die, which has six faces,
six numbers, so f is six.
How many edges on a cube?
Well, four around the top, four around the bottom,
four vertical, four a 12.
And 8 plus 6 is 12 plus 2.
So, the formula works for cubes.
But what Euler recognized is it works for this
vast range of other solids, other polyhedra,
like an icosahedron, like a dodecahedron,
like a pyramid.
It's incredibly pervasive in the realm of solids.
This formula holds.
It's so amazing that this was voted the second
most beautiful formula of all time in that poll I mentioned.
So, people think very highly of this.
Euler himself was a little more circumspect.
Whenever he looked at it, he said,
I find it surprising that these general results
in solid geometry have not previously been noticed
by anyone so far as I am aware.
But of course, Euler was special in what he could see.
Another great result of his is called the Basel problem.
This was a challenge problem from Jakob Bernoulli in 1689.
And the question was, can you find the exact sum
of this infinite series?
One plus a fourth plus a ninth plus a 16 plus a 25th.
It's an infinite series.
Notice what the reciprocals are are the perfect squares.
The denominators are 2 squared, which is the 4.
3 squared is 9.
4 squared is 16.
Suppose you take the squares, flip them over, add them up.
What do you get?
Jakob Bernoulli couldn't figure it out.
He challenged the world.
A generation later, Euler comes along
and finds the answer to be exactly pi squared over 6.
This is a bizarre result.
This will be the focus of my next lecture.
We'll see why it's pi squared over 6, and it's phenomenal.
This is the result that made Euler famous.
He was still a very young man when he did it.
And in that poll of the most beautiful theorems of all time,
this is number 5.
So Euler has 1, 2, and 5 locked up.
We'll see this one again in the next lecture.
What else?
Well, there's something called the Euler path.
Now, this comes from a paper called
the solution pertaining to a problem
of the geometry of position.
Geometrium situs, the geometry of position.
It was suggested to Euler by the arrangement
of the bridges of Caningsburg.
Caningsburg is a city in Germany.
Here's a map from one of his papers about how this city is configured.
You see the river flowing through, the river splits.
It circles that island labeled A, flows off.
And there's bridges connecting the various land masses.
And you can see those on the picture.
Well, according to the story, the citizens of Caningsburg on Sunday
would go strolling around in the park here
and across the island.
They wanted to take a journey so that they crossed each bridge
once and only once.
So this was the challenge.
And they tried it, and it never worked.
They missed a bridge, or they'd find themselves crossing a bridge
they'd already crossed.
So they wanted to know, can you do this?
Should we just work harder at it, or is this impossible?
And they asked the mayor.
I don't know why they asked the mayor, but they asked the mayor.
And the mayor of Caningsburg had no idea what's going on.
So he writes to Euler, and Euler answers the question
that in fact, with this configuration of bridges,
it is impossible to cross each bridge once and only once.
Such a crossing is now called an Euler path.
But this configuration doesn't have one.
He showed other configurations to do,
and thereby started a subject which we now know as graph theory.
It's pretty impressive work, but Euler said,
man, this solution bears little relationship to mathematics,
and I do not understand why to expect a mathematician to produce it
rather than anyone else, for the solution is based on logic alone.
So he showed it was impossible to take an Euler path here
just using logic.
He thought of it as a puzzle.
He didn't need math, he said,
because there wasn't any trigonometry in it or anything of that sort.
Today, this would definitely be recognized as mathematics.
And then there's geometry.
He worked in geometry.
Now, you think geometry had been around for thousands of years.
Surely there was nothing left to discover in the realm of geometry,
but he did.
He found something called the Euler line of a triangle.
Let me tell you about this.
Suppose you have any triangle.
You can consider the points where the altitudes meet,
the point where the altitudes meet.
An altitude, remember, is a line from a vertex perpendicular to the opposite side.
And if you draw the three altitudes,
they all meet in a single point called the orthocenter.
You can consider the point where the medians meet.
Now, median goes from each vertex to the middle of the opposite side,
and they all go through a point called the centroid.
And you can look at the point where the perpendicular bisectors meet.
So you take each side, bisect, put up a perpendicular,
and those three meet in a point.
I'm going to show you a picture in a minute.
That's called the circumcenter.
It's the center of the circumscribed triangle.
A circumscribed circle, excuse me.
So every triangle has these three points.
Let me show you a picture.
There's a triangle.
So let's first look at the intersection of the altitudes.
So I draw perpendicular to each side.
There they are.
And they all go through a point.
There it is.
It's called the orthocenter.
Now, let's get rid of those.
Let's take a look at the intersection of the medians.
Remember, the median goes from each vertex to the middle of the opposite side.
So there they are.
And they meet in a point.
That's called the centroid.
So there's that point.
Get rid of that.
And now look at the perpendicular bisectors of the three sides.
So we bisect each side and put up a perpendicular.
And they meet in a point called the circumcenter.
Well, guess what?
Can you see it?
These points always line up.
They always are in a straight line,
which is now called the Euler line,
because he's the first person that saw this in the 18th century.
Euclid missed it.
Archimedes missed it.
Heron missed it.
All the great geometries hadn't seen this.
It's a fascinating little result.
And furthermore, he showed that the centroid is always half as far from the circumcenter
as it is from the orthocenter.
In other words, those two segments you see in the line
are always in the ratio of one to two,
no matter which triangle you look at.
It's a great piece of geometry.
Euler also worked in applied mathematics.
Here's a diagram from one of his papers where he's studying the theory of machines.
And he has volumes and volumes and volumes on applied math.
And there's this little thing that shows up in one of his papers.
If you look at this picture of these little circles within circles, intersecting circles,
you probably know this as a Venn diagram.
Except Venn lived in the 19th century.
And I've taken this picture from something Euler did in the 18th century.
He's already drawing the little circles,
getting the logical connections among ideas.
So probably this should be called an Euler diagram,
if there were any justice in the world.
But truth to tell, Venn needs the publicity more than Euler does.
So we'll still call it a Venn diagram.
Well, the Swiss, some years ago, on their 10-frank note,
put a picture of their favorite son, Euler.
And here's the bill that has had him on it.
I believe it's no longer in circulation,
but at least for a while, a mathematician was on the Swiss money,
even as Newton was on the British pound.
A nice honor to Euler.
Condorcet, the great French mathematician, said this,
all celebrated mathematicians now alive are his disciples.
There is no one who is not guided and sustained by the genius of Euler.
I think that is true. I think that remains the case to this day.
We are all his disciples. He is the master of us all.
And I'll leave with a picture of Euler from later in life,
decked out in his finery, and say,
way to go, Uncle Leonhard.
