In this lecture, we'll focus on Leonhardt Euler of Switzerland.
Euler was history's most prolific mathematician.
He was certainly the dominant force in 18th century mathematics,
and he's a person everyone should meet.
What I want to do in this lecture is give his biography and sketch some of his great achievements.
The next two lectures will be great theorems to accompany the great thinker
as we look at some of his mathematical achievements.
I promise the two lectures that followed this will be just spectacular in terms of what Euler did.
But first we've got to meet him.
This is Euler.
When people see this picture, their first thought is, what is he wearing?
It's certainly a curious outfit to put on when the portrait painter comes over.
It looks like he just got out of the shower, actually.
But in fact, this was a fairly standard guard for the 18th century.
What's going on here is this, that the folks back then would wear wigs and shave their heads.
And their heads would get cold when they weren't wearing the wig,
and they would wear this peculiar looking headdress just as a head warmer
if they were living in cold climbs, and Euler did.
So this was just a headwarming device,
but what's interesting is when the portrait was going to be done,
he decided to dress informally like this rather than put on the wig,
and that conforms to his basic personality, which was a kind, unassuming person.
This is Euler in informal attire.
He was born in 1707 in Basel, Switzerland.
His father was a pastor at this church,
and I'm told that if Euler were to return to life, he would recognize it.
It still looks pretty much as it did back then.
His genius was evident quite early on.
His father wanted him to become a pastor to follow in his footsteps,
but Euler's skills and talent seemed better suited to math and science.
And so in 1720, when he was 13,
it was arranged that he would study with Johann Bernoulli.
Now, we met Bernoulli in an earlier lecture.
Bernoulli was in Basel, Switzerland at the time.
Bernoulli was probably the world's greatest active mathematician,
and he was right there in Euler's home town.
So young Euler would go to see the great Bernoulli.
He later remembered this as being kind of terrifying.
Here was Bernoulli, this crusty, arrogant, towering figure.
Here comes little Euler with his week's work.
Bernoulli would criticize it, make suggestions,
send them off to do another bit of mathematical work.
At that stage, Bernoulli is obviously the master Euler of the pupil.
In not too much time, you begin to see them acting as colleagues.
And then, in not too much time beyond that,
it's Euler who's the master,
and Bernoulli is in awe of what his former student could do.
In 1722, at the age of 15,
Euler graduated from the University of Basel.
He then completed a master's degree and applied for a job there.
There was actually a position in physics open at the university in his home town.
He wanted it, and he failed to get it.
The job went to somebody else,
and it became, I think, the worst hiring choice in the history of the University of Basel.
If not any university, they turned, they passed on Euler
in favor of somebody who is now completely forgotten.
So, what does Euler do? He needs a job.
And in 1727, at the age of 20,
he takes an appointment at the St. Petersburg Academy in Russia.
Now, remember, in Europe at this time,
the big courts would be surrounded by these academies,
the Royal Society in London, the Paris Academy, the Berlin Academy.
