They wanted to take a journey so that they crossed each bridge
once and only once.
So this was the challenge.
And they tried it, and it never worked.
They missed a bridge, or they'd find themselves crossing a bridge
they'd already crossed.
So they wanted to know, can you do this?
Should we just work harder at it, or is this impossible?
And they asked the mayor.
I don't know why they asked the mayor, but they asked the mayor.
And the mayor of Caningsburg had no idea what's going on.
So he writes to Euler, and Euler answers the question
that in fact, with this configuration of bridges,
it is impossible to cross each bridge once and only once.
Such a crossing is now called an Euler path.
But this configuration doesn't have one.
He showed other configurations to do,
and thereby started a subject which we now know as graph theory.
It's pretty impressive work, but Euler said,
man, this solution bears little relationship to mathematics,
and I do not understand why to expect a mathematician to produce it
rather than anyone else, for the solution is based on logic alone.
So he showed it was impossible to take an Euler path here
just using logic.
He thought of it as a puzzle.
He didn't need math, he said,
because there wasn't any trigonometry in it or anything of that sort.
Today, this would definitely be recognized as mathematics.
And then there's geometry.
He worked in geometry.
Now, you think geometry had been around for thousands of years.
Surely there was nothing left to discover in the realm of geometry,
but he did.
He found something called the Euler line of a triangle.
Let me tell you about this.
Suppose you have any triangle.
You can consider the points where the altitudes meet,
the point where the altitudes meet.
An altitude, remember, is a line from a vertex perpendicular to the opposite side.
And if you draw the three altitudes,
they all meet in a single point called the orthocenter.
You can consider the point where the medians meet.
Now, median goes from each vertex to the middle of the opposite side,
and they all go through a point called the centroid.
And you can look at the point where the perpendicular bisectors meet.
So you take each side, bisect, put up a perpendicular,
and those three meet in a point.
I'm going to show you a picture in a minute.
That's called the circumcenter.
It's the center of the circumscribed triangle.
A circumscribed circle, excuse me.
So every triangle has these three points.
Let me show you a picture.
There's a triangle.
So let's first look at the intersection of the altitudes.
So I draw perpendicular to each side.
There they are.
And they all go through a point.
There it is.
It's called the orthocenter.
Now, let's get rid of those.
Let's take a look at the intersection of the medians.
