Remember, the median goes from each vertex to the middle of the opposite side.
So there they are.
And they meet in a point.
That's called the centroid.
So there's that point.
Get rid of that.
And now look at the perpendicular bisectors of the three sides.
So we bisect each side and put up a perpendicular.
And they meet in a point called the circumcenter.
Well, guess what?
Can you see it?
These points always line up.
They always are in a straight line,
which is now called the Euler line,
because he's the first person that saw this in the 18th century.
Euclid missed it.
Archimedes missed it.
Heron missed it.
All the great geometries hadn't seen this.
It's a fascinating little result.
And furthermore, he showed that the centroid is always half as far from the circumcenter
as it is from the orthocenter.
In other words, those two segments you see in the line
are always in the ratio of one to two,
no matter which triangle you look at.
It's a great piece of geometry.
Euler also worked in applied mathematics.
Here's a diagram from one of his papers where he's studying the theory of machines.
And he has volumes and volumes and volumes on applied math.
And there's this little thing that shows up in one of his papers.
If you look at this picture of these little circles within circles, intersecting circles,
you probably know this as a Venn diagram.
Except Venn lived in the 19th century.
And I've taken this picture from something Euler did in the 18th century.
He's already drawing the little circles,
getting the logical connections among ideas.
So probably this should be called an Euler diagram,
if there were any justice in the world.
But truth to tell, Venn needs the publicity more than Euler does.
So we'll still call it a Venn diagram.
Well, the Swiss, some years ago, on their 10-frank note,
put a picture of their favorite son, Euler.
And here's the bill that has had him on it.
I believe it's no longer in circulation,
but at least for a while, a mathematician was on the Swiss money,
even as Newton was on the British pound.
A nice honor to Euler.
Condorcet, the great French mathematician, said this,
all celebrated mathematicians now alive are his disciples.
There is no one who is not guided and sustained by the genius of Euler.
I think that is true. I think that remains the case to this day.
We are all his disciples. He is the master of us all.
And I'll leave with a picture of Euler from later in life,
decked out in his finery, and say,
way to go, Uncle Leonhard.
