but in 1771, it was quite a serious problem.
They did try surgery on Euler,
and you don't even want to think about eye surgery in 1771.
It was painful, and it failed,
and it left Euler essentially blind.
Apparently, he could see vague shapes, but nothing more.
So, he gives up, right?
Wrong.
He keeps going, just as active as he ever was.
He did not let the blindness stop him.
And if you don't believe me, let me just note that in 1775,
as a blind man, he produced 50 papers that year,
a paper a week, and he couldn't see.
What he would do was this.
He would have a table full of scribes,
young people with their quill pens and their paper,
and he would dictate his papers,
and they would furiously write, trying to keep up with him,
trying to do this mathematics that he could see
only in his mind's eye.
But it just kept spewing out.
If a new paper came in from somebody else,
from Lagrange or Dallenbert, they'd read it to him.
And again, with this phenomenal memory of his,
he could capture it and comment and proceed further.
Euler's story, I think, is the most inspirational
in the history of mathematics.
Here he is, faced with this terrible physical ailment,
and he does not stop.
He proceeds as always.
He doesn't let it beat him.
And this makes Euler, really, the counterpart of Beethoven.
Remember, Beethoven loses his hearing,
and yet continues to produce great music.
Euler loses his vision, but continues to produce
great mathematics.
Now, his work is characterized by its remarkable quantity
and its remarkable quality, both.
He's off the scale in both of these dimensions.
Let me mention the quantity first.
His collected works are called the Opera Omnia.
These are now over six dozen volumes
and 25,000 pages of published mathematics.
What happened was, in 1911, the Swiss Academy of Science
started to publish Euler's collected works
when the first volume came out.
Now, this is a volume.
Let me show you this. It's huge.
It's a big, thick tome, hundreds of pages,
full of mathematics.
If this was the product of someone's entire life's work,
that would be quite impressive.
But this has 76 cousins just like it
that have been coming out ever since 1911.
It's now a century since the first volume came out,
and they're still coming. They're not done yet.
They're not quite sure how much mathematics Euler will eventually fill,
the volumes this will run to.
It's going to be in the vicinity of 80, 90, who knows.
It will be deep in the 21st century,
and they'll still be coming out.
I like to think that the grandchildren
