How many edges on a cube?
Well, four around the top, four around the bottom,
four vertical, four a 12.
And 8 plus 6 is 12 plus 2.
So, the formula works for cubes.
But what Euler recognized is it works for this
vast range of other solids, other polyhedra,
like an icosahedron, like a dodecahedron,
like a pyramid.
It's incredibly pervasive in the realm of solids.
This formula holds.
It's so amazing that this was voted the second
most beautiful formula of all time in that poll I mentioned.
So, people think very highly of this.
Euler himself was a little more circumspect.
Whenever he looked at it, he said,
I find it surprising that these general results
in solid geometry have not previously been noticed
by anyone so far as I am aware.
But of course, Euler was special in what he could see.
Another great result of his is called the Basel problem.
This was a challenge problem from Jakob Bernoulli in 1689.
And the question was, can you find the exact sum
of this infinite series?
One plus a fourth plus a ninth plus a 16 plus a 25th.
It's an infinite series.
Notice what the reciprocals are are the perfect squares.
The denominators are 2 squared, which is the 4.
3 squared is 9.
4 squared is 16.
Suppose you take the squares, flip them over, add them up.
What do you get?
Jakob Bernoulli couldn't figure it out.
He challenged the world.
A generation later, Euler comes along
and finds the answer to be exactly pi squared over 6.
This is a bizarre result.
This will be the focus of my next lecture.
We'll see why it's pi squared over 6, and it's phenomenal.
This is the result that made Euler famous.
He was still a very young man when he did it.
And in that poll of the most beautiful theorems of all time,
this is number 5.
So Euler has 1, 2, and 5 locked up.
We'll see this one again in the next lecture.
What else?
Well, there's something called the Euler path.
Now, this comes from a paper called
the solution pertaining to a problem
of the geometry of position.
Geometrium situs, the geometry of position.
It was suggested to Euler by the arrangement
of the bridges of Caningsburg.
Caningsburg is a city in Germany.
Here's a map from one of his papers about how this city is configured.
You see the river flowing through, the river splits.
It circles that island labeled A, flows off.
And there's bridges connecting the various land masses.
And you can see those on the picture.
Well, according to the story, the citizens of Caningsburg on Sunday
would go strolling around in the park here
and across the island.
