and gives you the functions of importance,
the polynomial functions, the exponential functions,
the logarithmic functions, the trigonometric functions,
the inverse trigonometric functions.
If you've taken calculus or precalculus,
you might recognize these.
You say, I know these.
These are the functions we studied.
Yeah, they've been the functions we've studied
ever since Euler's Introductio.
They're the basic functions in our toolkit in mathematics.
That was a very significant work.
In the 1750s, he wrote a differential calculus text.
It became the standard.
In the 1760s, he wrote an integral calculus text.
It actually covered three fat volumes.
It became the standard.
1770, an algebra text.
This is when his eyesight was failing him.
Nonetheless, he wrote this massive treatise on algebra.
He also wrote applied math.
He had a mechanics book, very influential in the 1730s,
an optics book, and he wrote popular science.
His best-selling book ever was Letters to a German Princess,
in which Euler explained to a real German princess
to whom he sent these.
They were later collected and published,
but he was actually sending them to a young girl
and explaining science.
Why is the sky blue?
Why is it colder on top of a mountain
than at the bottom?
That sort of thing.
There are a bunch of nice essays.
They're still in print.
It's not always the case that a great research scientist
can come down to the level of popular writing.
Euler did this quite well.
Gauss said that the study of Euler's works
will remain the best school for the various fields of mathematics
and nothing will replace it.
Gauss was a very great mathematician
who much admired Euler.
And Laplace, it is said,
in response to his students' inquiries of how do I learn math,
advise them to read Euler, read Euler,
he is the master of us all.
So, very deep footprints from this 18th-century figure.
Now, in the remainder of this lecture,
I want to show you some of the things he did
just to survey some of his achievements.
There's 25,000 pages,
so we're not going to get them all in there,
but just some of the highlights.
One of them, the number E.
If you've taken calculus,
you certainly have run into this.
If you haven't taken calculus,
you probably think I should be saying the letter E,
but actually it's a number.
And here it is as it appeared in his writings.
You can see it right there in the middle of the page.
