He says he's going to let the symbol E
stand for the number 2.71828, et cetera.
He carries it out to, I think, 12 places.
He loved calculating things numerically.
And he says,
which therefore denotes the base of the natural
or hyperbolic logarithm.
And sure enough, that's what E is.
It still plays that role.
It's a critical number in the calculus.
At the bottom of the page there,
you see he shows you how to calculate it.
1 plus 1 over 1 plus 1 over 1 times 2
plus 1 over 1 times 2 times 3,
and so on, an infinite series.
It converges very rapidly to E.
You don't have to calculate too many terms
and you get this real accurate estimate.
That's Euler's number.
If he had done nothing but give us E,
we'd remember him to this day.
But he did so much more.
And one thing he did in 1748
was give us Euler's identity.
Now, this is it in modern notation.
E, that number E, to the ix power
is cosine x plus i sine x.
Now, i is the square root of negative 1,
the imaginary constant.
This is a very weird formula.
On the left side, we have an exponential.
On the right side, we have trig functions,
sines and cosines.
There's i's flying around here.
What a strange, wonderful relationship,
which he proved.
Here's how he printed it.
E to the plus v times the square root of minus 1, he wrote.
At that time, he hadn't adopted i
for the square root of minus 1.
He had to write it out.
And then on the right side, he says,
c-o-s period v plus the square root of minus 1
times s-i-n period v.
This is because c-o-s and s-i-n were abbreviations
for cosines and sinines.
And since he was abbreviating,
he thought he'd better put the period in there.
So we now don't use the period.
Well, if you take Euler's identity
and let x equal pi in this,
you get E to the i pi equals cosine pi plus i sine pi.
And if you reduce this in terms of your trigonometry values,
your trigonometry knowledge,
it boils down to E to the i pi plus 1 equals 0.
Now, in that poll I mentioned,
the most beautiful theorems of all time,
this was number one.
This was regarded by the mathematical community
as the most beautiful theorem ever.
E to the i pi plus 1 equals 0.
It's such a peculiar relationship.
