And what makes it so intriguing is
that it contains the five greatest numbers in the world.
If you were going to have a party
and you wanted to invite the five greatest numbers to your party,
whom would you invite?
Well, you'd invite 0.
0 is the additive identity.
It's the number that, when you add it to something,
leaves it unchanged.
That's a critical number, 0.
You'd invite 1.
That's the multiplicative identity.
When you multiply something by 1, it's unchanged.
That's pretty important.
You better invite E, if you want to do calculus.
You better invite pi, if you want to do geometry.
And you better invite i,
if you want to do anything with the complex realm.
So there they are, the five great constants, 0, 1,
E, i, and pi.
They're all in this one equation.
How marvelous is that?
It's like the dream team of numbers all in one equation.
Now, this is doubly amazing.
First of all, it's amazing that there is an equation
linking these five numbers.
There's no reason why there has to be.
And it's amazing that it follows so readily
from Euler's identity.
This equation is so famous that someone wrote a poem about it.
W.C. Willig wrote a poem,
which I'm now going to recite to you about this equation.
It says, Willig,
e to the i pi plus 1 equals 0
made the mathematician Euler a hero.
From the real to complex,
with our brains in great flex,
he led us with zest,
but no fear o.
That's pretty great.
Hey, what else?
There's the Euler-Polyhedral formula from 1752.
It says that v plus f equals e plus 2,
is the way you see it,
but I've got to explain what all these letters mean.
Maybe I first better say, what's a polyhedron?
It's a solid body whose faces are planes,
plane figures.
So, for instance, think of a cube.
It's a three-dimensional body whose faces are square.
Now, v is the number of vertices of the solid,
the number of corners.
f is the number of faces on the solid,
and e is the number of edges forming this.
So, for my cube, v,
how many vertices are there?
Well, there's one, two, three, four around the top,
four around the bottom.
So, v is eight.
How many faces?
Well, think of a die, which has six faces,
six numbers, so f is six.
