Yikes.
What do you do?
Well, here's what you do.
We can do this.
There's 0 equals p of x.
There it is.
1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 5 factorial.
I'm trying to solve this.
Set this equal to 0.
Draw a line.
Draw a horizontal line.
In the top and bottom, I'm going to multiply by x, so I hit the top with an x, hit the
bottom with an x, and I can do that.
You don't change your fraction by doing the same thing to the top and bottom.
That's still equal.
But for one little snag here, x can't be 0 here, because then I would have a 0 on the
bottom, and you're never allowed to have that.
This is a legitimate operation provided x is in 0.
All right.
On the numerator, multiply through.
That x multiplies each term, and so you end up with 0 on the left, and on the right, you
got that x in the denominator, but up on top, when I hit an x across each term, I get x
minus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the fifth over 5 factorial minus x to the seventh
over 7 factorial.
We just increased each power up there by 1.
But wait a minute.
That numerator, I hope, looks familiar.
That's Newton's series.
That's the sine of x.
So I'm trying to solve p of x equals 0, and by this little trick of multiplying top and
bottom by x, I'm down to saying that the sine of x over x should be 0.
Now, that I can solve, because if you just cross multiply here, the sine of x would be
0, and now you've got to remember when is the sine of x 0.
Well, that was our first preliminary.
We saw that.
The sine of x is 0.
We said precisely when x is 0, plus or minus pi, plus or minus 2 pi, plus or minus 3 pi,
and so on.
Except there's one little catcher.
Remember we know that p of 0 is 1.
So x equals 0 is not a solution to p of x equals 0, because p of 0 isn't 0.
p of 0 is 1.
We've got to toss that out.
0 is not a solution to p of x equals 0.
Where did it come from?
Well, it sort of sneaked in there.
Remember when I multiplied top and bottom by x, I said x couldn't be 0.
That would be illegal.
