negative values of the sine, the B, C's going down, until they come back up and you're at
the right end of the diameter and you get a zero again.
So if you think about it, the sine will be zero whenever your angle leaves you at the
right end of that diameter or at the left end.
And then you just have to figure out when that is, which angles do that.
Well, if you're at zero degrees, you're over at A, the sine is zero.
If you're at 180, you're on the other end of the diameter, the sine is zero.
But you can actually go backwards too.
You might remember we can measure angles clockwise or counterclockwise.
If I go the other way, minus 180 will bring me to the same point.
So I'm going to say that the sine of x is zero when x is plus or minus 180 degrees.
Or you can do a whole revolution, plus or minus 360, either clockwise or counterclockwise,
you'll get yourself back to A again.
Or plus or minus 540, now you'll be back over on the other side.
So these are the angles, the values of x that could give you a sine of x equals zero, except
these are in degrees.
And remember when we're doing higher mathematics, we don't want degree readings, we want radiant
measure.
And so I've got to convert all of these to radians.
Now that's easy enough to do.
We remember how the radians work.
You're measuring the length of the arc, A, B, that's the size of your angle.
If you do a whole lap around, you go 2 pi, 2 pi r, with the radius of the circles 1.
So a 360 degree rotation is equivalent to a 2 pi radian rotation, 180 degrees is 1 pi.
And so here goes my solution.
This is what I really want here.
The sine of x is zero, if x is zero radians, plus or minus pi radians, plus or minus 2 pi
radians, 3 pi radians, and so on.
You can see this if you graph the sine wave.
So if you just graph the function y equals sine x, there it is.
You certainly have seen this wavy thing.
And look where it's crossing the x-axis at zero, at pi, at minus pi, at 2 pi, and minus
2 pi, 3 pi, and minus 3 pi.
And so my first preliminary is that the sine of x is zero.
If x is zero, plus or minus pi, plus or minus 2 pi, plus or minus 3 pi, et cetera.
So that's the first thing we're going to need to store away.
We'll be back to that in a minute.
Second thing we need to proceed with Euler's derivation is Newton's infinite series for
the sine of x.
We talked about this in a previous lecture.
Newton discovered this amazing fact that the sine of x, where x is in radians, is x minus
x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the fifth over 5 factorial minus x to the seventh over
7 factorial, and so on.
And I mentioned that this is a very beautiful formula, nicely structured, very regular in
its terms.
Newton had discovered it, Euler certainly knew it, and he's ready to use it.
So that's the second piece of the puzzle.
The third piece is a fact from algebra.
