b.
The next two, 1 minus x over 2 pi times 1 plus x over 2 pi, that multiplies to be 1
minus x squared over 4 pi squared.
The next two will multiply to be 1 minus x squared over 9 pi squared.
Now, look at the denominators here.
I'm starting to see something.
I see a 4 and a 9.
The next one would be 1 minus x squared over 16 pi squared.
Somewhere here, I'm getting an inkling that he's on to something.
He's getting these squares showing up in the bottom.
Remember, that was what the whole problem was to sum the 1 plus a fourth plus a ninth.
We're not there yet, but you begin to see he's thinking.
Okay, so there we have it.
p of x written as the infinite series at first and then this product of these terms, all
of which have x squareds in them.
Now what Euler says is multiply that out.
All those things in the square brackets, it's multiplied out.
Well, okay, if you do this, you always have to take one piece of each thing in the square
bracket and multiply along.
You can see what the constant term will be.
One comes out of the first bracket times one from the second square bracket times one from
the third.
You multiply all those ones, you get one.
So it's going to start with a one.
How many x's will emerge from this?
Well, if you multiply all those terms in the square brackets, you can never get an x because
you always have x squareds or you could have x to the fourth or x to the sixth as they
multiply.
You can never get an x to the first, so there's not going to be any x's.
How many x squareds are going to come out if you multiply all these square bracket terms
together?
So there's going to be some of them.
And what Euler says is think of where the x squared will come from.
Because you take that first square bracket where you have a minus one over pi squared
times x squared, suppose that minus one over pi squared multiplies all the other ones, you'll
get a minus one over pi squared, x squared.
Look at the second square bracket.
You have a minus one over four pi squared times x squared.
That minus one over four pi squared can multiply all the other ones.
And you'll get a minus one over four pi squared, x squared.
On the third term, you'll get a minus 1 over 9 pi squared x squared, and so on down the
road.
So if you've factored out the x squared, what you'd be left with is the coefficient
of the x squared is a minus 1 over pi squared, minus 1 over 4 pi squared, minus 1 over 9
pi squared, minus 1 over 16 pi squared, and so on.
And that would be your x squared coefficient.
After that, I don't care what happens, Euler just says whatever happens thereafter, we
don't need to worry about it.
