p of 0 is 1, p of a is 0, p of b is 0, p of c is 0, sure.
So that's not bad.
Now let me crank it up way up.
Suppose p of x is an infinite degree polynomial.
Oiler would always deal with these things, it just goes on forever.
Suppose p of 0 is 1, and suppose p of x equals 0 now has infinitely many solutions, x equals
a, x equals b, x equals c, etc.
Oiler was perfectly comfortable generalizing the previous results and saying here's how
you factor p of x.
You can write it as 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over b times 1 minus x over c, and
the product goes on forever.
Infinitely many factors, there you go.
The fact that this works for second degree and third degree and fourth degree, Oiler
says let's just extend it to a polynomial, if you will, of infinite degree, just one
that never ends.
Those are the three preliminaries.
Now he's ready to put them together and solve the Basel problem.
Well, in order to evaluate the series, which remember was 1 plus a fourth plus a ninth
plus a sixteenth plus a twenty-fifth, he's going to begin by introducing an infinite
degree polynomial well-chosen to be this.
This is what he wants to look at.
p of x equals 1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 5 factorial minus
x to the sixth over 7 factorial, and so on.
We haven't seen this one before, although it sort of calls to mind maybe the sine series,
but it isn't.
The powers aren't right.
In any event, it's going to be considered an infinite degree polynomial, p of x.
What Oiler wants to do is factor it using these preliminaries.
He wants to see if I can break this up into a product of pieces, and we can, if we use
the result I just showed you, if it applies to this p of x.
The first thing he's got to check is, is p of 0 1?
If we're going to use that result I just saw, we always demanded that p of 0 be 1.
Don't look at it.
Put 0 in there.
p of 0 is 1 minus 0 squared over 3 factorial plus 0 to the fourth over 5 factorial.
Well, you put in 0 for x, you're going to wipe out everything except that lead 1, and
so sure enough, p of 0 is 1.
That was one of the things required to do that factorization, so we check that off.
He's got that under control.
Next up, what are the solutions to p of x equals 0?
Remember these are going to be like the a's and the b's and the c's that we're going
to put into our factorization, so we've got to solve p of x equals 0.
This looks really tough.
Looks like we're going to go off the rails here because p of x is this monstrosity here.
1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 5 factorial, et cetera.
It's got infinitely many terms.
I set this equal to 0, and I've got to figure out what x is.
I've got to solve this.
