In our previous lecture, we met Leonhardt Euler, the master of us all, and surveyed some
of his work, a very small fragment, I might say.
In this lecture, in the next, I want to show you his mathematics.
I want to examine a great theorem from Euler in each of these lectures.
These are spectacular, but they are heavy into the mathematics.
So I reiterate my promise that I will try to take the material, break it down into understandable
steps so that you two can follow along as he does this extraordinary work.
These theorems, this one and the next, I think, are as spectacular as anything in the course.
I think they're a real treat, so let's begin.
The theorem for this lecture is his solution of the Basel problem, which I mentioned previously.
The problem was a challenge from Jacob Bernoulli.
It was issued in 1689.
He published this as a challenge to the mathematical world, and it was to find the exact value
of the infinite series one plus a fourth, plus a ninth, plus a sixteenth, plus a twenty-fifth.
You see what this is?
We're taking the whole numbers, squaring them, and taking their reciprocals, add them up forever.
Another one of these infinite series problems that was of such interest to people back then,
and figure out what is the sum.
Exactly.
Jacob couldn't do it.
We saw in an earlier lecture, if you take the triangular numbers that you can make in
the little triangles, one plus a third, plus a sixth, plus a tenth, Leibniz figured out
that sum was two.
That wasn't too hard.
Here I'm taking the square numbers, slightly different geometrical configuration, and this
one's way harder.
To Jacob's credit, he did get an estimate of the answer.
He could get a bound on the answer.
Let me show you what he did here to get at least an inkling as to what this series would
sum to.
There's the series, one plus a fourth, plus a ninth, plus a sixteenth, the sum of the
reciprocals of the squares.
I'm going to follow Jacob along in bounding this or approximating this.
Here's what you do.
Right this out as one plus one over two times two, instead of one fourth, split it up two
times two.
The ninth becomes one over three times three, the sixteenth, one over four times four, and
so on.
That's the same series.
Now what I'm going to do is compare that to a series where I slightly modify the denominators.
Let me put that series up.
It starts off with a one, but then the next term is one over one times two, instead of
its companion right above one over two times two.
When I move to the next one, instead of one over three times three, I change it to one
over two times three.
Then comes one over three times four, one over four times five.
The question is, how does that new series on the lower line compare to the original series
above?
Well, yeah, just think about it a minute.
Look up above.
I start with a one in each, so those are equal.
If I move to the next one, I have one fourth up above, one over two times two, and one
half down below.
You think about it, you see a fourth is less than a half, so the top is less than the bottom.
Move to the next one, a ninth on top, a sixth down below, a ninth is less than a sixth,
a sixteenth is less than a twelfth.
All the ones above are less than all the ones right below them.
The inequality sign I want to put here is a less than.
That is, the top series, the one I'm after, is less than the one below.
All right, now, the one below, if we multiply this out, is one plus one half plus one sixth
plus one twelfth plus one twentieth, and Bernoulli could handle this.
He would say that we'll leave the one in the front, but then when you get to that one
half, write it as one minus a half.
When you get to the one sixth, write it as a half minus a third.
The twelfth is a third minus a fourth.
The twentieth is a fourth minus a fifth.
We saw Leibniz employed this very same trick in summing a series, the challenge problem
from Huygens.
So, it's a trick that's kind of familiar, and now what happens is, you get cancellations
up and down the line.
The minus a half takes the plus a half beside it.
The minus a third takes the plus a third.
The minus a fourth takes the plus a fourth, and so on.
Everything cancels in the tail of the series.
All that's left is the one in the parenthesis, and there was that one at the front end.
So, if you look at what remains, we get two.
And so, the series in question is less than two, and Bernoulli knew that.
So he stated that whatever the answer to this is, whatever one plus a fourth plus a ninth,
and so on, comes out to be, it's surely less than two.
But that wasn't good enough.
He wanted to know exactly what it is, and he couldn't do it, and he wrote this in his
challenge.
He said, if anyone finds and communicates to us that which thus far has eluded our efforts,
great will be our gratitude.
We'll really be thankful if you can give us the answer.
We really want to know.
Now, this was dangerous for him to write this, of course, because his brother, Johann, might
have done it, and then he could have come running in, you know, waving the solution in
Jakob's face, but I'm sure he would have enjoyed that, but Johann couldn't do it either.
This was hard.
And the problem remains out there for a generation known as the Basel problem because Jakob had
issued it from Basel, Switzerland.
Whoever did this is going to be famous, but nobody could.
Well, in the 1730s, Euler found an accurate numerical approximation for the series.
Using some rather clever techniques, he found that the series in question, the one plus
a fourth plus a ninth, comes out somewhere near 1.644934, and that was pretty accurate.
Now, if that had come out to be, I don't know, something like 1.666667, you'd have a clue
as to what the answer should be.
That looks like a decimal for, you know, five-thirds, but 1.644934, it doesn't look like anything
to me, so, you know, it's not clear that this helped, and Euler said it seemed most unlikely
to be able to find anything new about this.
It seemed like that was, as far as we were going to get, ah, finally he said, against
all expectation, I have found an elegant expression for the sum of this series.
So he almost gave up on it, too, but then he saw something.
And that's what I want to show you, what he saw and how he figured out the value of this
series, exactly.
To do this, you need three preliminaries, three lemmas, I guess we could call these,
three things in the background.
And so let's take a look at these one at a time, and then you blend these together with
just the right touch of Eulerian genius, and you can figure out what the series equals.
The first one is this.
For which values of x is the sine of x equal to zero?
That's going to become important in what follows.
So now we've got to kind of delve into the realm of trigonometry, and remember what
the sine is, and see if we can figure out the x's that make the sine of x zero.
Here's a diagram.
Remember we're going to be working in the unit circle.
So the radius is one, from O to A is one.
Let me let x be the size of the angle opening there.
So angle A, O, B has major x.
If you drop B, C perpendicular to O, A, then you're going to form this triangle here, triangle
O, B, C, and in that triangle you can see the sine showing up.
The sine, remember, is that trigonometric ratio opposite side over hypotenuse.
So in the diagram, the sine of x, the sine of the angle x is the opposite side over the
hypotenuse, but the opposite side is B, C, and the hypotenuse is O, B, so it's the ratio
of B, C to O, B, but O, B, the radius of that circle is one.
This is a unit circle, and so the sine is B, C over O, B, that's really just B, C over
one, which is really just B, C. So in the picture, the sine of angle x is B, C, which
if you look at it is that vertical distance from the point C up to the circle, wherever
you end up when you move through the angle.
So there's the picture again.
I say the sine of x we said is B, C, the vertical distance, and so if I ask you when is the
sine of x equaling zero, what I'm really asking is when is B, C equal zero, when is that vertical
distance zero.
Now, if you'll think about this a minute, suppose x is zero degrees.
Suppose x is major zero, you don't start going around yet, so you're just running along
the line O, A. The whole angle just goes from A to O and back to A again, zero opening.
Well then B, C is certainly zero, it's the height up to the circle, but there is no height
if your angle is zero.
As you spin your angle around, the B, C will rise as it reaches the crest and then fall
back again, and it'll be zero again, the B, C will be zero again when you're 180 degrees
away from A. In other words, you're at the other end of that diameter at the left end.
Then you're going to hit another zero value for the sine.
Then the sine, if you continue around in a counterclockwise direction, you'll get these
negative values of the sine, the B, C's going down, until they come back up and you're at
the right end of the diameter and you get a zero again.
So if you think about it, the sine will be zero whenever your angle leaves you at the
right end of that diameter or at the left end.
And then you just have to figure out when that is, which angles do that.
Well, if you're at zero degrees, you're over at A, the sine is zero.
If you're at 180, you're on the other end of the diameter, the sine is zero.
But you can actually go backwards too.
You might remember we can measure angles clockwise or counterclockwise.
If I go the other way, minus 180 will bring me to the same point.
So I'm going to say that the sine of x is zero when x is plus or minus 180 degrees.
Or you can do a whole revolution, plus or minus 360, either clockwise or counterclockwise,
you'll get yourself back to A again.
Or plus or minus 540, now you'll be back over on the other side.
So these are the angles, the values of x that could give you a sine of x equals zero, except
these are in degrees.
And remember when we're doing higher mathematics, we don't want degree readings, we want radiant
measure.
And so I've got to convert all of these to radians.
Now that's easy enough to do.
We remember how the radians work.
You're measuring the length of the arc, A, B, that's the size of your angle.
If you do a whole lap around, you go 2 pi, 2 pi r, with the radius of the circles 1.
So a 360 degree rotation is equivalent to a 2 pi radian rotation, 180 degrees is 1 pi.
And so here goes my solution.
This is what I really want here.
The sine of x is zero, if x is zero radians, plus or minus pi radians, plus or minus 2 pi
radians, 3 pi radians, and so on.
You can see this if you graph the sine wave.
So if you just graph the function y equals sine x, there it is.
You certainly have seen this wavy thing.
And look where it's crossing the x-axis at zero, at pi, at minus pi, at 2 pi, and minus
2 pi, 3 pi, and minus 3 pi.
And so my first preliminary is that the sine of x is zero.
If x is zero, plus or minus pi, plus or minus 2 pi, plus or minus 3 pi, et cetera.
So that's the first thing we're going to need to store away.
We'll be back to that in a minute.
Second thing we need to proceed with Euler's derivation is Newton's infinite series for
the sine of x.
We talked about this in a previous lecture.
Newton discovered this amazing fact that the sine of x, where x is in radians, is x minus
x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the fifth over 5 factorial minus x to the seventh over
7 factorial, and so on.
And I mentioned that this is a very beautiful formula, nicely structured, very regular in
its terms.
Newton had discovered it, Euler certainly knew it, and he's ready to use it.
So that's the second piece of the puzzle.
The third piece is a fact from algebra.
And again, this will take a little bit of time to see what's up here.
But suppose, let me start simple here.
Suppose we have a second degree polynomial, quadratic.
And suppose you know a few things about it.
You know that p of 0 is 1.
So if I call my polynomial p of x, then if I put 0 in, I get 1 out.
And suppose you also know that p of x equals 0 has two solutions, x equals a and x equals
b.
So that is the given.
You can factor p of x as follows.
You can write p of x as the product of two things, 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over
b.
Well, why?
Let's see if we can understand this.
First of all, look at that equation.
p of x is 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over b.
If you were to multiply this back together, you'd surely get a quadratic, a second degree.
There'd be an x squared in it, nothing higher.
So for sure, that's a quadratic polynomial there.
What if you put 0 in?
What is p of 0 if I put 0 into this factored formula?
According to the formula, p of x is 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over b.
So p of 0 is 1 minus 0 over a times 1 minus 0 over b, just letting x be 0.
But 1 minus 0 over a is 1, 1 minus 0 over b is 1.
And so p of 0 is 1 times 1, which is 1, which is what it was supposed to be.
p of 0 is supposed to be 1 at checkout.
What if I put x equal a into this?
What if I ask for what's p of a?
So now p of a will be 1 minus a over a times 1 minus a over b.
But if you look at that, a over a is 1, so the p of a is 1 minus 1 times the other term,
1 minus a over b.
So 1 minus 1 is 0, and once you've got a 0, you multiply, you get 0.
So sure enough, with that factored form, p of a is 0.
And you can see that p of b is 0 for the same reason.
So I guess the point is that the factorization I showed you, p of x equals 1 minus x over
a times 1 minus x over b, meets the criteria.
It's a quadratic.
p of 0 is 1, p of a is 0, p of b is 0.
That's how you factor.
Okay, so that wasn't too hard.
So now let's crank it up, especially if you have a third degree polynomial, third degree.
And you know p of 0 is 1, again.
And you know that p of x equals 0 has three solutions now, x equals a, b, and c.
I want to factor p of x now.
It's exactly analogous to the previous case.
The factorization now has three terms, 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over b, and
then you stick on 1 minus x over c.
And you can check that's a third degree polynomial.
p of 0 is 1, p of a is 0, p of b is 0, p of c is 0, sure.
So that's not bad.
Now let me crank it up way up.
Suppose p of x is an infinite degree polynomial.
Oiler would always deal with these things, it just goes on forever.
Suppose p of 0 is 1, and suppose p of x equals 0 now has infinitely many solutions, x equals
a, x equals b, x equals c, etc.
Oiler was perfectly comfortable generalizing the previous results and saying here's how
you factor p of x.
You can write it as 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over b times 1 minus x over c, and
the product goes on forever.
Infinitely many factors, there you go.
The fact that this works for second degree and third degree and fourth degree, Oiler
says let's just extend it to a polynomial, if you will, of infinite degree, just one
that never ends.
Those are the three preliminaries.
Now he's ready to put them together and solve the Basel problem.
Well, in order to evaluate the series, which remember was 1 plus a fourth plus a ninth
plus a sixteenth plus a twenty-fifth, he's going to begin by introducing an infinite
degree polynomial well-chosen to be this.
This is what he wants to look at.
p of x equals 1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 5 factorial minus
x to the sixth over 7 factorial, and so on.
We haven't seen this one before, although it sort of calls to mind maybe the sine series,
but it isn't.
The powers aren't right.
In any event, it's going to be considered an infinite degree polynomial, p of x.
What Oiler wants to do is factor it using these preliminaries.
He wants to see if I can break this up into a product of pieces, and we can, if we use
the result I just showed you, if it applies to this p of x.
The first thing he's got to check is, is p of 0 1?
If we're going to use that result I just saw, we always demanded that p of 0 be 1.
Don't look at it.
Put 0 in there.
p of 0 is 1 minus 0 squared over 3 factorial plus 0 to the fourth over 5 factorial.
Well, you put in 0 for x, you're going to wipe out everything except that lead 1, and
so sure enough, p of 0 is 1.
That was one of the things required to do that factorization, so we check that off.
He's got that under control.
Next up, what are the solutions to p of x equals 0?
Remember these are going to be like the a's and the b's and the c's that we're going
to put into our factorization, so we've got to solve p of x equals 0.
This looks really tough.
Looks like we're going to go off the rails here because p of x is this monstrosity here.
1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 5 factorial, et cetera.
It's got infinitely many terms.
I set this equal to 0, and I've got to figure out what x is.
I've got to solve this.
Yikes.
What do you do?
Well, here's what you do.
We can do this.
There's 0 equals p of x.
There it is.
1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 5 factorial.
I'm trying to solve this.
Set this equal to 0.
Draw a line.
Draw a horizontal line.
In the top and bottom, I'm going to multiply by x, so I hit the top with an x, hit the
bottom with an x, and I can do that.
You don't change your fraction by doing the same thing to the top and bottom.
That's still equal.
But for one little snag here, x can't be 0 here, because then I would have a 0 on the
bottom, and you're never allowed to have that.
This is a legitimate operation provided x is in 0.
All right.
On the numerator, multiply through.
That x multiplies each term, and so you end up with 0 on the left, and on the right, you
got that x in the denominator, but up on top, when I hit an x across each term, I get x
minus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the fifth over 5 factorial minus x to the seventh
over 7 factorial.
We just increased each power up there by 1.
But wait a minute.
That numerator, I hope, looks familiar.
That's Newton's series.
That's the sine of x.
So I'm trying to solve p of x equals 0, and by this little trick of multiplying top and
bottom by x, I'm down to saying that the sine of x over x should be 0.
Now, that I can solve, because if you just cross multiply here, the sine of x would be
0, and now you've got to remember when is the sine of x 0.
Well, that was our first preliminary.
We saw that.
The sine of x is 0.
We said precisely when x is 0, plus or minus pi, plus or minus 2 pi, plus or minus 3 pi,
and so on.
Except there's one little catcher.
Remember we know that p of 0 is 1.
So x equals 0 is not a solution to p of x equals 0, because p of 0 isn't 0.
p of 0 is 1.
We've got to toss that out.
0 is not a solution to p of x equals 0.
Where did it come from?
Well, it sort of sneaked in there.
Remember when I multiplied top and bottom by x, I said x couldn't be 0.
That would be illegal.
But then I sort of forgot about it.
When I said sine of x is 0, I threw 0 into the pot.
0 has to be removed.
So now your only solutions are plus or minus pi, plus or minus 2 pi, and so on.
Those are like the a's, the b's, and the c's when I try to factor p of x.
So now, we're getting near the end here, and so take a deep breath.
p of x is an infinite degree polynomial.
p of 0 is 1.
The solutions to p of x equals 0 we know, plus or minus pi, 2 pi, 3 pi.
So here comes the factorization by that third preliminary.
First I'm going to write down what p of x was, just to remember.
It's 1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 5 factorial.
That was p of x.
Now I'm going to factor it.
So the preliminary said you take 1 minus x over a, where a is the first solution to
your equation.
So you take 1 minus x over pi.
We said that the solutions were plus or minus pi, so let's put pi in there.
1 minus x over a is like 1 minus x over pi.
Then the next one will do the minus pi.
So 1 minus x over b is like 1 minus x over negative pi.
Then we go and get 1 minus x over 2 pi times 1 minus x over negative 2 pi.
1 minus x over 3 pi, 1 minus x over negative 3 pi, and you've got this infinite product
of these factors.
Well Euler wants to clean this up a little bit.
The first term's fine, 1 minus x over pi, but the next one is 1 minus x over negative
pi.
We might as well write that as 1 plus x over pi.
So it starts off with 1 minus x over pi.
I'll change the second one to 1 plus x over pi.
Just get rid of the double negative.
The next one is 1 minus x over 2 pi.
That's fine, but the fourth term in the product, 1 minus x over minus 2 pi.
We turn that into 1 plus x over 2 pi, and then there's 1 minus x over 3 pi, 1 plus x
over 3 pi.
On it goes an infinite product.
So p of x is now expressed on the left side of the equal sign as an infinite sum, and
on the right side of the equal sign as an infinite product.
One of Euler's tricks, how he would do his amazing mathematics was he'd try to express
the same thing in two very different ways.
And look here.
We've got p of x expressed as a series and as a product.
Same thing, p of x.
Maybe by linking these together, we can get somewhere, and that's exactly what he does.
Okay, next up, we're going to multiply these binomials together two at a time.
Look at the first two.
1 minus x over pi times 1 plus x over pi, well, those can be multiplied together and
come out to be 1 minus x squared over pi squared, sort of like a minus b times a plus
b.
The next two, 1 minus x over 2 pi times 1 plus x over 2 pi, that multiplies to be 1
minus x squared over 4 pi squared.
The next two will multiply to be 1 minus x squared over 9 pi squared.
Now, look at the denominators here.
I'm starting to see something.
I see a 4 and a 9.
The next one would be 1 minus x squared over 16 pi squared.
Somewhere here, I'm getting an inkling that he's on to something.
He's getting these squares showing up in the bottom.
Remember, that was what the whole problem was to sum the 1 plus a fourth plus a ninth.
We're not there yet, but you begin to see he's thinking.
Okay, so there we have it.
p of x written as the infinite series at first and then this product of these terms, all
of which have x squareds in them.
Now what Euler says is multiply that out.
All those things in the square brackets, it's multiplied out.
Well, okay, if you do this, you always have to take one piece of each thing in the square
bracket and multiply along.
You can see what the constant term will be.
One comes out of the first bracket times one from the second square bracket times one from
the third.
You multiply all those ones, you get one.
So it's going to start with a one.
How many x's will emerge from this?
Well, if you multiply all those terms in the square brackets, you can never get an x because
you always have x squareds or you could have x to the fourth or x to the sixth as they
multiply.
You can never get an x to the first, so there's not going to be any x's.
How many x squareds are going to come out if you multiply all these square bracket terms
together?
So there's going to be some of them.
And what Euler says is think of where the x squared will come from.
Because you take that first square bracket where you have a minus one over pi squared
times x squared, suppose that minus one over pi squared multiplies all the other ones, you'll
get a minus one over pi squared, x squared.
Look at the second square bracket.
You have a minus one over four pi squared times x squared.
That minus one over four pi squared can multiply all the other ones.
And you'll get a minus one over four pi squared, x squared.
On the third term, you'll get a minus 1 over 9 pi squared x squared, and so on down the
road.
So if you've factored out the x squared, what you'd be left with is the coefficient
of the x squared is a minus 1 over pi squared, minus 1 over 4 pi squared, minus 1 over 9
pi squared, minus 1 over 16 pi squared, and so on.
And that would be your x squared coefficient.
After that, I don't care what happens, Euler just says whatever happens thereafter, we
don't need to worry about it.
I just say stuff.
More stuff comes out as you multiply and you get x to the fourth and x to the sixth.
For this problem, that's irrelevant.
So where are we?
We know that p of x, which is 1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over
5 factorial, and so on, has now been written after I factored it and then multiplied it
back together as 1 plus x squared times the quantity in square brackets, minus 1 over
pi squared, minus 1 over 4 pi squared, minus 1 over pi squared, 9 pi squared, and so on,
plus whatever's out there in the end.
And now you take a deep breath and equate the coefficients of x squared in this expression.
p of x has been expressed as a series in two different ways.
Notice they both start with 1, both to the left and the right of p of x.
Then you come to the x squared.
How many x squareds in the first expression, minus 1 over 3 factorial?
How many x squareds on the right-hand expression, that's what's in the square brackets, minus
1 over pi squared, minus 1 over 4 pi squared, minus 1 over 9 pi squared, those are the coefficients
of x squared for p of x, those must be the same, and so you set them equal.
But now, let's get rid of all the negative signs, so we'll just turn all the negatives
to positive.
Everything's negative there.
So positive, 1 over 3 factorial, 3 factorial, 3 times 2 times 1, that's a sixth.
On the right side, pull out the 1 over pi squared, and you're left with 1 plus a fourth
plus a ninth plus a sixteenth.
Inside the square brackets is the very thing Euler's after.
He has to sum that series.
But he's got it now, because 1 sixth is equal to 1 over pi squared times the series, cross
multiply by pi squared, and you get that the sum of the infinite series, 1 plus a fourth
plus a ninth plus a sixteenth, is sure enough, pi squared over 6.
And with that argument, Euler solved the Basel problem.
Pretty good.
When he published this, he had solved this great unsolved challenge he became famous
around the world.
Note, the answer, pi squared over 6 is less than 2, as Bernoulli had said.
Bernoulli was right when he approximated it or he bounded it.
And it's actually pretty close to 1.644934, as Euler had also determined.
But this is better than either of those, because this gets it exactly.
So Euler did it.
I want to end this with two quotations that I think are germane.
One is from Ivor Gratton Guinness, a 20th century math historian, who said, Euler was
the high priest of some worship, a play on sun worship, of course, for he was cleverer
than anyone else in inventing unorthodox methods of summation.
Euler could do this sort of thing better than anyone.
The other quotation, I don't have a source for, but I think it's apt.
He said, talent is doing easily what others find difficult.
Genius is doing easily what others find impossible.
By that definition, Euler, solver of the Basel problem, was indeed a genius.
