Well, yeah, just think about it a minute.
Look up above.
I start with a one in each, so those are equal.
If I move to the next one, I have one fourth up above, one over two times two, and one
half down below.
You think about it, you see a fourth is less than a half, so the top is less than the bottom.
Move to the next one, a ninth on top, a sixth down below, a ninth is less than a sixth,
a sixteenth is less than a twelfth.
All the ones above are less than all the ones right below them.
The inequality sign I want to put here is a less than.
That is, the top series, the one I'm after, is less than the one below.
All right, now, the one below, if we multiply this out, is one plus one half plus one sixth
plus one twelfth plus one twentieth, and Bernoulli could handle this.
He would say that we'll leave the one in the front, but then when you get to that one
half, write it as one minus a half.
When you get to the one sixth, write it as a half minus a third.
The twelfth is a third minus a fourth.
The twentieth is a fourth minus a fifth.
We saw Leibniz employed this very same trick in summing a series, the challenge problem
from Huygens.
So, it's a trick that's kind of familiar, and now what happens is, you get cancellations
up and down the line.
The minus a half takes the plus a half beside it.
The minus a third takes the plus a third.
The minus a fourth takes the plus a fourth, and so on.
Everything cancels in the tail of the series.
All that's left is the one in the parenthesis, and there was that one at the front end.
So, if you look at what remains, we get two.
And so, the series in question is less than two, and Bernoulli knew that.
So he stated that whatever the answer to this is, whatever one plus a fourth plus a ninth,
and so on, comes out to be, it's surely less than two.
But that wasn't good enough.
He wanted to know exactly what it is, and he couldn't do it, and he wrote this in his
challenge.
He said, if anyone finds and communicates to us that which thus far has eluded our efforts,
great will be our gratitude.
We'll really be thankful if you can give us the answer.
We really want to know.
Now, this was dangerous for him to write this, of course, because his brother, Johann, might
have done it, and then he could have come running in, you know, waving the solution in
Jakob's face, but I'm sure he would have enjoyed that, but Johann couldn't do it either.
This was hard.
And the problem remains out there for a generation known as the Basel problem because Jakob had
issued it from Basel, Switzerland.
Whoever did this is going to be famous, but nobody could.
Well, in the 1730s, Euler found an accurate numerical approximation for the series.
Using some rather clever techniques, he found that the series in question, the one plus
a fourth plus a ninth, comes out somewhere near 1.644934, and that was pretty accurate.
