In our previous lecture, we met Leonhardt Euler, the master of us all, and surveyed some
of his work, a very small fragment, I might say.
In this lecture, in the next, I want to show you his mathematics.
I want to examine a great theorem from Euler in each of these lectures.
These are spectacular, but they are heavy into the mathematics.
So I reiterate my promise that I will try to take the material, break it down into understandable
steps so that you two can follow along as he does this extraordinary work.
These theorems, this one and the next, I think, are as spectacular as anything in the course.
I think they're a real treat, so let's begin.
The theorem for this lecture is his solution of the Basel problem, which I mentioned previously.
The problem was a challenge from Jacob Bernoulli.
It was issued in 1689.
He published this as a challenge to the mathematical world, and it was to find the exact value
of the infinite series one plus a fourth, plus a ninth, plus a sixteenth, plus a twenty-fifth.
You see what this is?
We're taking the whole numbers, squaring them, and taking their reciprocals, add them up forever.
Another one of these infinite series problems that was of such interest to people back then,
and figure out what is the sum.
Exactly.
Jacob couldn't do it.
We saw in an earlier lecture, if you take the triangular numbers that you can make in
the little triangles, one plus a third, plus a sixth, plus a tenth, Leibniz figured out
that sum was two.
That wasn't too hard.
Here I'm taking the square numbers, slightly different geometrical configuration, and this
one's way harder.
To Jacob's credit, he did get an estimate of the answer.
He could get a bound on the answer.
Let me show you what he did here to get at least an inkling as to what this series would
sum to.
There's the series, one plus a fourth, plus a ninth, plus a sixteenth, the sum of the
reciprocals of the squares.
I'm going to follow Jacob along in bounding this or approximating this.
Here's what you do.
Right this out as one plus one over two times two, instead of one fourth, split it up two
times two.
The ninth becomes one over three times three, the sixteenth, one over four times four, and
so on.
That's the same series.
Now what I'm going to do is compare that to a series where I slightly modify the denominators.
Let me put that series up.
It starts off with a one, but then the next term is one over one times two, instead of
its companion right above one over two times two.
When I move to the next one, instead of one over three times three, I change it to one
over two times three.
Then comes one over three times four, one over four times five.
The question is, how does that new series on the lower line compare to the original series
above?
