I just say stuff.
More stuff comes out as you multiply and you get x to the fourth and x to the sixth.
For this problem, that's irrelevant.
So where are we?
We know that p of x, which is 1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over
5 factorial, and so on, has now been written after I factored it and then multiplied it
back together as 1 plus x squared times the quantity in square brackets, minus 1 over
pi squared, minus 1 over 4 pi squared, minus 1 over pi squared, 9 pi squared, and so on,
plus whatever's out there in the end.
And now you take a deep breath and equate the coefficients of x squared in this expression.
p of x has been expressed as a series in two different ways.
Notice they both start with 1, both to the left and the right of p of x.
Then you come to the x squared.
How many x squareds in the first expression, minus 1 over 3 factorial?
How many x squareds on the right-hand expression, that's what's in the square brackets, minus
1 over pi squared, minus 1 over 4 pi squared, minus 1 over 9 pi squared, those are the coefficients
of x squared for p of x, those must be the same, and so you set them equal.
But now, let's get rid of all the negative signs, so we'll just turn all the negatives
to positive.
Everything's negative there.
So positive, 1 over 3 factorial, 3 factorial, 3 times 2 times 1, that's a sixth.
On the right side, pull out the 1 over pi squared, and you're left with 1 plus a fourth
plus a ninth plus a sixteenth.
Inside the square brackets is the very thing Euler's after.
He has to sum that series.
But he's got it now, because 1 sixth is equal to 1 over pi squared times the series, cross
multiply by pi squared, and you get that the sum of the infinite series, 1 plus a fourth
plus a ninth plus a sixteenth, is sure enough, pi squared over 6.
And with that argument, Euler solved the Basel problem.
Pretty good.
When he published this, he had solved this great unsolved challenge he became famous
around the world.
Note, the answer, pi squared over 6 is less than 2, as Bernoulli had said.
Bernoulli was right when he approximated it or he bounded it.
And it's actually pretty close to 1.644934, as Euler had also determined.
But this is better than either of those, because this gets it exactly.
So Euler did it.
I want to end this with two quotations that I think are germane.
One is from Ivor Gratton Guinness, a 20th century math historian, who said, Euler was
the high priest of some worship, a play on sun worship, of course, for he was cleverer
than anyone else in inventing unorthodox methods of summation.
Euler could do this sort of thing better than anyone.
The other quotation, I don't have a source for, but I think it's apt.
He said, talent is doing easily what others find difficult.
Genius is doing easily what others find impossible.
By that definition, Euler, solver of the Basel problem, was indeed a genius.
