Now, if that had come out to be, I don't know, something like 1.666667, you'd have a clue
as to what the answer should be.
That looks like a decimal for, you know, five-thirds, but 1.644934, it doesn't look like anything
to me, so, you know, it's not clear that this helped, and Euler said it seemed most unlikely
to be able to find anything new about this.
It seemed like that was, as far as we were going to get, ah, finally he said, against
all expectation, I have found an elegant expression for the sum of this series.
So he almost gave up on it, too, but then he saw something.
And that's what I want to show you, what he saw and how he figured out the value of this
series, exactly.
To do this, you need three preliminaries, three lemmas, I guess we could call these,
three things in the background.
And so let's take a look at these one at a time, and then you blend these together with
just the right touch of Eulerian genius, and you can figure out what the series equals.
The first one is this.
For which values of x is the sine of x equal to zero?
That's going to become important in what follows.
So now we've got to kind of delve into the realm of trigonometry, and remember what
the sine is, and see if we can figure out the x's that make the sine of x zero.
Here's a diagram.
Remember we're going to be working in the unit circle.
So the radius is one, from O to A is one.
Let me let x be the size of the angle opening there.
So angle A, O, B has major x.
If you drop B, C perpendicular to O, A, then you're going to form this triangle here, triangle
O, B, C, and in that triangle you can see the sine showing up.
The sine, remember, is that trigonometric ratio opposite side over hypotenuse.
So in the diagram, the sine of x, the sine of the angle x is the opposite side over the
hypotenuse, but the opposite side is B, C, and the hypotenuse is O, B, so it's the ratio
of B, C to O, B, but O, B, the radius of that circle is one.
This is a unit circle, and so the sine is B, C over O, B, that's really just B, C over
one, which is really just B, C. So in the picture, the sine of angle x is B, C, which
if you look at it is that vertical distance from the point C up to the circle, wherever
you end up when you move through the angle.
So there's the picture again.
I say the sine of x we said is B, C, the vertical distance, and so if I ask you when is the
sine of x equaling zero, what I'm really asking is when is B, C equal zero, when is that vertical
distance zero.
Now, if you'll think about this a minute, suppose x is zero degrees.
Suppose x is major zero, you don't start going around yet, so you're just running along
the line O, A. The whole angle just goes from A to O and back to A again, zero opening.
Well then B, C is certainly zero, it's the height up to the circle, but there is no height
if your angle is zero.
As you spin your angle around, the B, C will rise as it reaches the crest and then fall
back again, and it'll be zero again, the B, C will be zero again when you're 180 degrees
away from A. In other words, you're at the other end of that diameter at the left end.
Then you're going to hit another zero value for the sine.
Then the sine, if you continue around in a counterclockwise direction, you'll get these
