And again, this will take a little bit of time to see what's up here.
But suppose, let me start simple here.
Suppose we have a second degree polynomial, quadratic.
And suppose you know a few things about it.
You know that p of 0 is 1.
So if I call my polynomial p of x, then if I put 0 in, I get 1 out.
And suppose you also know that p of x equals 0 has two solutions, x equals a and x equals
b.
So that is the given.
You can factor p of x as follows.
You can write p of x as the product of two things, 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over
b.
Well, why?
Let's see if we can understand this.
First of all, look at that equation.
p of x is 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over b.
If you were to multiply this back together, you'd surely get a quadratic, a second degree.
There'd be an x squared in it, nothing higher.
So for sure, that's a quadratic polynomial there.
What if you put 0 in?
What is p of 0 if I put 0 into this factored formula?
According to the formula, p of x is 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over b.
So p of 0 is 1 minus 0 over a times 1 minus 0 over b, just letting x be 0.
But 1 minus 0 over a is 1, 1 minus 0 over b is 1.
And so p of 0 is 1 times 1, which is 1, which is what it was supposed to be.
p of 0 is supposed to be 1 at checkout.
What if I put x equal a into this?
What if I ask for what's p of a?
So now p of a will be 1 minus a over a times 1 minus a over b.
But if you look at that, a over a is 1, so the p of a is 1 minus 1 times the other term,
1 minus a over b.
So 1 minus 1 is 0, and once you've got a 0, you multiply, you get 0.
So sure enough, with that factored form, p of a is 0.
And you can see that p of b is 0 for the same reason.
So I guess the point is that the factorization I showed you, p of x equals 1 minus x over
a times 1 minus x over b, meets the criteria.
It's a quadratic.
p of 0 is 1, p of a is 0, p of b is 0.
That's how you factor.
Okay, so that wasn't too hard.
So now let's crank it up, especially if you have a third degree polynomial, third degree.
And you know p of 0 is 1, again.
And you know that p of x equals 0 has three solutions now, x equals a, b, and c.
I want to factor p of x now.
It's exactly analogous to the previous case.
The factorization now has three terms, 1 minus x over a times 1 minus x over b, and
then you stick on 1 minus x over c.
And you can check that's a third degree polynomial.
