But then I sort of forgot about it.
When I said sine of x is 0, I threw 0 into the pot.
0 has to be removed.
So now your only solutions are plus or minus pi, plus or minus 2 pi, and so on.
Those are like the a's, the b's, and the c's when I try to factor p of x.
So now, we're getting near the end here, and so take a deep breath.
p of x is an infinite degree polynomial.
p of 0 is 1.
The solutions to p of x equals 0 we know, plus or minus pi, 2 pi, 3 pi.
So here comes the factorization by that third preliminary.
First I'm going to write down what p of x was, just to remember.
It's 1 minus x squared over 3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 5 factorial.
That was p of x.
Now I'm going to factor it.
So the preliminary said you take 1 minus x over a, where a is the first solution to
your equation.
So you take 1 minus x over pi.
We said that the solutions were plus or minus pi, so let's put pi in there.
1 minus x over a is like 1 minus x over pi.
Then the next one will do the minus pi.
So 1 minus x over b is like 1 minus x over negative pi.
Then we go and get 1 minus x over 2 pi times 1 minus x over negative 2 pi.
1 minus x over 3 pi, 1 minus x over negative 3 pi, and you've got this infinite product
of these factors.
Well Euler wants to clean this up a little bit.
The first term's fine, 1 minus x over pi, but the next one is 1 minus x over negative
pi.
We might as well write that as 1 plus x over pi.
So it starts off with 1 minus x over pi.
I'll change the second one to 1 plus x over pi.
Just get rid of the double negative.
The next one is 1 minus x over 2 pi.
That's fine, but the fourth term in the product, 1 minus x over minus 2 pi.
We turn that into 1 plus x over 2 pi, and then there's 1 minus x over 3 pi, 1 plus x
over 3 pi.
On it goes an infinite product.
So p of x is now expressed on the left side of the equal sign as an infinite sum, and
on the right side of the equal sign as an infinite product.
One of Euler's tricks, how he would do his amazing mathematics was he'd try to express
the same thing in two very different ways.
And look here.
We've got p of x expressed as a series and as a product.
Same thing, p of x.
Maybe by linking these together, we can get somewhere, and that's exactly what he does.
Okay, next up, we're going to multiply these binomials together two at a time.
Look at the first two.
1 minus x over pi times 1 plus x over pi, well, those can be multiplied together and
come out to be 1 minus x squared over pi squared, sort of like a minus b times a plus
