and any x to the fifth that emerges here has to be built out of distinct pieces because
look at p of x up at the top.
All the expressions have different powers of x in it.
So how many x to the eighths are there going to be if you multiply this out?
You can look at how many ways to break eight up into distinct pieces, and there'll be six
x to the eighths.
And you can multiply it, and you'll see that's in fact the case.
So what Euler has realized is that p of x, this thing he introduced up above, is one.
It starts with a one.
And then we're going to say we're going to add up, using the sigma notation, the sum
as n goes from one to infinity, of a certain number of x to the n's.
How many x to the n's are you going to get?
Exactly d of n.
Exactly as many ways of decomposing n into distinct pieces.
So when I write this expression, what I'm saying is that p of x is one plus d of one
times x to the first, plus d of two times x squared, plus d of three times x cubed,
the number of ways, the number of x to the n's you're going to get is precisely the number
of ways of splitting n up into distinct pieces, that is evident from this p of x.
All right, that's the first part of the proof.
So we'll store that.
We'll be back to it.
Next up, we have to recall something, something called an infinite geometric series.
So if you've not seen it lately, here's what this is.
It's the sum of one plus a plus a squared plus a cubed forever and ever, another infinite
series.
This is called geometric.
Notice how each term arises from the preceding one by just raising the power one more, a
squared, a cubed, and you add these up.
And the question is what's the sum, what does this add up to?
And it turns out to be one over one minus a, called an infinite geometric series.
Now, I don't have a whole lot of time to prove this, but let me just say here's a suggestion
of why this works.
First I take the one minus a and multiply it by the series.
So you take one minus a times this series one plus a plus a squared plus a cubed and
we multiply it out.
Now, when you hit the one times the one, you get a one, the minus a times the one gives
you a minus a.
Then the one hits the a and the minus a hits the a, so you get a plus a and a minus a squared.
You get a plus a squared and a minus a cubed, a plus a cubed minus a to the fourth.
What happens is these terms come out with a plus minus plus minus plus pattern on them.
And if you look at this, one minus a plus a minus a squared plus a squared minus a cubed
plus a cubed, everything collapses except one.
So if one minus a times the series is one, then the series is one over one minus a, and
that's the result I'm going to need in a minute.
So there it is.
There's the equation.
Similarly, I should just say, we use this formula from left to right.
We got the series and we want to write it as a sum, one over one minus a.
Euler is actually going to use it from right to left, as you'll see in a minute.
So we're going to use it backwards sort of.
Okay, now, for the second main part of his argument, he introduces q of x, he calls it,
which is one over one minus x times one over one minus x cubed times one over one minus
x to the fifth times one over one minus x to the seventh.
