Now why is he doing this?
Just hang on.
You'll see.
But that's what he's going to introduce.
P of x.
He says, let's multiply it out.
Multiply out this infinite product.
Well, all right, let's see.
What's going to happen here?
First of all, what's the constant term going to be here?
Well, the constant will arise if you multiply 1 from the first binomial times the 1 and
the second times the 1 and the third.
1 times 1 times 1 starts off with a 1.
How many x's are you going to get when you multiply this out?
Well, there's that x in the first term, and it can hit all the other ones, so you'll get
an x.
But if you look at the rest of this expression for P of x, you see there's no other source
of an x.
You could never get another x to the first, except that 1.
So this is going to start off 1 plus x.
How about x squared?
Well the x squared in the second binomial could multiply all the other ones and give
you an x squared, but there's no other way to get an x squared.
And so this is going to start off 1 plus x plus x squared.
You just have 1x squared coming out of this.
It's looking kind of boring here, but things get a little juicier.
How about x cubed?
Well, look, the third parenthesis has an x cubed in it, and it can multiply all the
other ones, so there's an x cubed, but there's another way to get an x cubed.
When that x squared in the second binomial multiplies the x and the first one, remember
you add the x bonus, you got x squared times an x is x cubed there.
So there's going to be a second x cubed emerge.
And I'm going to write it this way.
I'm going to show you where they're coming from, so I'm going to say plus peran x cubed
plus x to the 2 plus 1 showing where that other x cubed comes from.
So there's two x cubes, and that shows the source.
How about x to the fourth?
Well that x to the fourth in the fourth parenthesis can multiply all the other ones, or you can
get an x cubed times an x from the first and third parenthesis to give you a second
one.
So I'm going to write it x to the fourth plus x to the 3 plus 1 showing you where that
other x to the fourth came from.
And one more.
Let me do x to the fifth.
This will, I think, establish the pattern.
You can get an x to the fifth when the x to the fifth multiplies all the other ones.
You get another one when the x to the fourth hits the x, and you get yet another one when
the x cubed hits the x squared.
There's three x to the fifths, and look at those exponents, five, four plus one, three
plus two.
We've seen those before.
Those are exactly the decompositions of five into distinct pieces.
Every such decomposition of five into distinct pieces will yield another x to the fifth,
