So 8 has to get split up into odd pieces, 7 and 1, that's 8, 5 and 3, that's 8, they're
all odd.
How about 5 and 1 and 1 and 1?
Sure, that's 8.
Remember, we're allowed to repeat this time, but as long as they're odd.
How about 3 and 3 and 1 and 1?
That's 8.
How about a 3 and 5 ones?
That's 8.
And how about 8 ones?
Sure.
So there's the decompositions of 8 into odd sum-ands, and I count them up, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, O of 8 is 6.
So let's summarize.
Where are we here?
d of 5 was equal to O of 5.
They were both 3.
d of 8 was equal to O of 8.
They were both 6.
Now, if you try this for d of 10 and O of 10, they'll come out the same.
d of 12 and O of 12, they'll come out the same.
Is there something going on here?
Some theorem?
Well, in 1740, Philippe Nadeu called Euler's attention to this whole matter of partitioning
whole numbers.
Nadeu was a French mathematician.
He sent Euler a letter and said, we need to think about this.
This is an interesting problem.
Within days, Euler sent back a proof of the following great theorem that I'm going to
show you in the process apologizing for the delay caused by his bad eyesight, he wrote,
which I have been suffering for some weeks.
So his eyes were giving him trouble, and he apologized that it took him a few days to
solve this great theorem.
For most people, this is a career maker.
Euler did it with painful eyes in a very short period.
So here's the theorem.
That this phenomenon we observed with 5 and 8 is true always.
For all whole numbers, d of n, the number of decompositions of n into distinct pieces,
and O of n, the number of decompositions of n into odd pieces, always are the same.
And Euler's going to prove this for all whole numbers at once.
One proof will get it for all n's in one shot.
One proof fits all here.
All right.
Now, how in the world do you do this?
Well, he breaks it into three pieces.
So all we've got to do is follow through these three pieces, and we'll see the result emerge
as if by magic.
It's really spectacular.
First piece.
He says, I'm going to introduce this thing.
P of x, we'll call it, is 1 plus x times 1 plus x squared times 1 plus x cubed times
1 plus x to the fourth times 1 plus x to the fifth forever, an infinite product of these
binomials.
