Here's how it goes.
d of x, remember, is, we first saw it, 1 plus x times 1 plus x squared times 1 plus x cubed
forever and ever.
I've written it there, but I've left some room between the terms.
Euler draws a line.
It's going to make a fraction out of this.
Up in the numerator, next to the 1 plus x, I'm going to put a 1 minus x.
Well, that's OK as long as I put a 1 minus x below.
So I do.
That keeps everything equal.
Up next to the 1 plus x squared, I'm going to put a 1 minus x squared and match it with
a 1 minus x squared below.
A 1 minus x cube on the top, a 1 minus x cube on the bottom, a 1 minus x 4, 1 minus x 5,
1 minus x 6, all of these show up in the bottom to match their counterparts on the top.
So that's still p of x.
But now look at this.
1 plus x times 1 minus x.
I'm in the numerator.
Look at the first two terms.
1 plus x times 1 minus x, that looks familiar, that's 1 minus x squared.
And so those first two terms in the numerator take out the 1 minus x squared term in the
denominator.
They cancel.
The next two in the numerator, 1 plus x squared times 1 minus x squared, that's 1 minus x
to the fourth, cancel.
1 plus x cubed, 1 minus x cubed is 1 minus x to the sixth.
That takes the 1 minus x to the sixth in the bottom.
You do this all down the line.
What's left in the numerator?
1.
What's left in the denominator?
All the odds.
You see them there?
They didn't cancel.
And so p of x is just 1 over 1 minus x times 1 minus x cubed times 1 minus x to the fifth.
But hey, that's q of x.
p of x and q of x are the same.
Their series expansions are the same.
Every one of their coefficients must be the same.
d of n must equal o of n for all n, q, e, d, wow.
That is really a very nice argument.
Nobody had ever gone down this path, and he now starts the study of the partitioning of
numbers.
I think that's brilliant.
It was Frobenius, 19th century mathematician who said this about Euler.
He said Euler lacked only one thing to make him a perfect genius.
He failed to be incomprehensible.
And so it is.
You can read Euler's mathematics, like this example, like the Basel problem.
Give it a little attention, and you can follow it.
You can understand it.
And you can realize that Euler was one of the greatest of all.
