So I'm going to write it parentheses x cubed plus x to the 1 plus 1 plus 1, to show you
where the two x cubes come from.
For x to the fourths, you're going to get an x to the 3 plus 1, plus x to the 1 plus
1 plus 1, 2 x to the fourths.
x to the fifth, well think about it, there's three sources of an x to the fifth.
The x to the fifth in the third parentheses hits all the other ones, I can get an x cubed
times an x to the 1 plus 1, or I can get from the first parentheses x to the 1 plus 1 plus
1 plus 1 plus 1.
Three x to the fifths, look at those exponents, five, three and one and one, one and one and
one and one, those are exactly the decompositions of five into odd summands.
And you see they got to be odd because look at how q is written up at the top, all the
exponents are odd.
So what Euler sees is that q of x, this strange thing he introduced, is 1 plus the sum as
n goes from 1 to infinity of a certain number of x to the n's, how many x to the n's are
there?
O of n.
Exactly as many x to the n's as there are ways of breaking n up into odd summands.
So how many x to the eighths are there going to be here?
Six, because there's six ways to break eight up into odd pieces.
Okay, so that's the second part.
Now the dramatic conclusion.
Remember what we showed, p of x, which started off as 1 plus x times 1 plus x squared times
1 plus x cubed, Euler realized was 1 plus the sum of the d of n, x to the n's.
So it's 1 plus d of 1, x to the first plus d of 2, x squared, d of 3, x cubed and so
on.
The q of x, which started off as 1 over 1 minus x times 1 over 1 minus x cubed times
1 over 1 minus x to the fifth, he saw it turned out to be 1 plus the sum of O of n,
x to the n.
Now remember, this proof started so long ago, I forget what we're trying to prove.
We're trying to prove that d of n is always equal to O of n.
If you look at this and you see how these spin out, we could prove that if only p of
x and q of x were the same thing.
Now they're not, you can see, but if they were the same, then their series would have
to be the same, their expansions.
And so the number d of n, which is in front of x to the n and the top, would have to match
O of n, which is in front of x to the n below, all the way across the line.
d of 1 would have to be O of 1, d of 2 would have to be O of 2, d of 3 would have to be
O of 3.
You'd be done with your proof if only p of x and q of x were the same, then they'd have
the same series, they'd have the same coefficients, proof over.
If only they were the same.
But look, they're different.
They're different.
Hmm.
Euler says, or are they?
You know what?
They're really the same.
They're the same thing.
If I can show you that, then I know that d of n and O of n are the same for all n and
the proof is over.
So here comes the dramatic conclusion.
Why are these the same?
They don't look the same to me.
