In our previous lecture, we saw Euler solve the Basel problem, a great theorem if ever
there was one.
Now there he was working on infinite series, which is a subject that had been around for
a long time.
He was pushing the frontiers.
In this lecture, I want to show you another of his great theorems on a subject that was
brand new.
He was essentially making up a field of mathematics as he went along.
It's a theorem about the partitioning of numbers.
However, I have a little extra time in this lecture, so I thought I'd start by just surveying
one branch of mathematics we haven't mentioned yet, and that is number theory.
Number was one of the great number theorists of all time, certainly in that same chain
that brought us Euclid, Fermat, you got to include Euler.
He wrote volumes of wonderful mathematics on number theory.
Let me just tell you about one of the contributions he made.
A definition had been kicking around for centuries as follows.
It says whole numbers m and n are amicable, which means friendly, if each is the sum of
the proper whole number divisors of the other.
This needs an example.
Look at the number m equals 220 and n equals 284.
What I'm looking for are the proper divisors of 220.
By that I mean whole numbers that divide evenly into 220, but are not 220.
That's what the proper means, smaller than.
If you look at the divisors of 220, you'll get 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 11, 20, 22, 44, 55, and
110.
You also get 220, which divides into 220, but that's not proper.
If you add those up, you get 284.
Look at the proper divisors of 284, 1, 2, 4, 71, 142, those are the whole numbers that
go into 284 and are less than 284.
Add those up, you get 220.
Each of these numbers is the sum of the proper divisors of the other.
It's a strange reciprocity.
It has no particular use, but it's intriguing.
Mathematicians, number theorists love this.
I have a friend who, when he married the love of his life, gave her a key chain with 284
on it, and he has a key chain with 220 on it to indicate their undying friendship.
It's very sweet.
Now, let me give you the history of amicable numbers.
It's very short.
The Greeks knew that pair I just showed you.
220 and 284, the Greeks had somehow discovered, and they wanted to find more.
They couldn't.
These are hard to come by.
So that was it.
They just knew that one pair.
In the ninth century, the Islamic mathematician, Tabet Ibn Kura, whom I mentioned in an earlier
lecture, found a rule that generated two more pairs.
So now there were three known pairs.
However, apparently, Tabet's rule didn't make it back to Europe after the Renaissance,
where the European mathematicians only knew of that Greek pair, only that first pair.
And so in the year 1636, Pierre de Fermat, our friend, the number theorist, found another
pair, 17,286 and 18,416.
Believe it or not, if you add up all the proper divisors of 17,286, you get 18,416 and vice
versa.
You can check this if you wish, but that's a pair.
Guess what?
That's one of Tabet's numbers.
Fermat was rediscovering something that Tabet had found centuries before.
Now with that discovery, Fermat was looking pretty good, so his rival Descartes had to
find a pair of his own to sort of show his mathematical prowess.
So Descartes goes to work on it, and in 1638, he finds that pair, 9,363,584 and 9,437,056.
I figure if you make it to your 50th wedding anniversary, you give your spouse that number
on the key chain, and it's really amazing.
Guess what?
That's the other number that Tabet had found.
So that Fermat and Descartes were really just retracing the ground.
These are the three easiest pairs of amicable numbers, believe it or not.
These are the ones that come up first, and that's what the world knew in 1638.
Three pairs.
A century later, three pairs.
No one had found any more.
And in 1750, Euler thinks about this.
He writes a paper called De Numeris Amicabilibus on amicable numbers, and in this paper he
finds 58 more pairs.
The supply had gone from 3 to 61.
He multiplied the number of known amicable pairs by 20 in one paper.
This is what Euler would do.
He would blow these problems out of the water.
It's really quite astonishing.
Plus, I love the word amicabilibus.
It's fun to say, and it's part of the title of his paper.
So that's an Euler result in number theory.
Let me mention one other, a little curiosity I would call this.
We're getting to our great theorem in a minute, but this is just prologue.
Someone challenged Euler to find four whole numbers, the sum of any two of which is a
perfect square.
Four whole numbers.
If you add up any two, you get a perfect square.
Now, wait.
We have to qualify this.
I could say, here they are, 8, 8, 8, and 8.
If I add up any two of them, I get 16, which is a perfect square.
That's too easy.
So, okay, we got to say four different whole numbers.
There we go.
That makes it a lot harder.
Four different whole numbers, the sum of any two of which is a perfect square.
Imagine you're trying to create these yourself.
So here's what you might try.
You start with 1.
Okay.
Now, I've got to find something to add to 1 to make a perfect square, so maybe 3.
1 plus 3 is 4.
Perfect square.
Great.
Now, there's something to add to 3 to make a perfect square.
So you try 6.
6 and 3 is 9.
Perfect square.
But you can see what went wrong.
You just messed up the 1.
6 and 1 is 7.
That's not a perfect square.
Now, you could go back and change the 1 to 10.
So the 10 and the 6 is 16, which is a perfect square, but now the 10 and the 3 doesn't work.
So it's like you're juggling balls, and while you're worrying about these two, you drop
the third one.
And that's just three numbers.
Euler had to find four numbers, so the sum of any two is a perfect square.
Well, he thinks about it.
He said, try these four.
How about 18,530, 38,114, 45,986, and 65,570?
And you can check it.
They work.
The sum of any two of those is a perfect square.
But when you see these, you sort of think he must have been a space alien or something.
How does anybody come up with numbers like that?
Well, then you read it, and he tells you how he did it.
And there's, of course, a method, and it's very logical.
And by the time you're done, you say, oh, I could have thought of that.
That wasn't so hard.
But you would never have thought of that.
This was how Euler worked.
OK, so that was just a little background.
Here comes my great theorem for this lecture.
It's on the partitioning of numbers.
And it requires some terminology, notation, and background.
So again, we'll try to go through this very deliberately to see this result.
Let me, first of all, let d of n be the number of ways of writing the whole number n as the
sum of distinct whole numbers, different whole numbers, so that d stands for distinct.
Now, we need an example.
So let's just try one here.
Numbers n is 5.
So what I'm trying to do is break 5 up into the sum of different size pieces.
And then d of 5 will be how many ways to do this?
Well, for 5, it isn't too hard.
Let's see.
We want to break 5 up into distinct pieces.
One of them will allow as 5 itself, so it's the entire 5, not broken at all.
That's going to be 1.
How about 4 and 1?
That makes 5.
And they're different.
Now, are there some more?
Well, you could say 2 and 3, but that's really the same as 3 and 2.
We're not going to count that as a different one.
You could say, well, how about 6 and negative 1?
They're different, and they add up to 5, which is true, but negative 1 isn't allowed.
These have to be whole numbers, positive, so that's no good.
You could say, what, the difference between 2 and 3 is that you're going to add up to
5, which is true, but negative 1 isn't allowed.
What, 3 and a half and 1 and a half, which add up to 5, and they're different, but they're
not whole numbers either, so that's no good.
So if you think about it, these are the only ones, 5, 4 and 1, 3 and 2.
That's the only way to break 5 up into different sized pieces.
So d of 5, remember, is how many ways to do this?
3.
There they are.
Those are 3.
Now, let me let o of n, new symbol, be the number of ways of writing n as the sum of
not necessarily distinct odd numbers.
So now we want to take n and break it up into odd sum-ands, but this time I'm going to allow
them to be repeated, but you see what I'm restricting is they've got to be odd.
Well, let's look at an example.
Let's do 5 again.
So I want to break 5 up into odd pieces.
One of them could be 5 standing alone.
How about 3 and 1 and 1, 3, 4, 5, and they're all odd?
Now, notice I've repeated the 1 here, but for this game, for the o of n, I'm allowed to
repeat as long as they're odd.
So that's a second way to do it.
And how about 1 and 1 and 1 and 1 and 1, 5-1s are all odd.
That's 5.
And then if you think about it, you're not going to find any more.
So that's it.
So we would say o of 5 is how many ways to split 5 up into odd pieces, o of 5 is 3, and
there they are, those 3 decompositions.
Well, before we move on, let me do another example.
Let's try 8.
Let's look at the number n equals 8 and do this again for 8.
So if I'm looking for distinct sum-ands, now you've got to break 8 up into different sized
pieces.
Here we go.
8, stand-alone, great.
How about 7 and 1?
That makes 8, and they're different, sure.
6 and 2, yep, that makes 8, 5 and 3, good, that makes 8, 4 and 4, well, that makes 8,
but they're not different.
So that's out.
So we can't count that one.
But there's a few more out there.
How about 5 and 2 and 1?
That makes 8, and there's 3 sum-ands now, but they're all different, so that's good.
And how about 4 and 3 and 1?
That makes 8, and they're all different.
If you try to find any more, you won't.
That's the whole collection, and how many ways to do that, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 6 ways to
break 8 up into the sum of distinct sum-ands, so d of 8 is 6.
Remember, d of 8 counts how many ways to do the process, 6.
Let's do O of 8.
Let's break 8 into odd sum-ands.
Let's see what happens.
So 8 has to get split up into odd pieces, 7 and 1, that's 8, 5 and 3, that's 8, they're
all odd.
How about 5 and 1 and 1 and 1?
Sure, that's 8.
Remember, we're allowed to repeat this time, but as long as they're odd.
How about 3 and 3 and 1 and 1?
That's 8.
How about a 3 and 5 ones?
That's 8.
And how about 8 ones?
Sure.
So there's the decompositions of 8 into odd sum-ands, and I count them up, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, O of 8 is 6.
So let's summarize.
Where are we here?
d of 5 was equal to O of 5.
They were both 3.
d of 8 was equal to O of 8.
They were both 6.
Now, if you try this for d of 10 and O of 10, they'll come out the same.
d of 12 and O of 12, they'll come out the same.
Is there something going on here?
Some theorem?
Well, in 1740, Philippe Nadeu called Euler's attention to this whole matter of partitioning
whole numbers.
Nadeu was a French mathematician.
He sent Euler a letter and said, we need to think about this.
This is an interesting problem.
Within days, Euler sent back a proof of the following great theorem that I'm going to
show you in the process apologizing for the delay caused by his bad eyesight, he wrote,
which I have been suffering for some weeks.
So his eyes were giving him trouble, and he apologized that it took him a few days to
solve this great theorem.
For most people, this is a career maker.
Euler did it with painful eyes in a very short period.
So here's the theorem.
That this phenomenon we observed with 5 and 8 is true always.
For all whole numbers, d of n, the number of decompositions of n into distinct pieces,
and O of n, the number of decompositions of n into odd pieces, always are the same.
And Euler's going to prove this for all whole numbers at once.
One proof will get it for all n's in one shot.
One proof fits all here.
All right.
Now, how in the world do you do this?
Well, he breaks it into three pieces.
So all we've got to do is follow through these three pieces, and we'll see the result emerge
as if by magic.
It's really spectacular.
First piece.
He says, I'm going to introduce this thing.
P of x, we'll call it, is 1 plus x times 1 plus x squared times 1 plus x cubed times
1 plus x to the fourth times 1 plus x to the fifth forever, an infinite product of these
binomials.
Now why is he doing this?
Just hang on.
You'll see.
But that's what he's going to introduce.
P of x.
He says, let's multiply it out.
Multiply out this infinite product.
Well, all right, let's see.
What's going to happen here?
First of all, what's the constant term going to be here?
Well, the constant will arise if you multiply 1 from the first binomial times the 1 and
the second times the 1 and the third.
1 times 1 times 1 starts off with a 1.
How many x's are you going to get when you multiply this out?
Well, there's that x in the first term, and it can hit all the other ones, so you'll get
an x.
But if you look at the rest of this expression for P of x, you see there's no other source
of an x.
You could never get another x to the first, except that 1.
So this is going to start off 1 plus x.
How about x squared?
Well the x squared in the second binomial could multiply all the other ones and give
you an x squared, but there's no other way to get an x squared.
And so this is going to start off 1 plus x plus x squared.
You just have 1x squared coming out of this.
It's looking kind of boring here, but things get a little juicier.
How about x cubed?
Well, look, the third parenthesis has an x cubed in it, and it can multiply all the
other ones, so there's an x cubed, but there's another way to get an x cubed.
When that x squared in the second binomial multiplies the x and the first one, remember
you add the x bonus, you got x squared times an x is x cubed there.
So there's going to be a second x cubed emerge.
And I'm going to write it this way.
I'm going to show you where they're coming from, so I'm going to say plus peran x cubed
plus x to the 2 plus 1 showing where that other x cubed comes from.
So there's two x cubes, and that shows the source.
How about x to the fourth?
Well that x to the fourth in the fourth parenthesis can multiply all the other ones, or you can
get an x cubed times an x from the first and third parenthesis to give you a second
one.
So I'm going to write it x to the fourth plus x to the 3 plus 1 showing you where that
other x to the fourth came from.
And one more.
Let me do x to the fifth.
This will, I think, establish the pattern.
You can get an x to the fifth when the x to the fifth multiplies all the other ones.
You get another one when the x to the fourth hits the x, and you get yet another one when
the x cubed hits the x squared.
There's three x to the fifths, and look at those exponents, five, four plus one, three
plus two.
We've seen those before.
Those are exactly the decompositions of five into distinct pieces.
Every such decomposition of five into distinct pieces will yield another x to the fifth,
and any x to the fifth that emerges here has to be built out of distinct pieces because
look at p of x up at the top.
All the expressions have different powers of x in it.
So how many x to the eighths are there going to be if you multiply this out?
You can look at how many ways to break eight up into distinct pieces, and there'll be six
x to the eighths.
And you can multiply it, and you'll see that's in fact the case.
So what Euler has realized is that p of x, this thing he introduced up above, is one.
It starts with a one.
And then we're going to say we're going to add up, using the sigma notation, the sum
as n goes from one to infinity, of a certain number of x to the n's.
How many x to the n's are you going to get?
Exactly d of n.
Exactly as many ways of decomposing n into distinct pieces.
So when I write this expression, what I'm saying is that p of x is one plus d of one
times x to the first, plus d of two times x squared, plus d of three times x cubed,
the number of ways, the number of x to the n's you're going to get is precisely the number
of ways of splitting n up into distinct pieces, that is evident from this p of x.
All right, that's the first part of the proof.
So we'll store that.
We'll be back to it.
Next up, we have to recall something, something called an infinite geometric series.
So if you've not seen it lately, here's what this is.
It's the sum of one plus a plus a squared plus a cubed forever and ever, another infinite
series.
This is called geometric.
Notice how each term arises from the preceding one by just raising the power one more, a
squared, a cubed, and you add these up.
And the question is what's the sum, what does this add up to?
And it turns out to be one over one minus a, called an infinite geometric series.
Now, I don't have a whole lot of time to prove this, but let me just say here's a suggestion
of why this works.
First I take the one minus a and multiply it by the series.
So you take one minus a times this series one plus a plus a squared plus a cubed and
we multiply it out.
Now, when you hit the one times the one, you get a one, the minus a times the one gives
you a minus a.
Then the one hits the a and the minus a hits the a, so you get a plus a and a minus a squared.
You get a plus a squared and a minus a cubed, a plus a cubed minus a to the fourth.
What happens is these terms come out with a plus minus plus minus plus pattern on them.
And if you look at this, one minus a plus a minus a squared plus a squared minus a cubed
plus a cubed, everything collapses except one.
So if one minus a times the series is one, then the series is one over one minus a, and
that's the result I'm going to need in a minute.
So there it is.
There's the equation.
Similarly, I should just say, we use this formula from left to right.
We got the series and we want to write it as a sum, one over one minus a.
Euler is actually going to use it from right to left, as you'll see in a minute.
So we're going to use it backwards sort of.
Okay, now, for the second main part of his argument, he introduces q of x, he calls it,
which is one over one minus x times one over one minus x cubed times one over one minus
x to the fifth times one over one minus x to the seventh.
Why is he introducing this?
Hang on, there's a reason.
You look at it, you see the pattern, it's quite clear.
We have one over one minus x to the odd powers.
So what's he want to do with this?
Well, the first thing he says, I don't want all these denominators here.
So look at that first expression, one over one minus x.
Look at the geometric series up above.
I could replace the one over one minus x by a series using the formula up above from
right to left and replacing a and using x in its place.
So one over one minus x is just one plus x plus x squared plus x cubed in infinite series.
So that is that first expression.
The next one is one over one minus x cubed.
Well, look at the geometric series at the top.
Instead of one over one minus a, I'm going to put an x cubed where the a is.
Just use the same formula again.
So now I'm going to have one plus a, which is x cubed, plus a squared, which is x cubed
times x cubed, which is x to the sixth plus x to the ninth.
So when I take that second fraction, one over one minus x cubed, I replace it by this infinite
series, one plus x cubed plus x six plus x ninth.
You do the same thing with one over one minus x to the fifth.
Now the role of a is being played by x to the fifth.
So you get one plus x to the fifth, plus x to the tenth, plus x to the fifteenth.
And so this is another expression for q.
It actually looks worse if you think about it.
Now you have infinitely many infinite series here, and what is Orle going to do with this?
He's got a little adjustment to make.
You see that first expression, one plus x plus x squared plus x cubed?
He's going to write it this way.
One plus x to the first, plus instead of x squared, x to the one plus one, sure, that's
x squared, instead of x cubed, x to the one plus one plus one, and so on.
For the second line, one plus x cubed plus x six plus x nine, how about one plus x cubed
plus x to the three plus three for six, three plus three plus three for nine.
The next one will be one plus x to the fifth, plus x to the five plus five plus x to the
five plus five plus five.
So we're going to break these down, and we're going to get the q of x is equal to the product
of these things, one plus x to the first plus x to the one plus one and so on, times one
plus x cubed, plus x to the 3 plus 3, and so on, plus, or times 1, plus x to the 5th,
plus x to the 5 plus 5, and so on.
All right, so that's q of x.
What do you do with it?
He says multiply it out, infinitely many infinite series.
Okay, let's try it.
The constant term is going to be 1, 1 times 1 times 1, from each of those parentheses,
you're going to get a 1.
How many x's are you going to get here?
If you look at it, there's only one source of an x, that x to the first in the first
parentheses hits all the other ones, no other way to get an x.
x squared, that x to the 1 plus 1 in the first parentheses is an x squared, it can hit all
the other ones, that's the only way to get an x squared.
x cubed, ah, there's two ways to get an x cubed.
The x3 in the second parentheses can hit all the other ones, or you go back to the first
parentheses and there's an x to the 1 plus 1 plus 1, a second x cubed.
So I'm going to write it parentheses x cubed plus x to the 1 plus 1 plus 1, to show you
where the two x cubes come from.
For x to the fourths, you're going to get an x to the 3 plus 1, plus x to the 1 plus
1 plus 1, 2 x to the fourths.
x to the fifth, well think about it, there's three sources of an x to the fifth.
The x to the fifth in the third parentheses hits all the other ones, I can get an x cubed
times an x to the 1 plus 1, or I can get from the first parentheses x to the 1 plus 1 plus
1 plus 1 plus 1.
Three x to the fifths, look at those exponents, five, three and one and one, one and one and
one and one, those are exactly the decompositions of five into odd summands.
And you see they got to be odd because look at how q is written up at the top, all the
exponents are odd.
So what Euler sees is that q of x, this strange thing he introduced, is 1 plus the sum as
n goes from 1 to infinity of a certain number of x to the n's, how many x to the n's are
there?
O of n.
Exactly as many x to the n's as there are ways of breaking n up into odd summands.
So how many x to the eighths are there going to be here?
Six, because there's six ways to break eight up into odd pieces.
Okay, so that's the second part.
Now the dramatic conclusion.
Remember what we showed, p of x, which started off as 1 plus x times 1 plus x squared times
1 plus x cubed, Euler realized was 1 plus the sum of the d of n, x to the n's.
So it's 1 plus d of 1, x to the first plus d of 2, x squared, d of 3, x cubed and so
on.
The q of x, which started off as 1 over 1 minus x times 1 over 1 minus x cubed times
1 over 1 minus x to the fifth, he saw it turned out to be 1 plus the sum of O of n,
x to the n.
Now remember, this proof started so long ago, I forget what we're trying to prove.
We're trying to prove that d of n is always equal to O of n.
If you look at this and you see how these spin out, we could prove that if only p of
x and q of x were the same thing.
Now they're not, you can see, but if they were the same, then their series would have
to be the same, their expansions.
And so the number d of n, which is in front of x to the n and the top, would have to match
O of n, which is in front of x to the n below, all the way across the line.
d of 1 would have to be O of 1, d of 2 would have to be O of 2, d of 3 would have to be
O of 3.
You'd be done with your proof if only p of x and q of x were the same, then they'd have
the same series, they'd have the same coefficients, proof over.
If only they were the same.
But look, they're different.
They're different.
Hmm.
Euler says, or are they?
You know what?
They're really the same.
They're the same thing.
If I can show you that, then I know that d of n and O of n are the same for all n and
the proof is over.
So here comes the dramatic conclusion.
Why are these the same?
They don't look the same to me.
Here's how it goes.
d of x, remember, is, we first saw it, 1 plus x times 1 plus x squared times 1 plus x cubed
forever and ever.
I've written it there, but I've left some room between the terms.
Euler draws a line.
It's going to make a fraction out of this.
Up in the numerator, next to the 1 plus x, I'm going to put a 1 minus x.
Well, that's OK as long as I put a 1 minus x below.
So I do.
That keeps everything equal.
Up next to the 1 plus x squared, I'm going to put a 1 minus x squared and match it with
a 1 minus x squared below.
A 1 minus x cube on the top, a 1 minus x cube on the bottom, a 1 minus x 4, 1 minus x 5,
1 minus x 6, all of these show up in the bottom to match their counterparts on the top.
So that's still p of x.
But now look at this.
1 plus x times 1 minus x.
I'm in the numerator.
Look at the first two terms.
1 plus x times 1 minus x, that looks familiar, that's 1 minus x squared.
And so those first two terms in the numerator take out the 1 minus x squared term in the
denominator.
They cancel.
The next two in the numerator, 1 plus x squared times 1 minus x squared, that's 1 minus x
to the fourth, cancel.
1 plus x cubed, 1 minus x cubed is 1 minus x to the sixth.
That takes the 1 minus x to the sixth in the bottom.
You do this all down the line.
What's left in the numerator?
1.
What's left in the denominator?
All the odds.
You see them there?
They didn't cancel.
And so p of x is just 1 over 1 minus x times 1 minus x cubed times 1 minus x to the fifth.
But hey, that's q of x.
p of x and q of x are the same.
Their series expansions are the same.
Every one of their coefficients must be the same.
d of n must equal o of n for all n, q, e, d, wow.
That is really a very nice argument.
Nobody had ever gone down this path, and he now starts the study of the partitioning of
numbers.
I think that's brilliant.
It was Frobenius, 19th century mathematician who said this about Euler.
He said Euler lacked only one thing to make him a perfect genius.
He failed to be incomprehensible.
And so it is.
You can read Euler's mathematics, like this example, like the Basel problem.
Give it a little attention, and you can follow it.
You can understand it.
And you can realize that Euler was one of the greatest of all.
