versa.
You can check this if you wish, but that's a pair.
Guess what?
That's one of Tabet's numbers.
Fermat was rediscovering something that Tabet had found centuries before.
Now with that discovery, Fermat was looking pretty good, so his rival Descartes had to
find a pair of his own to sort of show his mathematical prowess.
So Descartes goes to work on it, and in 1638, he finds that pair, 9,363,584 and 9,437,056.
I figure if you make it to your 50th wedding anniversary, you give your spouse that number
on the key chain, and it's really amazing.
Guess what?
That's the other number that Tabet had found.
So that Fermat and Descartes were really just retracing the ground.
These are the three easiest pairs of amicable numbers, believe it or not.
These are the ones that come up first, and that's what the world knew in 1638.
Three pairs.
A century later, three pairs.
No one had found any more.
And in 1750, Euler thinks about this.
He writes a paper called De Numeris Amicabilibus on amicable numbers, and in this paper he
finds 58 more pairs.
The supply had gone from 3 to 61.
He multiplied the number of known amicable pairs by 20 in one paper.
This is what Euler would do.
He would blow these problems out of the water.
It's really quite astonishing.
Plus, I love the word amicabilibus.
It's fun to say, and it's part of the title of his paper.
So that's an Euler result in number theory.
Let me mention one other, a little curiosity I would call this.
We're getting to our great theorem in a minute, but this is just prologue.
Someone challenged Euler to find four whole numbers, the sum of any two of which is a
perfect square.
Four whole numbers.
If you add up any two, you get a perfect square.
Now, wait.
We have to qualify this.
I could say, here they are, 8, 8, 8, and 8.
If I add up any two of them, I get 16, which is a perfect square.
That's too easy.
So, okay, we got to say four different whole numbers.
There we go.
That makes it a lot harder.
Four different whole numbers, the sum of any two of which is a perfect square.
Imagine you're trying to create these yourself.
So here's what you might try.
You start with 1.
Okay.
Now, I've got to find something to add to 1 to make a perfect square, so maybe 3.
1 plus 3 is 4.
Perfect square.
Great.
Now, there's something to add to 3 to make a perfect square.
