Why is he introducing this?
Hang on, there's a reason.
You look at it, you see the pattern, it's quite clear.
We have one over one minus x to the odd powers.
So what's he want to do with this?
Well, the first thing he says, I don't want all these denominators here.
So look at that first expression, one over one minus x.
Look at the geometric series up above.
I could replace the one over one minus x by a series using the formula up above from
right to left and replacing a and using x in its place.
So one over one minus x is just one plus x plus x squared plus x cubed in infinite series.
So that is that first expression.
The next one is one over one minus x cubed.
Well, look at the geometric series at the top.
Instead of one over one minus a, I'm going to put an x cubed where the a is.
Just use the same formula again.
So now I'm going to have one plus a, which is x cubed, plus a squared, which is x cubed
times x cubed, which is x to the sixth plus x to the ninth.
So when I take that second fraction, one over one minus x cubed, I replace it by this infinite
series, one plus x cubed plus x six plus x ninth.
You do the same thing with one over one minus x to the fifth.
Now the role of a is being played by x to the fifth.
So you get one plus x to the fifth, plus x to the tenth, plus x to the fifteenth.
And so this is another expression for q.
It actually looks worse if you think about it.
Now you have infinitely many infinite series here, and what is Orle going to do with this?
He's got a little adjustment to make.
You see that first expression, one plus x plus x squared plus x cubed?
He's going to write it this way.
One plus x to the first, plus instead of x squared, x to the one plus one, sure, that's
x squared, instead of x cubed, x to the one plus one plus one, and so on.
For the second line, one plus x cubed plus x six plus x nine, how about one plus x cubed
plus x to the three plus three for six, three plus three plus three for nine.
The next one will be one plus x to the fifth, plus x to the five plus five plus x to the
five plus five plus five.
So we're going to break these down, and we're going to get the q of x is equal to the product
of these things, one plus x to the first plus x to the one plus one and so on, times one
plus x cubed, plus x to the 3 plus 3, and so on, plus, or times 1, plus x to the 5th,
plus x to the 5 plus 5, and so on.
All right, so that's q of x.
What do you do with it?
He says multiply it out, infinitely many infinite series.
Okay, let's try it.
The constant term is going to be 1, 1 times 1 times 1, from each of those parentheses,
you're going to get a 1.
How many x's are you going to get here?
If you look at it, there's only one source of an x, that x to the first in the first
parentheses hits all the other ones, no other way to get an x.
x squared, that x to the 1 plus 1 in the first parentheses is an x squared, it can hit all
the other ones, that's the only way to get an x squared.
x cubed, ah, there's two ways to get an x cubed.
The x3 in the second parentheses can hit all the other ones, or you go back to the first
parentheses and there's an x to the 1 plus 1 plus 1, a second x cubed.
