So you try 6.
6 and 3 is 9.
Perfect square.
But you can see what went wrong.
You just messed up the 1.
6 and 1 is 7.
That's not a perfect square.
Now, you could go back and change the 1 to 10.
So the 10 and the 6 is 16, which is a perfect square, but now the 10 and the 3 doesn't work.
So it's like you're juggling balls, and while you're worrying about these two, you drop
the third one.
And that's just three numbers.
Euler had to find four numbers, so the sum of any two is a perfect square.
Well, he thinks about it.
He said, try these four.
How about 18,530, 38,114, 45,986, and 65,570?
And you can check it.
They work.
The sum of any two of those is a perfect square.
But when you see these, you sort of think he must have been a space alien or something.
How does anybody come up with numbers like that?
Well, then you read it, and he tells you how he did it.
And there's, of course, a method, and it's very logical.
And by the time you're done, you say, oh, I could have thought of that.
That wasn't so hard.
But you would never have thought of that.
This was how Euler worked.
OK, so that was just a little background.
Here comes my great theorem for this lecture.
It's on the partitioning of numbers.
And it requires some terminology, notation, and background.
So again, we'll try to go through this very deliberately to see this result.
Let me, first of all, let d of n be the number of ways of writing the whole number n as the
sum of distinct whole numbers, different whole numbers, so that d stands for distinct.
Now, we need an example.
So let's just try one here.
Numbers n is 5.
So what I'm trying to do is break 5 up into the sum of different size pieces.
And then d of 5 will be how many ways to do this?
Well, for 5, it isn't too hard.
Let's see.
We want to break 5 up into distinct pieces.
One of them will allow as 5 itself, so it's the entire 5, not broken at all.
That's going to be 1.
How about 4 and 1?
That makes 5.
And they're different.
Now, are there some more?
Well, you could say 2 and 3, but that's really the same as 3 and 2.
We're not going to count that as a different one.
You could say, well, how about 6 and negative 1?
They're different, and they add up to 5, which is true, but negative 1 isn't allowed.
These have to be whole numbers, positive, so that's no good.
