In this lecture, we'll meet Carl Friedrich Gauss.
Gauss was six years old when Euler died, and it's easy to see this as a passing of the
baton from one towering figure to another.
In my book, the mathematical Mount Rushmore contains Archimedes from classical times,
the Great Newton, Euler, and Gauss.
So our object in this lecture is to meet Mr. Gauss.
This is a picture of him as a young man, very good looking.
Notice he's not wearing the head warmer because he didn't do the wig.
This is a more modern era.
He looks almost like he's wearing clothes we would recognize, maybe from a Jane Austen
novel.
He lived about that time.
He was born to a poor family in Brunswick, Germany, did not have the advantages of wealth.
It was said that little Gauss could calculate before he could speak.
He was obviously gifted in terms of his work in mathematics, and there's a story that
at the age of three, he was correcting errors in his father's account books.
This might be legendary, but you can sort of imagine this little boy barely able to see
over the table, but pointing out that this column of numbers had been added up incorrectly.
Famous story from Gauss' childhood involves something that happened at his school where
he was asked to sum the first hundred whole numbers.
The story, again, its authenticity might be suspect, but the teacher sort of wanted a
break, and so asked the students to add up the first hundred numbers, figuring that would
occupy them for some time.
Well, in an instant, little Gauss comes up, puts his slate on the desk, and it's got the
correct answer, and so how in the world did he do this?
Did he add up a hundred numbers in a split second?
No, no, he saw something.
So the way the story goes is this.
You imagine the sum of the first hundred numbers, one plus two plus three, all the way up to
a hundred, and call that S for sum.
Now, little Gauss imagined writing that same sum right below, also S, but this time, write
the numbers in descending order, same sum, but now I'm going to take a hundred plus
ninety-nine plus ninety-eight down to three, two, one.
So you haven't changed the value at all, just the order in which you've written them.
Now, draw a line and add in columns.
Well, on the left side of the equal sign, you get two S plus S is two S, obviously, that's
easy enough.
