It's a very hot item right now in mathematics that tends to be traced back to Gauss.
Along with Wilhelm Weber, he worked on the theory of magnetism.
Gauss and Weber jointly did experiments, studied magnetism.
They kind of invented the telegraph, although his name isn't attached to that.
But we did have a, or do have a unit of magnetic flux called the Gauss, and people honor him
with that unit.
He also looked at something called the Gaussian distribution in probability.
We call it the normal distribution, the bell curve.
Now, that's pretty important.
It permeates all of statistical analysis.
Gauss was one of the first to look at this carefully to understand that this shows that
the distribution of error, random error, follows this bell curve, this Gaussian.
When the Germans still issued marks rather than the Euro, this was their 10 mark note.
And here's Gauss on the bill, you can see him.
And if you look just to the left of his cheek and a little above that 10, you see a bell curve,
the Gaussian distribution.
In Europe, it's more likely to be called the Gaussian.
Here in the U.S., I think it's more likely to be called the normal.
But it's the same distribution, and it's just as important, no matter where you are.
Gauss also worked in non-Euclidean geometry.
Now, I'm going to talk more about this in the next lecture, but let me just say what was going on was,
he was going to replace Euclid's theory of parallels with one in which triangles have
fewer than 180 degrees in their angle sum.
You know, with Euclid's geometry, if you take his fifth postulate, you prove that a triangle has 180 degrees.
He said two right angles in its angle sum.
But Gauss fiddled with that postulate and came out with triangles that have less than 180 degrees
and studied this, what we now call non-Euclidean geometry.
He said it's a special geometry, quite different from ours, which is absolutely consistent
in which I have developed quite satisfactorily.
So he believed he had followed the path into non-Euclidean geometry, and he understood it.
As I say, we'll talk more about this in the next lecture.
In the personal side, he married wife Johanna, and he had two children, and then she died tragically.
So he remarried wife Minna, and there were three more Gaussian offspring.
He was known as glacially cold as a personality.
And indeed, in the family, there weren't warm relationships.
It wasn't a warm and fuzzy family that were falling out, the scenarios among the children and the parents.
Gauss was conservative in his mathematics, conservative in his politics.
