He had a motto, palca sed matura, which is Latin for few but ripe.
And the idea was he would publish few results.
He wasn't like Euler that filled 75 volumes and 25,000 pages.
Gauss's collected works are much more modest, so they're few, but boy, are they ripe.
He's not going to publish them until they're just perfect, ready to be plucked,
and he gave the world some very ripe mathematics.
Now, I want to tell you a little bit about the regular Heptadecagon, as it's called,
the regular 17-sided polygon, Heptae 7-deca-10.
And how it was that Gauss pursued this and showed that you could construct such a thing
with a compass and straight edge.
Much to the surprise of everybody, this resulted.
All prior geometers had missed, even though it was lying right under their noses.
A couple of preliminaries you need.
One is from Descartes.
René Descartes had shown in the 17th century that it is possible to construct with a compass and straight edge
any length that is built from the whole numbers and the operations of addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division, and the extraction of square roots.
So if you can build an expression from the whole numbers in these algebraic operations,
up to and including square rooting things, then you can actually construct that length.
Now, these are now called the quadratic SIRDS, S-U-R-D, SIRDS, which means roots.
It's actually a contamination of a word from Al-Quarizmi, our old friend from medieval Islam,
the great Algebraist, the word SIRD comes from him.
A quadratic SIRD, thus, would be something like the square root of 2,
because that's made out of the number 2, square rooted.
So you can construct a length of the square root of 2 with a compass and straight edge.
Or how about 3 plus the square root of 5?
Yeah, because it's 3 and 5, square root, add, all of that's legit.
You can construct that, or even some monster like this,
1 plus 2 times the square root of 3 plus 4 times the square root of 5
over 6 minus the square root of 7 over 8.
That looks pretty nasty, but it's made out of the whole numbers,
added, subtracted, multiplied, divided, and square rooted.
Maybe square roots within square roots, but that's okay.
That could be constructed with a compass and straight edge.
Any quadratic SIRD could be so constructed that from Descartes.
Second preliminary Gauss needed was this fact.
You can construct a regular heptadecagon, a regular 17-gon,
