So what he's saying there is that people know that you can take out a compass and straight
edge and do an equilateral triangle, a regular three-gone, of course that was the first thing
Euclid did in book one.
You can do a square, a regular four-gone, a regular pentagon, a regular fifteenth-gone.
We've seen all this, and Gauss acknowledges one was already that far in the time of Euclid.
So that was known.
So much the more, me thinks, he writes, so much the more, me thinks, does my discovery
deserve attention that besides those regular polygons, a number of others, for instance
the 17-gone allow of a geometrical construction.
What he's announcing here is that you can take out your compass and straight edge and
construct a regular 17-sided polygon which no one had ever even imagined was possible.
His teacher appended a little note to this announcement and said, it is worth mentioning
that Mr. Gauss is now in his eighteenth year and has devoted himself here in Brunswick
with equal success to philosophy and classical literature as well as higher mathematics.
So this is an endorsement from the teacher.
Gauss later attributed his mathematical career to this discovery of the regular 17-gone.
That convinced him that maybe he had a future in mathematics, otherwise he might have become
a philosopher or a classicist.
In 1799 he obtained his doctorate from the University of Helmstadt.
His doctoral thesis, his dissertation, was the first proof of the fundamental theorem
of algebra.
Now what's that?
It's this statement that any real polynomial can be factored into the product of real linear
and or real quadratic factors.
You give me a real polynomial, maybe of degree 80 or 800.
You can shatter it down into the product of first and second degree pieces.
It's called the fundamental theorem of algebra.
For example, if I looked at x to the fourth minus one, that's a fourth degree polynomial,
you can obviously break that into x squared plus one times x squared minus one and further
break the x squared minus one into an x plus one times an x minus one.
The fourth degree is written as the product of a quadratic, the x squared plus one, and
the two linear pieces.
That's the phenomenon that he's getting at in his dissertation, but he proves this is
true of any real polynomial.
It's an existence proof.
He shows that there exists such a factorization.
It doesn't demonstrate how to find it explicitly.
