if the cosine of theta is the cosine of 2 pi over 17, since we're in the first quadrant,
you can conclude that theta is 2 pi over 17. So that angle there, angle AOB, which I had called
theta, I'm going to remove the theta and replace it with 2 pi over 17, that's what that must be.
But that means that the arc, thus created, the arc from B to C is exactly 1 17th of the way around.
Notice I haven't drawn this to scale, that picture doesn't look like 1 17th, but I wanted it to be
big enough to see what was going on. In any event, the arc BC is 1 17th of the way around,
so if you draw the line along BC, the chord, from B to C, that is the side of the regular 17
gun, get out your compass, copy it 17 times, bingo, you got it. So that's the second fact,
if you can construct the cosine of 2 pi over 17, you can do a regular 17 gun.
And now the third and really most amazing part of Gauss' reasoning is this. He looked at what's
called the 16th degree cyclotomic polynomial, x to the 16th plus x to the 15th plus x to the 14th,
all the way down to x squared plus x plus 1. He figured out the roots of this, and using that,
and some really amazing and ingenious mathematics, he concluded that the cosine of 2 pi over 17
could be written as minus 1 16th plus 1 16th the square root of 17 plus 1 16th the square root
of 34 minus 2 times the square root of 17, but there's more. There's another gigantic square root
with 1 8th in front of it, and I'm not even going to read this last part, but notice there's square
roots within square roots within square roots. This is exactly what the cosine of 2 pi over 17 is.
Nobody, nobody had ever seen anything like this, but Gauss proved it by studying that 16th degree
polynomial up there. This is the hard part of the proof. This would take many, many, many lectures
to go through, so I'm just going to tell you he did this, but here's the critical issue. Look at that
monstrosity there. It is a quadratic surd. It's nothing but the whole numbers added, subtracted,
multiplied, divided, and square rooted, so that's a surd. Although some people when they look at it
say that's absurd, that's really ridiculous, but this is a surd. And now here comes the argument
that Gauss cobbles together. He said, look, I just showed you that the cosine of 2 pi over 17 is a
quadratic surd because I figured out what it is, and it had nothing but square roots and numbers in
it. So the cosine of 2 pi over 17 is a quadratic surd, but that means it's constructible from what
Descartes had said. You can construct quadratic surds. So with a compass and straight edge,
I can actually make a length cosine 2 pi over 17, but then Gauss had shown that if you could do the
cosine of 2 pi over 17, you could do the regular 17 gone in the fashion I showed you. What's the
conclusion? A regular 17 sided polygon is constructible with compass and straight edge. It's
astonishing, and it was from an 18-year-old kid. Well, actually Gauss proved more than this,
more than just the 17 gone. He proved this amazing fact that if the number p equals 2 to the power
2 to the power n, so we have a stack of exponents here, 2 to the 2 to the n plus 1, if that number
is prime, 2 to the 2 to the n plus 1, then you can construct a regular p gone with a compass and
straight edge. So this was his generic theorem. Now, let me just look at a few values for n here
and see what's up. If n is 0, then the number is 2 to the 2 to the 0 plus 1, and what you do is you
go up to that exponent, you look at the 2 to the 0 up there, which is 1, and so I have 2 to the first
