if you can construct the cosine of 2 pi over 17.
So he's sort of replacing the challenge.
Instead of having to construct the 17-gon, he said,
look, if you just can construct the cosine of 2 pi over 17, that'll be enough.
And I'll show you then how to go from there to the 17-gon.
Now, this takes a little bit of background.
First of all, once this 2 pi over 17 doing here,
remember, in radians, 2 pi is one loop around the circle.
So an angle with measure 2 pi over 17 is exactly 1 17th of the way around.
So somehow, if I can construct the cosine of 2 pi over 17,
and we'll see what that is in just a minute,
but if I can do that, I'm sort of onto the problem of going exactly 1 17th of the way around,
but exactly 1 17th of the way around is what you need to do a regular 17-gon.
So somehow, there's this connection, and here's how it goes.
Let's suppose I have constructed the cosine of 2 pi over 17.
So somehow, I got out my compass and straight edge, I did all my work,
and I did it, and there it is.
It's red.
I've constructed that length.
Now, how do I go from that and make a regular 17-gon?
Here's what Gauss says you do.
You get a point O to be the center of a circle, draw a circle of radius 1,
so there's an arc, I just have the first quadrant there,
and take your little red line, your cosine of 2 pi over 17,
which you have constructed, and copy it along the horizontal axis from O to A.
So that length from O to A is cosine 2 pi over 17, the length you have constructed.
From A, you put a perpendicular upward till it hits the circle at B,
and you draw OB, the radius, which of course is also 1,
because this is the unit circle, and this forms a triangle here, a right triangle, OAB.
Let me call the angle down there, angle AOB theta, we'll think of that in radians,
and now we want to look at triangle AOB and get this cosine into the picture.
Now, we've talked about sines in here, I don't think we've previously mentioned cosines,
so let's just remember that the cosine of the angle theta is the adjacent side over the hypotenuse.
Remember the sine is the opposite over the hypotenuse, cosine's adjacent over hypotenuse.
So in triangle AOB, the adjacent side is OA, the hypotenuse is OB, and so my ratio of OA to OB,
remember OA was the cosine of 2 pi over 17, OB was the radius of 1, so the cosine of theta
is just the cosine of 2 pi over 17. Well, that means if you look at the drawing there,
