If I gave you an 80th degree polynomial, it wouldn't show you what the factors were, but
it shows they exist.
This was a giant advance.
Euler in the previous century had given a clever but ultimately unsuccessful proof of
the fundamental theorem of algebra.
In 1749, he had advanced it, he thought it was true, he gave a proof, and it wasn't a
valid proof, so Euler had sort of flubbed it.
Gauss, in his dissertation, mentioned Euler's proof and criticized Euler, saying that Euler's
argument was shadowy.
Gauss then proceeded to prove the result.
He was willing to take on even Euler in his dissertation.
The fundamental theorem of algebra, as the name suggests, is really important.
How many people prove a fundamental theorem in their dissertation?
Not many.
In fact, it's been said that Gauss's was probably the greatest doctoral dissertation in the
history of mathematics.
It proved the fundamental theorem of algebra.
In 1801, he published his Disquisitioni's Arithmetichai.
This is a deep and difficult book on number theory, and here we are again with that old
subject, number theory, Euclid, Fermat, Euler, and now Gauss puts his name in the chain of
great number theorists, the Disquisitioni's Arithmetichai, but it's very hard going, it's
very difficult reading.
Someone has said that the book is no easier to understand in its English translation than
it was in its Latin.
It doesn't matter if you translate it, it's still going to be hard to get through.
This was sort of typical of Gauss's writing.
He was terse, he left out a lot.
This contrast with Euler, Euler's writing was very discursive, very expository.
He would tell you what he's thinking.
He said, I would try this, and that didn't work very well, now I'll try that.
As you read it, you're following his thought processes right along.
It's very user-friendly, shall we say.
Not Gauss, Gauss would remove the extraneous details.
He wasn't going to tell you what he was thinking, he'll just show you the steps, and sometimes
only every other step, and you kind of had to fill in the gaps yourself.
Reading a Gaussian work is a lot harder than reading an Eulerian one.
Gauss has been compared to the fox that walks through the sand dragging its tail behind
