Look on the right side.
That first column, you have a one plus a hundred, that's a hundred and one.
Next to it is two plus ninety-nine, well, that's a hundred and one.
Three plus ninety-eight, again, a hundred and one.
Each time we raise the number above, we lower the number below, same sum, a hundred and
one.
It continues all the way across, ninety-eight plus three, a hundred and one, ninety-nine
plus two, a hundred and one, a hundred plus one, a hundred and one.
So two S is the sum of all these hundred and ones.
How many are there?
Well, there's exactly as many as there are columns, and there's a hundred columns.
So there's a hundred, hundred and ones, which even I can do in my head is ten thousand
one hundred.
If two S is ten thousand one hundred, S is half that, five thousand fifty.
In other words, the sum of the first hundred numbers is five thousand fifty, and in a shorter
time period than it took me to explain it, little Gauss had seen it, written it on his
slate and handed it in.
So obviously, this is not an ordinary student here.
By the age of fifteen, Gauss's academic training was being funded by the Duke of Brunswick.
His talents were so evident that the Duke said, we have to support this young man through
his training, even though he is not a person of means, we'll find the money.
And Gauss certainly benefited from the training he got.
He read the works of Newton, of Euler, and others, and became inspired by the great predecessors
who had blazed the path for him.
He said, I became animated with fresh ardor, and by treading in their footsteps, I felt
fortified in my resolution to push forward the boundaries.
So read the masters, he read the masters, and now he's ready to push further.
As an adolescent, he kept a notebook with his mathematical discoveries and conjectures,
written in a very cursory fashion, but he would just make these little notes of this
or that that he discovered or believed.
This is now a treasure trove of great results as he's anticipating so much mathematics that
would come forth in the nineteenth century.
His first great discovery occurred in 1796, and he announced it this way.
Gauss wrote, it is known to any beginner in geometry that various regular polygons,
for instance the triangle, the square, the pentagon, the fifteenth gone, and those which
arise by the continued doubling of the number of sides of one of them, are geometrically
constructable.
