it, so as to erase its tracks, so you don't know that it even passed by.
There's no record of the fox having gone by.
Gauss kind of removed himself from the story, but on his behalf, people would say, wait a
minute, now the architects of the great cathedrals don't leave the scaffolding out.
You remove the scaffolding, and you see the art, the cathedral behind, Gauss would remove
all the extraneous material and leave just a gem of the theorem.
So as a contrast, the Gaussian and the Eulerian way of writing mathematics.
In 1801, Gauss became famous for finding a missing asteroid, so they lost an asteroid,
and he found it.
Now that requires a little story too here.
What happened was that the asteroid Ceres had been observed by Giuseppe Piazzi in January
of 1801.
Piazzi discovered it, he'd had a few readings of where it was, but then it was lost in the
glare of the sun.
The asteroid was too near the sun, you couldn't observe it anymore.
Now what happens is that you know that it's going to come out on the other side of the
sun eventually, and then you could look for it, but they couldn't find it.
They didn't have enough information of its orbit, and so although they sort of suspect
that it was out there in the sky someplace, they couldn't find Ceres.
So Gauss is given the limited data that Piazzi had acquired, he had a little bit of information
of where this asteroid was, and what he had to do was try to use this to figure out its
orbit and tell the astronomers where to look for this thing.
Well, Gauss used a refined theory of celestial mechanics that he had worked on, and a personal
invention of what we now call the method of least squares, quite important today.
Using this, he made his prediction, and he told the astronomers where to look for Ceres,
and they turned their telescopes to that spot in the sky, and voila, there it was.
So he found the lost asteroid using his wonderful mathematics, his fabulous mind.
In 1807, he became the director of the observatory at Goettingen in Germany, and remained there
for the rest of his career.
So he was an astronomer as well as a mathematician, and he made other contributions to the sciences.
As I mentioned, the theory of least squares has become a very important subject.
It now underpins the whole theory of regression, and regression is something that's used in
business and economics and psychology and all sorts of subjects.
If you dig deeply backward, you'll find the theory of least squares there.
That's one of Gauss' great contributions.
He worked on geodesy, the study of the Earth's surface, did maps, measured the Earth.
He worked in differential geometry, a very abstract theory of surfaces in space.
