she doubtless has the most noble courage, extraordinary talent, and superior genius.
A very nice testimonial to what clearly was the courage of Sophie's your man to persist in the
face of all these obstacles. In 1816, she won the Paris Academy Prize for her work on elasticity,
an area of applied mathematics. So this was right in the spotlight. There she was. She won the prize.
But her best known work today is in number theory, where there is something called a
German prime. We still study a number P is a German prime if two P plus one is prime as well.
And this is an important distinction among the primes that she used as she was looking into
Fermat's last theorem. So if P is five, for instance, that is a German prime because that's
prime and two P plus one is 11, which is also prime. Whereas P equals seven, which is a prime,
is not a German prime because twice seven plus one is 15, which is composite.
So she left her marks in number theory. Gauss wanted to honor her with an honorary doctorate
from Gerdigan, his university, and was in the process of doing so when she died in 1831.
So she didn't get that honor. But she made great contributions and started to open the door.
Other women followed in the 19th century. Two I should mention are Sophia Kovalskaya of Russia,
a very interesting woman. She arranged a marriage to get out of Russia so she could go to Germany
to study mathematics. And she did, she worked with Weierstrass, later becomes the first woman
to receive a professor appointment at a European university. And Grace Chisholm Young English
studied the foundations of calculus and is the first woman to receive a PhD from a German university.
So the 19th century saw the door crack open. Now I would not argue that it is wide open even today.
There are still negative attitudes out there, but it is so much better than it was before these
heroines pushed it open. Well, my next lecture, we're going to talk about that fourth great
trend of the 19th century abstraction as it showed up in the set theory of Georg Cantor.
