Now, as I say, we're not going to do anything more with this definition than look at it. It takes a lot
of getting used to, but people who study mathematical analysis rather quickly do get used to it. And
from this, we can in a perfectly rigorous fashion define all the concepts of calculus. Notice it
has in it five inequalities, if I count right, plus a universal statement for every statement and an
existential statement, their exist statement, and an implication in the bottom line,
it's quite sophisticated, but such is the nature of modern calculus.
All right, so that's my first big theme. The second I said was liberation,
in which mathematics is freed from the bounds of reality. This came forth in the study of
non-Euclidean geometry. Gauss, remember, had looked into this. He had studied a geometry,
which he called non-Euclidean, in which triangles have fewer than 180 degrees. So you have a triangle,
you've got your angles alpha, beta, gamma, add them up, it comes out less than 180 degrees.
Now, you say, well, that's impossible. Triangles have 180 degrees in them. Well, they do in Euclid's
geometry, but if you look back when we were examining Euclid, you see that the theorem that
guaranteed that, as Euclid would have said, the sum of the angles of the triangle is two
right angles, that hinged upon his parallel postulate. The parallel postulate is what Gauss
jettisoned. He said, well, let's try a different postulate in that spot. All the other postulates
were fine, but let's just replace the parallel postulate by an alternative that gives us triangles
with less than 180 degrees in them and see what happens. So he's fiddling around with this and
he said that you create in this fashion a special geometry quite different from ours,
by which he means Euclid's, but which is absolutely consistent. It's a perfectly good logical system.
Well, interestingly, as Gauss was doing this, two other mathematicians were traveling the
same path. It was one of these discoveries that was happening simultaneously in different places,
just as the calculus with Newton and Leibniz. This time, the mathematicians were the Hungarian
Johann Boliai, who cooked up a geometry in which triangles have less than 180 degrees,
and the Russian Nikolai Lobachevsky, who cooked up a geometry in which triangles have
less than 180 degrees. It was an amazing parallel, if I may use the pun there, an amazing parallel
where all three of these mathematicians were at work at the same time. And we now
attribute it to Gauss, Boliai and Lobachevsky jointly. It sounds like a mathematical law firm,
but Gauss, Boliai and Lobachevsky gave us non-Euclidean geometry. It's an amazing realm.
