Second, there was the denial of a formal education. You know, mathematics is pretty
sophisticated. And as you move along, you really need training. You need to go to school. You need
to go to university to see what's happening here. If you're not allowed through the doors, you've got
a great obstacle in your path. And then what about a job? Suppose you managed to overcome the
negative attitude and to learn the math. What do you do with it? Is anyone going to hire a woman
to do mathematics? So these were very serious barriers.
In the 19th century, we start to see the door cracking open. And here's one of the people that
did this. Sophie Germain, French mathematician, roughly lived at the time of Gauss, almost the
same birthday, she broke through. She tells that as a youngster, she'd read that story about Archimedes
death. He's proving his theorem. You know, he was so engrossed in this when the Roman came up. He
told the Roman to go away and he gets killed. She thought, wow, if somebody could be that passionate
about mathematics, this is something I want to learn. So interestingly, that story inspired her.
She was self taught in geometry and higher mathematics. She had to just learn this on
her own, but she had the genius and she had the ability to push this through, to get a hold of
things like Newton, Euler, Gauss, and start moving along in her mathematical training.
Even though much of this had to be done in secret, she tells about her clandestine study
by candlelight. Her parents wouldn't let her do this. So after they went to bed, she'd sneak away
and light a candle and do her mathematics like it was something illegal, but such was the negative
attitude that this would have been reprimanded had she been caught. Again, this is just a horrible
obstacle in your path. She didn't get to go to university. She was not allowed in. Women were
not allowed in the classrooms back then. So sometimes she would eavesdrop at the door and try to hear
what the mathematicians' lectures were about, or she had some sympathetic male colleagues that would
share notes with her. But eventually she's up there right at the frontier doing real significant
mathematics, and she decided she wanted to write to Gauss. So German writes to Gauss, but wasn't
going to sign her name, Sophie German, but rather she signed it Monsieur Le Blanc. So Gauss gets this
letter in 1804, very impressive, from Le Blanc, whoever this is. And the correspondence continues
for three years when Gauss discovers that his correspondent was a female, was a woman.
Sophie's your man. And Gauss writes this. He says, when a woman, because of her sex,
our customs and prejudices, overcomes these fetters and penetrates that which is most hidden,
