of the tangent. So that that much is easy. But then what? What do you do to get the exact slope of
the tangent line? Not just an approximation, but the exact one. And this is where things got a little
messy. Newton, when he cooked up his calculus, his fluctuations, used vanishing quantities
to get at the exact slope of the dotted line. Vanishing quantities. So here's the picture,
and let me quote him. He said, by the ultimate ratio of vanishing quantities, and what he called
the ultimate ratio is what we're looking for, the derivative, is meant the ratio of the quantities
not before they vanish or afterwards, but with which they vanish. Now, what's he talking about?
Well, we have this delta y over delta x. So you have this ratio. And he imagines that these
vanish. They head towards zero. So the delta x is getting smaller. The delta y is getting smaller.
The little blue line there would therefore be getting ever more close in its slope to the dotted line.
You'd be heading towards something that you want. And he says, as these get smaller and smaller,
at the instant they vanish, that ratio is the ultimate ratio. That's the derivative.
Now, I would agree with him that you don't want the ratio before they vanish, which is what he says.
When he says you don't want to take the ratio after they vanish, I don't even know what that means.
After they vanish, the question is, how long after they vanish are you going to come back
and look at these things? They're gone. No, no. He wants the ratio with which they vanish. So you
imagine, here they go, and poof. At that instant they vanish, you try to capture the ratio.
Well, you can see that's not really a satisfactory definition upon which to build your calculus.
That looks a little hazy. And it's not just I thought that. Bishop George Barclay certainly
thought that back in the 18th century. Barclay was a cleric. He was a philosopher. He was a
mathematician. And he was unhappy with Newton's vanishing quantities. He said,
these are neither finite quantities nor quantities infinitely small nor yet nothing.
And famously, he said, may we not call them the ghosts of departed quantities.
So this is a pretty caustic rebuke as these things disappear as the delta y and the delta x go to
zero. At the instant they vanish, you look at their ghosts and take that ratio. So you can see
Barclay saying the foundational issue is not set here. This is trouble. We've got to repair this.
Well, Leibniz, when he invented his calculus, had a slightly different attack on this. If you
look at the picture, he had the little triangle. But now he thought that the horizontal displacement
was dx, he called it, the vertical displacement dy, where these were differentials. These were
