A few lectures ago, I talked about the 17th century, the so-called heroic century in the
history of mathematics, the century that brought us logarithms, analytic geometry, and at the
century's end, the calculus itself. As centuries go, the 17th set a very high bar. But the 19th
century is not far behind. It, too, was a very significant 100-year period in the history
of mathematics, and it is the 19th century I want to talk about in this lecture. Of course,
any century that begins with Carl Friedrich Gauss on the stage is going to be a pretty
important one. It's off to a great start. And Gauss was 23 in 1800, and of course the bulk
of his career was spent in the 19th century. But he wasn't the only actor. He was not the only
contributor. And the achievements of the century go well beyond those of Carl Friedrich Gauss.
What I would suggest is that we can break the centuries' achievements into four themes, if
you will, four trends that seem to be addressed with great success in the 19th century. So,
let me tell you what those four are. First of all, there's what I will call rigorization,
strange word. But what this is about is the process by which the foundations of mathematical
ideas are made more rigorous, more precise, more logically exact than they had been in the past.
And this is particularly critical when it comes to the foundational ideas of the calculus. Newton
and Leibniz had invented the calculus. The Bernoulli's and Euler had refined it. But there
were still problems with the foundations. These were evident, and they needed to be fixed. As we
move to a more rigorous calculus, that was a great achievement of the 19th century. Second,
I would say was the movement toward liberation, by which I mean this, that mathematics no longer
was tied in to physical reality. It was freed from the constraints that were imposed upon it,
say by the physicists. Previously, mathematicians would study mathematics that related directly
to the real world. That seemed to be the mission. But by the end of the 19th century, that no longer
was the case. Mathematicians could study logical structures, logical systems that didn't necessarily
have a connection to reality. They were freed from this, and the event that led to this liberation
was the appearance of non-Euclidean geometry in the 19th century. So I want to talk about that.
Third, there is what I would call diversification. And by this, I do not mean diversification of
topics, but diversification of the cast members, the players, who was allowed to do mathematics.
And in particular, I'm talking about the appearance of women upon the scene. If you think about it,
all the faces we've seen thus far have been male. All the mathematicians we've encountered have been
men. Women have to break through some pretty serious barriers, and that happens in the 19th
century. So we'll meet a few of those heroines who broke through. And finally, there was the
move toward abstraction and generalization. This was a major trend in the 19th century,
best typified by the work of Georg Cantor, his abstract set theory, and I will talk about Cantor
in the next lecture. So for this lecture, let's just focus on those first three,
rigorization, liberation, diversification, with abstraction to come next.
All right, rigorization. What's this about? Well, this was with regard to the underlying ideas of
calculus. And in particular, let's look at the notion of the derivative. This is one of the key
ideas in calculus. This is the slope of the tangent line to a curve at a point. So there's a curve,
and there's a point on it. And so what I want to do is draw the tangent line there. So I have it as
a dotted line. And what is of interest, the derivative is the slope of that line. What it's
showing you is how steeply the curve is rising at that point or falling if it's going downhill.
Now, imagine this. Imagine you're running along the curve. You're moving along that curve. And when
you get to the point that I've shown there, you suddenly just shoot off into the straight direction
in which you're headed at that instant. That would be the direction of the tangent. And so the slope
of the tangent is showing you the direction you're moving along a curved object, along a wavy line,
for instance, at a point. It's a very sophisticated idea and very important. It's called the derivative.
All right, so how do we do this? Well, how do you find it? You see the trouble is if you want
the slope of a line, you need two points on it. The slope is the rise over the run, and I only have
one point where the tangent occurs there. So you've got to use some ingenuity to figure out what
this slope is. What is normally done is the following. They make a little triangle here. You go over
a little distance called delta x and up a little distance called delta y. As the picture shows,
delta x is the horizontal distance, of course, of the little right triangle. Delta y is the
vertical. And I go up to the curve. Then I draw the line that completes the hypotenuse.
And the argument is this, that I can't necessarily find the slope of the tangent line, but I can find
the slope of that little blue line I just drew, which is going to be an approximation. So the slope
of the tangent at the point is approximately the slope of the blue line, which is the rise over the
run, as always, which means the change in y over the change in x, which in my picture is clearly
delta y over delta x. So you think of delta y over delta x as an approximate value for the slope
of the tangent. So that that much is easy. But then what? What do you do to get the exact slope of
the tangent line? Not just an approximation, but the exact one. And this is where things got a little
messy. Newton, when he cooked up his calculus, his fluctuations, used vanishing quantities
to get at the exact slope of the dotted line. Vanishing quantities. So here's the picture,
and let me quote him. He said, by the ultimate ratio of vanishing quantities, and what he called
the ultimate ratio is what we're looking for, the derivative, is meant the ratio of the quantities
not before they vanish or afterwards, but with which they vanish. Now, what's he talking about?
Well, we have this delta y over delta x. So you have this ratio. And he imagines that these
vanish. They head towards zero. So the delta x is getting smaller. The delta y is getting smaller.
The little blue line there would therefore be getting ever more close in its slope to the dotted line.
You'd be heading towards something that you want. And he says, as these get smaller and smaller,
at the instant they vanish, that ratio is the ultimate ratio. That's the derivative.
Now, I would agree with him that you don't want the ratio before they vanish, which is what he says.
When he says you don't want to take the ratio after they vanish, I don't even know what that means.
After they vanish, the question is, how long after they vanish are you going to come back
and look at these things? They're gone. No, no. He wants the ratio with which they vanish. So you
imagine, here they go, and poof. At that instant they vanish, you try to capture the ratio.
Well, you can see that's not really a satisfactory definition upon which to build your calculus.
That looks a little hazy. And it's not just I thought that. Bishop George Barclay certainly
thought that back in the 18th century. Barclay was a cleric. He was a philosopher. He was a
mathematician. And he was unhappy with Newton's vanishing quantities. He said,
these are neither finite quantities nor quantities infinitely small nor yet nothing.
And famously, he said, may we not call them the ghosts of departed quantities.
So this is a pretty caustic rebuke as these things disappear as the delta y and the delta x go to
zero. At the instant they vanish, you look at their ghosts and take that ratio. So you can see
Barclay saying the foundational issue is not set here. This is trouble. We've got to repair this.
Well, Leibniz, when he invented his calculus, had a slightly different attack on this. If you
look at the picture, he had the little triangle. But now he thought that the horizontal displacement
was dx, he called it, the vertical displacement dy, where these were differentials. These were
infinitely small quantities. So they didn't have to vanish. They were already infinitely small.
But what's that mean? Is that mean zero? If something's infinitely small, it's zero?
Well, it didn't seem to be quite that. But if it's not zero, it was, can't you always make
a nonzero quantity even smaller? How can you be infinitely small? Just take half of it,
wouldn't that be smaller still? Well, the logic there, the basic philosophical meaning of infinitely
small isn't very clear either. And Bishop Barclay was on the scene criticizing Leibniz as well.
He said infinitely small quantities present an infinite difficulty to understanding.
So you see, Barclay wasn't buying either of these approaches to try to explain
the foundations of calculus. He said, the further the mind analyzes and pursues these fugitive
ideas, the more it is lost and bewildered. So he's suggesting we need to work on this.
Now, he didn't deny the outcome. You know, the derivative of x squared is 2x. He understood
that. That's true. It was the logic behind it that he found unsatisfactory. And Barclay said,
error may bring forth truth, though it cannot bring forth science. So maybe the results came
out right, but they were based on error, maybe even compensating errors. It was not science,
it needed the attention of the mathematical community to rigorize this great subject.
Well, that process of rigorization to repair the crisis and the foundations of calculus,
that happens in the 19th century when mathematicians try to make calculus every bit as precise and
rigorous as, say, Euclid's geometry was. And so it was a great adventure, and it was not simple,
but it finally came to pass in the 19th century. And the name associated with the rigorization
of the calculus is Augustin Louis Cauchy, a French mathematician who was Gauss's almost
exact contemporary. And had Gauss not lived, Cauchy would have been the prince of mathematicians.
He was an extraordinarily talented person. Here's a portrait of him from his youth,
and I have something new here, a photograph. We actually now can see what these people look
like in a photographic record. This is Cauchy in later years. Now, what Cauchy said is,
we're not going to build the theory of calculus, the derivative, on the basis of vanishing quantities
as Newton had, nor infinitely small quantities as Leibniz had, but Cauchy says the trick is to do
this with limits. And so he built his calculus upon this bedrock of limits. Whenever he looked at
the delta y over delta x, for instance, that ratio of the height and base of the little triangle,
then to get the exact slope of the tangent, he would take the limit as delta x goes to zero
of that delta y over delta x, and that's the derivative for Cauchy. Now, if you've had calculus,
you know this is how it's done today. You do limits to define derivatives, y, Cauchy. He gave us this
great idea. Now, there is a problem here, though. Just to say the word limit, that doesn't really
help. What is a limit? I need to define it. So if this is actually going to work, it's not just
we have a term on the board, but we have to give it meaning. And here was Cauchy's 1821 definition
of limit. He said, when the values successively attributed to a variable approach indefinitely
to a fixed value, in a manner so as to end by differing from it by as little as one wishes,
this last is called the limit of all the others. So there is his definition. So you have a fixed
quantity. Your variable is approaching it so as to end by differing as little as you want
from that limit. So if you want to get within one tenth, you get within one tenth. If you want to
get within one one thousandth, you'll get within one one thousandth. You can get as close as you
want. That becomes his characteristic property of limits. And then using this definition, he
defines derivatives and continuity and integrals and all of calculus comes from this. And he does
it in a very precise and methodical fashion. It's a great, great achievement.
However, it's still not quite the last word. If you look at the definition that Cauchy provided,
it's very wordy. It doesn't look quite as mathematical as almost more literary. We need
to sort of clean this up, get the symbols on the page, get rid of all these excess words. And that
was done by Karl Weierstrass. Weierstrass, a German mathematician active in the latter
part of the 19th century, he and his followers put forth this definition of limit, which is now
the one we use. So here it comes. I'll show this to you. We're not going to work with it at all in
this course, but I just want you to see it to see how this idea finally evolved. So the thing we're
trying to define is this. The limit as x goes to a of a function f of x is l. What does that mean
to a modern mathematician? Here's what it means. Take a deep breath. For every epsilon greater
than zero, there exists a delta greater than zero so that if zero is less than the absolute value of
x minus a, which in turn is less than delta, then the absolute value of f of x minus l is less than
epsilon. Wow. It's a real mouthful there. The idea for every epsilon greater than zero, that's the
as close as one wishes. And what you say is then there is a target value delta on the x-axis.
So if x and a are within delta of each other, really close together, then f of x and l are
within epsilon of each other, you've hit the target, you're as close as one wishes.
Now, as I say, we're not going to do anything more with this definition than look at it. It takes a lot
of getting used to, but people who study mathematical analysis rather quickly do get used to it. And
from this, we can in a perfectly rigorous fashion define all the concepts of calculus. Notice it
has in it five inequalities, if I count right, plus a universal statement for every statement and an
existential statement, their exist statement, and an implication in the bottom line,
it's quite sophisticated, but such is the nature of modern calculus.
All right, so that's my first big theme. The second I said was liberation,
in which mathematics is freed from the bounds of reality. This came forth in the study of
non-Euclidean geometry. Gauss, remember, had looked into this. He had studied a geometry,
which he called non-Euclidean, in which triangles have fewer than 180 degrees. So you have a triangle,
you've got your angles alpha, beta, gamma, add them up, it comes out less than 180 degrees.
Now, you say, well, that's impossible. Triangles have 180 degrees in them. Well, they do in Euclid's
geometry, but if you look back when we were examining Euclid, you see that the theorem that
guaranteed that, as Euclid would have said, the sum of the angles of the triangle is two
right angles, that hinged upon his parallel postulate. The parallel postulate is what Gauss
jettisoned. He said, well, let's try a different postulate in that spot. All the other postulates
were fine, but let's just replace the parallel postulate by an alternative that gives us triangles
with less than 180 degrees in them and see what happens. So he's fiddling around with this and
he said that you create in this fashion a special geometry quite different from ours,
by which he means Euclid's, but which is absolutely consistent. It's a perfectly good logical system.
Well, interestingly, as Gauss was doing this, two other mathematicians were traveling the
same path. It was one of these discoveries that was happening simultaneously in different places,
just as the calculus with Newton and Leibniz. This time, the mathematicians were the Hungarian
Johann Boliai, who cooked up a geometry in which triangles have less than 180 degrees,
and the Russian Nikolai Lobachevsky, who cooked up a geometry in which triangles have
less than 180 degrees. It was an amazing parallel, if I may use the pun there, an amazing parallel
where all three of these mathematicians were at work at the same time. And we now
attribute it to Gauss, Boliai and Lobachevsky jointly. It sounds like a mathematical law firm,
but Gauss, Boliai and Lobachevsky gave us non-Euclidean geometry. It's an amazing realm.
It's got surprising features. Boliai said, out of nothing, I have created a strange new universe.
He's created this new geometry just with the power of his mind.
Now, I want to show you one of the surprising results about this kind of geometry.
It is one of these things that almost takes your breath away. How can this be? And yet,
if you look at the logic, you're bound to reach this conclusion. So, follow me on this.
First of all, in the non-Euclidean realm, a quadrilateral has less than 360 degrees in it,
I will argue. A quadrilateral, a four-sided figure will have less than 360. Well, that's
pretty easy to see. If I take quadrilateral ABCD, I want to show that the four angles add up to
less than 360. Just draw a diagonal across it. Draw AC. And that splits it into two triangles.
Now, triangle ACD has less than 180 in it, because this is non-Euclidean geometry.
Triangle ABC has less than 180 in it. And if you add up the four angles, angle ABC and D,
you see you're essentially adding up the six angles of the triangle. And each of those
triangles has less than 180. So, the four angles of the quadrilateral have less than 180 plus 180,
360. So, that's pretty clear. Quadrilaterals are deficient in their angles just as triangles are.
All right. With that background, I claim this. In a non-Euclidean world, different size triangles
have different angle sums. Now, in Euclid's world, every triangle has the same number
of degrees in it, 180. Not so in non-Euclidean geometry. Different triangles have different
sums. It's not like they all would have 179. They're different angle sums. There is no single
value for the sum of the angles of a triangle. Let me show you why.
Here's a right triangle I will create in non-Euclidean geometry. Let's say that the horizontal and the
vertical sides of this are both the same length. We'll call it x. That makes this an isosceles
triangle. And the theorems of isosceles triangles still hold in non-Euclidean geometry. That had
nothing to do with parallels, if you remember Euclid's development. And so, this triangle has
its base angles congruent. They're both alpha. So, there's this little triangle. Now, extend the
horizontal leg out, another x, and extend the vertical leg upward, another x, and connect the
ends. And now, you've got a great big triangle there. It's a right triangle, two x on one side,
two x on the other. It's isosceles, so its base angles are the same. We'll call this beta and beta.
And then, two other angles I want to fill in here. The angle next to the alpha, if it's 180 degrees
along a straight line, and one piece is alpha, the other is 180 degrees minus alpha, as is the one
down below. So now, I'm getting to something amazing here. Let me color in that quadrilateral,
that's the difference between the big triangle and the little triangle. Let me make it yellow.
Now, remember, from the yellow quadrilateral, we can deduce that the sum of the four angles of the
yellow quadrilateral is less than 360. So, if I have the beta plus the 180 minus alpha plus the
180 minus alpha plus the beta, as you go around, that comes out less than 360 degrees, because all
quadrilaterals have less than 360 degrees in the non-Euclidean world. But, look, there's a 180 on
the left, another 180 on the left, they will cancel the 360 on the right. And when you collect your
terms, you see the two beta minus two alpha, which is what remains on the left, is less than zero.
And in other words, two beta is less than two alpha. So, in the non-Euclidean geometry, this
would follow. But now, look what happens. The sum of the angles of that great big triangle,
the one we built on the outside, is 90 plus two betas. But that's going to be less than 90 plus
two alphas, because two betas less than two alpha. But that's the sum of the angles of the small
triangle, 90 plus two alpha. So, whoa, what we just found is different size triangles have different
angle sums. The angle sum of the big triangle is less than the angle sum of the little one.
There is no single number that measures the angle sum of a triangle. That's strange. That's what
Boy, I called the strange new universe. Now, what mathematicians decided was, if you studied
Euclid's geometry, where triangles all have 180 degrees, great. If you study this non-Euclidean
geometry, where they don't, great. But notice, these both cannot be true of reality.
Maybe neither is, but certainly, they can't both be true. So, when mathematicians are studying
these two different branches, at least one of them is wasting their time, at least in terms of
reality. But mathematicians say, no, this is not a waste of time. Logically, these are sound, these
are consistent, these are legitimate pursuits. And thus, mathematics is freed from the constraints
of physical reality by the kinds of pursuits that Gauss, Boy, I, and Lobachevsky began.
It was a very major break. Okay, so that was pretty important. Now, what about my third trend,
diversification? And there I mean diversification with regard to the cast of characters, the people
who are allowed to play the game of mathematics. In particular, where are the women in this story?
Well, they faced insurmountable obstacles, almost insurmountable, I guess, incredible
obstacles to pursuing mathematics. There was, first of all, a negative attitude. Women just
weren't supposed to do this. This was not feminine. And any woman seen doing mathematics was attacked.
Second, there was the denial of a formal education. You know, mathematics is pretty
sophisticated. And as you move along, you really need training. You need to go to school. You need
to go to university to see what's happening here. If you're not allowed through the doors, you've got
a great obstacle in your path. And then what about a job? Suppose you managed to overcome the
negative attitude and to learn the math. What do you do with it? Is anyone going to hire a woman
to do mathematics? So these were very serious barriers.
In the 19th century, we start to see the door cracking open. And here's one of the people that
did this. Sophie Germain, French mathematician, roughly lived at the time of Gauss, almost the
same birthday, she broke through. She tells that as a youngster, she'd read that story about Archimedes
death. He's proving his theorem. You know, he was so engrossed in this when the Roman came up. He
told the Roman to go away and he gets killed. She thought, wow, if somebody could be that passionate
about mathematics, this is something I want to learn. So interestingly, that story inspired her.
She was self taught in geometry and higher mathematics. She had to just learn this on
her own, but she had the genius and she had the ability to push this through, to get a hold of
things like Newton, Euler, Gauss, and start moving along in her mathematical training.
Even though much of this had to be done in secret, she tells about her clandestine study
by candlelight. Her parents wouldn't let her do this. So after they went to bed, she'd sneak away
and light a candle and do her mathematics like it was something illegal, but such was the negative
attitude that this would have been reprimanded had she been caught. Again, this is just a horrible
obstacle in your path. She didn't get to go to university. She was not allowed in. Women were
not allowed in the classrooms back then. So sometimes she would eavesdrop at the door and try to hear
what the mathematicians' lectures were about, or she had some sympathetic male colleagues that would
share notes with her. But eventually she's up there right at the frontier doing real significant
mathematics, and she decided she wanted to write to Gauss. So German writes to Gauss, but wasn't
going to sign her name, Sophie German, but rather she signed it Monsieur Le Blanc. So Gauss gets this
letter in 1804, very impressive, from Le Blanc, whoever this is. And the correspondence continues
for three years when Gauss discovers that his correspondent was a female, was a woman.
Sophie's your man. And Gauss writes this. He says, when a woman, because of her sex,
our customs and prejudices, overcomes these fetters and penetrates that which is most hidden,
she doubtless has the most noble courage, extraordinary talent, and superior genius.
A very nice testimonial to what clearly was the courage of Sophie's your man to persist in the
face of all these obstacles. In 1816, she won the Paris Academy Prize for her work on elasticity,
an area of applied mathematics. So this was right in the spotlight. There she was. She won the prize.
But her best known work today is in number theory, where there is something called a
German prime. We still study a number P is a German prime if two P plus one is prime as well.
And this is an important distinction among the primes that she used as she was looking into
Fermat's last theorem. So if P is five, for instance, that is a German prime because that's
prime and two P plus one is 11, which is also prime. Whereas P equals seven, which is a prime,
is not a German prime because twice seven plus one is 15, which is composite.
So she left her marks in number theory. Gauss wanted to honor her with an honorary doctorate
from Gerdigan, his university, and was in the process of doing so when she died in 1831.
So she didn't get that honor. But she made great contributions and started to open the door.
Other women followed in the 19th century. Two I should mention are Sophia Kovalskaya of Russia,
a very interesting woman. She arranged a marriage to get out of Russia so she could go to Germany
to study mathematics. And she did, she worked with Weierstrass, later becomes the first woman
to receive a professor appointment at a European university. And Grace Chisholm Young English
studied the foundations of calculus and is the first woman to receive a PhD from a German university.
So the 19th century saw the door crack open. Now I would not argue that it is wide open even today.
There are still negative attitudes out there, but it is so much better than it was before these
heroines pushed it open. Well, my next lecture, we're going to talk about that fourth great
trend of the 19th century abstraction as it showed up in the set theory of Georg Cantor.
