A few lectures ago, I talked about the 17th century, the so-called heroic century in the
history of mathematics, the century that brought us logarithms, analytic geometry, and at the
century's end, the calculus itself. As centuries go, the 17th set a very high bar. But the 19th
century is not far behind. It, too, was a very significant 100-year period in the history
of mathematics, and it is the 19th century I want to talk about in this lecture. Of course,
any century that begins with Carl Friedrich Gauss on the stage is going to be a pretty
important one. It's off to a great start. And Gauss was 23 in 1800, and of course the bulk
of his career was spent in the 19th century. But he wasn't the only actor. He was not the only
contributor. And the achievements of the century go well beyond those of Carl Friedrich Gauss.
What I would suggest is that we can break the centuries' achievements into four themes, if
you will, four trends that seem to be addressed with great success in the 19th century. So,
let me tell you what those four are. First of all, there's what I will call rigorization,
strange word. But what this is about is the process by which the foundations of mathematical
ideas are made more rigorous, more precise, more logically exact than they had been in the past.
And this is particularly critical when it comes to the foundational ideas of the calculus. Newton
and Leibniz had invented the calculus. The Bernoulli's and Euler had refined it. But there
were still problems with the foundations. These were evident, and they needed to be fixed. As we
move to a more rigorous calculus, that was a great achievement of the 19th century. Second,
I would say was the movement toward liberation, by which I mean this, that mathematics no longer
was tied in to physical reality. It was freed from the constraints that were imposed upon it,
say by the physicists. Previously, mathematicians would study mathematics that related directly
to the real world. That seemed to be the mission. But by the end of the 19th century, that no longer
was the case. Mathematicians could study logical structures, logical systems that didn't necessarily
have a connection to reality. They were freed from this, and the event that led to this liberation
was the appearance of non-Euclidean geometry in the 19th century. So I want to talk about that.
Third, there is what I would call diversification. And by this, I do not mean diversification of
topics, but diversification of the cast members, the players, who was allowed to do mathematics.
And in particular, I'm talking about the appearance of women upon the scene. If you think about it,
all the faces we've seen thus far have been male. All the mathematicians we've encountered have been
