down below. So now, I'm getting to something amazing here. Let me color in that quadrilateral,
that's the difference between the big triangle and the little triangle. Let me make it yellow.
Now, remember, from the yellow quadrilateral, we can deduce that the sum of the four angles of the
yellow quadrilateral is less than 360. So, if I have the beta plus the 180 minus alpha plus the
180 minus alpha plus the beta, as you go around, that comes out less than 360 degrees, because all
quadrilaterals have less than 360 degrees in the non-Euclidean world. But, look, there's a 180 on
the left, another 180 on the left, they will cancel the 360 on the right. And when you collect your
terms, you see the two beta minus two alpha, which is what remains on the left, is less than zero.
And in other words, two beta is less than two alpha. So, in the non-Euclidean geometry, this
would follow. But now, look what happens. The sum of the angles of that great big triangle,
the one we built on the outside, is 90 plus two betas. But that's going to be less than 90 plus
two alphas, because two betas less than two alpha. But that's the sum of the angles of the small
triangle, 90 plus two alpha. So, whoa, what we just found is different size triangles have different
angle sums. The angle sum of the big triangle is less than the angle sum of the little one.
There is no single number that measures the angle sum of a triangle. That's strange. That's what
Boy, I called the strange new universe. Now, what mathematicians decided was, if you studied
Euclid's geometry, where triangles all have 180 degrees, great. If you study this non-Euclidean
geometry, where they don't, great. But notice, these both cannot be true of reality.
Maybe neither is, but certainly, they can't both be true. So, when mathematicians are studying
these two different branches, at least one of them is wasting their time, at least in terms of
reality. But mathematicians say, no, this is not a waste of time. Logically, these are sound, these
are consistent, these are legitimate pursuits. And thus, mathematics is freed from the constraints
of physical reality by the kinds of pursuits that Gauss, Boy, I, and Lobachevsky began.
It was a very major break. Okay, so that was pretty important. Now, what about my third trend,
diversification? And there I mean diversification with regard to the cast of characters, the people
who are allowed to play the game of mathematics. In particular, where are the women in this story?
Well, they faced insurmountable obstacles, almost insurmountable, I guess, incredible
obstacles to pursuing mathematics. There was, first of all, a negative attitude. Women just
weren't supposed to do this. This was not feminine. And any woman seen doing mathematics was attacked.
