of that delta y over delta x, and that's the derivative for Cauchy. Now, if you've had calculus,
you know this is how it's done today. You do limits to define derivatives, y, Cauchy. He gave us this
great idea. Now, there is a problem here, though. Just to say the word limit, that doesn't really
help. What is a limit? I need to define it. So if this is actually going to work, it's not just
we have a term on the board, but we have to give it meaning. And here was Cauchy's 1821 definition
of limit. He said, when the values successively attributed to a variable approach indefinitely
to a fixed value, in a manner so as to end by differing from it by as little as one wishes,
this last is called the limit of all the others. So there is his definition. So you have a fixed
quantity. Your variable is approaching it so as to end by differing as little as you want
from that limit. So if you want to get within one tenth, you get within one tenth. If you want to
get within one one thousandth, you'll get within one one thousandth. You can get as close as you
want. That becomes his characteristic property of limits. And then using this definition, he
defines derivatives and continuity and integrals and all of calculus comes from this. And he does
it in a very precise and methodical fashion. It's a great, great achievement.
However, it's still not quite the last word. If you look at the definition that Cauchy provided,
it's very wordy. It doesn't look quite as mathematical as almost more literary. We need
to sort of clean this up, get the symbols on the page, get rid of all these excess words. And that
was done by Karl Weierstrass. Weierstrass, a German mathematician active in the latter
part of the 19th century, he and his followers put forth this definition of limit, which is now
the one we use. So here it comes. I'll show this to you. We're not going to work with it at all in
this course, but I just want you to see it to see how this idea finally evolved. So the thing we're
trying to define is this. The limit as x goes to a of a function f of x is l. What does that mean
to a modern mathematician? Here's what it means. Take a deep breath. For every epsilon greater
than zero, there exists a delta greater than zero so that if zero is less than the absolute value of
x minus a, which in turn is less than delta, then the absolute value of f of x minus l is less than
epsilon. Wow. It's a real mouthful there. The idea for every epsilon greater than zero, that's the
as close as one wishes. And what you say is then there is a target value delta on the x-axis.
So if x and a are within delta of each other, really close together, then f of x and l are
within epsilon of each other, you've hit the target, you're as close as one wishes.
