infinitely small quantities. So they didn't have to vanish. They were already infinitely small.
But what's that mean? Is that mean zero? If something's infinitely small, it's zero?
Well, it didn't seem to be quite that. But if it's not zero, it was, can't you always make
a nonzero quantity even smaller? How can you be infinitely small? Just take half of it,
wouldn't that be smaller still? Well, the logic there, the basic philosophical meaning of infinitely
small isn't very clear either. And Bishop Barclay was on the scene criticizing Leibniz as well.
He said infinitely small quantities present an infinite difficulty to understanding.
So you see, Barclay wasn't buying either of these approaches to try to explain
the foundations of calculus. He said, the further the mind analyzes and pursues these fugitive
ideas, the more it is lost and bewildered. So he's suggesting we need to work on this.
Now, he didn't deny the outcome. You know, the derivative of x squared is 2x. He understood
that. That's true. It was the logic behind it that he found unsatisfactory. And Barclay said,
error may bring forth truth, though it cannot bring forth science. So maybe the results came
out right, but they were based on error, maybe even compensating errors. It was not science,
it needed the attention of the mathematical community to rigorize this great subject.
Well, that process of rigorization to repair the crisis and the foundations of calculus,
that happens in the 19th century when mathematicians try to make calculus every bit as precise and
rigorous as, say, Euclid's geometry was. And so it was a great adventure, and it was not simple,
but it finally came to pass in the 19th century. And the name associated with the rigorization
of the calculus is Augustin Louis Cauchy, a French mathematician who was Gauss's almost
exact contemporary. And had Gauss not lived, Cauchy would have been the prince of mathematicians.
He was an extraordinarily talented person. Here's a portrait of him from his youth,
and I have something new here, a photograph. We actually now can see what these people look
like in a photographic record. This is Cauchy in later years. Now, what Cauchy said is,
we're not going to build the theory of calculus, the derivative, on the basis of vanishing quantities
as Newton had, nor infinitely small quantities as Leibniz had, but Cauchy says the trick is to do
this with limits. And so he built his calculus upon this bedrock of limits. Whenever he looked at
the delta y over delta x, for instance, that ratio of the height and base of the little triangle,
then to get the exact slope of the tangent, he would take the limit as delta x goes to zero
