It's got surprising features. Boliai said, out of nothing, I have created a strange new universe.
He's created this new geometry just with the power of his mind.
Now, I want to show you one of the surprising results about this kind of geometry.
It is one of these things that almost takes your breath away. How can this be? And yet,
if you look at the logic, you're bound to reach this conclusion. So, follow me on this.
First of all, in the non-Euclidean realm, a quadrilateral has less than 360 degrees in it,
I will argue. A quadrilateral, a four-sided figure will have less than 360. Well, that's
pretty easy to see. If I take quadrilateral ABCD, I want to show that the four angles add up to
less than 360. Just draw a diagonal across it. Draw AC. And that splits it into two triangles.
Now, triangle ACD has less than 180 in it, because this is non-Euclidean geometry.
Triangle ABC has less than 180 in it. And if you add up the four angles, angle ABC and D,
you see you're essentially adding up the six angles of the triangle. And each of those
triangles has less than 180. So, the four angles of the quadrilateral have less than 180 plus 180,
360. So, that's pretty clear. Quadrilaterals are deficient in their angles just as triangles are.
All right. With that background, I claim this. In a non-Euclidean world, different size triangles
have different angle sums. Now, in Euclid's world, every triangle has the same number
of degrees in it, 180. Not so in non-Euclidean geometry. Different triangles have different
sums. It's not like they all would have 179. They're different angle sums. There is no single
value for the sum of the angles of a triangle. Let me show you why.
Here's a right triangle I will create in non-Euclidean geometry. Let's say that the horizontal and the
vertical sides of this are both the same length. We'll call it x. That makes this an isosceles
triangle. And the theorems of isosceles triangles still hold in non-Euclidean geometry. That had
nothing to do with parallels, if you remember Euclid's development. And so, this triangle has
its base angles congruent. They're both alpha. So, there's this little triangle. Now, extend the
horizontal leg out, another x, and extend the vertical leg upward, another x, and connect the
ends. And now, you've got a great big triangle there. It's a right triangle, two x on one side,
two x on the other. It's isosceles, so its base angles are the same. We'll call this beta and beta.
And then, two other angles I want to fill in here. The angle next to the alpha, if it's 180 degrees
along a straight line, and one piece is alpha, the other is 180 degrees minus alpha, as is the one
