men. Women have to break through some pretty serious barriers, and that happens in the 19th
century. So we'll meet a few of those heroines who broke through. And finally, there was the
move toward abstraction and generalization. This was a major trend in the 19th century,
best typified by the work of Georg Cantor, his abstract set theory, and I will talk about Cantor
in the next lecture. So for this lecture, let's just focus on those first three,
rigorization, liberation, diversification, with abstraction to come next.
All right, rigorization. What's this about? Well, this was with regard to the underlying ideas of
calculus. And in particular, let's look at the notion of the derivative. This is one of the key
ideas in calculus. This is the slope of the tangent line to a curve at a point. So there's a curve,
and there's a point on it. And so what I want to do is draw the tangent line there. So I have it as
a dotted line. And what is of interest, the derivative is the slope of that line. What it's
showing you is how steeply the curve is rising at that point or falling if it's going downhill.
Now, imagine this. Imagine you're running along the curve. You're moving along that curve. And when
you get to the point that I've shown there, you suddenly just shoot off into the straight direction
in which you're headed at that instant. That would be the direction of the tangent. And so the slope
of the tangent is showing you the direction you're moving along a curved object, along a wavy line,
for instance, at a point. It's a very sophisticated idea and very important. It's called the derivative.
All right, so how do we do this? Well, how do you find it? You see the trouble is if you want
the slope of a line, you need two points on it. The slope is the rise over the run, and I only have
one point where the tangent occurs there. So you've got to use some ingenuity to figure out what
this slope is. What is normally done is the following. They make a little triangle here. You go over
a little distance called delta x and up a little distance called delta y. As the picture shows,
delta x is the horizontal distance, of course, of the little right triangle. Delta y is the
vertical. And I go up to the curve. Then I draw the line that completes the hypotenuse.
And the argument is this, that I can't necessarily find the slope of the tangent line, but I can find
the slope of that little blue line I just drew, which is going to be an approximation. So the slope
of the tangent at the point is approximately the slope of the blue line, which is the rise over the
run, as always, which means the change in y over the change in x, which in my picture is clearly
delta y over delta x. So you think of delta y over delta x as an approximate value for the slope
