We can match A with Jefferson, B with Roosevelt, C with Washington, D with Lincoln.
Every element in my set, A, B, C, D, has a president it's matched with.
Every president has a letter it's matched with.
By my definition, yeah, there are four elements in my set.
I've compared it to the standard.
So Mount Rushmore is my standard.
How about this question?
Are there four Beatles?
You know, the Beatles.
Well, do they have the Beatles?
Does it work?
Sure.
You just need a one-to-one correspondence between Beatles and presidents.
So we match Paul with Teddy, Ringo with Abe, John with Tom, and of course, George with
George.
So there's a one-to-one correspondence.
So yes, there are four Beatles.
Now, Cantor said, let's play the same game, but introduce a number that's infinite.
He says, I'm going to define a set to have aleph not members.
Aleph not.
We'll talk about that symbol in a minute.
But here's the definition.
If it can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers in one, two, three,
four, and so on, then we're going to tell how many members that set has it has aleph
not.
Aleph is the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet.
And the little sub-zero, we would probably say aleph sub-zero, but the British version,
aleph not, is what everybody says.
Cantor chose this symbol because he wanted something different, a Hebrew letter, as opposed
to all the Latin and Greek letters that were kicking around mathematics, because this really
was different.
He had just defined aleph not, which is a transfinite cardinal number, he said.
It's a perfectly legitimate number, but it's beyond the finite ones, it's transfinite.
Pretty exciting stuff here.
So if I ask you how many Beatles are there, you would say four, because you compared them
to Mount Rushmore, my definition of four.
If I say how many even numbers are there, you say there's aleph not, even numbers, because
of that one-to-one correspondence we showed between the evens and n.
And that's aleph not is just as legitimate a number as four.
How many energies are there?
Aleph not, same thing, we showed that correspondence.
So now we have on the table this new kind of number, a transfinite quantity nobody had
ever gone down this road before.
