and ultimately a suicide.
So there are certainly parallels in their lives.
The one great difference is that Van Gogh died not knowing how he would be received,
not knowing how greatly he would be loved by future generations.
Cantor lived long enough to see his work actually prevail, and so he had that satisfaction.
For poor Vincent, he died having sold but one painting and probably figuring his life
had been a failure.
You would like to be able to tell him that now his works hang on museum walls around
the world, reproductions are in homes all over the place, he is this great artist as
we now recognize.
Cantor's great achievement, this radical thing that he did was to tackle the infinite,
to take on the infinite in a way that nobody ever had.
His work rests on two foundational principles.
So let me talk about the two principles that Cantor built upon.
The first was that we can legitimately talk about the completed infinite.
The completed infinite.
Now that, what's that, we need a little background here.
Well no one doubted the legitimacy of the potential infinite.
This was the dichotomy, the potential infinite versus the completed infinite.
So the potential infinite meant that no matter where you were, you could always go further.
If you have an infinite collection, you never get to the end.
So here, think of the natural numbers, N, and I have a little set bracket and then I
have one, two, three.
All right, if you're that far, can you go further, sure, you can go to four.
If you go further, sure, to five, to six, you can keep going.
The potential infinite is there, there's never going to be the last item.
That's clear.
But Cantor said we can legitimately talk about the completed infinite.
We can complete that set, which I will indicate by writing down N, set bracket, one, two,
three, four, five, six, dot, dot, dot, and I'll put the other bracket on the end.
Now that is complete.
Imagine that you have a bag and you're putting in the natural numbers, one, two, three, you're
sticking them in the bag.
Those who advocated the potential infinite would agree that you can always put more numbers
in the bag.
Cantor says we can complete the process.
The bags full in there are all the natural numbers.
It's a complete set.
I can think about it, I can talk about it, I can treat it as a legitimate player.
In taking this position, Cantor was running up against some important opposition.
Gauss, earlier in the century, had rejected this.
I protest above all against the use of an infinite quantity as a completed one, which
is never allowed, said Gauss.
