We're talking about the 19th century, the century of rigorization, liberation, and diversification,
and the century of abstraction in mathematics.
And that is most evident in the work of Georg Cantor and his abstract set theory.
I want to talk about it in this lecture and in the next.
It's quite amazing.
This is Cantor, born in 1845, lived into the 20th century.
He came from a long line of musicians, and people often make something of this, that
he was a little more artistic, that he was a little more of a romantic in his mathematics.
So judge for yourself when you see it.
But he was coming from a musical family.
He studied with Weierstrass in Berlin, was influenced by Weierstrass, and Cantor's early
work in number theory gave little hints of the radical direction that his mathematics
would eventually take.
Cantor suffered from bouts of depression on a regular basis.
He was hospitalized with his depression in 1884, in 1899, in 1902, 4, 7, and 11.
He would go into the hospital, recover, come back, do some work, but then the depression
would strike again back to the institution.
He said that these periods cost him his mental freshness.
Now we now can see this was a bipolar problem.
Or treatments today, in those days they would just institutionalize him for a while.
He had some kind of quirky ideas outside of mathematics.
He believed that Francis Bacon had written the works of Shakespeare, and would speak
and write about this.
He was quite convinced that Bacon was the real author of Shakespeare's plays.
And he asserted that his mathematical discoveries had religious significance, that in fact God
was leading him to certain mathematical achievements.
Now if you're going to put forth some ideas that are truly radical in mathematics, and
you have these other issues, you know, touting the works of Shakespeare as being Bacon's
products, or telling people God was whispering over your shoulder, people can attack you.
It's not just being eccentric, it was a source of ridicule.
And so Cantor had to overcome such personal baggage, as well as the intellectual challenge
is evident in his mathematics.
He ends up dying in a neuropathic hospital in 1918, unfortunately he was institutionalized
at the end, and this was in World War I in Germany, it must have been a horrible, horrible
ending.
I find it impossible not to compare Cantor and Van Gogh.
I think this is a natural comparison, they lived at roughly the same time, they kind
of resembled each other a little bit if you look at the pictures.
They were both extremely innovative, they were doing things in their respective disciplines
be it mathematics or painting that hadn't been done before, pushing in new directions.
They were both undeniably geniuses, but they both faced criticism for their radical work.
And they both suffered their mental demons.
Cantor back and forth to the mental hospital, Van Gogh put in a mental institution as well
and ultimately a suicide.
So there are certainly parallels in their lives.
The one great difference is that Van Gogh died not knowing how he would be received,
not knowing how greatly he would be loved by future generations.
Cantor lived long enough to see his work actually prevail, and so he had that satisfaction.
For poor Vincent, he died having sold but one painting and probably figuring his life
had been a failure.
You would like to be able to tell him that now his works hang on museum walls around
the world, reproductions are in homes all over the place, he is this great artist as
we now recognize.
Cantor's great achievement, this radical thing that he did was to tackle the infinite,
to take on the infinite in a way that nobody ever had.
His work rests on two foundational principles.
So let me talk about the two principles that Cantor built upon.
The first was that we can legitimately talk about the completed infinite.
The completed infinite.
Now that, what's that, we need a little background here.
Well no one doubted the legitimacy of the potential infinite.
This was the dichotomy, the potential infinite versus the completed infinite.
So the potential infinite meant that no matter where you were, you could always go further.
If you have an infinite collection, you never get to the end.
So here, think of the natural numbers, N, and I have a little set bracket and then I
have one, two, three.
All right, if you're that far, can you go further, sure, you can go to four.
If you go further, sure, to five, to six, you can keep going.
The potential infinite is there, there's never going to be the last item.
That's clear.
But Cantor said we can legitimately talk about the completed infinite.
We can complete that set, which I will indicate by writing down N, set bracket, one, two,
three, four, five, six, dot, dot, dot, and I'll put the other bracket on the end.
Now that is complete.
Imagine that you have a bag and you're putting in the natural numbers, one, two, three, you're
sticking them in the bag.
Those who advocated the potential infinite would agree that you can always put more numbers
in the bag.
Cantor says we can complete the process.
The bags full in there are all the natural numbers.
It's a complete set.
I can think about it, I can talk about it, I can treat it as a legitimate player.
In taking this position, Cantor was running up against some important opposition.
Gauss, earlier in the century, had rejected this.
I protest above all against the use of an infinite quantity as a completed one, which
is never allowed, said Gauss.
The infinite is only a manner of speaking.
Gauss believed in the potential infinite.
He most certainly did not believe in the completed one.
And so Cantor, if he's going to come out in favor of the completed infinite, he's taking
on a pretty important opponent here, the great Gauss.
It's hard for any mathematician to take on Gauss.
Cantor does.
Now the completed infinite holds hidden dangers.
I mean it's true.
There are things going on with this concept that are troubling.
And I want to show you my favorite example of this, how if you grant me the completed
infinite, I can appear to run into some awful paradox.
So watch this, see what you think.
This is going to be a multi-step game we're going to play.
So I'll keep track of the steps and I have two players.
So one of them we'll call Jeff.
Now here's what we do.
In the first step, I'm going to give Jeff two tennis balls, blue, two blue tennis balls
with the numbers one and two on them.
And Jeff's job is to toss away the one with the higher number.
So he's got tennis balls one and two and he gives back tennis ball two.
Okay now, he has a companion, a co-player whom we will call Mutt.
Now Mutt likewise gets two tennis balls in the first steps, his are green, but his procedure
is to toss away the one with the smaller number.
So Mutt gets one and two, he throws away one.
So at the end of the first step, how many tennis balls does each player have?
Well Jeff has one tennis ball, number one, Mutt has one tennis ball, number two, they
both have one.
Okay, that's simple.
Step two, give them each the next two tennis balls in order.
So Jeff will get tennis balls three and four, blue, Mutt will get tennis balls three and
four, green.
Jeff's job is to toss away the bigger number.
So there goes the four, Mutt's job is to toss away the smaller, so at the moment Mutt
has two, three and four, so he tosses the two.
So after the second step, how many does each have?
Well, Jeff has one and three, Mutt has three and four, they both have two tennis balls
after two steps.
Keep going.
Step three, we give Jeff tennis balls five and six, we give Mutt tennis balls five and
six of a different color, and now they play the game.
Jeff throws away six, Mutt throws away three, after the third step they each have three
tennis balls.
Now just do one more, you see the pattern, and step four, Jeff gets seven and eight,
Mutt gets seven and eight, Jeff tosses the eight, Mutt tosses the four, at this point
they both have four tennis balls.
Now if you continue this to seven steps, you can see each is going to have seven tennis
balls, and you can even see what they are.
Jeff's tennis balls are going to be the first seven odd numbers, because he always throws
away an even.
Both have one, three, five, seven, nine, eleven and thirteen, that's his seven, Mutt will
have the seven tennis balls from number eight to number fourteen.
But they both have seven tennis balls after seven steps, after fifty steps they both have
fifty tennis balls, after a million steps they both have a million tennis balls.
Now pretend that we can complete this process, the game is over, we have the completed infinite,
we allow the process to be done, question, how many tennis balls will each player have
at the end of this completed process?
Well, let's say here, Jeff, that's pretty easy, Jeff's going to have infinitely many,
because he's going to have all the odd numbered ones, he has one and then one and three and
then one and three and five, he's going to have an infinitude of tennis balls, no problem.
It's Mutt, that's the question, how many does he have left?
Now remember, after a billion steps they both had a billion, after fifty billion steps they
both have fifty billion tennis balls, after infinitely many steps, think about it a minute,
Mutt has none, no tennis balls, they're all gone, now you say no way man, that can't be,
how can that be?
Think about it, Mutt had the tennis balls one, two, three, four, five, six, there they
were, given to him two at a time, on the first step he threw away tennis ball one, so he
doesn't have that one left, at the second step he threw away tennis ball two, at the
third step three, at the fourth step four, and then five and six and seven and eight,
he throws them all away, he can have nothing left at the end of this process, well you
say no, surely he has something left, maybe tennis ball number one million, uh-uh, he
threw away tennis ball number one million on the one million step, he throws them all
away, and so if you grant me the completed infinite, in this process I get what appears
to be a kind of shocking conclusion that Mutt is out of tennis balls somehow, a lot of people
find this very uncomfortable.
Now there's another way to think of this little tennis ball game though, that might reveal
what's going on a little more clearly, suppose instead of getting these tennis balls two
at a time, they just all got the tennis balls at once, so they just got the infinitude at
once, the completed infinite, there they are, you can think what Jeff was doing is giving
back the even ones one at a time, so you give him infinitely many and he gives you back
infinitely many, but if he gives you back the evens, he's still left with infinitely
many, whereas Mutt is giving them back one at a time, but he's giving them all back,
one, two, three, four, and he's got none left.
So you can see infinitely many in, infinitely many out could leave you with infinitely many
as in Jeff's case, or infinitely many in, infinitely many out could leave you with none
as in Mutt's case, and you might be able to construct a game where infinitely many in,
infinitely many out leaves you with 117 if you want to play it like that.
The whole point though is that if you allow the completed infinite, you better get ready
for things like this, there's sort of hidden dangers and mathematicians that weren't ready
for this were yelling about the completed infinite.
Gauss, remember, protested against the use of the infinite quantity as a completed one,
Cantor responded and he said the completed infinite was a fixed constant quantity lying
beyond all finite magnitudes.
He believed in the completed infinite.
Well that was one of his introductory premises to build his theory of the infinite.
The other was this definition.
He asked when do two sets have the same cardinality, by which he means the same number of items?
When do two sets contain the same number of items?
And a good example would be the sets of fingers on my two hands.
Do they have the same cardinality?
Do I have the same number of fingers on each hand?
Well, if you ask anybody today, they just say sure, one, two, three, four, five, one,
two, three, four, five, there's five fingers on each hand, that's fine.
But Cantor said no, we can answer this question of equal cardinality without having to count
to five.
Suppose you couldn't count to five, I could still answer the question.
Do I have the same number of fingers on each hand?
The answer is you answer it by seeing if there is a one to one matching of the fingers on
your two hands, so that every finger on the left hand matches something on the right and
vice versa, and the matching is easily done.
There it is.
That's a one to one correspondence, and that would show me that I have the same number
of fingers on each hand, even if I don't know the number five.
So his general definition is two sets have the same cardinality if their members can
be put into a one to one correspondence with each other, so just think of matching fingers.
If that can be done, yes, same cardinality, same number of items.
If it can't be done, no, not the same cardinality.
You could imagine a problem like this.
Suppose you're in a big auditorium, the crowd is coming in, there's lots of seats, lots
of audience members, and somebody says, are there as many seats as audience members?
You say, gee, do I have to count all the seats?
That'll take a long time, and then count all the audience members.
That'll take a very long time, and then you could answer the question.
Maybe there's 1,500 of each or something.
Here's a much easier way to answer this question.
Are there the same number of seats as audience members?
You just get on the microphone and say, would everybody please sit down?
Now when that is accomplished, if every person has a seat and every seat has a person, then
there's the same number of seats as audience members because that process of sitting down
forms the one-to-one correspondence between people and seats.
So the answer would be yes, in that case.
On the other hand, if when you tell everyone to sit down, there's some people still standing,
then they don't have the same number of people and seats, or if there's some empty seats
over there, the cardinalities are different.
Now this actually seems like a fairly innocent concept, right?
It's certainly innocent with the fingers on your hand and with people in the auditorium,
but these are both finite sets, finitely many fingers, finitely many seats.
Cantor said, why can't we apply the same definition of equal cardinality to sets that aren't necessarily
finite?
We can still ask the question if two infinite sets have the same number of elements by applying
the very same definition, can you match up their members in a one-to-one fashion?
This is pretty bold.
He's out there.
We're going to talk about whether two infinite sets have the same cardinality.
And here's an example of how this would work.
Let me let N be the natural numbers again.
One, two, three, four, five, six, our old friend.
I've got the set brackets on either side suggesting that's a completed infinite.
So there is the completed infinite set.
All the natural numbers are in there.
Let me now introduce the even numbers, two, four, six, eight, again, in set brackets.
That's that completed infinite.
And now the question is, do those two infinite sets have the same cardinality?
Do they have the same number of items in them?
Well, it doesn't seem like it, right?
It seems like there's only half as many even numbers as whole numbers.
The answer should be no, but the answer is yes.
They do have the same cardinality by Cantor's definition.
What's he got to do?
He's got to find a one-to-one correspondence matching every natural number with an even
and every even with a natural.
And if he can do that, if he can find that correspondence, that's like the fingers matched
up left and right.
That would be enough to guarantee they have equal cardinality.
So here comes the matching.
Let's match one with two, from the naturals to the evens, two with four, three with six,
four with eight, five with ten, and so on.
It's a natural way to do this.
In general, what I'm doing is taking n in the natural numbers and matching it with
two n in the evens.
Now if you think about this, this is a one-to-one correspondence.
Every natural number matches with some even, namely, it's double.
Every even number matches with some natural number, namely, it's half.
It's a perfectly good one-to-one correspondence.
Conclusion, these two sets have the same cardinality by Cantor's definition.
And for him, it was no different than the fingers on the hand or the people in the auditorium,
except these were infinite sets, doesn't matter, he said.
Same definition applies.
There's just as many whole numbers as even numbers.
Hey, let me go the other way.
Let's look at the set z for all the integers.
We usually let z stand for the set of all the integers, positive, negative, and zero.
So it's the set, as I've written it there, it's sort of doubly infinite.
There's dot, dot, dot, and you get minus three, minus two, minus one, zero, one, two, three,
and dot, dot, dot, off the other way.
So there's an infinite set.
And I find a one-to-one correspondence between z and n between the set of all integers and
the set of natural numbers.
Again, it might not seem like it.
It seems like there's more integers than natural numbers, because the natural numbers are already
in there, but now you've got all these negatives we're throwing in.
Doesn't that give you a bigger infinity?
No.
We're going to look for a one-to-one correspondence between n and z.
So here's n, the set, one, two, three, four, five, and so on, and z, the set running from
the negative through the negative integers through zero and out the other side through
the positive ones.
And now I'm going to try to find a one-to-one correspondence here.
Now what you might try first would be, let's take one from the natural numbers and match
it with one, two match with two, three match with three, four match with four, and so on.
So there's a matching, but that's not going to work, because if you think about it, every
natural number matches some integer, but not every integer gets matched with some natural
number.
There's nothing in this process that matches negative two or negative three.
So that is not a one-to-one correspondence between all of n and all of z that fails.
Didn't work.
But just because my first try doesn't work doesn't mean there isn't another way to do
this that will work, that will provide a one-to-one correspondence.
And in fact, here it comes.
I will match these two sets up in a one-to-one fashion.
I'll start by matching one to zero.
And here, just to keep track of this, let me make a little chart here.
So here's n and it's mate in z, so one is matched to zero.
I'll match two to one, so two matches with one from the natural numbers, and now it looks
like I'm going down the wrong road here if I just keep going to the right, but now I'm
going to match three with negative one.
I'll pick up the negative, so three matches with negative one.
Now four matches with two, but then five goes and matches with negative two.
And so we continue this process matching the next positive, the next negative, the next
positive, the next negative.
If you want a formula for this, you can actually crank one out here, the number n in the natural
numbers matches this thing, one plus negative one to the n times the quantity two n minus
one over four in the integers.
And if you check this out, this is the correspondence I'm illustrating here.
It is a one-to-one correspondence between n and z, conclusion, those two sets have the
same cardinality.
Well Cantor says, I'm going to introduce an adjective.
I'm going to say that a set that can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with n with
the natural numbers is called denumerable.
Sometimes you'll see the term countably infinite used, but I'll use denumerable.
So if you can match it up with the set of natural numbers, we're going to say it is
a denumerable set.
That's an adjective.
The set E is a denumerable set.
The set Z is a denumerable set.
You've seen in both cases the matching exists, and of course n itself is a denumerable set
because you can match n in a one-to-one fashion with itself just by matching one-to-one, two-to-two,
three-to-three, and so on.
But now Cantor is ready for an even bolder move.
He wants to introduce a new number, an infinitely large number.
Maybe for this we better back up and just think about the finite case.
Suppose you wanted to introduce the number four.
Suppose you wanted to tell people what four is.
What does it mean for a set to have four things in it?
You might never have thought about this.
How do you define four?
Well, here comes a definition.
I'm going to pose this one.
I say a set has four members.
If it can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the faces on Mount Rushmore.
That's going to be my standard of comparison, Mount Rushmore.
So if you want to see if you have four items in your set, you've got to go see if you can
match up your items with the heads on Mount Rushmore.
So there's Mount Rushmore.
And suppose somebody tosses me the set A, B, C, and D, and the question is, does this
set contain four members?
Well, it's up to me now to do a matching.
So let's see here.
We can match A with Jefferson, B with Roosevelt, C with Washington, D with Lincoln.
Every element in my set, A, B, C, D, has a president it's matched with.
Every president has a letter it's matched with.
By my definition, yeah, there are four elements in my set.
I've compared it to the standard.
So Mount Rushmore is my standard.
How about this question?
Are there four Beatles?
You know, the Beatles.
Well, do they have the Beatles?
Does it work?
Sure.
You just need a one-to-one correspondence between Beatles and presidents.
So we match Paul with Teddy, Ringo with Abe, John with Tom, and of course, George with
George.
So there's a one-to-one correspondence.
So yes, there are four Beatles.
Now, Cantor said, let's play the same game, but introduce a number that's infinite.
He says, I'm going to define a set to have aleph not members.
Aleph not.
We'll talk about that symbol in a minute.
But here's the definition.
If it can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers in one, two, three,
four, and so on, then we're going to tell how many members that set has it has aleph
not.
Aleph is the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet.
And the little sub-zero, we would probably say aleph sub-zero, but the British version,
aleph not, is what everybody says.
Cantor chose this symbol because he wanted something different, a Hebrew letter, as opposed
to all the Latin and Greek letters that were kicking around mathematics, because this really
was different.
He had just defined aleph not, which is a transfinite cardinal number, he said.
It's a perfectly legitimate number, but it's beyond the finite ones, it's transfinite.
Pretty exciting stuff here.
So if I ask you how many Beatles are there, you would say four, because you compared them
to Mount Rushmore, my definition of four.
If I say how many even numbers are there, you say there's aleph not, even numbers, because
of that one-to-one correspondence we showed between the evens and n.
And that's aleph not is just as legitimate a number as four.
How many energies are there?
Aleph not, same thing, we showed that correspondence.
So now we have on the table this new kind of number, a transfinite quantity nobody had
ever gone down this road before.
Cantor said when confronted about these kind of controversial things, the essence of mathematics
lies in its freedom.
He is free to think of the completed infinite.
He is free to define sets with equal cardinality via the one-to-one correspondence, and then
he follows this where it leads, and if it leads him into unknown territory, so be it.
It's a very bold direction for him to take.
Well, at this point we're left with two big questions, at least.
Here's the two I want to look at.
One is, can every infinite set be put into a one-to-one correspondence within?
The evens could, the integers could, is this true of every infinite set?
If the answer is yes, then there's sort of this one standard for infinity.
You just match up the elements with the counting numbers you got your infinite set.
In other words, every infinite set would be denumerable by that definition.
If the answer is no, then there's an infinite set that's so vast that you cannot match it
within.
It would be, I mean, here's the scary thing, it would be a bigger infinity.
So this is a pretty important question.
Second question, is any of this useful?
Is there any mathematical use for this, or is this just sort of a logical game?
So that's also a legitimate question, and Cantor was confronted with this.
So what?
Who cares?
Now, in a remarkable paper from the year 1874, Cantor answered both of these questions.
He answered them both in one paper.
The answer to the first question is no.
When every infinite set be put into a one-to-one correspondence with n, no.
There are bigger infinities, and he showed where to find one.
The answer to the second question is this at all useful mathematically.
That answer is yes, and Cantor shows a brilliant application of this in that 1874 paper.
My next lecture is going to be about those two questions, and I'll answer them for you,
as Cantor did.
Can every infinite set be put into a one-to-one correspondence with n, and why does anybody
care?
The next lecture will show the answers.
