forms the one-to-one correspondence between people and seats.
So the answer would be yes, in that case.
On the other hand, if when you tell everyone to sit down, there's some people still standing,
then they don't have the same number of people and seats, or if there's some empty seats
over there, the cardinalities are different.
Now this actually seems like a fairly innocent concept, right?
It's certainly innocent with the fingers on your hand and with people in the auditorium,
but these are both finite sets, finitely many fingers, finitely many seats.
Cantor said, why can't we apply the same definition of equal cardinality to sets that aren't necessarily
finite?
We can still ask the question if two infinite sets have the same number of elements by applying
the very same definition, can you match up their members in a one-to-one fashion?
This is pretty bold.
He's out there.
We're going to talk about whether two infinite sets have the same cardinality.
And here's an example of how this would work.
Let me let N be the natural numbers again.
One, two, three, four, five, six, our old friend.
I've got the set brackets on either side suggesting that's a completed infinite.
So there is the completed infinite set.
All the natural numbers are in there.
Let me now introduce the even numbers, two, four, six, eight, again, in set brackets.
That's that completed infinite.
And now the question is, do those two infinite sets have the same cardinality?
Do they have the same number of items in them?
Well, it doesn't seem like it, right?
It seems like there's only half as many even numbers as whole numbers.
The answer should be no, but the answer is yes.
They do have the same cardinality by Cantor's definition.
What's he got to do?
He's got to find a one-to-one correspondence matching every natural number with an even
and every even with a natural.
And if he can do that, if he can find that correspondence, that's like the fingers matched
up left and right.
That would be enough to guarantee they have equal cardinality.
So here comes the matching.
Let's match one with two, from the naturals to the evens, two with four, three with six,
four with eight, five with ten, and so on.
It's a natural way to do this.
In general, what I'm doing is taking n in the natural numbers and matching it with
two n in the evens.
Now if you think about this, this is a one-to-one correspondence.
Every natural number matches with some even, namely, it's double.
