infinitely many out leaves you with 117 if you want to play it like that.
The whole point though is that if you allow the completed infinite, you better get ready
for things like this, there's sort of hidden dangers and mathematicians that weren't ready
for this were yelling about the completed infinite.
Gauss, remember, protested against the use of the infinite quantity as a completed one,
Cantor responded and he said the completed infinite was a fixed constant quantity lying
beyond all finite magnitudes.
He believed in the completed infinite.
Well that was one of his introductory premises to build his theory of the infinite.
The other was this definition.
He asked when do two sets have the same cardinality, by which he means the same number of items?
When do two sets contain the same number of items?
And a good example would be the sets of fingers on my two hands.
Do they have the same cardinality?
Do I have the same number of fingers on each hand?
Well, if you ask anybody today, they just say sure, one, two, three, four, five, one,
two, three, four, five, there's five fingers on each hand, that's fine.
But Cantor said no, we can answer this question of equal cardinality without having to count
to five.
Suppose you couldn't count to five, I could still answer the question.
Do I have the same number of fingers on each hand?
The answer is you answer it by seeing if there is a one to one matching of the fingers on
your two hands, so that every finger on the left hand matches something on the right and
vice versa, and the matching is easily done.
There it is.
That's a one to one correspondence, and that would show me that I have the same number
of fingers on each hand, even if I don't know the number five.
So his general definition is two sets have the same cardinality if their members can
be put into a one to one correspondence with each other, so just think of matching fingers.
If that can be done, yes, same cardinality, same number of items.
If it can't be done, no, not the same cardinality.
You could imagine a problem like this.
Suppose you're in a big auditorium, the crowd is coming in, there's lots of seats, lots
of audience members, and somebody says, are there as many seats as audience members?
You say, gee, do I have to count all the seats?
That'll take a long time, and then count all the audience members.
That'll take a very long time, and then you could answer the question.
Maybe there's 1,500 of each or something.
Here's a much easier way to answer this question.
Are there the same number of seats as audience members?
You just get on the microphone and say, would everybody please sit down?
Now when that is accomplished, if every person has a seat and every seat has a person, then
there's the same number of seats as audience members because that process of sitting down
