Every even number matches with some natural number, namely, it's half.
It's a perfectly good one-to-one correspondence.
Conclusion, these two sets have the same cardinality by Cantor's definition.
And for him, it was no different than the fingers on the hand or the people in the auditorium,
except these were infinite sets, doesn't matter, he said.
Same definition applies.
There's just as many whole numbers as even numbers.
Hey, let me go the other way.
Let's look at the set z for all the integers.
We usually let z stand for the set of all the integers, positive, negative, and zero.
So it's the set, as I've written it there, it's sort of doubly infinite.
There's dot, dot, dot, and you get minus three, minus two, minus one, zero, one, two, three,
and dot, dot, dot, off the other way.
So there's an infinite set.
And I find a one-to-one correspondence between z and n between the set of all integers and
the set of natural numbers.
Again, it might not seem like it.
It seems like there's more integers than natural numbers, because the natural numbers are already
in there, but now you've got all these negatives we're throwing in.
Doesn't that give you a bigger infinity?
No.
We're going to look for a one-to-one correspondence between n and z.
So here's n, the set, one, two, three, four, five, and so on, and z, the set running from
the negative through the negative integers through zero and out the other side through
the positive ones.
And now I'm going to try to find a one-to-one correspondence here.
Now what you might try first would be, let's take one from the natural numbers and match
it with one, two match with two, three match with three, four match with four, and so on.
So there's a matching, but that's not going to work, because if you think about it, every
natural number matches some integer, but not every integer gets matched with some natural
number.
There's nothing in this process that matches negative two or negative three.
So that is not a one-to-one correspondence between all of n and all of z that fails.
Didn't work.
But just because my first try doesn't work doesn't mean there isn't another way to do
this that will work, that will provide a one-to-one correspondence.
And in fact, here it comes.
I will match these two sets up in a one-to-one fashion.
I'll start by matching one to zero.
And here, just to keep track of this, let me make a little chart here.
So here's n and it's mate in z, so one is matched to zero.
I'll match two to one, so two matches with one from the natural numbers, and now it looks
like I'm going down the wrong road here if I just keep going to the right, but now I'm
