Now just do one more, you see the pattern, and step four, Jeff gets seven and eight,
Mutt gets seven and eight, Jeff tosses the eight, Mutt tosses the four, at this point
they both have four tennis balls.
Now if you continue this to seven steps, you can see each is going to have seven tennis
balls, and you can even see what they are.
Jeff's tennis balls are going to be the first seven odd numbers, because he always throws
away an even.
Both have one, three, five, seven, nine, eleven and thirteen, that's his seven, Mutt will
have the seven tennis balls from number eight to number fourteen.
But they both have seven tennis balls after seven steps, after fifty steps they both have
fifty tennis balls, after a million steps they both have a million tennis balls.
Now pretend that we can complete this process, the game is over, we have the completed infinite,
we allow the process to be done, question, how many tennis balls will each player have
at the end of this completed process?
Well, let's say here, Jeff, that's pretty easy, Jeff's going to have infinitely many,
because he's going to have all the odd numbered ones, he has one and then one and three and
then one and three and five, he's going to have an infinitude of tennis balls, no problem.
It's Mutt, that's the question, how many does he have left?
Now remember, after a billion steps they both had a billion, after fifty billion steps they
both have fifty billion tennis balls, after infinitely many steps, think about it a minute,
Mutt has none, no tennis balls, they're all gone, now you say no way man, that can't be,
how can that be?
Think about it, Mutt had the tennis balls one, two, three, four, five, six, there they
were, given to him two at a time, on the first step he threw away tennis ball one, so he
doesn't have that one left, at the second step he threw away tennis ball two, at the
third step three, at the fourth step four, and then five and six and seven and eight,
he throws them all away, he can have nothing left at the end of this process, well you
say no, surely he has something left, maybe tennis ball number one million, uh-uh, he
threw away tennis ball number one million on the one million step, he throws them all
away, and so if you grant me the completed infinite, in this process I get what appears
to be a kind of shocking conclusion that Mutt is out of tennis balls somehow, a lot of people
find this very uncomfortable.
Now there's another way to think of this little tennis ball game though, that might reveal
what's going on a little more clearly, suppose instead of getting these tennis balls two
at a time, they just all got the tennis balls at once, so they just got the infinitude at
once, the completed infinite, there they are, you can think what Jeff was doing is giving
back the even ones one at a time, so you give him infinitely many and he gives you back
infinitely many, but if he gives you back the evens, he's still left with infinitely
many, whereas Mutt is giving them back one at a time, but he's giving them all back,
one, two, three, four, and he's got none left.
So you can see infinitely many in, infinitely many out could leave you with infinitely many
as in Jeff's case, or infinitely many in, infinitely many out could leave you with none
as in Mutt's case, and you might be able to construct a game where infinitely many in,
