We're talking about the 19th century, the century of rigorization, liberation, and diversification,
and the century of abstraction in mathematics.
And that is most evident in the work of Georg Cantor and his abstract set theory.
I want to talk about it in this lecture and in the next.
It's quite amazing.
This is Cantor, born in 1845, lived into the 20th century.
He came from a long line of musicians, and people often make something of this, that
he was a little more artistic, that he was a little more of a romantic in his mathematics.
So judge for yourself when you see it.
But he was coming from a musical family.
He studied with Weierstrass in Berlin, was influenced by Weierstrass, and Cantor's early
work in number theory gave little hints of the radical direction that his mathematics
would eventually take.
Cantor suffered from bouts of depression on a regular basis.
He was hospitalized with his depression in 1884, in 1899, in 1902, 4, 7, and 11.
He would go into the hospital, recover, come back, do some work, but then the depression
would strike again back to the institution.
He said that these periods cost him his mental freshness.
Now we now can see this was a bipolar problem.
Or treatments today, in those days they would just institutionalize him for a while.
He had some kind of quirky ideas outside of mathematics.
He believed that Francis Bacon had written the works of Shakespeare, and would speak
and write about this.
He was quite convinced that Bacon was the real author of Shakespeare's plays.
And he asserted that his mathematical discoveries had religious significance, that in fact God
was leading him to certain mathematical achievements.
Now if you're going to put forth some ideas that are truly radical in mathematics, and
you have these other issues, you know, touting the works of Shakespeare as being Bacon's
products, or telling people God was whispering over your shoulder, people can attack you.
It's not just being eccentric, it was a source of ridicule.
And so Cantor had to overcome such personal baggage, as well as the intellectual challenge
is evident in his mathematics.
He ends up dying in a neuropathic hospital in 1918, unfortunately he was institutionalized
at the end, and this was in World War I in Germany, it must have been a horrible, horrible
ending.
I find it impossible not to compare Cantor and Van Gogh.
I think this is a natural comparison, they lived at roughly the same time, they kind
of resembled each other a little bit if you look at the pictures.
They were both extremely innovative, they were doing things in their respective disciplines
be it mathematics or painting that hadn't been done before, pushing in new directions.
They were both undeniably geniuses, but they both faced criticism for their radical work.
And they both suffered their mental demons.
Cantor back and forth to the mental hospital, Van Gogh put in a mental institution as well
