The infinite is only a manner of speaking.
Gauss believed in the potential infinite.
He most certainly did not believe in the completed one.
And so Cantor, if he's going to come out in favor of the completed infinite, he's taking
on a pretty important opponent here, the great Gauss.
It's hard for any mathematician to take on Gauss.
Cantor does.
Now the completed infinite holds hidden dangers.
I mean it's true.
There are things going on with this concept that are troubling.
And I want to show you my favorite example of this, how if you grant me the completed
infinite, I can appear to run into some awful paradox.
So watch this, see what you think.
This is going to be a multi-step game we're going to play.
So I'll keep track of the steps and I have two players.
So one of them we'll call Jeff.
Now here's what we do.
In the first step, I'm going to give Jeff two tennis balls, blue, two blue tennis balls
with the numbers one and two on them.
And Jeff's job is to toss away the one with the higher number.
So he's got tennis balls one and two and he gives back tennis ball two.
Okay now, he has a companion, a co-player whom we will call Mutt.
Now Mutt likewise gets two tennis balls in the first steps, his are green, but his procedure
is to toss away the one with the smaller number.
So Mutt gets one and two, he throws away one.
So at the end of the first step, how many tennis balls does each player have?
Well Jeff has one tennis ball, number one, Mutt has one tennis ball, number two, they
both have one.
Okay, that's simple.
Step two, give them each the next two tennis balls in order.
So Jeff will get tennis balls three and four, blue, Mutt will get tennis balls three and
four, green.
Jeff's job is to toss away the bigger number.
So there goes the four, Mutt's job is to toss away the smaller, so at the moment Mutt
has two, three and four, so he tosses the two.
So after the second step, how many does each have?
Well, Jeff has one and three, Mutt has three and four, they both have two tennis balls
after two steps.
Keep going.
Step three, we give Jeff tennis balls five and six, we give Mutt tennis balls five and
six of a different color, and now they play the game.
Jeff throws away six, Mutt throws away three, after the third step they each have three
tennis balls.
