Cantor said when confronted about these kind of controversial things, the essence of mathematics
lies in its freedom.
He is free to think of the completed infinite.
He is free to define sets with equal cardinality via the one-to-one correspondence, and then
he follows this where it leads, and if it leads him into unknown territory, so be it.
It's a very bold direction for him to take.
Well, at this point we're left with two big questions, at least.
Here's the two I want to look at.
One is, can every infinite set be put into a one-to-one correspondence within?
The evens could, the integers could, is this true of every infinite set?
If the answer is yes, then there's sort of this one standard for infinity.
You just match up the elements with the counting numbers you got your infinite set.
In other words, every infinite set would be denumerable by that definition.
If the answer is no, then there's an infinite set that's so vast that you cannot match it
within.
It would be, I mean, here's the scary thing, it would be a bigger infinity.
So this is a pretty important question.
Second question, is any of this useful?
Is there any mathematical use for this, or is this just sort of a logical game?
So that's also a legitimate question, and Cantor was confronted with this.
So what?
Who cares?
Now, in a remarkable paper from the year 1874, Cantor answered both of these questions.
He answered them both in one paper.
The answer to the first question is no.
When every infinite set be put into a one-to-one correspondence with n, no.
There are bigger infinities, and he showed where to find one.
The answer to the second question is this at all useful mathematically.
That answer is yes, and Cantor shows a brilliant application of this in that 1874 paper.
My next lecture is going to be about those two questions, and I'll answer them for you,
as Cantor did.
Can every infinite set be put into a one-to-one correspondence with n, and why does anybody
care?
The next lecture will show the answers.
