going to match three with negative one.
I'll pick up the negative, so three matches with negative one.
Now four matches with two, but then five goes and matches with negative two.
And so we continue this process matching the next positive, the next negative, the next
positive, the next negative.
If you want a formula for this, you can actually crank one out here, the number n in the natural
numbers matches this thing, one plus negative one to the n times the quantity two n minus
one over four in the integers.
And if you check this out, this is the correspondence I'm illustrating here.
It is a one-to-one correspondence between n and z, conclusion, those two sets have the
same cardinality.
Well Cantor says, I'm going to introduce an adjective.
I'm going to say that a set that can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with n with
the natural numbers is called denumerable.
Sometimes you'll see the term countably infinite used, but I'll use denumerable.
So if you can match it up with the set of natural numbers, we're going to say it is
a denumerable set.
That's an adjective.
The set E is a denumerable set.
The set Z is a denumerable set.
You've seen in both cases the matching exists, and of course n itself is a denumerable set
because you can match n in a one-to-one fashion with itself just by matching one-to-one, two-to-two,
three-to-three, and so on.
But now Cantor is ready for an even bolder move.
He wants to introduce a new number, an infinitely large number.
Maybe for this we better back up and just think about the finite case.
Suppose you wanted to introduce the number four.
Suppose you wanted to tell people what four is.
What does it mean for a set to have four things in it?
You might never have thought about this.
How do you define four?
Well, here comes a definition.
I'm going to pose this one.
I say a set has four members.
If it can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the faces on Mount Rushmore.
That's going to be my standard of comparison, Mount Rushmore.
So if you want to see if you have four items in your set, you've got to go see if you can
match up your items with the heads on Mount Rushmore.
So there's Mount Rushmore.
And suppose somebody tosses me the set A, B, C, and D, and the question is, does this
set contain four members?
Well, it's up to me now to do a matching.
So let's see here.
