That's my definition, a dolphin is algebraic if it lives in the water, and a dolphin will
be transcendental if it's not algebraic.
So that's exactly the parallel that Euler was using between the algebraic numbers and
the rest, the transcendental numbers.
Now I got my algebraic dolphins and the rest.
That's a perfectly good definition of a transcendental dolphin, but there aren't any.
There are no transcendental dolphins.
You've never seen a dolphin walking down the street or flying overhead.
They all live in the water.
So just because I've defined this category doesn't guarantee there are any members.
All right, so, are there any transcendental numbers?
Well, people started looking, but it's a very hard problem to show a number's transcendental.
You have to show it can't be the solution of any polynomial equation with integer coefficients
no matter the degree, so it could be a 15,000th degree polynomial, it can't be the solution
of any such polynomial.
It took a century before anybody found even one of these.
The mathematician was Joseph Leoville.
Here he is, and he in 1844 found the first example of a transcendental number.
It was a very sophisticated argument, but he did it.
So now we know there's at least one of these.
People then decided, let's look at some famous numbers and see if they're transcendental.
And one of the numbers was E. We've met that number, Euler's number E. People speculated
that that would be a good candidate to be a transcendental number, so let's try to prove
that.
It was a big challenge, and it took a lot of work and effort by Charles Hermit, who in
1873 proved that E is a transcendental number.
E is not the solution of any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
It was a great triumph, one of the great proofs of 19th century mathematics.
So people patted Hermit on the back and said, great job.
Now here's another candidate, Pi.
I think Pi is transcendental.
Hermit, why don't you prove that?
Pi is another famous number, it would be great to show that was transcendental.
Hermit responded, no way.
He said, I do not dare to attempt to show the transcendence of Pi.
If others undertake it, no one will be happier than I about their success, but believe me,
my dear friend, this cannot fail to cost them some effort.
He had worked so hard on E, he said one transcendental is enough, so he wasn't going to even try
Pi.
It turned out Pi is transcendental, but that took a little longer to prove.
Okay, so there's the situation.
Transcendental numbers exist, but they seem kind of rare, hard to find, hard to establish.
