Every number between 0 and 1 has got to be there somewhere.
Contradiction has been reached.
We have reached a contradiction.
Conclusion, how did this all start?
It started when Cantor assumed there was a 1 to 1 correspondence.
Conclusion, there cannot be such a correspondence.
It cannot exist.
The set i of all real numbers between 0 and 1 is not denumerable, usually called non-denumerable.
It can't be matched.
It's amazing.
This is the proof.
What Cantor has done here is found an infinite set that's bigger than n.
n is the natural numbers, lots of infinite sets can be matched with it, but the set of
all real numbers between 0 and 1 is so vast that it cannot be matched with n.
It does not have cardinality l if not, which is the cardinality we assign to all sets that
can be put into a 1 to 1 correspondence with n.
It's a bigger creature.
Cantor's just found a bigger infinity.
Now, if you aren't comfortable with his work with denumerable sets and that first infinity,
now you're really getting nervous because here comes a bigger infinity onto the scene.
In fact, it's not just the real numbers between 0 and 1.
He shows that a bigger infinity exists for all the real numbers.
If you take all the ones across the real line, again, it's bigger than l if not.
We have non-denumerable sets as well as denumerable ones.
People were getting a little nervous about this point.
What about the application?
We know there's sets that are so infinite they can't be matched with n, but so what?
Who cares?
Is there any use to this?
This was put to Cantor.
He realized that maybe he needed to sell this a little bit, so he found an amazing application.
This goes back to a definition that had been kicking around for a century and more.
It says this, a real number is called algebraic.
If it is the solution to a polynomial equation with integer coefficients, it's called an
algebraic number.
If you can get it as a solution to a polynomial equation regardless of the degree, but the
coefficients of that equation must be integers.
How about an example?
Well, I say two-thirds.
The number two-thirds qualifies as an algebraic number by this definition.
Why?
I have to show it's the solution to some polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
