We've met Georg Cantor and his remarkable theory of the infinite, but now we have to
address those two remaining questions.
Can every infinite set be matched in a one-to-one fashion with the natural numbers?
And what good is any of this to other realms of mathematics?
To answer the first question, we're going to remember that a real number, a real number,
can be written as an infinite decimal.
For instance, one-third we can write as 0.33333 forever, it's an infinite decimal.
Two-fifths is 0.4, and you might just stop there, but if we wanted, we could continue
it as an infinite decimal with lots of zeros thereafter.
Pi is 3.141592, and on it goes a number like r, this curious pattern of 0.12123123412345,
an infinite decimal, that's a real number.
So the real numbers we will regard as the infinite decimals.
Now a real number between 0 and 1, which is really where we're going to restrict our
attention, this can be written as an infinite decimal, but its integer part is going to
be 0, so it's going to look like 0 point, and then here come the decimal places, a,
b, c, d, e, f, and so on.
But if it lives between 0 and 1, that integer part to the left of the decimal point is just
a 0.
Alright, let me let i be the set of all the real numbers between 0 and 1.
So here we go with one of these completed infinite sets.
We'll call it i for interval.
Here's the theorem Cantor proves.
There cannot exist a 1 to 1 correspondence between n and i, between the natural numbers
and the set of all real numbers between 0 and 1.
No way you can make a 1 to 1 correspondence between these, impossible.
Pretty bold statement.
How in the world do you prove this?
How do you prove that the set of real numbers between 0 and 1 is not denumerable in Cantor's
terminology from the last lecture?
The proof is by that age old weapon, contradiction.
We've seen this in the hands of Archimedes.
Here it is in modern times.
Cantor's going to prove this by contradiction.
Now what's he trying to prove?
There cannot be a 1 to 1 correspondence between n and i.
How do you contradict it?
You assume there is one.
You assume there is such a 1 to 1 correspondence and get yourself into logical hot water.
So let's assume, for the sake of eventual contradiction, that some 1 to 1 correspondence
exists.
Now what I have to do is display it, you know, this hypothetical 1 to 1 correspondence.
So let me say it's going to look something like this.
It doesn't have to be this one, but I just need something on the screen.
So let's say this is the correspondence.
There could be anyone.
The contradiction will be the same, but let's use this as my concrete example.
So what am I going to do?
On the one hand, I got in the left-hand column the natural numbers, n.
So there's 1, 2, 3, 4, on they go.
Now these are matched in a 1 to 1 fashion with real numbers between 0 and 1, which are
these infinite decimals.
So 1 has to match with something.
Suppose it matches with the number 0.123, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3.
Suppose 2 matches with the number 0.995, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0.
3 matches with 0.6023, 1, 9, 8, 8, 8.
It could be anything.
It matches with something.
4, let's say, matches with 0.7777 and so on.
So hypothetically, here it is, the 1 to 1 correspondence, where in the left-hand column
we have all the natural numbers.
In the right-hand column, we have all the real numbers between 0 and 1, and these are
matched like the fingers on my hands.
There's actually a logical contradiction lurking in front of us if we can just ferret
it out.
Well, Cantor says, let's introduce a real number, which I'm going to call c, and it's
going to be a real number of the form 0.c1, c2, c3.
Where are the digits?
And my job is to figure out what these digits should be to get me into a contradiction.
Let's suppose the first decimal digit of c, that is the thing that I'm calling c1, is
chosen to be different from the first decimal digit of the number matched with 1.
Now that sounds a little confusing here, so let's go back to the correspondence.
What I do is I look at the number matched with 1, so it's that 0.123123, I look at its
first decimal digit, there it is, put a circle around it, it's a 1.
So I want my c1, my first digit of c, not to be that.
I want to insist that c1 be something other than 1.
So let's just crank it up 1 and make it 2.
So c1 is 2.
Now remember my number I'm trying to build here, c, looks like 0.c1, c2, c3.
What I've just said is let c1 be 2, so my number now looks like 0.2, and then here comes
c2, c3, and the rest.
Well, now, Cantor says, choose c2 to differ from the second decimal digit of the number
matched with 2.
Again, back to the chart, the number matched with 2 is 0.99500.
I go to the second decimal digit there, which is at 9, and I want to choose c2 to be something
other than 9.
There's lots of choices, let's just crank it up to 0.
So now my number, c, which looked like 0.c1, c2, c3, now it starts off 0.20, and then here
come the rest, c3, c4.
And we continue on this process, let me do two more steps.
I'll choose c3 to differ from the third decimal digit of the number matched with 3.
There we go, the number matched with 3, there it is, 0.60231, etc.
I go over to the third digit of that, 602, I want c3 to be something other than 2.
So make it be 3.
So now my number is looking like 0.203, and then the next digits are coming, c4 will be
chosen to differ from the fourth decimal digit of the number matched with 4.
So back to the chart, the number matched with 4 is 0.77777, you go over to the fourth one,
which is a 7 of course, I'll pick an 8.
And so my number starts, my number c starts 0.2038.
This process can be continued forever until you build your whole real number, your infinite
decimal c, and this is called Cantor's diagonalization proof.
And you can see why from the picture, these numbers are spinning down the diagonal of that
array.
All right, now, so what?
Well, I say first of all, the number c, thus generated, 0.2038, dot, dot, dot, belongs
to i.
Now, remember, i was all the real numbers between 0 and 1, so is this a real number?
Yes, it's an infinite decimal, c is an infinite decimal.
Is it between 0 and 1?
Yes, it starts 0 point.
So it is a real number between 0 and 1, therefore, under Cantor's hypothesis that we had a one
to one correspondence, c has to appear somewhere in that right hand column.
Remember we assumed every natural number was on the left, every number in i was on the
right, and they were matched up.
So if c is a number in i, it's got to be on the right somewhere.
But it can't be, it's not there, not this number c.
And you can see it because c differs in at least one decimal place with every number
in that right hand column.
You've built it, so it can't possibly be there.
Look, it can't be the number matched with 1 because that starts 0.1 and you start 0.2.
So c is not that one.
It can't be the number matched with 2 because there's a 9 in the second decimal place of
the number matched with 2, but I have a 0 in the second decimal place of mine.
It can't be the number matched with 3, it can't be the number matched with 4, c cannot
be the number matched with 400 or 4 million, c isn't in the right hand column.
He has built a number that can't be there.
And yet, the hypothesis was that every number is in that right hand column.
Every number between 0 and 1 has got to be there somewhere.
Contradiction has been reached.
We have reached a contradiction.
Conclusion, how did this all start?
It started when Cantor assumed there was a 1 to 1 correspondence.
Conclusion, there cannot be such a correspondence.
It cannot exist.
The set i of all real numbers between 0 and 1 is not denumerable, usually called non-denumerable.
It can't be matched.
It's amazing.
This is the proof.
What Cantor has done here is found an infinite set that's bigger than n.
n is the natural numbers, lots of infinite sets can be matched with it, but the set of
all real numbers between 0 and 1 is so vast that it cannot be matched with n.
It does not have cardinality l if not, which is the cardinality we assign to all sets that
can be put into a 1 to 1 correspondence with n.
It's a bigger creature.
Cantor's just found a bigger infinity.
Now, if you aren't comfortable with his work with denumerable sets and that first infinity,
now you're really getting nervous because here comes a bigger infinity onto the scene.
In fact, it's not just the real numbers between 0 and 1.
He shows that a bigger infinity exists for all the real numbers.
If you take all the ones across the real line, again, it's bigger than l if not.
We have non-denumerable sets as well as denumerable ones.
People were getting a little nervous about this point.
What about the application?
We know there's sets that are so infinite they can't be matched with n, but so what?
Who cares?
Is there any use to this?
This was put to Cantor.
He realized that maybe he needed to sell this a little bit, so he found an amazing application.
This goes back to a definition that had been kicking around for a century and more.
It says this, a real number is called algebraic.
If it is the solution to a polynomial equation with integer coefficients, it's called an
algebraic number.
If you can get it as a solution to a polynomial equation regardless of the degree, but the
coefficients of that equation must be integers.
How about an example?
Well, I say two-thirds.
The number two-thirds qualifies as an algebraic number by this definition.
Why?
I have to show it's the solution to some polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
That's easy.
3x minus 2 equals 0.
If you put in x equals two-thirds, it certainly works.
That's a solution to that linear equation, first-degree equation.
So it's a polynomial of degree one, and notice the coefficients in that polynomial are integers
three and negative two.
So that's all you need.
Two-thirds becomes an algebraic number.
I say the square root of three is an algebraic number.
So now if I claim that, I've got to show that the square root of three is a solution to
a polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
Again, not too hard.
x square minus three equals zero will work.
That's a polynomial of degree two.
The coefficients are integers one and negative three, and the square root of three certainly
solves that.
If you stick in x equals square root of three, then the square root of three squared minus
three is zero, so square root of three is an algebraic number.
Now, they get more complicated.
This thing, the fifth root of one plus two times the cube root of four is an algebraic
number, I claim, because it's a solution to this polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
Get ready, x to the 15th minus 3x to the 10th plus 3x to the fifth minus 33 equals zero.
So it turns out my fifth root up there at the top is a solution to that.
That's a 15th degree polynomial with integer coefficients.
So good enough, that makes my number algebraic.
So there's lots and lots of algebraic numbers.
Now it was Euler that introduced this concept.
He said this is what the algebraic numbers are, but he thought there might be some others.
There might be some real numbers that were not algebraic, which means they could not
be the solution of any polynomial equation with integer coefficients, no matter the degree.
He called these supposed non-algebraic numbers, he called them transcendental numbers, because
they transcend algebra.
They transcend the polynomials.
They go beyond what would fall out of polynomial equations as solutions.
So he imagines that there are these numbers, but the question is, are there any?
Now you might say, well, sure there are, he just gave it a name, transcendental numbers.
Isn't that enough to guarantee there's something there?
Well, no, that's not a guarantee there are any, just because you've defined them to
be all the rest of the numbers, maybe there aren't any more.
And here, if you don't like that example, think of the world of animals.
Suppose I am looking at dolphins, and I say a dolphin is algebraic if it lives in the
water.
That's my definition, a dolphin is algebraic if it lives in the water, and a dolphin will
be transcendental if it's not algebraic.
So that's exactly the parallel that Euler was using between the algebraic numbers and
the rest, the transcendental numbers.
Now I got my algebraic dolphins and the rest.
That's a perfectly good definition of a transcendental dolphin, but there aren't any.
There are no transcendental dolphins.
You've never seen a dolphin walking down the street or flying overhead.
They all live in the water.
So just because I've defined this category doesn't guarantee there are any members.
All right, so, are there any transcendental numbers?
Well, people started looking, but it's a very hard problem to show a number's transcendental.
You have to show it can't be the solution of any polynomial equation with integer coefficients
no matter the degree, so it could be a 15,000th degree polynomial, it can't be the solution
of any such polynomial.
It took a century before anybody found even one of these.
The mathematician was Joseph Leoville.
Here he is, and he in 1844 found the first example of a transcendental number.
It was a very sophisticated argument, but he did it.
So now we know there's at least one of these.
People then decided, let's look at some famous numbers and see if they're transcendental.
And one of the numbers was E. We've met that number, Euler's number E. People speculated
that that would be a good candidate to be a transcendental number, so let's try to prove
that.
It was a big challenge, and it took a lot of work and effort by Charles Hermit, who in
1873 proved that E is a transcendental number.
E is not the solution of any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
It was a great triumph, one of the great proofs of 19th century mathematics.
So people patted Hermit on the back and said, great job.
Now here's another candidate, Pi.
I think Pi is transcendental.
Hermit, why don't you prove that?
Pi is another famous number, it would be great to show that was transcendental.
Hermit responded, no way.
He said, I do not dare to attempt to show the transcendence of Pi.
If others undertake it, no one will be happier than I about their success, but believe me,
my dear friend, this cannot fail to cost them some effort.
He had worked so hard on E, he said one transcendental is enough, so he wasn't going to even try
Pi.
It turned out Pi is transcendental, but that took a little longer to prove.
Okay, so there's the situation.
Transcendental numbers exist, but they seem kind of rare, hard to find, hard to establish.
Well then, here comes Georg Cantor with his theory of the infinite in his 1874 paper, and
he shows that this true situation is exactly the opposite, that the transcendental numbers
are more plentiful than the algebraics, even though we're having trouble finding them
there in the majority, and he does this with this brilliant piece of reasoning, which I
want to show you.
He turned intuition on its head, and this was not the first time, nor would it be the
last.
What Cantor did was, through a nice sophisticated argument, he proved that the algebraic numbers
could be put into a one-to-one correspondence with N, the natural numbers.
So these algebraic numbers, these solutions of polynomial equations with integer coefficients,
he classified them in such a way that he got a match-up between the algebraic numbers
and N, even as we got a match-up in the previous lecture between Z and N, between the integers
and N, or between E and N, between the evens and N, he showed how to do it with the algebraics
matched up with N.
So the algebraic numbers were denumerable because they match with N, and their cardinality
was alphanott, that famous transfinite number that Cantor had introduced.
Those are the algebraics.
But wait a minute, I showed you earlier in this lecture that he proved that the interval
of real numbers between zero and one was not denumerable, and indeed, all the real numbers
taken as a whole are not denumerable.
So the algebraic numbers are denumerable, and all the real numbers are not, and maybe
you can see where this is going, because the algebraics cannot account for all the real
numbers.
A denumerable set versus a non-denumerable set, there's got to be more things than the
real numbers than just the algebraics, and what are they?
They're the transcendentals.
They're out there.
And in fact, because denumerable is a small infinity, and the non-denumerability of the
reals is a big infinity, it turns out not only are the transcendentals there, but they're
there in overwhelming abundance.
The transcendental numbers are by far in the majority.
So, how about this little schematic?
Suppose we have our balance.
On one side, Cantor puts the algebraics.
On the other side, he puts the reals.
Now he knows that the algebraics are denumerable, and the reals are not.
So the picture looks like this.
They're in balance.
There's more weight on the side of the real numbers.
Where did the weight come from?
How come there's more real numbers?
Well, it must be the transcendentals tipping the scale.
They're out there.
They're out there in overwhelming abundance.
Most numbers are transcendental.
And yet, you know, people had found so few of them.
It seemed like such a battle to even find a couple.
What Cantor's saying is, no, no, they're in the majority.
E.T. Bell, a 20th century mathematician and a very fine writer put it this way.
The algebraic numbers, said Bell, are spotted over the plane like stars against a black
sky.
The dense blackness is the firmament of the transcendentals.
So the algebraics are out there, but they're like the stars.
You just hear in there.
But that background, the blackness behind, are the transcendentals, which are in the
overwhelming majority.
So there is an application of his theory of the infinite.
But wait a minute.
This was a cardinality argument.
But how many transcendentals did Cantor actually exhibit in this proof?
Which ones did he show you?
None.
He didn't show you a single one.
He knew they were there because of this cardinality reason, but he didn't provide a specific example.
And people sort of wanted to see some.
Come on.
If you tell me the transcendentals are there, you tell me they are.
In the majority, show me a few.
Cantor said, I don't have to.
I know they're there.
I've counted.
Hmm.
Well, that didn't go down too well with some people.
Imagine, let's go back to our dolphins.
Okay.
Remember, we got our algebraic dolphins, and we got all our dolphins.
And suppose I use some kind of clever counting argument and find that the scale tips.
As shown, what's that mean?
The algebraic dolphins cannot account for all the dolphins, so they'd be transcendental
dolphins, which, if you remember, are the dolphins that don't live in the water.
Well, if somebody claimed that there are dolphins that don't live in the water, I would sure
want to see one, show me one.
But Cantor would say, I don't have to.
They're there.
I know they're there.
I counted.
And you can see how this could generate a bit of controversy.
But it's a very nice piece of reasoning.
Was it just trickery?
Uh-uh.
Cantor believed that this was not just playing games with infinity.
This was a legitimate proof that led to a profound conclusion.
And he wrote, I entertain no doubts as to the truths of the transfinites, which I recognized
with God's help.
So he is certainly a fan of this fabulous theory that he invented.
Not everyone was so excited about it.
Henri Poincare, a 20th century mathematician of great ability, said later generations will
regard set theory as a disease from which one has recovered.
He thought this was sick, pathological.
We don't really want to deal with this.
But Poincare actually was in the minority on this.
Cantor ends up prevailing.
And we have a quotation from Bertrand Russell that says, Cantor's work is probably the greatest
of which the age can boast.
That's a pretty high praise from a very great mathematician.
And I think this is how the mathematical world today regards Cantor's contribution.
It's indisputably great.
Well, at this point, I think we've reached the end of this lecture.
And we're reaching the end of the course.
It seems like a fitting place to end, to see Cantor using his wonderful imagination, using
the tools of logic like proof by contradiction, and coming up with a result that is beautiful
and really astonishing in its scope.
It's exactly the sort of thing we've been trying to look at throughout this course.
It places him in a line of great thinkers going way back.
We've seen a lot of them from Euclid and Archimedes and Heron in the time of the Greeks.
Then we jumped over to medieval Islam and saw Al-Qarizmi in action.
Back to Europe in the Renaissance with the crazy story of Cardano and the cubic.
We encountered the mathematicians of the heroic century, ending it with Newton and Leibniz
in the invention of calculus, and then their followers, the Bernoulli's, Euler, later Gauss,
and now Cantor, this long string of great thinkers, and a long string of great theorems
that accompany them.
I'd like to end with a few quotations, one from a very ancient mathematician from classical
times, and one from our friend Bertrand Russell in the modern era.
These obviously come from different time periods, but they both are getting at the power and
beauty of mathematics.
Proclus from the fifth century wrote this.
This, therefore, is mathematics.
She gives life to her own discoveries.
She awakens the mind and purifies the intellect.
She brings light to our intrinsic ideas.
She abolishes the oblivion and ignorance that are ours by birth.
Pretty good testimonial to abolish oblivion and ignorance and give light to our ideas.
Proclus captured something there about this wonderful discipline of mathematics.
So too did Bertrand Russell.
We've seen him so many times.
Here is a quotation I had in my very first lecture.
I love it.
He says, mathematics is that ordered cosmos where pure thought can dwell as in its natural
home, this idea that mathematics is the realm where pure thought is most comfortable.
And let me conclude with a quotation also from Russell that I think is a very apt one.
He wrote this.
He said, mathematics rightly viewed possesses not only truth but supreme beauty, a beauty
cold in austere like that of sculpture without appeal to any part of our weaker nature, without
the gorgeous trappings of painting or music, yet sublimely pure and capable of a stern
perfection such as only the greatest art can show.
Russell here has captured the essence of what we've been discussing throughout this course,
mathematics as great art.
As I said at the outset, a landmark theorem has much in common with a landmark painting
or a landmark novel.
In the first lecture, I mentioned aesthetic qualities that a great proof can exhibit.
One of these was elegance, an economy of thought in which the argument is reduced to its fundamentals,
rather like haiku, in which the author seems to say more than the words possibly can.
Euclid's proof of the infinitude of primes was one of these.
The elegance there was amazing.
Or even Cantor's diagonalization proof we just looked at, in which he established a
very profound result in a very efficient, economical, elegant fashion.
Another characteristic of great theorems was their unexpectedness, in which the strange
nature of the result seems somehow to come out of the blue.
Here I could cite Heron's formula for triangular area, very unexpected in my book.
Euler's solution of the Basel problem, in which he summed that series to get pi squared
over six, or the proof we've just seen, that the transcendental numbers vastly outnumber
their seemingly more abundant algebraic brethren.
Well this course has been meant to reveal this sort of artistry in mathematics and to
take us to that place where pure thought indeed can dwell as in its natural home.
It's been a great pleasure to introduce you to these great thinkers and to share some of
their masterworks.
I hope you have enjoyed the journey.
