Well then, here comes Georg Cantor with his theory of the infinite in his 1874 paper, and
he shows that this true situation is exactly the opposite, that the transcendental numbers
are more plentiful than the algebraics, even though we're having trouble finding them
there in the majority, and he does this with this brilliant piece of reasoning, which I
want to show you.
He turned intuition on its head, and this was not the first time, nor would it be the
last.
What Cantor did was, through a nice sophisticated argument, he proved that the algebraic numbers
could be put into a one-to-one correspondence with N, the natural numbers.
So these algebraic numbers, these solutions of polynomial equations with integer coefficients,
he classified them in such a way that he got a match-up between the algebraic numbers
and N, even as we got a match-up in the previous lecture between Z and N, between the integers
and N, or between E and N, between the evens and N, he showed how to do it with the algebraics
matched up with N.
So the algebraic numbers were denumerable because they match with N, and their cardinality
was alphanott, that famous transfinite number that Cantor had introduced.
Those are the algebraics.
But wait a minute, I showed you earlier in this lecture that he proved that the interval
of real numbers between zero and one was not denumerable, and indeed, all the real numbers
taken as a whole are not denumerable.
So the algebraic numbers are denumerable, and all the real numbers are not, and maybe
you can see where this is going, because the algebraics cannot account for all the real
numbers.
A denumerable set versus a non-denumerable set, there's got to be more things than the
real numbers than just the algebraics, and what are they?
They're the transcendentals.
They're out there.
And in fact, because denumerable is a small infinity, and the non-denumerability of the
reals is a big infinity, it turns out not only are the transcendentals there, but they're
there in overwhelming abundance.
The transcendental numbers are by far in the majority.
So, how about this little schematic?
Suppose we have our balance.
On one side, Cantor puts the algebraics.
On the other side, he puts the reals.
Now he knows that the algebraics are denumerable, and the reals are not.
So the picture looks like this.
They're in balance.
There's more weight on the side of the real numbers.
Where did the weight come from?
How come there's more real numbers?
Well, it must be the transcendentals tipping the scale.
