This, therefore, is mathematics.
She gives life to her own discoveries.
She awakens the mind and purifies the intellect.
She brings light to our intrinsic ideas.
She abolishes the oblivion and ignorance that are ours by birth.
Pretty good testimonial to abolish oblivion and ignorance and give light to our ideas.
Proclus captured something there about this wonderful discipline of mathematics.
So too did Bertrand Russell.
We've seen him so many times.
Here is a quotation I had in my very first lecture.
I love it.
He says, mathematics is that ordered cosmos where pure thought can dwell as in its natural
home, this idea that mathematics is the realm where pure thought is most comfortable.
And let me conclude with a quotation also from Russell that I think is a very apt one.
He wrote this.
He said, mathematics rightly viewed possesses not only truth but supreme beauty, a beauty
cold in austere like that of sculpture without appeal to any part of our weaker nature, without
the gorgeous trappings of painting or music, yet sublimely pure and capable of a stern
perfection such as only the greatest art can show.
Russell here has captured the essence of what we've been discussing throughout this course,
mathematics as great art.
As I said at the outset, a landmark theorem has much in common with a landmark painting
or a landmark novel.
In the first lecture, I mentioned aesthetic qualities that a great proof can exhibit.
One of these was elegance, an economy of thought in which the argument is reduced to its fundamentals,
rather like haiku, in which the author seems to say more than the words possibly can.
Euclid's proof of the infinitude of primes was one of these.
The elegance there was amazing.
Or even Cantor's diagonalization proof we just looked at, in which he established a
very profound result in a very efficient, economical, elegant fashion.
Another characteristic of great theorems was their unexpectedness, in which the strange
nature of the result seems somehow to come out of the blue.
Here I could cite Heron's formula for triangular area, very unexpected in my book.
Euler's solution of the Basel problem, in which he summed that series to get pi squared
over six, or the proof we've just seen, that the transcendental numbers vastly outnumber
their seemingly more abundant algebraic brethren.
Well this course has been meant to reveal this sort of artistry in mathematics and to
take us to that place where pure thought indeed can dwell as in its natural home.
It's been a great pleasure to introduce you to these great thinkers and to share some of
their masterworks.
I hope you have enjoyed the journey.
