I know they're there.
I counted.
And you can see how this could generate a bit of controversy.
But it's a very nice piece of reasoning.
Was it just trickery?
Uh-uh.
Cantor believed that this was not just playing games with infinity.
This was a legitimate proof that led to a profound conclusion.
And he wrote, I entertain no doubts as to the truths of the transfinites, which I recognized
with God's help.
So he is certainly a fan of this fabulous theory that he invented.
Not everyone was so excited about it.
Henri Poincare, a 20th century mathematician of great ability, said later generations will
regard set theory as a disease from which one has recovered.
He thought this was sick, pathological.
We don't really want to deal with this.
But Poincare actually was in the minority on this.
Cantor ends up prevailing.
And we have a quotation from Bertrand Russell that says, Cantor's work is probably the greatest
of which the age can boast.
That's a pretty high praise from a very great mathematician.
And I think this is how the mathematical world today regards Cantor's contribution.
It's indisputably great.
Well, at this point, I think we've reached the end of this lecture.
And we're reaching the end of the course.
It seems like a fitting place to end, to see Cantor using his wonderful imagination, using
the tools of logic like proof by contradiction, and coming up with a result that is beautiful
and really astonishing in its scope.
It's exactly the sort of thing we've been trying to look at throughout this course.
It places him in a line of great thinkers going way back.
We've seen a lot of them from Euclid and Archimedes and Heron in the time of the Greeks.
Then we jumped over to medieval Islam and saw Al-Qarizmi in action.
Back to Europe in the Renaissance with the crazy story of Cardano and the cubic.
We encountered the mathematicians of the heroic century, ending it with Newton and Leibniz
in the invention of calculus, and then their followers, the Bernoulli's, Euler, later Gauss,
and now Cantor, this long string of great thinkers, and a long string of great theorems
that accompany them.
I'd like to end with a few quotations, one from a very ancient mathematician from classical
times, and one from our friend Bertrand Russell in the modern era.
These obviously come from different time periods, but they both are getting at the power and
beauty of mathematics.
Proclus from the fifth century wrote this.
