That's easy.
3x minus 2 equals 0.
If you put in x equals two-thirds, it certainly works.
That's a solution to that linear equation, first-degree equation.
So it's a polynomial of degree one, and notice the coefficients in that polynomial are integers
three and negative two.
So that's all you need.
Two-thirds becomes an algebraic number.
I say the square root of three is an algebraic number.
So now if I claim that, I've got to show that the square root of three is a solution to
a polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
Again, not too hard.
x square minus three equals zero will work.
That's a polynomial of degree two.
The coefficients are integers one and negative three, and the square root of three certainly
solves that.
If you stick in x equals square root of three, then the square root of three squared minus
three is zero, so square root of three is an algebraic number.
Now, they get more complicated.
This thing, the fifth root of one plus two times the cube root of four is an algebraic
number, I claim, because it's a solution to this polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
Get ready, x to the 15th minus 3x to the 10th plus 3x to the fifth minus 33 equals zero.
So it turns out my fifth root up there at the top is a solution to that.
That's a 15th degree polynomial with integer coefficients.
So good enough, that makes my number algebraic.
So there's lots and lots of algebraic numbers.
Now it was Euler that introduced this concept.
He said this is what the algebraic numbers are, but he thought there might be some others.
There might be some real numbers that were not algebraic, which means they could not
be the solution of any polynomial equation with integer coefficients, no matter the degree.
He called these supposed non-algebraic numbers, he called them transcendental numbers, because
they transcend algebra.
They transcend the polynomials.
They go beyond what would fall out of polynomial equations as solutions.
So he imagines that there are these numbers, but the question is, are there any?
Now you might say, well, sure there are, he just gave it a name, transcendental numbers.
Isn't that enough to guarantee there's something there?
Well, no, that's not a guarantee there are any, just because you've defined them to
be all the rest of the numbers, maybe there aren't any more.
And here, if you don't like that example, think of the world of animals.
Suppose I am looking at dolphins, and I say a dolphin is algebraic if it lives in the
water.
