other than 9.
There's lots of choices, let's just crank it up to 0.
So now my number, c, which looked like 0.c1, c2, c3, now it starts off 0.20, and then here
come the rest, c3, c4.
And we continue on this process, let me do two more steps.
I'll choose c3 to differ from the third decimal digit of the number matched with 3.
There we go, the number matched with 3, there it is, 0.60231, etc.
I go over to the third digit of that, 602, I want c3 to be something other than 2.
So make it be 3.
So now my number is looking like 0.203, and then the next digits are coming, c4 will be
chosen to differ from the fourth decimal digit of the number matched with 4.
So back to the chart, the number matched with 4 is 0.77777, you go over to the fourth one,
which is a 7 of course, I'll pick an 8.
And so my number starts, my number c starts 0.2038.
This process can be continued forever until you build your whole real number, your infinite
decimal c, and this is called Cantor's diagonalization proof.
And you can see why from the picture, these numbers are spinning down the diagonal of that
array.
All right, now, so what?
Well, I say first of all, the number c, thus generated, 0.2038, dot, dot, dot, belongs
to i.
Now, remember, i was all the real numbers between 0 and 1, so is this a real number?
Yes, it's an infinite decimal, c is an infinite decimal.
Is it between 0 and 1?
Yes, it starts 0 point.
So it is a real number between 0 and 1, therefore, under Cantor's hypothesis that we had a one
to one correspondence, c has to appear somewhere in that right hand column.
Remember we assumed every natural number was on the left, every number in i was on the
right, and they were matched up.
So if c is a number in i, it's got to be on the right somewhere.
But it can't be, it's not there, not this number c.
And you can see it because c differs in at least one decimal place with every number
in that right hand column.
You've built it, so it can't possibly be there.
Look, it can't be the number matched with 1 because that starts 0.1 and you start 0.2.
So c is not that one.
It can't be the number matched with 2 because there's a 9 in the second decimal place of
the number matched with 2, but I have a 0 in the second decimal place of mine.
It can't be the number matched with 3, it can't be the number matched with 4, c cannot
be the number matched with 400 or 4 million, c isn't in the right hand column.
He has built a number that can't be there.
And yet, the hypothesis was that every number is in that right hand column.
