We've met Georg Cantor and his remarkable theory of the infinite, but now we have to
address those two remaining questions.
Can every infinite set be matched in a one-to-one fashion with the natural numbers?
And what good is any of this to other realms of mathematics?
To answer the first question, we're going to remember that a real number, a real number,
can be written as an infinite decimal.
For instance, one-third we can write as 0.33333 forever, it's an infinite decimal.
Two-fifths is 0.4, and you might just stop there, but if we wanted, we could continue
it as an infinite decimal with lots of zeros thereafter.
Pi is 3.141592, and on it goes a number like r, this curious pattern of 0.12123123412345,
an infinite decimal, that's a real number.
So the real numbers we will regard as the infinite decimals.
Now a real number between 0 and 1, which is really where we're going to restrict our
attention, this can be written as an infinite decimal, but its integer part is going to
be 0, so it's going to look like 0 point, and then here come the decimal places, a,
b, c, d, e, f, and so on.
But if it lives between 0 and 1, that integer part to the left of the decimal point is just
a 0.
Alright, let me let i be the set of all the real numbers between 0 and 1.
So here we go with one of these completed infinite sets.
We'll call it i for interval.
Here's the theorem Cantor proves.
There cannot exist a 1 to 1 correspondence between n and i, between the natural numbers
and the set of all real numbers between 0 and 1.
No way you can make a 1 to 1 correspondence between these, impossible.
Pretty bold statement.
How in the world do you prove this?
How do you prove that the set of real numbers between 0 and 1 is not denumerable in Cantor's
terminology from the last lecture?
The proof is by that age old weapon, contradiction.
We've seen this in the hands of Archimedes.
Here it is in modern times.
Cantor's going to prove this by contradiction.
Now what's he trying to prove?
There cannot be a 1 to 1 correspondence between n and i.
How do you contradict it?
You assume there is one.
You assume there is such a 1 to 1 correspondence and get yourself into logical hot water.
So let's assume, for the sake of eventual contradiction, that some 1 to 1 correspondence
exists.
Now what I have to do is display it, you know, this hypothetical 1 to 1 correspondence.
So let me say it's going to look something like this.
