Hello, and welcome to Unheard. I'm Freddie Sayers. Joining us today is Curtis Yavin.
He is a thinker who's been talked a lot about recently. A dangerous thinker. Lots of people
have strong opinions about him. He's had write-ups in the New York Times and Vanity Fair, but
he's also appeared on Tucker Carlson. And generally, people are trying to make sense
of some of his very challenging thoughts. And so we thought we would try to do the same.
Hi, Curtis.
Great to be on your show, Freddie.
I think it's fair to say you've published over a million words. Is that right?
I'd say gazillion precisely.
So I have cannot claim to have read all million of your words, but I have been trying to kind
of get up to speed with it. And the idea that really jumped out at me as challenging and
interesting and worthy of trying to understand what you mean by it is the idea that we should
be returning in the West, or let's say in America, to monarchy as a system of government.
So I'm hoping that by the end of this episode, even if people completely reject it or don't
agree with it, they will at least understand what you mean and what you're thinking is.
All right.
So let's start from the beginning and tell us, you know, what's wrong with the democracy
system we have going at the moment.
There's three forms of government that you see across history. And the three forms are
monarchy, oligarchy and democracy. Aristotle describes these originally monarchy being
the rule of one oligarchy being the rule of a few and democracy being the rule of many.
And so when you literally mean these words, they can be really very tricky because it
can actually be hard to even figure out which kind of system of government you're living
in. And so, for example, most people today think of themselves as living in a democracy.
Substantively, we're looking, I would argue, at an oligarchy. And, you know, but most people
who would say, oh, we're living in some kind of an oligarchy, generally they'll point
to like big business or some sort of classical kind of abstract scapegoat in a way don't
really have a good definition of what that oligarchy is. I would describe the oligarchy
in the US today as a combination of the administrative state, what people, you know, the civil service,
what people sometimes call the deep state, basically permanent employees of the government
together with education and media. So basically mainstream, legitimate education and media.
And if you look at education and media, you know, Harvard in your times or whatever, you
see that sort of what defines the prestige of these sort of outlets of these, in many
cases, private companies is sort of nowhere to find. There's no, you know, US News and
World Report has like a list of the top 14 law schools or whatever. What makes that list,
right? It hasn't changed in, I believe, a generation, right? And yet none of these things
is mentioned in the Constitution as a written document. But they are very, very important
to have powerworks in the United States today and in the world.
So I notice you don't mention big business in that context or the tech, tech powers.
Why is that not on your list?
Because the influence over of those over the world outside them is much smaller than the
influence of the world outside them over them. So basically, when you look at, for example,
the sort of censorship that takes place on social media today, this is something that
in fact Silicon Valley resisted for many years. But it was basically forced into it by continuous
media pressure. Moreover, what companies like like Metta are discovering is that even when
you give into this pressure, it doesn't reduce the sort of, you know, power doesn't really
take yes for an answer. They always want more, you know, the number of Facebook has done
many, many things that the press has asked them to do over the last five years. This
is not decreased the number of negative stories about Facebook or Metta in the press, right?
So in fact, it sort of attracts more because basically people see that they can make an
impact on Facebook. So within basically the current power structure, what you're seeing
is that actually business and also the military, which people also sort of blame is very, very
much cowed and very, very much subordinate to these other powers, right? And so basically
in the sort of conflict between Facebook and Harvard, like Harvard, you know, Facebook
doesn't investigate Harvard, Harvard investigates Facebook, right? Or so, you know, Elon Musk
did this really sacrilegious thing recently on Twitter where, you know, he's like, you
know, well, all these nonprofit organizations are like, you know, with like nice acronym
names that are not actually part of the government are like criticizing Facebook, like Facebook
is heavily criticized by like people who matter. And Elon is like, who are these people who
is funding them? Why do they matter? Right? And these are sorts of, you know, sort of
the ritual of not asking these questions and not asking why these organizations tend to
agree with each other so frequently really is like the question of like not asking about
the oligarchy that you actually have. The third form of government besides democracy,
I mean, so if you basically say, well, when we say democracy, when we say liberal democracy,
when we say civil society, when we say sort of all of these good words, we mean the authority
of this sort of oligarchy of prestige and reputation. And we trust that reputation
equals quality. This you've called the cathedral in your writing, right? That's that's that's
the term you use to sum up all of these other powers, sort of the brain, you know, basically,
if you're looking at, you know, the oligarchy is a sort of the bottle, the cathedral meaning
prestigious media and education is its brain, and the administrative state or deep state
is its body, right? And so the brain generally controls the body. And, you know, generally
decisions made in the administrative state have to sort of agree with the consensus, whether
it's, you know, in like science or even foreign policy, have to agree with the consensus of
the cathedral. Basically, you're looking at something that calls itself a democracy, and
is actually an oligarchy. And so basically, those two other forms of government, which are
always forms of power that can exist in the world have to be in a way suppressed. The simplest
way to suppress democracy, what we call sort of the force of actual democracy in the world
today is politics or populism. And so, you know, one of the interesting things you'll notice
about the English language, as I believe you use it on the other side of the Atlantic as
well, is that there are these two nice words, democracy and politics. And what's interesting
is, they literally mean the same thing. But one of them has positive connotations, the other one
has negative connotations. So if you're basically saying, we're going to democratize US foreign
policy, that's good. But to politicize it would be very bad. So to politicize it would basically
to give politicians power over the government. And essentially, the way that democracy has
disappeared in the Western world is familiar to anyone who's ever seen an episode of Yes,
Minister. It's basically that the administrative state has practical control over the ceremonial
politicians who are elected to supervise them. And that's why when you elect, you know, Boris
Johnson, you know, a sort of dubious sobriety, I guess, in many ways, or dubious seriousness,
really, in many ways, or you elect, you know, a very, very old man like Joe Biden, you're not
really electing anything like a CEO of the government. The politicians you elect are not
in charge. So you are not in charge. If you want to basically turn down the power on democracy,
basically call it, you know, this other word politics, which means the same and is bad,
you know, get people to believe that basically for politicians to have control over the government
is traditionally wrong. I mean, this whole sort of American administrative state is basically
the personal regime of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, sort of surviving without an executive in charge.
Right. And this was America was a monarchy as recently as the 30s, in a sense.
So your definition, so we've sort of, we're all coming onto monarchy then. So your definition of
monarchy is not necessarily a king or a queen, you mean a single individual who has real agency
over the levers of the state. Exactly. Exactly. I couldn't define it better than that. So
a real, essentially, you have this difference between a real monarchy and it turns out that
constitutional monarchies always turn into ceremonial monarchies. It's sort of not clear why this is,
but basically once you've contaminated, you know, basically James, the first was right about this.
Once you've contaminated the spirit of monarchy, which is absolute with a sort of partial sense
in which other powers are supreme over the monarch, the monarch will rapidly lose power
and basically get his head cut off. And I believe you've gone through some of that in
the Kingdom. Yeah, tell us a bit. And very, very unfortunate, very, very unfortunate affair.
Right. You know, and I really regret it. And so, like, when you look in sort of interesting
test for is this a real monarchy or a costume monarchy is a very simple test, which I call
the Elizabeth test. The Elizabeth test basically says, is this more like Elizabeth the first or
more like Elizabeth the second? Now, you know, there's some debate over the absolutism of Elizabeth
the first, right? You know, so really we should say like Henry the eighth or even Henry the seventh,
who is a serious badass. But the if you basically say, is this monarchy more like Elizabeth the
second, you're talking about something, an organ of government that could simply be removed
from existence and life in the country would not change. So basically what happens if you remove
the monarchy in the UK today? Well, it's not actually part of the governance loop. It's not
actually doing things. So what you lose is basically some tourist revenue, you know, a lot of
sort of entertainment. I've got to stop you there. I got to stop you there, Curtis, because I'm living
in a constitutional monarchy. And we've got our Jubilee celebrations coming up for Elizabeth the
second. And I think maybe there's a slight misunderstanding here, because the functions
of a kind of modern as you put it ceremonial monarchy, it's not as you're right to say that
it's not part of the executive branch of the government exactly, even though it might theoretically
be. But the ceremonial role, the symbolic role is not nothing. It's actually potentially quite
significant. And I think if on the unhappy day that she dies, I think the world will see just
how significant it is for the people of the UK. It is possible just restore the powers of a
monarchy that has become ceremonial. But it has to be done in a sort of all in one way.
The kind of monarchy that you're suggesting is Elizabeth the first, not Elizabeth the second?
Is an Elizabeth the first, not Elizabeth the second? And the other thing to notice about
that comparison is that you can use it also to apply to democracy. So you can say, are we living
in an Elizabeth the first democracy, or an Elizabeth the second democracy? And in an Elizabeth
the first democracy, you elect a leader like Franklin Roosevelt, who actually controls the
government. And in an Elizabeth the second democracy, you don't. You elect Joe Biden.
Another word for monarch in the 20th century contest is obviously a despot or a dictator.
Or yes, or a CEO. Let's skip forward to basically the case for monarchy. So we're basically looking
at, you know, to recap, we think we're in a democracy. We're actually in an oligarchy.
Democracy itself has significant problems. You know, putting politicians in charge,
the politicians we have in charge of government is an obviously as impossible an idea as it seems.
They have no capacity for doing this. The people have no like populism is not a success.
It sort of can kind of briefly achieve some authority. It loses power really, really rapidly.
And so sort of the only thing that you're left with in a way, if you don't like the way this
oligarchy is trending, is the third system of government monarchy. So the first thing,
you know, the point that you were about to make is that basically,
when people look at 20th century informal monarchies, which are basically any sort of
new monarchy trying to be born in a sense, they see basically very, very bad results.
So the Hitler's, the Stalin's and so on. And so Kim Jong-un is basically frequently mentioned.
And there's a couple of things worth noting about that status. First of all, when you basically
take that as your sample of history, you're doing this very, very extreme fisheye lens thing where
what happens in 40 or 50 years in the early 20th century means more than basically the rest of time.
And so actually, when you look at all across human history, the absolute normal form of government
is monarchy. You know, Hume writes about this, he's basically like, yeah, obviously the best
form of government is like, until democracy is basically considered one of the worst forms of
government until the 18th century. It's a sort of becomes the reverse of a slur in America around
that time. But it had traditionally been like, oh, this was tried and it doesn't work. Everyone
who writes about, if you go to the Wikipedia page for Athenian democracy, you'll find this curious
note where some modern scholar is quoted that almost, it's curious that that system of government
should be so celebrated, because almost all the ancient primary sources we have about it,
say it was awful. So we basically come to this sort of strange reversal in the last 250 years
of the traditional attitudes in Western culture toward these forms of government.
If we're not supposed to look at the 20th century, because that's a recent and distorted
slice of history, who are the monarchs we should be looking at as the kinds of examples we should
be emulating? I think you can, Elizabethan England was an absolutely wonderful place. I think you
can learn a lot from Napoleon. His military strategy was perhaps a little aggressive, but
Napoleon is perhaps the monarch who's most reminiscent of like a 21st century Silicon
Valley CEO in some ways. Napoleon is really a startup guy. Henry VIII, he was on your list earlier.
Yeah, Henry VIII is not so bad. It would have been quite scary to live in Henry VIII's time,
I feel like. Well, is it scary to walk down the street in London? I don't know. I mean,
to compare Henry VIII to Stalin, it depends where you are, it depends when it is. To compare Henry
VIII to Stalin is like, I mean, sort of the, like you're talking about orders of magnitude
and differences in sort of the level of tyranny. Yes, you could get your head cut off if you were
involved in court politics in the wrong way in Henry VIII's time. You did not have vast
gulags operating in the north of Scotland or whatever, right? I mean, and so, like,
one of the things that people do when they basically sort of apply these kinds of traditional
forms of odium is that their sense of proportion disappears. And so we were talking about a sense
of proportion kind of across time, you know, where people think about Hitler and they don't think
about, say, Augustus. The kind of monarch we're going to get through your system then, obviously,
is not, it's not a single family. You're ditching the hereditary element of monarchy. Yeah, yeah.
Yes, yes. So, you know, we're skipping ahead a little bit, because let me just mention two other
things. One of the things that people forget about the dictators and the despots of the last 250
years is that by definition, all of these dictators and despots are in a very, very strange state
where they're in a war against democracy. And democracy is coming to kill them whether they
want to tangle with it or not. And so they sort of develop, there's a bunch of kinds of pathologies
which you see across all of these states, including like Franco's Spain, you see it in Tsarist Russia
in the 19th century, which is hated by all sort of the democratic countries, where basically the
intellectuals kind of pull away from the ruling monarchy and basically get attracted to London
or New York or Washington. And they become like, you know, all the intellectuals by the time of the
Russian Revolution, all the word intelligentsia comes from Russia, they're basically sort of
drawn away to this new force. And so these regimes find themselves not in the sort of
condition of a unified nation that say Elizabeth the first had, where the court is actually in a
way the center of intellectual life, even in Elizabethan England, to this situation where
the regime kind of intellectually dries up and is opposed by this kind of new force. And that's
one of the reasons why we find, we intellectuals find these regimes so awful, and we focus on
them so much. But let me fast forward to basically, you know, the case for monarchy now that I've kind
of cleared up or at least addressed some of the cases against it. So one of the things you'll
notice in the real world that you live in, is the government is important. One of the other
things you'll notice is that almost everything in your world that works was made by a monarchy.
So we're using computers here, your computer was built by a corporation that is run by a CEO who
basically has absolute but accountable control over the operations of that company. So Steve Jobs,
in a way, is very similar in some ways to Napoleon, but he's sort of working at a kind of different
level of sort of virtualization, you might say. I think if you spoke to a lot of CEOs,
they would feel that their power was surprisingly limited, not that they've got a board that keeps
them in check, they've got departments that refuse to do what they're told. And actually,
maybe the difference between a president in the White House and a CEO in a big company
isn't so different after all. It depends on how sort of infected your companies are
by the spirit of government. And in Europe especially, you have, you know, this is frankly
one reason I've been a CEO and I've competed against European companies. I've also worked
for a company that was headquartered in Europe. And sort of this sense of dynamism that you have
in the best Silicon Valley companies where Elon Musk can come in and fire an entire department
before lunch becomes absent in these companies. And the jobs in them become much more like
government jobs. And you'll see that ossification in bigger, older companies like IBM as well.
You'll see certain kinds of, you know, it's true that if you're the CEO of IBM, you're really kind
of more presiding over IBM or the CEO of ExxonMobil was put in, you know, Rex Tillerson went from
being presiding over, you know, in a state lead and dignified way ExxonMobil to, you know,
presiding over the State Department where he did basically nothing, right? And because of course,
he could do nothing. And so in that case, maybe Elon Musk is more of a kind of exception than
the rule. He's the unusual case. He still exerts that kind of power. I would say, you know,
both the exception and the ideal. And one of the things about being from Silicon Valley startup
culture is that this is really not done here. This is two things. One is this is considered a
real poison in this environment. Two is that even the environment, you know, a sense of proportion
needs to always be had. So even, yes, is this effect, is the yes minister effect visible in
IBM? Yes, it is. But it's going to be about a hundred times weaker than the yes minister
effect in yes minister or in like the little, you know, catty little things that Dominic Cummings
tells us about how it works now in Whitehall. And, you know, just in the sense of proportion,
I mean, my my parents were American bureaucrats. So I sort of saw the American bureaucracy from
underneath. And so, yeah, you know, it's like saying, is there alcohol and beer? You know,
is there alcohol in Scotch? Yes, there is. There's alcohol and apple cider. But like, you know,
the proportions are very, very different. And so you're looking when you look at a sort of oligarchical
machine, you're working at looking at a machine that fundamentally works, according to process,
it basically acts almost like a court in a way. It's very, very ossified, and it hates giving
decisions to individuals. It doesn't operate by sort of mission orders and sort of the command
hierarchy doesn't really mean much. It's like an exception handling hierarchy. So it's really a
very, very different thing from sort of the way a private company works. And even when you look
at private companies around Washington, the so called Beltway bandits, they tend to sort of be
ossified in this way. This is why any engineer hates working for like a major old school defense
contractor. So there's really a lot of this poison basically, sort of going around, and it's the poison
of basically not having not sort of operating at least a normal default way by command. And so,
the other thing you mentioned is boards. And this is a very important part of doing what I call an
accountable monarchy. So the thing is that... So we're on to the plan now, Curtis. We're on to the
plan now. You're telling us the future. I'm explaining basically how to do it right, generally.
And the way to do it generally right is to have something I call an accountable monarchy.
So you basically want the way a CEO relates to the board. You know, in theory, the board
cannot operate the company. It's like when Elon Musk was going to be on Twitter's board,
everyone's like, well, Elon's going to do this. Elon's going to do that. Elon's going to go to
a room four times a year and look at somebody reading a PowerPoint and have some general
opinions. The board is not a management mechanism. If a company is managed by its board, something
has gone really, really, really wrong. It's even worse if the shareholders are involved. If the
shareholders are involved, something is on fire. And so what a board is there for is a backup
mechanism in case things are really not going right. And so Facebook's board, Meta's board,
is Mark Zuckerberg. And he meets with himself. He meets with some people he shows PowerPoints to.
He has absolute power over that company because he has magic shares that let him control the board.
When I was the CEO, I had magic shares that let me control the board. And that's actually a
relatively normal thing. So you can sort of function entirely without this accountability layer
in a lot of situations. And it comes into play when you have to replace the CEO, when you have to
like these things also happen. You have problems at the executive layer. People go crazy.
People become drug addicts. People get brain tumors. Elizabeth the first, okay, yeah,
does she chop off the heads of anyone but Mary Queen of Scots? No, not really. But
suppose she'd gotten a brain tumor that made her start going around being like off of their head
all the time. Right? What's going to happen there? Oh, George the Third is much more. You should read
Andrew Roberts' new history of George the Third. It's quite nice. George the Third was really just
a big nerd. How does this now transpose to government? So we've got to get this CEO plus
board situation. In the US Constitution, as originally written, we have a very, very simple
and beautiful means of constructing what I would call a crude, accountable monarchy. And this system
is that the American people every four years elect a president. And the president is the chief
executive of the executive branch. Now, people have simply forgotten two things. One, they've
forgotten the sort of reasons that caused this Constitution to be written the way it was, which
was that the very, very anarchic democracy of the Articles of Confederation period was not working
at all. And secondly, that it was a sort of ersatz monarchy intended to fit basically George
Washington and Alexander Hamilton as a kind of, you know, co-founding duo. And third, that the
literal words of the Constitution say that the president is the chief executive of the executive
branch that they have. In other words, the power of Elon Musk, who is the chief executive of Tesla.
And this Constitution has been systematically perverted to basically, if you, you know,
there's a fun experiment you can try. You can go to DC and talk to anyone on the Hill or anyone
involved in the process and just tell them, we don't actually have an executive branch.
We have a legislative branch. And we'll agree with you because obviously, the agencies are
managed by Congress. They don't come and testify in the White House. They testify before Congress.
DC would actually work probably better without the White House. It's a completely, it's actually
Elizabeth II. And so this is what Americans didn't realize when they elected Trump. They didn't
realize they were electing Elizabeth II. And so when you read the literal letter of the Constitution,
there's nothing that says this. It's just like, oh, yeah, this is the way we've always done it.
Like, well, you know, Congress is in the Constitution.
Congress is in the Constitution. But the Constitution identifies the three branches
of government as co-equal. It does not say which gets to supervise the other. And it is certainly
blatant, you know, the founders expected Congress to be passing the laws, not to be micromanaging
the executive branch. The bills, the omnibus bills, it passed like nothing like laws.
But you're saying that three branches of government that are equal, that doesn't sound
a lot like a monarchy. It sounds like they're carefully designed to not be a monarchy.
Right. No, what it means that they're equal is simply that they're not in control of each other.
And so what it means that basically the Supreme Court and the Congress are not in control of the
executive branch is that the executive branch has a very grave responsibility to act on the
opinions of the Supreme Court and the advice of Congress. But it is also its requirement to ignore
that advice when that advice is bad. And then it is for the people of the United States to decide
whether that breach, which of these co-equal branches should be held supreme. And if they
feel the president has done wrong, they should get rid of the president at the next election.
What you're looking at in the United States is actually a perfectly, almost perfectly designed
absolute elective monarchy, sort of where the board meets the board as the American people,
and they meet every four years. And they say, is FDR doing a great job? Has he cured the Great
Depression, conquered the world, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera? Would you keep the four-yearly
votes in your monarchy so that they stay? Well, so there's a lot of merit in basically abiding
by established forms. Because by putting the executive branch under the management of a chief
executive who actually knows how to manage, would have only one obvious result, which is that
for the most part, you wouldn't even keep most of the existing civil service. There would be no
reason to keep these institutions or structures. You would be starting from, you would be running the
government like a startup. It would be actually much more like the relationship between the old
sort of regime and the new regime would be much closer to the relationship between
the German government in 1944 and the German government in 1946. It would be a complete
turnover in authority. Or indeed, the change that happened 12 years before that.
Or the change that happened in 1989 in East Germany. Or the change that happened in 1918
in Germany. You've seen basically a number of true revolutions in, I mean, Germany has seen
literally, there are people who live through four absolute regime changes in Germany in the 20th
century. And so to say, can you say regime change is always for the better or regime change is
always for the worse? Regime change? No. I mean, it can be awful. It can be amazing. It can be the
fall of East Germany. It can be the rise of Hitler. So let me try and summarize, and you probably won't
accept my choice of words. But so we're talking about something akin to a strongman. We're talking
about a powerful leader elected via the democratic process. But once they achieve office, they start
thinning out or throwing out wholesale chunks of what was there before, whether we call it the
deep state or institutions or whatever. That's the sort of, I mean, there are examples of that
that do come to mind. One kind of more soft core example, I suppose, is what's been going on in
Hungary with Viktor Orban. A lot of people will defend him and say that he's been a highly
effective and successful politician. Other people will criticize him. But he got there through
elections. He's not especially interested in a lot of the institutions of civil society.
Is he the kind of guy that we're talking? Orban is indeed a soft core, like you have to understand
the sort of relationship between 20th century fascism and anything that sounds a lot to you
like 20th century fascism. And the reason Orban sounds a lot sort of seems to rhyme in some ways
with 20th century fascism, even with sort of the best of those leaders like Metaxas in Greece
or Salazar in Portugal, people who people don't think too much about, because just the amount of
bad shit that went on in those countries into those leaders was very, very low.
So when you look at sort of the best of those leaders, they're all in sort of the best of
them spent the most time on the side of the Allies, which is not a coincidence, because it was the
best thing for the countries to do in general in the long run. And even the ones who don't like,
you know, Salazar is kind of very ostentatiously neutral, for example, even though his regime is
exactly the same form of the regime of Hitler, right? Or Mussolini, he's basically like those
dictators don't really collaborate very well, which is even Germany and Japan do not collaborate
well, which is an interesting thing to note about them. This is Orban. You're telling us about
Orban. This is Orban. So if you look at Orban, he has the same basic problem as all of these regimes,
which is that he's in conflict with a higher power that he's not going to defeat. We talk about
these countries as isolated, you know, as if Hungary was like isolated like North Korea. In fact,
what happens under an Orban is that all of Hungary's intelligence, he has simply just looks to the
EU and they become European. And basically, you have this strange, all of these regimes are sort
of these strange bastard regimes that have lost their upper class. And they have lost their upper
class because their upper class regards the true authorities as being London and New York, because
the true authorities are the intellectual authorities of the world. So they lose their
intelligentsia, they lose their upper class, and they sort of develop these kind of shitty peasant
features. I mean, in Germany before the Holocaust, sort of anti-Semitism is considered this kind of
shitty peasant thing, which in fact it is. And so when people see even a leader like Trump,
who basically draws from the same lower middle class or true middle class or whatever you want
to call it, class, what they see is basically this kind of regime that's basically sundered between
its intelligentsia. And it still sort of has this class conflict within it. And the key thing about
a true monarchy is that it has to heal this conflict. And it has to actually be the center
of the nation, both at the level of governing sort of the masses and the middle classes,
and at being sort of the intellectual and moral center of the nation.
So how are you going to pull that off in America?
In America, you know, there's a saying that why are there no coups in America? Why are there no
revolutions in America? Because America is the only country in the world in which there is no
American embassy. I grew up as a brat of the US State Department, so I sort of really, you know,
I feel that quote. And so actually pulling it, America is the only country it can be pulled
off in. Because America is basically where all other countries look to leadership. And so if you
have basically a regime that in any way rebels against this oligarchy, it will be rebelling
against the whole ruling class that ruling class will basically respond to Washington and New York
the way it does. And you will have one of these shitty fascist type regimes that basically peels
off its upper class. But how would you avoid that happening in the US when you've got the
cathedral as you describe it, which are all of one mind on so many things? If you elect your new
CEO slash monarch slash dictator, the intelligentsia will pull away, right? Like they always do in these
examples. So the intelligentsia will not pull away because they don't have a higher power to
pull away to that sense of like, there is a higher power that we could tune our radios to
is sort of very, very clear around the world and the center of that sort of the you know,
the main antenna of that power station is located in America. So your argument is that because it
would happen within America, they wouldn't peel away to London or Paris or Singapore, they would
stay. They would peel away to whoever was in power, whoever was in power in America.
Maybe a better example, then maybe if I can throw one out, another one at you, it might be
Putin's Russia at the moment, because we are literally seeing the oligarchs coming back to
Moscow at the moment, because there is no welcoming external power, perhaps other than China. So is
Putin's Russia closer to the ideal in your worldview? The intelligentsia in Putin's Russia
are still overwhelmingly westernized. They're overwhelmingly pussy-riotized. They're overwhelmingly.
There are definitely plenty of smart Russians who do not basically follow the Anglo-American
antenna, but they're really in the minority. When you look at Russia, Russia is a regime that has
suffered the same sort of disease that leads it in the direction of fascism, which is simply that
it's lost its intelligentsia. And if you're looking for one difference between the regime of
Elizabeth I and the regime of Putin or whatever fascist despot, the question of, you know, has
it lost its intelligentsia is the biggest one, because Elizabeth I regime definitely had not,
and Putin's regime, Orban's regime, et cetera, et cetera, definitely have. Hitler's regime definitely
had. The thing is that he was at war against the entire world, and he was defeated by the entire
world. And so, you know, we saw the worst sort of, like, it was very clear to the most basic
observers of Hitler from the 30s on in Germany and outside Germany, that the regime was capable
of the most outrageous criminality. And so, it was also put in a situation where that criminality
was most likely to come out. But the thing that's confusing me here, Curtis, is that you're against
the intelligentsia, it sounds to me, that this is the cathedral that's kind of homogenous left
liberal New York Times view is what you rail against in your blogs. So, you presumably,
you'd be happy for them to leave. No, no, no, no, not at all. Not at all. I want to cure them.
They're my people. My father was a philosophy professor who later worked as a Foreign Service
Officer. These are the people that I grew up with. I don't want to, you know, cure them. I don't want
to hurt them. I want to free them, basically. And when you look at these institutions, they're
composed of, like, my fiance is a journalist. Like, when you look at these institutions,
they're composed of very, very good people. And what you see very, very quickly is that
the cause of, you know, it's like people outside, you know, people from this kind of fascist,
populist, democratic world, look at this and they're like, they're all pedophiles.
You know, because sort of the only way that they can explain kind of the bad work that these
structures do and the bad state in which they leave the country is to say that they're all evil.
On the contrary, they're, as individuals, they're neither evil nor incompetent. You know, anyone
who's dealt with civil servants and journalists, you know, sometimes their heads are a little bit
swelled. You know, that's true of anyone who matters, really. But when you look at these people,
they're not bad people. The problem is the structures. And so what you're trying to do is
destroy the structures and keep the people. The more you talk about it, the less totally
revolutionary it sounds. Because if we're keeping it in the American context, we're going to keep
the intelligentsia. We're just going to tweak or destroy the structures they work for. But we're
going to keep them as the powerful people. And in fact, this CEO, monarch leader would probably
then come from their ranks, probably, if they're going to be so loyal to him or her.
Collective loyalty is a less, you know, is a less power, sort of loyalty to the collective
is something we kind of all believe in or loyalty to people like us is sort of something we all
believe in kind of in the 20th century. In a way, it's sort of treated as not a good force. It's
actually not a good force. One of the things that you see is that these sorts of diffuse loyalties
are easily overcome by a functional kind of command hierarchy, such as is found in any
corporation that gets shit done in any like system, you know, you're directing a movie,
that's a monarchy with a command hierarchy. And the command hierarchy, you know, of course,
in the military, the police, they have a command hierarchy. And the command hierarchy comes with
basically a culture of loyalty that like blows all these other collective loyalties away. So you
look at say a police department in the US, it will be populated by white officers, Asian officers,
black officers, whatever. Basically, they all stick together, they all kind of bleed blue,
for example. So, you know, these kinds of racial loyalties, which are very loyalties we take very
seriously in this country, you know, are easily overcome by sounds also like it could be
sounds a bit like a minute. So in that case, he could almost this person could be drawn from
the military. Well, yeah, the military kind of is good at these things in some ways and kind of
sex at them in other ways. I think that just my bias is if you're restaffing some kind of new
executive administration, you're going to use a lot of Silicon Valley people. I mean, you know,
because basically, these are people that are used to organizing in very, very efficient structures
like this. It's like one of the things that really tells you this is, you know, when you saw Silicon
Valley come in and fix remember Obama's healthcare sign up site, where they tried to do it the DC
way and it cost hundreds of millions of dollars and took years and didn't work and then some guys
from Silicon Valley came in and fixed it in a couple weeks basically. That's sort of an indication
of the level of disparity and organizational competence. You know, there's 30,000 Googlers,
50,000 Googlers, I don't know how many like, you know, suppose you just shut down Google and we all
use Bing and like those people come and take over, you know, Washington, right? I mean, the strange
thing is though, it feels like we're kind of close to this. It's not such an outlandish suggestion.
A lot of people feel like we are already in a situation where Silicon Valley is de facto Monarch
in a literally deciding the rules of our society. Yes. And, you know, but the thing is they sort
of feel that way because they're pressing against it. And they're pressing the real question is sort
of how much kind of power does this world or whatever this, you know, emerging culture is.
How much power does it deserve to have over Washington DC? Napoleon had this great line
where he said that every government is safe in which the most competent people are in power.
You know, so far in the last few years, you know, the people in charge of Washington,
let's see, virology has given us COVID-19. Arguably, if you believe the lab leak hypothesis,
which you do, the State Department is trying to start World War III.
You know, what else could go wrong, right? You know, I mean, this system is like deeply
on the rails and like, you know, San Francisco is full of tents. Like, you know, is this right?
How is this supposed to work? Right? You know, like, there's sort of all of these things where
you just walk around and you're just like, this is obviously a mess. And then you go down, you know,
to Apple or Google and you see these, you know, beautifully refined machines that they produce
and you're like, the most capable organizations and leaders and structures in our society are
basically making toys and selling ads. Whereas the structures that basically are responsible for
actually governing, which is, I'm not a libertarian, you know, which is a huge responsibility,
are just like hopelessly and ridiculously incompetent and making just these enormous
mistakes. So it basically is a plan to put Silicon Valley formally in charge instead of just partially
in charge. Well, I mean, you know, surrender and it's Zuckerberg and Musk are new monarchs and we
just need to lean into it. Well, I mean, if you look at what happened in 1933, right, you you're
basically seeing something relatively close to that with the kind of, and you sort of preview
of that with Woodrow Wilson, you basically saw this kind of different culture, like the idea that
like professors would be setting government policy was ridiculous 100 years ago. Or 120 years ago,
it was ridiculous. 100 years ago, it was a novelty. By the 30s, it had become an established fact
and now no one questions it. Right. And so, you know, the sense in which, you know, to say sort
of putting Silicon Valley in charge is sort of implying that, no, actually, I don't think anyone
who did this would ever go back. Like, you know, they would basically you would be drafting the
talent of Silicon Valley, but not saying actually Google is running this. No, like, you know,
this would be a promotion. And you would never go back from the experience of actually running
things. Because after that, going back and running a toy would be absurd. I mean, you know,
the country I now need to ask you about, because there is a country in the world,
which has done something a little bit like this. And that is China,
which actually you have written quite favorably about. Yeah, yeah, yeah, China is like so great
about China. China is still China also has this problem of having peeled off its intelligence
yet sort of less so. It's a very different sort of kind of country. It certainly works way better
than Putin's Russia. There are many ways in which basically, China looks at the United States as a
third world country, and they come to Europe, or the US. And as one Chinese guy said to me, he's
like, wow, I was like, what is I thought? Am I in Manila? Right, you know, and the so so the sense
of like China is working. And obviously, everything you own is made in China. It's like, you know,
people talk about monarchy. If you have if you have anything that says made in China, it was made
in a monarchy by a monarchy, because it was made by a capitalist corporation in China. And, you
know, all these weird no brand products that you order on Amazon, because they're so cheap,
and they work well, even though what is a kazunk, right, you know, those are made in a monarchy by
a monarchy. And so China works very well in some ways, but it's also kind of a shit show in other
ways. And the shit show is again, among the things that matter to the intelligentsia like us. And so,
you know, does one example of the chit show, of course, which is because it's been on all of our
TV screens in recent weeks, is their unbelievably repressive COVID lockdowns that they persist in
long beyond the kind of epidemiological justification. If you talk if you talk to what is
your response about because I saw an excellent, you know, respond to that from China, which was
basically that from the perspective of most people in China, what happened in Shanghai,
is that Shanghai was sort of overly westernized in their COVID policy. And rather than doing
a short, sharp lockdown when they got 20 cases, which is the way the rest of China would do it,
they're like, oh, we can't, we can't do this. And so they basically delayed until they had 20,000
cases at which point it became a much harder problem to solve exponentially. So you are,
are you doubling down on this China COVID stuff? I'm doubling down on this China.
People in China, people in China, people in China, like for the last two years have looked at people
in the West as like, holy shit, like they're walking around with these stupid masks, they're
going on the airplane with this bullshit, like, you know, how China has actually lived this completely
free life for the last two years. While we've been like dealing with our fucking vaccine cards
and all this garbage, right? And so essentially, that's not true. They're checking in with QR codes
all over the place. They're having a huge degree of surveillance, physical and digital, and their
life is not at all free. And none of that affects them in anything like the way wearing a mask on
an airplane does. None of them basically says they can't go out and see their friends. They can't go
to parties. They can't go to concerts. They can't have a social life. Like a lot of people's lives
literally ended because they couldn't have a social life in the Western world, right? And
basically, that was because we had this ridiculous sort of, you know, strategy that the oligarchy
that created this thing, yes, it was created in China, but it was created in China by like Western
on a Western science project. So, you know, is China a perfect fuck now?
But let me just, let me just flip it. Do they always flip it? But is there anything about the
incredibly authoritarian technology enabled regime currently in place in China that does freak you
out? What freaks me out is that basically the sort of clumsiness that they get from kind of
this situation where they're, for the same reasons that Chinese kids want to go to Harvard
rather than Peking University. I mean, Harvard, if in case you don't know, is this enormous
brand name in China, right? You know, this is a serious mistake that the regime has made.
It's sort of whenever, when you look at anything from COVID restriction to the Uyghur problem to
anything like that, what you see is this very non-Western pattern of government, which is sort
of cold and crude and heavy-handed and kind of lacks a certain kind of subtlety and finesse and
elegance. And it's that subtlety and finesse and elegance that basically you would expect of,
you know, I'm not from China, I've never lived in China. Like, I don't want to judge their elites
or whatever. They have a, you know, an amazing cultural tradition. It's very cold there. It's
very sterile. It's very like, you know, it's sort of strange how you have this beautiful ancient
culture and they destroyed almost all of it in the 60s. And now there's all this just like sterile
Westernized shit all over the place. Another word for it is, is efficient, though. I mean,
it sounds close to the kind of regime you like, because there is centralized power and they can
make things happen. And that coldness and lack of finesse is somehow connected to the efficiency.
I don't think so. I don't think so, because basically when you look at, there are plenty of
history, I mean, if you look at the sheer efficiency of Elizabethan England, like the
number of bureaucrats, the employee, the number, the rule of the number of people,
you're going to find that it was actually a very efficient place. And so I don't think that
efficiency and kind of sterility or either sterility or brutality are necessarily associated.
I think that those are sort of evidence of inefficiency. And when you look at, you know,
one of the things that's really surprising and unpleasant about kind of China beating the West
at its own game in sort of so many ways is the number of ways in which things in China just
obviously work extremely badly. And so like, yeah, you know, the place is still kind of a third
world country in a way, you know, the one of the things that's blamed for the Wuhan leak is this,
I'm going to butcher the pronunciation of it, a Chabudwo, which means basically good enough
culture. Like, you know, and so there's still like, this is not a society that should be out
competing ours or even competing with like Germany in like making shit, it just isn't.
You must be able to observe, even though you might not feel it yourself, that for most people
in the West, in places like the US, the Chinese regime is intuitively horrific. And they just
hate it. They're like, whatever, wherever I live, I don't want it to be like that.
Maybe you're more comfortable with it because you're more, you belong to this kind of Silicon
Valley class that, you know, highlights efficiency and getting things done over everything else. But
maybe for most more normal people, there are other things than efficiency, other things than
a capable central government, they would like to live in a freer, more colorful, less centralized
well. To answer your question, that feeling of basically sort of, I'm like free in a sense,
in an abstract sense, which doesn't mean, you know, I'm free in the sense that there's not a
camera over here, or there's not a scanner that basically tells the government every time I walk
into a bar, that's a kind of freedom, that's a kind of freedom that doesn't affect the way you
live your life. And of course, you know, when people in China who've been living or people in
New Zealand don't be fucked up, look at people in zero COVID countries, look at the US, they see
people living their lives in a way that has changed in very, very painful and real ways that it's
destroyed people's social lives, that it's destroyed businesses and made me have to have to wear a
mask on the guy. Right now, I'm in London and no one's wearing a mask and it's entirely I know,
I don't think people are locked up in their home. Yes. Yes. In Shanghai, people are locked up in
their homes because basically Shanghai did a sort of Western style thing and tried to keep
their lockdown soft. And in fact, you know, one of the things you wonder about when you look at,
say, New Zealand, for example, New Zealand is a better example, because it's culturally closer
to us. So New Zealand had this great zero COVID policy because they managed to basically do it
right at the beginning. And for like a year, year and a half or so, they were full zero COVID.
And they had occasional scares. But the thing is, they didn't really treat their border like a
like nuclear waste toxic security site. And so basically what would happen is they'd like repurpose
some hotel and like somebody would be arriving with COVID and somebody would be leaving without it,
except they passed each other in the hall or whatever. And you got COVID in the country and
now they're like, oh, we had this great zero COVID thing, but it didn't work. And the thing is, if
they had basically, you know, that was just a technical problem, which the government failed at.
And, you know, you also, when you look at China, some of the measure of like Chabud wonus of China
is that, you know, COVID slips into the country, right? And you're just like, wow, you know,
my picture of China is this perfectly efficient dictatorship. How would COVID even get into
China? And the answer is they actually kind of suck. I'm going to try to get you to sum up here,
Curtis. But before they do that, I'm going to say my honest reaction to what you said, which is,
I think a lot of what you said, a lot of people would agree with. So, you know, the fact that we
have a kind of aging sclerotic institutions that are inefficient, and that, you know, we are not
as free as we feel, because in fact, a lot of the world around us is governed by a small number of
people, as you call it, the cathedral. And yet all of those things, I think a lot of people would
be nodding their heads at. It's the final step you take, in which you say the solution to it is
to go in a kind of Chinese direction, where we say goodbye to even the partial democracy that we have,
and instead just vote in or choose some kind of technology enabled Silicon Valley overlord,
and just accept that we are serfs in this new regime. That bit, I think most people would
resile from. Tell me why I'm wrong and why we should follow you to the ends of this plan.
Yeah, I think I think you're wrong, because I think that those, I think that there is a technique
for getting over that reaction. And I think the technique for getting over that reaction is to
admit that in a way, you know, Hobbes spoke of this, he's like, when people talk about freedom,
they're really talking about power. They're not talking about what he called, you know, the
desolate freedom of the wild ass, they're talking about the right to matter. And so the thing is
that basically once this right to matter has become essentially symbolic, sort of casting it aside,
in a way, is this ironic gesture of freedom. And one of the things that Western populations
have gotten way, way better at over the last hundred years, have they gotten more virtuous,
more responsible? No. Have they gotten more violent? No, they've gotten much less violent,
which is sort of an obstacle to violent ways of taking over the state. People are just not
capable of violence. So if you're not into violence, that's great. But if you want to take over the
state, that means that violence is not available to solve that problem. You have to do it in a
beautiful way. I happen to prefer that because I've never been in a fistfight, but many people
would say otherwise. So people are less violent, that makes it harder to do a regime change.
But what people are is they're more sophisticated, and they're more ironic, and they're basically
sort of better at thinking their way out of traps. They're better at sort of having, doing these kind
of nonlinear creative exercises into thinking, where they're like, oh, I'm sort of being hurted
in this direction by like my natural fear. And I have this natural fear of not mattering,
and not having any power, and not being relevant. And I associate not mattering and not, you know,
the famous line of Charles I, he's like, you know, a subject and a sovereign are clear different
things. And the sense that a subject and a sovereign are clear different things, we have a
regime in which in practice, a subject and a sovereign are clear different things. Because
actually, these chains, you know, these sort of political democratic mechanisms of putting
voters in charge of the state simply don't work. And power always comes from the top down and even
cultural sort of political power comes from the top down. Gay marriage in the US is very popular
now, but its popularity came just like the popularity of abortion, the popularity came from
the power. Once it was clear that basically, this was the law of the land, opinion changed to follow
but the law was not made by democracy. In fact, people had voted repeatedly against both of those
things. So we're using these sophisticated kind of mental techniques to basically,
in some almost sort of Buddhist way, surrender any hope at power and just accept that we are
subjects and that Elon Musk, or whoever you're going to install as our overlord is the only
human with power and the rest of us can just lead into it. We're surrendering our desire. And the
thing is, we don't have any power to surrender. We just have this unfrust, this frustrated Buddhist
desire. And one, you know, without, you know, bringing Elon Musk into the picture, or whoever,
you can think of this, it is indeed a very Buddhist exercise. It's an exercise and sort of
detachment from desire because this political desire is very like sexual desire, except that
very few people are getting any. Most people have this sort of weird, paraphilic kind of fan-based
relationship to politics. So, you know, they sort of feel that it's like sort of pornographic,
that it's delivering kind of the appearance of reality without any sort of deep meaning,
but they sort of can't stay away from it. And if they can drop basically, you know, the first step
in sort of thinking, okay, we have to, we, you know, the real problem is that we have a very
ineffective government. How do we get to an effective and responsible and accountable and
capable government, which doesn't do things like fund the creation of COVID-19, right?
You know, how do you, like, how do you make the level of change that's required? Well,
if there's any level of change even close to this, it's required, the only way to do it is to
basically just switch at the organization. Like, otherwise, you're just trying to, I mean, you're
trying to turn a carriage company into an airplane company, right? I mean, just start any
airplane company, right? That's sort of how bad the performance of this regime is and sort of
everyone can feel it. And with it, you're going to change the model. So, we're moving from an
oligarchy pretending to be a democracy to a monarchy that is a monarchy.
Which admits, which admits, ideally, that it's a monarchy. Like the Electoral College,
for example, which never worked, was designed, was designed to be a kind of board of directors,
right? You know, they sort of had all the pieces of that structure in place. It just didn't really
come out right. And so actually, this, this is very much in alignment with the intent of the
founders. Let's leave it on that patriotic note then, Curtis. So, actually, what you're, what
you're advocating is, is to rediscover the desire of the family. To rediscover the American form
of government. And you could certainly say that in a sense, because it empowers the people,
this democracy, this monarchy is the true democracy. Curtis Yavin, thank you very much.
All right. Thank you so much, Freddie. That was great.
That was Curtis Yavin, a now celebrity thinker and political philosopher, I suppose we should
call him, formerly a computer programmer. Described sometimes as being a neo-reactionary,
or part of the new right. Sometimes the deep right, which I believe is the phrase he prefers.
Either way, I was trying to get to the bottom there of what he really believes. And
some of the things he said, I thought were entirely sensible and most people would agree with. And
then some of them I felt very strongly like I disagreed with. I'm sure you probably had a
similar experience, but it was simulating and really fun to have him on. So thanks to Curtis,
and thanks to you for tuning in. This was Unheard.
