Hello and welcome. Thanks for tuning in. You are watching Lockdown TV. This is the pop-up news
and discussion program from Unheard. Throughout the lockdown weeks, we have been bringing
conversations and interesting people together to work out what's going on and how we should be
thinking about this current crisis. I'm delighted that today we are joined down the line from Sweden
by Dr Johan Giseke. Dr Giseke, thank you so much for making the time today.
My pleasure. If I can give you, you helped me a little bit here, but you trained originally at
the London School of Tropical Medicine. Is that right? No, it started before that. I used to be
an infectious disease clinical doctor and worked a lot with AIDS patients during the 1980s.
And that's what put me into epidemiology. And then I spent one year or two years at the
London School of Tropical Medicine in the early 90s. And then I came back to Sweden and then I
became state epidemiologist for Sweden, which means having control over all infectious diseases.
Which is the job that Anders Tegnell currently has? So I actually hired him 20 years ago and
then I was his boss and now he's my boss, but it is working actually quite well.
And you then became chief scientist at the European Center for Disease Control?
And what roles do you have now? Who are you advising at the moment?
I'm advising Anders Tegnell at the Swedish Agency for Public Health on a consultant basis. I'm
retired really, so I'm doing this mostly because it's fun. And the World Health Organization,
you were also saying you were on a call with them earlier today. Do you have an ongoing
relationship with them? Yes, I'm advising the Director General together with a group of old
scientists, but that's an unpaid, it's just an honorary post in a way.
So having how, as it were, established your credentials to talk with confidence on this topic,
there's been a lot of confused thinking and a lot of confusion about what the correct response
to a threat such as COVID-19 should be. And I just wanted to begin by getting your kind of
summary thoughts of how Sweden is differing from other countries and why you think that is.
The main reason is that we or the Swedish government decided early in January that the
measures we should take against the pandemic should be evidence-based. And when you start
looking around for the measures that are being taken now by different countries, you find that
very few of them have the shred of evidence-based. But one we know that's known for 150 years or
more and that is washing your hands is good for you and good for others when you're in an epidemic.
But the rest, like border closures, school closures, social distancing, there's almost no
science behind most of these. So what is the current policy in Sweden? Social distancing is
part of the policy, isn't it? What is the regime that Sweden has gone with?
The main difference to other countries is that you're not locked up in your home. If you go out
to buy food or groceries or drugs, I mean medicines, there's no police to stop you in the
street and ask you what you're doing here. That's one thing. People are asked to stay inside but
there's no reinforcement or enforcement of that. People do it anyway. So that's one.
We have the rule that a crowd cannot be bigger than 50 people.
So I can still have an event for 49 people. Yes, you could. And the schools, the upper
schools are closed. Secondary education and universities closed. Schools up age 15, 16 are open.
What more do we have? The nursing homes or houses for old people are closed to visitors.
So it sounds like it's a moderate social distancing regime then at the moment.
Yes, it is. Sorry, it's very similar to the one that the UK had before. There was a famous paper
by the Imperial College by the modellers who made models for infectious diseases that came out
on the day after you made a U-turn in England. Yes, so tell us about that. So the original
strategy in the UK became known as a herd immunity strategy. That's what it was called.
Before we come on to talk about the Imperial model, which I would like to talk about,
is it correct to call it herd immunity? And is that the Swedish strategy?
It's not a strategy, but it's a byproduct of the strategy. But the strategy is to protect
the old and the frail, try to minimize their risk of becoming infected and taking care of them if
they get infected. And if you do that the way we're doing it, you would probably get herd immunity
in the end. But that's a byproduct of that. It's not the main reason to do it.
So you were saying then, so the initial UK response seemed to be similar to what
was Sweden is doing now. And you thought that was better?
Yeah. No, I think it was very good. And we were very pleased with having the same policy as the UK
that gave some credibility to what we were doing. But then Mr. Johnson made this 180-degree turn.
Yeah, so there may have been other political factors involved. He was definitely under a lot of
pressure because lots of European countries were doing a formal lockdown at that point. But
the turning point did seem to be that Imperial College report, which forecast 510,000 deaths in
the UK with a completely unmitigated approach. 250,000 deaths with a mitigated approach,
which is roughly equivalent to what you're doing in Sweden. And then it suggests that it might be
as few as 20,000 if we did a full suppression or lockdown. What was your impression of that paper?
I think it's not very good. And the thing that they miss a little is any models for infectious
disease spread are very popular. Many people do them. They're good for teaching. They seldom tell
you the truth because I make a small parenthesis. Which model could have assumed that the outbreak
would start in northern Italy in Europe? Difficult to model that one. And any such model,
it looks complicated. There are strange mathematical formula and integral signs and stuff. But it
rests on the assumptions. And the assumptions in that article could be heavily criticized for,
I won't go through that. It would take the rest of your day if I went through them all.
The paper was never published scientifically. It's not peer reviewed, which your scientific
paper should be. It's just an internal departmental report from Imperial. And it's fascinating. I don't
think any other scientific endeavor has made such an impression on the world as that rather
debatable paper. So it's your impression that it was overly pessimistic? Yes, very much so.
So what, I guess it comes down to some degree of speculation, but what's your impression of
of how serious the disease is? And what kind of fatalities we would be looking at if we had a
more moderate or more mitigated approach? Yeah, what's the number of deaths in the UK now? I don't
know. 13,000. So you're getting close to 20 now? Yeah. But probably not 510,000.
I think, well, let me back one step. One thing that the model has missed is that it assumes that
the hospital capacity will remain the same. And that's not what's happening anywhere. I mean,
in Sweden, we've tripled our intensive care capacity. And I think that's happening in the UK
as well. But the paper completely overlooks that. It's a static thing.
But so just to sort of come back on this, the argument what people watching will be asking,
and I think what most people who support the lockdown would say, and that is the overwhelming
majority of people in politics and in the media, is that the reason the curve is now flattening
and that the numbers of deaths are gradually coming down on a daily basis is because of the
lockdown. And that shows that the policy has worked. And Professor Neil Ferguson,
who led the Imperial paper, suggests that he stands by his prediction that 500,000 dog people
would have died had that not taken place. So if it wasn't the lockdown that has been flattening
our curve, what else could it have been? One thing is immunity. The other is that
the people who are frail and old will die first. And when that group of people is sort of thinned
out, you will get less deaths as well. The other thing is that when you start your exit strategy,
that's the favorite word now in all this public effort, the exit strategy. When you start that
one, you'll have some other deaths that we had already. Yes. So I mean, does that mean then that
as the disease passes through the population, are we going to see
second and third spikes now after this? It will be part of the exit strategy because the only
way to check that if you're taking away one restriction, let's say we'll open the schools
again as an example. How do you evaluate that? You have to see, ooh, numbers are going up again.
More people are dying. We have to stop that. We have pulled back that softening and try another.
That's what the exit strategy will be in all countries. Countries will ease up a little on
the restriction, see what happens over the next two, three weeks. Ooh, it didn't work very well.
We resume that. We try another restriction. We list that one. Ooh, it worked. And so this is
every country will have to do it that way. And that means that the increasing number of deaths
will be part of checking which strategy should be kept and not. So what should we be doing instead?
Oh, you can't. I remember when I first heard, which is now six weeks ago, about the different
draconic measures that were taken. I asked myself, how are they going to climb down from that one?
When will they open the schools again? What should be the criterion to open the schools?
Did anyone of the most strong and very decisive politicians in Europe think about how do we get
out of this when they introduced it? And I think that would be a problem for the UK as well.
So let's take as a comparison the neighboring countries in Scandinavia because a lot
of people are sending around these charts that show that Denmark and Norway and Finland
have had much fewer deaths on a per capita basis. And Sweden, the rate is still climbing.
And they take that as proof, essentially, that Sweden should have gone into a more draconian
lockdown. What do you say to those people? Well, first, it's not true for Denmark.
Secondly, one important thing is that Norway, the nursing homes in Norway are usually quite small,
whereas the nursing homes in Sweden are quite big with hundreds of people,
which means that if you get the virus into one nursing home in Norway,
it will affect far fewer people than a big one. So that's part of the reason. It's not all the reason.
For Finland, the epidemic never really took off there. They started their measures before it had
even started. But I think we should have this discussion a year from now. Let's decide that.
We do this on the 17th of April, 2021. I think that the difference between countries will be quite
small in the end. So that you don't think that the severity of these intervening measures are going
to make that much difference? No, I don't think so. I think, actually, should I tell you what I
really think? Please. I almost never do this. I think what we're seeing is a tsunami of usually
quite mild disease, which is sweeping over Europe. And some countries do this, and some countries do
that, and some countries don't do that. And in the end, there will be very little difference.
So when you say it's usually quite mild disease, what do you mean by that?
That most people who get it will never even notice they were infected.
So does that mean that you think the actual fatality rate of this disease is much lower than the
numbers that have been talked about? Much, much lower. So have you made any speculations as to
what sort of zone the real fatality rate might be in? I think it will be like a severe influenza
season, the same as which would be an order of 0.1 percent, maybe. So that would suggest, then,
for a country like the UK that is already heading towards 20,000 deaths, that would suggest that
millions, many millions of people have already had it. Do you think that is also true in Sweden,
then, that a substantial percentage of the population has had it?
Yep. I'm rather certain of that, actually. And when we get, we don't have the tests really yet,
as you know, you have these two kinds of tests. One that tells that you have it now,
another one that tells you that you had it at some point before, an immunity or serology test.
And they are just being developed and they're just being employed. I know from discussions with
friends in the UK that you started last week with 3,500 such tests, and you were gone in one week,
and then it will be about 8,000 per week. And when you get tests that show people that have the
disease, you'll see that most of them never even dreamt they had it. But we don't have yet any
effective antibody tests, I don't think. You're right, but it's coming. But you're confident
that we will get those tests? Oh, yes. That's a matter of time. And so what sort of percentage
of the population do you think we will discover has had it once we get mass antibody testing in
place? At least half. In the United Kingdom, or do you mean in Sweden as well? Both countries.
So the whole sort of rationale for introducing these lockdowns across Europe that has created such
unbelievable side effects and pretty much stopped the whole world in its tracks.
You believe is a misguided policy? And do you think it's doing more harm than good?
Yes, I think so. Although, I mean, if you listen, what I'm saying is that people who will die a
few months later are dying now. And that's taking months from their lives. So that's maybe not nice.
But comparing that to the effects of the lockdown, which may be, I mean,
what am I most afraid of? It's the dictatorial trends in Eastern Europe that Orban is now
dictator for Hungary forever. There's no finishing date. I think the same is popping up in other
countries. It may pop up in more established democracies as well. I think the ramifications
can be huge from this. We don't even start seeing them. So you think the correct policy from the
start, just to get this clear, should have been to shield old and vulnerable groups?
That we failed. Sweden failed. We were not on our toes enough to really shield the old people.
We should have banned visitors earlier. Many of the people working in nursing homes are from
other countries. They're refugees or asylum seekers in Sweden. Their Swedish may not be
perfect. They may not always be understanding information that has been spread to the population.
There are many things we could have done better a couple of months ago.
So at the point we are now, what you're advocating then is we protect those groups better.
And as far as the rest of the population is concerned, we just allow it to pass through
the population, essentially. Essentially, yes. Which is, I mean, I know that it's now
herd immunity. Yes. That's what's commonly understood by what we call the herd immunity
strategy, basically. Yeah. Obviously, it's not just the old and frail. I mean, there are the
people that should be protected. But I don't think you can stop it. It's spreading.
You can stop it for some time. But then, I mean, countries that have been successful,
South Korea is giving up now. They can't maintain their policy.
Taiwan, I don't know about Taiwan. They were quite successful. Singapore, similar problem.
So those countries that are held up as the most successful, in some cases ones that totally
managed to suppress the outbreak, you think that it's just a question of delay and actually
they won't be able to hold that back. So how should we judge success then? It seems like
numbers of deaths does seem like a fair measure. If you're saying that they're essentially deaths
that are just going to happen later, it will sound to some people like a slightly sort of
cold-hearted approach, I suppose, that if you're saying they're going to die anyway,
so we should allow the disease to take its path. I think a lot of people might feel that
a government can't sit back and do that. If now, having had this lockdown, we're headed
towards 20,000 deaths. How many deaths might we have had if we had had no lockdown? Would it have
been more? Yeah, probably a bit more. But in the end, the result will be rather much the same.
And I agree it's a bit careless to say that to let people, we're not saying that. We're saying
protect the old, try to slow the spread of the epidemic a bit so that the health care system
will manage when we have many sick people, many severely ill people.
But it's more where I don't think you can't really. At some point, the
tsunami is not bad. It will roll over Europe no matter what you do.
Will, as it rolls over Europe sooner or later, presumably treatments will improve.
Yes. We'll get better at knowing how to treat it. It already feels like the initial focus on
ventilation has shifted to other ideas and people are thinking of new ways to treat it.
Is that in itself not an argument for suppressing it as much?
But how long in a democracy do you think people keep a lockdown? How long will it take before
people say, no, I'm not taking it? You can do it in China. In China, you can do it. You can tell
people to stay at home and you can weld back that door so they can't get out.
But in a democracy, you can't. And after three, four weeks, people will say,
well, I don't know anyone who had the COVID and I haven't met them. I want to go out. I want to
go down to the pub. How long do you think you could lock people up like this? Stay in your home.
You need a permit to go to the shop. We don't actually need a permit. I think
we've now just had it extended by three weeks. There is an enormous amount of public support
for it and that's one of the interesting factors about this, that at the moment the public is
very much onside with the lockdown in the United Kingdom. Some people seem to like it.
So it may be that it's hard to persuade people to go back in some way. But
do you feel, Dr Isiga, that the policies that have been put in place by the UK and by other
European governments, how did they come about? You've been a leading epidemiologist for your
whole career. You dealt with influencers and SARS and you advised the World Health Organization.
What was it about this pandemic that was so different that has led to this global shutdown?
New disease. A lot of people dying. You don't know really what will happen.
And this fear of contagion, I think, is almost genetic in people.
And showing political strength, decisiveness, force, very important for politicians.
Do you think the fact that it came out of China and we had witnessed such an enormous
response, quarantining whole provinces and so on, set the tone in some way and that felt like the
appropriate response? Could be. Let's do like the Chinese. But again, you can't compare to China.
It's a different world. And do you think you could keep the lockdown to protect the old people
until we have good drugs and good vaccines? Six months a year, 18 months. I think people
would get a bit tired of it, even if they support the policy in the UK.
So a couple of specific things that have occurred to me during our conversation. One is how many
deaths do you foresee in Sweden? Is it 1400 or something?
I think it will be like a severe influenza. And it's interesting with influenza. When the
flu comes, we all say, oh, the flu is coming. Like every winter, it's in the papers, the flu is here,
okay. And it usually kills in this country around 1000, 2000 people. But it's normal,
it's influenza. We have it every year. And they're old and they're going to die soon anyway. So no
one is very upset about influenza. But I think if influenza came around as a new disease,
you never had it before. But suddenly this new disease called influenza popped up.
We would have exactly the same reaction as we have now. So I think the number of deaths will
be about the same as in a severe influenza in winter. Sweden, how many are you? 50 million?
65. 65. So multiply by six. So it would be 12,000 cases in the UK.
Yeah, but we've already had 13,000. Maybe 18. And a lot of influenza deaths are not
booked or they're not recorded in that way anyway, in a normal influenza season.
So I think this is similar, about the same. And it may be double as much, but it won't be 10 times
as much. The reports from hospitals, though, are very different, aren't they? That the way
disease progresses seems different from influenza. Oh, yeah, it's different. It's not the same
disease as influenza. But it's not the shape of the epidemic is not that different.
There are a few differences. For example, the influenza is driven by children.
An influenza outbreak is driven by children in society. They are the ones who pose it on
between the generations. And this does not hurt children very much. They don't have any symptoms,
and they're not very infectious. So there are epidemiological differences.
When talking about old people like you did, as opposed to children, a lot of people will say
that young people have been dying of COVID-19. There are examples of young people dying, and
some of the data out of America suggests that a large number of hospitalizations are among
younger people. Is it responsible to describe it as just a disease for elderly people?
No, but influenza kills people too, even though not that many. And it makes more headlines right
now. And if you look at the data, I mean, the people under 50 are a clear minority of all the
cases. So if I'm 38, I'm on the sort of borders between young and old, if you're younger than me,
what is your advice to young people? I mean, should they be
campaigning to have the lockdown eased because it's inappropriate? What are other risks for
young people? I mean, we're told that it's about carrying the disease to other people,
and they act as spreaders, even though they're not vulnerable themselves. What should we be
doing with younger people? No, I think it's because the thing you do now, they won't hurt that much.
I mean, you can't say that it's completely without what's the English word.
It's not completely safe. I mean, there will be young people who die, but for the majority,
but what you said is correct that they should think about protecting other people. That's
important because they move around a lot, and then they shouldn't meet their grandmother and
grandfather too much until they've had it themselves. Yep. So I'm just trying to get
a sense. We're nearing time now. I just want to get a sense. What should the British government
do now, in your opinion? Did we should say, okay, lockdown is cancelled? No, you can't do that.
Then you have a wave of O-cases. Then you really have a peak, one week, two weeks later, if you
took away all the lockdown. No, you'll have to climb down one ladder at one,
run all the ladder at a time, and probably start with the school closures, maybe.
It's a good thing it makes society. I mean, in this country, in Sweden, we have one million
people, children between zero and 10. They need to be looked after. If they're not in school,
then someone has to stay at home with them. One of my friends who's a nurse and head of an emergency
room, an emergency ward here in Stockholm, she prays every morning when she wakes up that the
government will not close junior school because then she loses all her stuff. So a school closure
is one thing, but I think one step has to be taken at the time. It's interesting how the
countries in Europe are sort of after the lockdown, approaching the Swedish policy now. They're opening
up schools in all the Nordic countries. In Austria, you can shop in the shop. That's smaller than
400 square meters. In Germany, they're going to do the same thing on Monday. In Germany,
they're also thinking about opening the schools again. Countries are approaching
the Swedish, but they had to lock down first.
So you don't think, because there's two things that people get very hopeful about. One is a
vaccine, and then some way we can suppress the disease completely until a vaccine comes.
Is that a feasible stretch? No, we'll take too long. It won't work in a democracy.
And one other idea are the so-called immunity passports, or people who have proven to have
had the disease, they could then carry a wristband or something, and they would then be allowed back
into jobs and in full society. Is that a feasible strategy in your view?
There are some technical problems, like you indicated, the antibody tests are not that
perfect yet. But it's not a bad idea. Do you need a passport? Do you tell your boss at work that
I'm immune? Well, maybe he wants to see a paper. No, but I mean, that's the way it will work,
that you find people are immune and they can go back and you can work in the hospital without
all this space you've done, things like that. Will that be part of the Swedish strategy? Yeah.
So in terms of what happens next then in Sweden, there's a huge amount of pressure.
A lot of people are looking to prove that it was a mistake in some way.
Do you think the Swedish strategy will just stay as it has been? I don't think it will be tougher.
No, we're talking now about opening the final year of schooling so that people who spend 12 years
in school can celebrate, which is a big thing in this country. It's not because of the celebration
that it's being done, but to see that those who finish school get grades and finish all the tests
they have to take and things like that. And so you feel like the curve is improving sufficiently
in Sweden to start releasing further the suppression measures? Yes. And how did that happen
without a lockdown? Just by voluntary social distancing has already achieved that, you believe?
And there are some, maybe we should finish this now, but one
is not a law. What do you call a minor law in it? It's an ordinance. That's something that
is not as strong as a law, but anyway. Restaurants, the rule is you can only eat sitting down.
The food should be hot and served at the table. You can't stand up drinking. If you want your beer,
you have to sit down at the table, which is five feet away from the nearest table. And that's
being checked now. But it's not the government, it's the local medical officers of health that go
out and check restaurants. And when they close two or three restaurants because the tables are too
closed or people are standing at the bar, the other follows you. You don't need a law for that.
They know that if the MOH, the medical officer of health comes in, they're closed for business.
When do we get past that? When can we just be back to normal then and no social distancing at all?
What will be the metric for making that decision? That's a good question. I'm not quite sure I can
answer that. But it will take a couple of months to climb down from a lockdown. Can you climb down
from a lockdown? I don't know. Open up. Professor Gisige, thank you so much for your time. That was
fascinating. Thank you. We've learned an entirely different perspective there. And we will definitely
be in touch in one year from now. But hopefully we will get a chance to talk to you before that.
Okay. Thank you. Nice talking to you. Thank you. So there you have it. You have been watching
Lockdown TV from Unheard. That was Professor Johan Gisige from Sweden, the former state
epidemiologist, advisor to the World Health Organization, who believes that the lockdowns
imposed across Europe and in the United Kingdom were the wrong policy and that we're going to find
it very difficult to reverse out of. So that is a different perspective. Thanks for tuning in. We
will be back next week.
