Yeah, I think the movement from, you know, pre-awakening to awaken is kind of like, you know,
the movement from a symmetrical state of perception or consciousness to a more symmetrical
state of consciousness. If you look at, like, good art to, like, even a good physique or body
builder, you know, whatever it is, pleasing to look at, even just, like, you know, your face.
I said that people have more symmetrical face and, like, good art and good music have, like, you know,
really balanced and symmetrical harmonies and just think that. Same with consciousness, I think.
You know, just, like, the pre-awakening state where you're a person and your character's talking
ahead and your attention, you know, the arrow of attention is just pointed that way. That's not a
very symmetrical state. Everything's being filtered through, like, the center. And then once you
started to construct the center and then more and more and more, and at the end, where everything's
just aware of itself, like, a sensation. You sort of, like, if size, sound, and the body sensations
and emotions and thoughts, they're all just being rendered as sensei experiences happening by itself,
exactly where they are. That's a state of, I would say, a very symmetrical state, a state of
balance compared to the the period we can state. And if you, you know, go even deeper and, like
you said before, the state of the sensation where it's like a perfect, perfect balance state,
that nothing exists. And in a sense, like, everything just, like, planks out. So it's almost
like, you know, then, you know, like, the universe is like perceiving itself so much so that, you
know, it just planks out. Kind of like, you know how, like, you know, you put, like, I don't know
how to describe it, but if you put, like, two mirrors or something like that against each other,
you just get into, like, this is like, you have this sound, like, each other at the end. It's
kind of exposed, kind of like that. So I guess the perfect symmetrical state is, like, death or
something, you know, the down fabricated state, the conditioned state, where, you know, there's no
experience at all, no, no perceptions. Maybe we can't experience a perfect symmetrical state.
Like, you know, once there is experience, then there is, you know, a little bit of suffering,
right? And, you know, like the most, the most peaceful state, you know, from the Buddhist point
of view, is death, is Nibbana, lights out. So...
