Yeah, thanks so much for joining me. How are you doing?
Awesome. And thank you very, very much for having me. I'm
excited. This is going to be fun.
Yeah, yeah, I'm really looking forward to it. Yeah, I want I
want to shine the light on some of the younger people that are
doing some amazing stuff. And I'm really excited about your
work. So
thank you. Yeah, me too.
Cool. Yeah, so maybe maybe just, you know, introduce yourself
where you are now. And we'll we'll go from there.
Totally. So I am Ali Hansen and I'm in Raphael Usain Lab here at
Columbia. And how did I don't know that it's time yet to go into
a full background, but I'll just suffice it to say that I've
completed my psychiatry residency. But my background was in
sort of selling of developmental biology, and sort of jumped
into the field of neuroscience and using Hydra as a model
system to sort of study, let's say, to be able to see the whole
nervous system at once. And from there, what really interested
me is the role of spontaneous neural activity, neural activity
that's going on when the animal is not behaving. So I'm now a
postdoc finishing that and in the process of figuring out where
I'll go next to start my own group.
Yeah, yeah, why don't you maybe talk a little bit about your
background and just kind of your journey as far back as makes
sense of how you got here.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I mean, I think, I think maybe far, far
back, I'll just broad overview of a person from Iowa thinking, I
don't know, no one else is probably paying attention to
basketball, but Caitlin Clark, it went to my high school and
she's the newest phenom. And so I thought, I wrote on my thing,
I was going to play basketball in the WNBA and then I never
grew, but ended up playing basketball in college, and studied
molecular biology, and ended up doing MD PhD program. And my
PhD at that point was in, yeah, so cell and developmental
biology and the molecular mechanisms of wind signaling, so
very, very molecular. And so I got sort of trained in that,
that belief system that molecules are king. And that sort of
explains, you know, not only how cells work, but how
development works. And so my thesis was on that sort of the
molecular mechanisms of wind signaling and ubiquit relation
and these kinds of things. But then luckily, someone clued me
in to the physiology course at the MBL in Woods Hole, which sort
of was like, Oh, there's a whole other way to do this, you can
sort of really zoom out and interact with other people, and
in many other different disciplines, right? So there I
was with peer mathematicians, physicists, computational
scientists and people who had no experience with biology and I
was the biologist coming in. And so it was like this awesome
thing, right? Where you go and you do two weeks with different
scientists on different projects and get really
exposed to totally different ways of thinking. And in that, I
ended up with Goudon's Danizer, actually, as one of my mentors,
and I did a two week course on modeling three proteins in the
wind pathway. And I was like, Oh, wow, like you can really start
learning something really counterintuitive, something that
you wouldn't know by just saying, Hey, you're going to draw
the cell signaling pathway in a two dimensional piece of paper
and draw a bunch of arrows and that's understanding. I was
like, Oh, shit, that doesn't actually explain anything, right?
So yeah, that that was sort of my first worry. And then of
course, the likes of like Mark Kirschner and Andrew Murray were
on the chalkboard doing all kinds of these things. And it was
like, Oh, there's a different way to do this to find the
simplest system possible, and try to model as much of it as you
can to gain some understanding. And of course, that was right
the end my PhD. So I didn't have time to sort of implement that
and then went back to do medical training. And then I took
another foray, which I think is important to how I ended up
doing this kind of resume right now, which is art. So I left
in the middle of my MD PhD training to go study painting in
Santa Fe, New Mexico, with an amazing person who is Tony
Rider, and that totally changed sort of, this is going to sound
nuts, but how I see and the way I think it sort of opened up my
mind to like, how you approach reality with a fixed idea. And
so I went in there and I'm like, Oh, I got to paint here was so
it was it was classical realism. So you're trying to be
portraiture and nude models drawing and painting. I didn't
have any experience with this really at all, except for you
know, childhood classes or something. And going in there
just for an example of like, Oh, a shadow is dark, just black,
or something is like, no, as long as you have this belief,
you'll never paint a shadow as it actually is because there's
no such thing as pure black in nature, or reality, right?
There's always some amount of light, some amount of color,
something. And I remember so Ted South Jacobs was Tony's
teacher is a very similar sort of lineage in art and science,
who wrote a whole book on the anatomy of human forms. Like if
you paint a human eyeball that looks like an almond with a
circle in it, you'll never ever paint an eyeball that is true to
reality. So it's kind of like, Oh, all of these concepts that
I'm laying on top of these things are not real. Like it can I
get rid of those things? That was part of that exercise for two
years of trying to like, unlearn all of the things I had been
told about what a human, you know, is and the features of it in
order to paint what it actually is. And at the same time, there
was a upaya Zen Center was in the back yard of this place. So I
learned Zen brain, which is about conscious complex adaptive
systems and all of this kind of stuff. Also Santa Fe
Institute was there. So I was just all over doing all this
stuff and taking all kinds of classes around all of that. And
ultimately sort of, you know, I was I was debating, do I go
paint full time? Do I do a postdoc? And if I was going to
just do a straight postdoc, I was going to do on the origin of
multicellularity, right? Like, how do you go from one cell to a
group of cells? That was what I was interested in. But then, you
know, I got interested in like, I really want to help people in
quotes. And I want to do that through sort of psychiatry. So
it's our way to put all of that stuff together. And I was like,
well, shit, now I'm going to have to switch fields and study
neuroscience. Which I was like, that's not at the time, I'm
sorry, any neuroscience is out there. But like, that's not
science. That's not molecular. What is that? It's, it's a you're
putting a human in fMRI skin, you're looking at blood flowing
all around. You're not even looking at neural activity. It
was like, this isn't understanding. This isn't
mechanism. Because for me, mechanism, what's the amino
acid on the protein? That that's a mechanism, right? That was the
kind of thinking. But going to that Zen brain conference
actually was was one of those things we're like, oh, some of
these questions, you just can't reduce to an amino acid and a
protein, like that that model that that way of thinking doesn't
doesn't compute here. So there was a lot of, you know, things
going all around. But then, yeah, deciding, okay, I'm going to
pursue a residency in psychiatry and try to figure out what is
neuroscience. And so like, you had to do all these interviews,
and I was just essentially using the residency interview as a
postdoc interview to say, who's doing neuroscience? Where? What
are they up to? And what level of scalar people studying all of
this? I was just trying to see the lay of the land. Yeah, and I
remember, I think, actually, at one point, somehow got a hold of
Sidney Brenner, when he was in the hospital in Singapore, and
I was like, Hey, what level scale do you think we should be
doing this? You know, studying the nervous system? And I'm
pretty sure I can't even remember his answer, but it was like
single cells, you could go down, you can go up and this kind of
thing. And so that kind of question of, of where, how do
you tackle this problem? And then I ended up reading Rafa's
articles, George Church and Scientific American around that
time of like, you know, using complex adaptive systems theory
to study the brain, you need to see the whole thing. I'm like,
Yes. So on that interview, I then talked to Rafa, and he had a
hydra on the screen, and it was just one of those moments where
I'm like, No way. This is amazing. This is this is exactly
what I've been looking for, like all of my dreams coming true on
the screen, like it's a simple system. You can see the whole
thing, you know, I don't know. And it's like, it has a lot of
it, you know, obviously, rich history and cell and developmental
biology, evolution, like it was all together. And one thing
I'm like, All right, that's what I'm gonna have to do. And,
yeah, in early saw that there was this spontaneous neural
activity in that animal. And I was like, What is this? Right?
What is that? And that got me very curious about where else that
was found, which leads to the human brain and all of these
things and, and the self and all of that. So it sort of all was
coming together. And then I was sort of, you know, seeing
patients as a resident. And then had a little bit of research
time. So I was like, really reading and thinking and looking
and, and all of that. Yeah, and I mean, I'll just disclose to
you that I'm a, I'm a Zen student. And so it was also a
scientist of my own mind. So I've been, you know, exploring it
from that angle. A lot. So first person point of view and third
person with patience. And then, you know, the in quotes, third
person objective view of the system too. So there's all of
that at play all the time. So yeah, that's the longest version
I can muster.
Yeah, yes, very interesting. The art at the art angle, I think
is also is also quite quite interesting. I do know, you know,
I can't draw anything like that. But I do a bunch of photography
and I agree with you that that watching the light and like
trying to trying to capture what you actually see or what you
think you see is an interesting component of it. Yeah. How do
you, how do you think about I'm curious, since you have you have
a background in molecular genetics and also now neuroscience?
How do you think about the kinds of things that those systems
are good at? Like how are how are molecular dynamics and the
kinds of things you get out of those different from what you
can get out of out of, you know, for example, electrophysiology,
you know, in terms of the computations, the usage, like
how are the how what's different about those systems?
You mean like sort of at the cellular level versus the system
level or like the neural?
I mean, I mean, if you were going to if you were going to
build things and your options were gene regulatory networks
and diffusion versus electrical networks and synaptic kinds of
things, what are the different, you know, dynamics that you can
expect to get out of those systems? How are they different
functionally?
Yes, great question. I mean, ultimately, this is what I sort
of, I mean, this isn't any big idea or anything. It's just like
one of them is slower, right? So like molecules diffusing limits
you I think in space and time. Whereas electricity, right,
allows speed and distance. So it just speeds up processes, right?
So I don't think there's anything particularly special
about neurons. I think you agree with that, right? They did. I
don't know. And if we're talking about, let's say memory or
computation, any of those things, those can be implemented in
any, any material, right? There's nothing special about
neurons, this can happen in those molecules, if you put them
together in certain ways, and you maintain a pattern, right,
that's relevant to the organism, that can be implemented in the
molecules. But it just sort of limits, I would say, yeah, the
space and time of that that molecules are on a shorter like
length scale, obviously, and take longer to move and
communicate, whereas you can send electricity much faster over
a longer distance. So yeah, I don't know if that's answering
what you're asking, but that's sort of how I think about it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I agree. That's that's definitely, that's
definitely an important, an important feature. You know,
people people sometimes ask me like, what's what's magical
about bio electricity, like what's different about
electrical networks, that's harder, or maybe even even not
doable in typical molecular, you know, the kinds of kinds of
networks. Yeah.
Right. And I mean, because I, what I mean, I'm just thinking of
this, like, intuitively, at some point of like, you know, what
do we as human beings use to communicate, we use electricity
because it's the fastest thing, use the smallest thing in
electron that can go the fastest, right? And that's how we
connect globally via the internet and all of this. So of
course, nature would be using the same thing. And I remember
looking it's up at some point in one of your papers, right, of
like, when you get a wound, the first thing that happens is
electrical communication, and then the molecules. And then I
was at some point thinking like, one of the things I did, I
mean, shit, every day all day was running Jell-O-Lusher
freezes in a lab, right? Yeah, you're generating an electric
field to put your proteins where you want them. Why would it
nature be doing that, right? Itself, organizing itself using
electricity. So the molecules are sort of, you know, and as you
know, it's both bottom off and top down. But that, you know,
you're using electricity because it's the fastest way to
communicate from head to tail, let's say, in this organism,
some things up on this end, and then you bring the molecules
over there. Yeah. So for me, it's about sort of, yeah, speed
and distance. That's what I would say. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So yeah, so what kind of what are you working on
now, talk to, you know, talk about? Totally. Yeah. And I
mean, I don't know, I have a few slides I could go up, bring up
here. Yeah. If you can see, I can't see that. Right. So this
isn't, we don't really have to do a formal formal thing, but
don't do as much as you want. Yeah, this is sort of the gist of
it, right? As I've alluded to is what is going on with this
spontaneous neural activity. And this would be an outline of
like sort of why somebody like me, mostly interested in
studying something like the human brain is some interested
in studying as something as simple as this hydra. And then
sort of that brings us into some kind of history of the
spontaneous neural activity, what it might be doing, the tools
needed to study that hydra and some of these future directions.
And so I don't know how much we have time for, but I'll just
kind of go as quickly as possible. And this is one of my
favorite things to start with to say, like, just imagine that
you're a scientist, and you're the first person to ever see an
image that looks like this, which is exactly what happened to
Golgi when he put the Golgi sound neural, like a nervous system
for the first time, and you're trying to make sense of what is
this. And he thought that this is just one giant reticular
mesh work. It's all one thing. And other people at this time
looked at basically the same image and saw something else. And
they zoomed in on these little shapes here would look like
these little pyramidal things. So Sherrington and Ramonica Hall
say, Oh, what about these little pyramidal things? Like, what
those are how this works? What are those are the functional
units of this system?
By the way, sorry, could I ask the Golgi stain? Was that random?
Was he just trying random chemicals? Or did he have some
idea that that was going to stain something interesting?
I have no idea. Honestly, I would have to look that's a great
question that he like why how that ended up happening. But
before that, like, there was no ability to sort of see what it
looked like. So there was all kinds of speculations, I think
on behavior and all of that, but no real way to see or
visualize the nervous system. And then what you do, then you've
got to make sense of it, right? I think like, this is just a
fundamental thing about science. It's like, first of all, the
method that you use to view the thing will determine what you
see. And this is exactly what happens in Neil Thies. We'll
talk about this. And so this was happening at the same time as
you know, cell theory with Schleiden Schwann, because at
that time, they see cell boundaries, they see lipid
membranes. And so they're like, Oh, what the functional unit of
that system of non neural tissues is cells. But Neil will make
the point, if you had just had a nuclear stain, what you would
have seen is just a bunch of dots floating in liquid, you
wouldn't have known that there were these things called
membranes as you had sort of an Eastern conception of what's the
functional unit of tissue, right? It would be like, Oh, it's
fluid with a bunch of dots floating in it. So here, you
have this at the beginning, right, like this whole picture of a
nervous system. And then you're arbitrarily deciding which
parts are separate from the rest. And so the decision at that
point was sort of, we're going to go with cell theory, and the
neuron doctrine that these little pyramidal shaped things are
the units. And at the same time, Sherrington was going nuts on
in reflex arcs. So that sort of solidified this idea that the
not only the structural unit might be a single neuron, but
the functional one, because you hit your knee, you get one
sensory neuron that goes in synapses on another motor neuron
your spinal cord, and that's your reflex, right? So that sort
of gave them two ideas. A, that single neurons are the
functional units. And that B, the nervous system is doing
nothing unless you stimulate it from the outside. So those are
just these two sort of major paradigms taken from mostly
spinal cord peripheral nervous system is sort of applied to the
cortex. And that must be how it works. But I would argue that
those two major ideas have left us in a situation where you
still don't really know the true functional unit, at least of
cortex or non spinal cord peripheral nervous systems
really are. Is it multiple neurons? Is it all one thing? Is
it some amount of, let's say, ensemble, how many neurons are
in ensemble? How do those things interact to generate
complex cognitive states? And how do those go awry in
neuropsychiatric disorders?
Do you think that? Do you think there's a single objective
answer to that question? Like, is there a, you know, the the
optimal subunit or is that where do you think it's more of a
observer dependent kind of, you know,
Oh my God, yes, we got to skip his head till like 20 slides
from now. But
no problem. Keep keep keep going.
Totally. And yeah, and I think I think it's I think there's
again, what I'm most interested in, which I think most people
are, are general principles. And I think this is going to be,
there'll be general principles in that there's not one answer of
like, what a functional unit is in a particular system, but the
general way that that works, I think will probably be general.
And so yeah, I don't need to introduce a complex adaptive
system to you, but maybe other people, if anyone ever sees
this would be interested. So basically, it's just you have a
bunch of individual simple systems or subunits, right at this
level of scale. And I should just say that why am I talking about
that? I'm saying because if the brain is actually this complex
adaptive system, maybe we're studying at the wrong level of
scale, we can't see the functional units because we're
studying one thing at a time. So this is a bunch of units,
right, these can be anything, these can be electrons in the
magnet, water molecules and water, ants and ant colony birds
and flock or neurons in a nervous system. The key is you put
enough of them together and they follow simple rules. And if we
just think of this as an electron simplest example, you
have an electron that spin up and its neighbors spin down and
it needs to become a spin down. And you put enough of them
together and critically that won't happen with one electron or
10 electrons and it's a property of many electrons, you get this
emergent phenomenon of the higher level scale. In this case,
it'd be like magnetism, right? And then that higher level scale
can feedback down and coordinate and constrain the lower lower
level. And the key here right is that you you're never going to
see magnetism if you're looking at this level here at this
single electron, you're only going to see it up here if
you're looking at a higher level of scale. And that level of
scale also is going to be following sort of totally
different rules than this level of scale. So if that's what
we're trying to do in neuroscience in general, we
think of this as a TV screen. Like, you know, for the most of
the history of neuroscience, we've been doing these single
pixels at a time, you know, single unit electrophysiology,
which of course is critical, we need to do that, we had to
understand what a neuron is, and doing that one at a time, but
you can't really see the whole picture at once. Alternatively,
you can zoom out and do things like I was saying MRI, EEG, MEG,
these kinds of things, you get a global view, but it's very low
spatial temporal resolution. So you can sort of tell that
something's happening. But it's hard to sort of see what that
is. So the ultimate goal then, right, is to just look at that
TV screen with single pixel resolution to sort of see, okay,
now that we can see all these individual neurons, what picture
is emerging at this higher level scale, what can we see by just
looking at it, right? And again, I'm interested in this big
thing here, the human brain, given that I'm interested in the
human mind and helping these kinds of folks. But it's huge,
it's 86 billion neurons with trillions of connections, it's
not going to fit under the microscope and all of that. So
you can simplify that problem, you can do it in a mouse brain,
right? But even here, how are you going to get all this
hardware in here, record all those neurons, and even if you
do that optically, if I don't know, right now, we're up to,
let's say, let's be generous, I think I'm really arresting by
saying 20,000 neurons, that's out of 71 million. So it's just
really not much of the whole TV screen, let's say. So you could
simplify this even further. And you can do zebrafish, right?
And Drosophila and even CL again, but even these systems are
still quite complex. Depending on the, you know, developed stage
of the zebrafish, you can have up to 10 million neurons still
and lots of different cell types, and they're all, I think,
importantly, sort of shoved together in these complex brains
and ganglia that are also sort of hard to disentangle. So
Sidney Brenner sat down with my mentor, Rafa, who we all know,
Sidney was the one who pioneered the work on C. elegans. And he
said, that's even still too complicated, right? What if we
try something even simpler? Let's do Hydra, which has 200 to
2000 neurons, depending on the size of the animal. And
depending on how you cut off the cell sequencing, single cell
sequencing data, you get 11 to 12, maybe 13 different neural
cell types. And it doesn't have a true brain or ganglia as you'll
see momentarily. I gotta get that off there. Okay, I say. Right.
So then it also not only is it simple, but it's an interesting
position on the evolutionary tree, at least as far as I'm
concerned, it's right after and quotes the non neural lineage,
and then right before the bilaterians, which is the branch
of life that we're sort of used to studying. And neuroscience,
where you have a central midline structure structure and a
left and a right side. Whereas the Nigerians are sort of
totally radially symmetric, they don't have any of those
things. So it's it's another instance where you can sort of
say, Hey, what are these general principles? This nervous
system looks nothing like that one. And yet it's able to
generate complex behavior. Does it matter what the
architecture of this nervous system is? Because it's
seemingly, right? Everyone's very interested and obsessed with
getting those the circuit diagrams, right? But does that
matter? Can you get complete essentially the same
functionality out of completely different architectures? And I
think that's probably what we'll find if we look. How do I go
forward? Oh, there we go. So, so this is just what an actual
hydra looks like with its mouth, tentacles, foot, and then this
hydra buds. So this is going to be important in a second,
because hydra can reproduce asexually. So hydra essentially
just can clone itself with it. You keep feeding these animals
instead of them just getting infinitely big or long. They
start budding and reproducing and making a genetically
identical copy, right? I think it's critical for you. And then
they can also reproduce sexually too. So the same
animal can their stem cells can then generate testes or ovaries
or an egg here and reproduce sexually. So either way. And
then right, so again, it has essentially not exactly the same
but 20,000 genes very similar to our genome, right? So the genes
here are are essentially the same thing as your eye and yet
it's building something completely different. And then
it's small so it can be anywhere from 500 or one, one and a
half centimeters. And I'm currently sort of figuring out
what's the smallest one we can get to to make so that we can fit
that really under the field of view. Transparent, robust, you
can do all kinds of things to this thing. And then
interestingly also is that it completely regenerates its
nervous system every 20 days. So it's constantly making this
nervous system and maintaining itself somehow. Right. A lot
of molecular tools being developed. And then it has
these well-defined behaviors. So these are just so it's
resting, right? Just laying there doing nothing. And then
can just do a very simple longitudinal contraction where
it goes from long to short. And then the opposite of that is
elongation. So it goes from short to long. And then it has
complex behaviors. I mean, these are arbitrary words I'm
defining. I'm just saying these are more complex. And this one
is eating. So in lab, you feed hydra, artemianopoly, just
brine shrimp. And this is just glutathione, reduced glutathione
will also have them do this feeding response. So they'll
rip open. So they'll use their tentacles to capture shrimp,
rip open, rip open in their mouth and shove a bunch of them
inside of their body. And then the most complex, I would say is
somersalting. So it will reach out, stick its head and
tentacles down, contract, release its foot, flip over, and
then put its foot back down. So in this way, it can sort of
in quotes, walk. So it can do all of this with a very, very
simple nervous system. And so this is just some quick, yep.
Sorry, sorry, could I just ask on the on the behavior side? Does
anybody do? Has anybody checked various learning training? Can
you teach these things anything?
Right. So this is this is the new frontier. But there it's also
the new old frontier. So as is all science, that that there were
some old studies, I think some of the first was 1900 and then
1950 of habituation in Hydra. So if you just sort of if you
pinch them, or even stick an electrode in them, they'll
contract. And if if you keep doing that over and over again,
with it with the proper inter stimulus interval, they'll
stop, they'll habituate. But that hasn't there hasn't been like,
in the last, I don't know, 50 years, any of that has not been
repeated. And and I don't think it's because people have tried
and failed. I think most people haven't really revisited that.
But yeah, that's, that's on the docket. Yeah, and, and I mean,
there's so I guess, was I think it was nematostellas showing
associative learning there. So other Nigerians now have been
shown to be doing, you know, more complex things than meet the
eye. Right. So you get this hypostome. This is just a cartoon
of the same thing, this nerve net, the tentacles. This is where
they would have the buds coming off. This is the basal disc. And
this is the tissue. So it's a just two layers. It's not a true
three layer thing. There's no true mesoderm. There's just the
endoderm on the inside and the extra term on the outside. And
it's thought that all of these, these are also myo epithelial
cells, they're epithelial cells with, let's just go over there
like muscle processes at the bottom. So they're sort of a
dual cell type. And then it's thought that all of those are
connected by gap junctions. And then you have your nerve net in
the endoderm with sensory neurons poking into the inside of
the gut, and then ganglion neurons in the ectoderm with
sensory neurons poking out to the outside environment. And it's
thought that these do not communicate. But I think that
might not be accurate. But that's the current idea. And then
these three different cell types, you have eye cells, which are
the stem cells that make the germ cells, the gland cells,
nomadicides, which are specific to, to Nigeria are super cool cell
type that shoot out darts, like with toxins, essentially, and
then neurons. And then these all cell-free new. So the eye cells
make these four and the ectoderm and endoderm cell-free
new themselves also. So that's sort of just the gist of that.
And then this is the current view of sort of the connectome, if
you will, of Hydra. So this is from Charlie David at LMU using
anti-kid heron antibody that they've just shown sort of stains
all of the neurons in the animal. And it looks, you know,
like, again, this could just diffuse nerve net. And in the
ectoderm, it's sort of this north-south highway where you
have more of a bipolar neuron. And in the endoderm, it's a
more multipolar thing that's sort of going more radially
around the animal. And then again, this is from Rob Steele at
Irvine, where this is just GFP expressed in eye cells. And you
can see that there appears to be a little bit of a condensation
of neurons in the, in the foot and in the head. And again, I
think this is another thing to keep in mind that what we're
seeing is depending on the tool that we're using to look at this
thing. So which is true. Yes, they're both true. But when you
look at that, it's unclear, like how that there's no obvious
circuitry, there's no anything that you say that would really
tell you just looking at that structure, how that's going to
function. Is it functioning as one thing as many things who
knows, until Christoph put in G camp six. So this is a molecule
that will fluoresce every time the neuron fires. And you, he
made a transgenic animal expressing this in the eye
cells. So all of the neurons had G camp six expressed, he then
put the hydra in between two cover slips. So this is just a
hundred micron spacer, it's swimming around in hydra media,
so it can still behave in two dimensions. And then just put
this on a normal white field microscope, and came up with a
movie that looks like this. So it's sort of, you know, this
can you see all the pixels in the movie at the same time. And
when you do, what do you see? Are they all firing completely
independently, total chaos? No, and are they all firing as one
thing? No, it's, it's something else. And in order to figure
out what the something else was, Christoph had to painstakingly
circle every one of those neurons and track it over time to
analyze that data and figure out what, what is happening here
and came up with this sort of general model, and saying that
out of that seemingly simple nerve net, you have these three
independent sort of units, ensembles or circuits, however
you want to call that groups of neurons that are co firing
together. And the one that's most consistently associated with
muscle activity is CB, where every time it fires, you get a
longitudinal contraction. So it gets shorter. That's very, very
clear that that's motor. These other two are less clear rhythm
potential one and rhythm potential two. But the potential
two in that early paper was most associated with radial
contraction. So that's in the end of the animal, when that
fires, it gets skinnier and can do some ingestion. So it will
spit its food out or water, let's say from its mouth. And then
rhythm potential one is in the ectoderm. And when it fires in
that paper was correlated with elongation toward light. But
what was most interesting to me was that this was also
happening when the when the animals just sitting there
doing nothing, just there. And that again, is not new. We're
noticing a thing. Reading literature is helpful. So that
this was found in the 60s by Pisano and McCullough, where
they were just sticking an electrode into Hydra. And they
found the same thing that there was this rhythmic, you know,
firing of some kind of neural network in the animal, they
didn't have access to, they just knew that this was happening
with their electrode when the animals doing nothing. And they
were called this cryptic activity, they said, What the
hell is this doing? Right? Because again, at the time, the
idea is that the nervous system is there to generate
behavior. Otherwise, it's off. Why at the base of the Tree of
Life, the simplest nervous system, are we seeing all kinds of
activity going on? If it's not generating behavior? And so
he hypothesized in one of his early papers, that is this
thing, coordinating the nervous system, sort of the
quarterback of the thing, the conductor, whatever metaphor you
want to use. And I've been told that he went off and started
selling bikes. And so never finished that work. And so we
don't know. But it was discovered there, right with
an electrode, and it was discovered rediscovered, let's
say with calcium. So it's method independent that you find the
same sort of thing. And that is what got me interested and
brings us to this very brief history of what we know about
simultaneous neural activity, which is very little. Because as
I was saying, Sherrington at that time, the big mantra was
reflexive brain, it's doing nothing. Otherwise, but his
own student actually was finding something very different
than that. And he sort of, he cut the head off of a cat and
deafferented the cat, no sensory input whatsoever, zero input to
a nervous system, he had all kinds of activity going on to
the point where the cat could still walk. So this was clearly
internally generated neural activity had nothing to do with
outside input. But that was just ignored. I was like, whatever,
that guy's nuts. Whatever he's up to, let him do that. And then
at the same time, or around the same time, Hans Berger was
inventing the EEG, EEG, we have humans. I'm just sitting in a
chair, all kinds of electrical activity going on there as well.
And like I was saying, so it wasn't just Poisson and McCulloch
discovering this spontaneous activity in hydra, it was sort
of anybody looking at any Nigeria, we're sort of discovering
this kind of thing going on. But of course, no one's talking to
each other. And so no one knows. And so it wasn't, of course,
until the 2000s when Raeckel and others at WashU put humans into
fMRI scanners. And at the time, right, it's sort of what was
interesting is the task evoked activity. Anything else that you
couldn't explain was seen as noise, like white noise on the
TV, get rid of it. What we're interested in is what happens to
the brain when you go to do the task. But at some point, he was
like, Hey, all of those areas in the brain that are active at
rest seem to be specific. And they're specifically inhibited
when the person is going to do the task. So he called up this
default mode network, which became like, you know, a very hot
topic, and has reignited interest in study of spontaneous
neural activity, which we now know is one of the most highly
conserved aspects of all brains. And so this is from
Busacchi's review, and that spans a wide range of frequencies
to 600 Hertz, very ultra pass all the way down to ultra slow of
like the point one to point one Hertz. And this is something
that's found in all mammalian brains, regardless of size or
structure, you find this, right? And I think the current idea is
that that's just noise, right? That's reverb, you have a
complex enough electrical system, you're going to get
oscillations, it's not functional, it's not relevant,
it's an epiphenomenon of the system. It's not doing anything.
And I think one of the reasons that that still is the idea is
because you can't really image it or manipulate them in a
specific way to determine if you if you manipulate this
oscillation, in particular, does that do anything? Or what
does it do? But again, it's taking 20% total body energy and
one of the most highly conserved aspects of all brains that we've
looked at. So the question is why or what is it doing? And
again, one of the most highly studied is the default mode
network in humans. And this is related to the self in theory.
So it's most active at rest, it's going on all the time and its
function continues to be debated. But it's thought to be
involved when you're internally focused. So you're either
remembering your past, thinking about yourself right now or
contemplating your future. And the same sort of midline
structures that I'll show you in a second appear to be
activated when you're doing self related processing. So if I'm
shown a picture of a stranger versus myself, the default mode
network lights up when I'm looking at something related to
the self. And that's in any modality, whether that's pictures,
whether that's hearing my voice, those kinds of things. So and
then also it's linked to a number of neuropsychiatric
disorders. And so you can't throw like a dart at PubMed right
now and not see the default mode network link to something. And
the way I'm simplifying that is to say that the general idea
seems to be that you have states like depression and anxiety
when you're too internally focused, the default mode network
is too active. This is associated with rumination and
worry and depression and anxiety and vice versa. When in
states like psychosis, psychedelic meditation, when
you disrupt the default mode network, this leads to in quotes
ego dissolution. So some of the best data that there are in human
studies are when you put humans in and that they can self
report, you know, on either psilocybin, LSD or DMT, that
whatever they think they are sort of dissolved, and then you
can see what happened in the MRI scanner. And that correlates
with disruption of the default mode network. So the question is
how how why or how would that have anything to do with the
self? What would be the mechanism by which the
development network could implement something like a
self? And there's sort of, you know, the structural argument
and the functional argument, the structural argument being that
it's a central midline structure. So medial prefrontal
cortex, the posterior cingulate, the medial temporal lobes, that
these are sort of these major rich hubs in the brain that are
connecting regions that would otherwise be segregated, right?
So you can imagine if you had a brain where the visual cortex
was not talking to the auditory cortex is not talking to the
olfactory cortex, and it was not talking to the internal
brainstem system, that you know, that would be a disintegrated
system. So is this this sort of central midline superhighway
with these thickly malignated axons connecting all of those
brain areas sort of getting input from all of them and then
maybe getting sending information back. So that's sort of
the structural thing. And then the functional piece is that
it's one of the lowest frequency oscillators in the brain of
0.01 to 0.1 Hertz. And this is where we got to go real crazy.
And this is now finally going to answer your question about the
observers in the brain, which is so Buzaki was saying, right,
like, this is what we've been doing as a neuroscientist is
looking at things from a quote unquote, third party, third
party objective view, you're looking at a brain with a bunch
of squiggly activity, and then you're looking at its output,
this behavior, and you're correlating those two things. And
you can say, Okay, if I see this squiggly activity, then I
can predict that the animal, whatever organism is going to
do this behavior. And that's helpful for us. And that's very
useful clinically, right, we could use that. But that's not
understanding. That's not what the brain is doing. The brain has
to observe itself, the neurons have to observe their own
information, and then decide sort of in quotes, decide what what
to do. So, right, so if you think of neuron A, B, and C
here, neuron A has to sort of observe the upstream activity
from its inputs neurons one, five, and nine. And in order to do
that, it has to be integrating that information over a certain
period of time. And let's just say that's 100 milliseconds. So
it reads that information and decides and not decides whatever
word you want to use, will fire or not, right? Based on that
that upstream input and same thing with B and C. So you can
think of those as sort of the highest frequency oscillators in
the system, the letters, if you want, in the neural code. Then
the downstream observer of A, B, and C is Q, let's say it has to
read out the input from A, B, and C, and therefore has to be
integrating that input over a longer period of time to give
time to for A, B, and C to give it its input. So that would then
say integrate over 200 milliseconds. So it then reads
out A, B, and C. And so reading out, let's say, cab a neural
word. So looking over here, that would be like this frequency.
And so you could say you would go from letters to neural words,
and then this is going to read over a longer time scale to get
inputs from those to form sentences, and then paragraphs
and all the way down. And so is it possible that you have this
thing that's the lowest frequency oscillator, getting all of
the input on the longest time scale in the entire nervous
system to read all of that information out? And so this is
just sort of a picture of what that might look like, placed on
top of the brain. And I like to think of this in terms of the
visual cortex is sort of the easiest for me to conceptualize.
And if we think of this little red thing here as the highest
frequency oscillator, sort of the letter of the neural code, if
that's coding in the visual cortex, at least for the
simplest thing like edges in the visual field, then the next
layer, layer two is getting input from that layer. And that
has to be reading that over a longer period of time. So it
has enough time to get input from, let's say two edges for it
to read out a higher level abstract concept or shape that
looks like this. And then the next lowest layer, lower
frequency reading out the input from layer two, right over a
longer time scale, so that it has time to read out this shape
and this shape to form a higher level abstract concept of this
shape, all the way down, right, to the lowest frequency
oscillator, the, let's say in this case, the default network
that's reading out all of the visual information, the auditory
information, the somatosensory information, the factory and
internal state of the organism. And in that way, getting all of
the highest level view, the highest abstract view of both
the external environment, the world in the internal
environment of the organism or the self. Right. So that's sort
of, okay, can it, can it be the reader, sort of the integrator
of the information, but then can it also be the coordinator top
down? And in this way, we sort of went through that diagram, but
in this case, if we're thinking, is it possible that these low
frequency oscillators can essentially organize higher
frequency oscillators through various mechanisms of cross
frequency coupling of like phase phase coupling, phase
amplitude coupling and these kinds of things. So is it possible
that this lowest frequency oscillator is essentially sort
of critical for setting up this hierarchy of oscillators and
organizing them in sort of space and time in the brain, such
that if you get rid of it, that organization, that hierarchy
might disappear. And there's some evidence, right, that when you
give humans psychedelics, the brain goes into a more disordered
or chaotic state. And it's unclear totally. If, if you get
rid of this default mode network, do you get something like
this, where you have all these other oscillators that are all
like this or do the oscillators themselves go completely out of
order and you just get complete chaos, right? And it seems to
me that it's not the latter of that complete chaos, because it
seems like, you know, if people report psychedelic
experiences, it's like, they're still having some kind of
experience, it's just less order that you might be having those
ensembles playing in a different order than you normally would.
So all this is complete speculation, right? And so it's
because it's very difficult, like I said, to image or
manipulate human brain. So luckily, this thing appears to be
highly conserved. So you have humans, monkeys, rats, a hierarchy
of brain white oscillations have been found a bunch of insects
also. And then this gets into some, you know, really out there
stuff where we're talking about finding these things in even in
systems that don't have a nervous system. So people have
been looking at this kind of thing in plants for a long
time, when you just put a microelectrode array in their
root, and you see these kinds of, let's say electrical spikes in
plants that Belusca and others have been saying for a long time
might be involved in information integration and
communication plant wide. And then Adamatsky putting this, these
electrodes into oyster mushrooms, and just finding the same
thing, like, yeah, these, these global organism wide electrical
spikes. Yeah, and this animal that he's doing all kinds of
interesting things to about is this is this is a fungal
language. And that kind of thing. And then same thing with
amoeba, finding these low frequency, I guess, electrical
like oscillations or spikes, it's unclear what they're made of,
right, in that case, and then bacteria here in single cells
when I'm going first made the voltage indicators of putting
those into single cells, and seeing that even bacteria are
having these low frequency electrical oscillations, that
then if you play that movie too, and you didn't, and I didn't
tell you that those are bacteria, you might think that those
aren't like a dish of neurons, you know, flashing. And then,
once you put them together, as you know, into a biofilm, right,
so those individual bacteria, you put them together, they, they
generate these global sort of biofilm wide potassium waves
that help them coordinate themselves as one giant unit,
and then not only can they do that with themselves, but they
can do this, you know, long range. So biofilm one wants to
eat, and biofilm two wants to eat. If there's enough nutrients,
they eat at the same time. But if there's not, they can
coordinate nutrient sharing, and then they sort of oscillate in
anti phase. So the general idea then just being that are these
low frequency electrical oscillations, right, ways to
coordinate otherwise autonomous units into coherent holes, no
matter where you are with or without a nervous system. Right,
so this, this gets a little bit, you got to take a lot of drugs
to watch this, but this is, this is what I just showed you,
right, we're all very used to this, the neural tissue being
electrical, you get ions flowing through. And, and that's how
you, you know, you generate action potentials, we're all
used to that. But this is where people get confused, okay, hung
up, where you're leading the chart, this is, this is what
yeah, like when I when I learned of your stuff, I was like, no
way. So yeah, it's like, of course, this is how this works.
Um, it's just a different, it's just slower, right, people for
really hard time. And I think this is going to be out there,
but like, I'm excited to think of like, different scales of
like, planetary or really small, we can't deal with. And it's
like, even in the biological sphere, we can't deal with like
different spatial stuff. But yeah, this is just, it's just
slower. So you can have ions flowing through gap junctions
and non neural tissue. And this, you know, I'd be very curious
to know what you think or what you're finding in terms of any
of these, let's say, non neural bioelectric networks. If, if
you're finding anything of the sort, if there are, there are
any kind of like, you know, higher frequency oscillations or
lower frequency oscillations, and if there's any of that, that
that's sort of organizing even the non neural tissue, we can get
there in a second. But that would be the idea is it's a very
similar thing as I was just saying up here that, yeah, you
have individual cells that would be, you know, that the voltage
there, if there's some kind of fluctuation would be also
some higher frequency. And those can be sort of put into
groups of a lower frequency to form, let's say, a subunit, like
an arm, and then you can have a bunch of those arms being read
out, right? Yeah, okay. What time is it? Okay, yeah, yeah. And,
and, and on up to sort of, to sort of like build chunks of
bodies based on on a similar, let's say principle of these
voltage circuits, being read out by lower and lower frequency
oscillators. And then in single cells, is this possible that
instead of proteins being sort of just the structural units of
cells, which is what I've been taught my whole life, is it
possible that these things are actually themselves conducting
electricity, which is what I'm forgetting his name now, Stuart
Lindsay at Arizona has shown that you get like nano semen
currents flowing through all proteins, no matter he just
picked six at random, like BSA, collagen, some things that you
just wouldn't be like, oh, that's conducting electricity, why
would it be? So is it the case that cells are actually true
little living computer chips, where the proteins are forming
electrical circuits on and off, and that metabolism itself
we've been taught is sort of generating ATP and energy, but
it's also generating a bunch of hydrogen ions. And so is it
also just giving us a pool of hydrogen ions to be flowing
through the computer chip. So that's, that's out there, but
that's, that's what I was thinking on that one. Okay, so
right, so you can build all these things in these different
ways at these different scales. And, and so what might they be
doing again, could they be sort of maintaining systems out on
your criticality, right? If in the human brain, for example,
with the default mode network around is thought to be at
criticality, where I can sort of help the system form patterns
at a useful time scale. But you imagine, you can also then
have a system that's totally on or totally off, you either
have brain death, or totally on speed is a tonic chronic
seizure, or totally disordered, in terms of total total chaos.
And this appears to be what happens, you go towards chaos,
if you get rid of this organizer and at least the human
brain. So I don't know what happens in any of these other
systems, if you get rid of that. So again, integrating all the
bottom of electrical information in the system, and then
coordinating at top down. And so very quickly on that, not
only with this thing sort of maybe maintained the overall
electrical sort of organization or structure of the system,
but then it's the spikes of that oscillator are not totally
constant, like a mechanical clock that you get, you know,
every 60 seconds, it's variable. And I think that would be
variable in terms of like, external and internal input,
so that it can sort of coordinate the entire system top
down and provide some kind of information about the overall
state of the system by how frequently it's firing. And so
that's complete speculation there. Low frequency, you're
sort of saying, okay, within a range of frequencies, everyone
that's local gets some kind of global piece of information
that's giving everyone that that knowledge that this is this
frequency means everything is cool, keep doing your local
job, however you do it. And a higher frequency signal means
something else to the local function. And there maybe need
to speed up their processes. Right. So, so again, is this is
this thing conserved in Hydra? And so that's sort of what I
want to do is just start testing this thing there. And to
just speed this up is to just say, does the does the Hydra
cell phone serve as the organizer? Sorry, organisms
unifier, an ultimate integrator of both its internal and
external input to generate coherent behavior, i.e. a
unified self, and I'll just breeze through. So again, just
to quickly say that first of all how to do all this manual
tracking by hand. And so what I've been spending my time
doing is trying to get all this automatic working with a
group of people in Rafa's lab to sort of make a I don't know
if people can see this or what, but the dual color animals so
that you can use that nucleus that never disappears while
the animals moving because keep in mind in all other neural
systems, you're putting a microscope on the head of the
thing. And it's not moving much, but this entire system is
moving. So you have to figure out a way to track it and
extract all of those calcium signals from each neuron and
end up down here with individual spikes from each of
those neurons. And what's another interesting or I think
potentially unique thing about Hydra is from Christos
initial work when he put an electrode in, at least in one
of the particular neurons in Hydra does appear that one
calcium spike equates to about one active potential. So just
using optical information from this animal, you can
essentially capture every spike from every neuron and get a
real clear picture because in other systems, a calcium is
equate to many, many active potentials in the mouse, for
example. So it's hard to have that as you only read out.
Okay, right. So I'll just show you really quickly this beautiful
movie. This is right. So those are the all of the the TD
Tomato and then the G Camp seven neurons there. So then you
can track all of that and do the signal analysis. And then you
can write then you can also do these automatic behavior
tracking using deep block cut so that you can do automated
behavior and automated neural signal and start making sense
of this stuff. And so with that, I'll just I'll just end with a
few like teasers, right? So like this is just to show you
prove that Hydra's lays there and rests and it still has this
neural activity which will flash in a second right there. So
you can start asking. So what is the relationship between
that network and its other two networks? Is that network
actually predictive of global neural activity in this animal
and all of those kinds of studies? What's really I think
unique about Hydra is this, right? These two other things
that you can do where this is the parent animal, this is the
foot in the head and this is a bud. This is an early bud
coming off and you can start to say, okay, this is again,
this is genetically identical animal. This is one slab of
tissue. But at some point, the genetically identical thing
becomes two individuals, right? And how does that happen? You
can like so, right? At this point at this stage, their
global neural activity is essentially looking the same
and their behavior is essentially the same. But at some
point, that tissue becomes three different individuals. So
this is a bud here, a bud here and the parent here, and
they're flashing so asynchronously, right? Like
different Christmas trees and they start to develop
completely independent behavior. So you can sort of, you
know, go to town on all of those kinds of questions. And
then you can also do all kinds of other crazy shit, which is
cut, make these two animals with two heads and you would
expect sort of like a split brain patient. You're sharing one
body, you have two heads, one foot. In this case, these, I
would have predicted they're gonna, you know, act
independently. But it's also the case that it looks like
Hydra's brain like the plant might be in its foot. So these
actually start acting basically the same. But you can, and I
didn't know if this would be possible, you can actually
break a Hydra. So if you make a split foot, then it starts
acting. So this was contracting independently of this foot.
And then all of its sort of nervousness was sort of broken
that it's not, it is no longer one coherent thing. So even
the tentacles, it's sort of the body here is, is, is, let's
say, flashing independently of this foot independently of
that one. And so it's sort of having a hard time trying to
coordinate itself as one coherent thing. Right. Right. So
yeah, so just to conclude that these things, you know, low
frequency electrical oscillations are found through the
living world. We don't really know what they're doing. This
crazy hypothesis is that are they, you know, overall
electrical organism organizers that can do these three
jobs, maintaining systems out of near criticality that if you
get rid of them, you go more towards chaos disorder. And
then are they integrating the little information and then
from that top level view, coordinating everything from
the top down. And then I'm going to start trying to test
these things out. These tools have been built. So there's the
the world one tour. And I'd like to thank all those people
that have contributed all this. And you for sitting here.
Yeah. That was awesome. Thank you so much. Yes. Super
interesting. We're going to have to, we're going to have to
schedule a part two because there's a bunch of things I
want to I want to ask you and and and also talk about this
the cell phone concept, both in cells and embryos and then
outside of electrophysiology in general, because we're
starting to see something similar in other systems that
are not natively electrophysiological at all. Yeah.
So so I think this is this is a more, you know, what you've
got here is a very kind of profound generic concept that
I think could apply to a lot of things. Yeah, awesome. Love
it. Yeah. All right. Thank you so much. Yeah. Great. Yeah.
We'll talk soon. All right. See you. Okay. Thanks.
