Yeah, so we had some good ones this time, Illusion of Transparency, which like, yeah and then expecting short inferential distances and I feel like they actually would have been really good ones.
Hold up just one second, aren't we?
How are we doing?
What was it? Is Molecular Technology scientific and scientific evidence, legal evidence, rational evidence?
Am I completely off to the left side?
Uh, son of a bitch.
Uh, should we, should we like, maybe?
Well, we'll chop that, but no worries.
No, I mean, should we maybe like reconvene at a different day?
I can't, if this is going on on Wednesday, I can record, we want more tomorrow night, that takes from like, usually six to nine, so.
Crap, you know what, no, no, no, I've read both of these a number of times, I know them all, let's keep going.
Alright, you got it.
Yeah, so I was saying that we have some good ones this time, Illusion of Transparency and expecting short inferential distances, both of which would have been really good to go along with talking to strangers,
especially Illusion of Transparency, it's very much in line with the major themes of that book.
Uh, someone want to summarize it or shall I go?
I think you're doing a good job so far, go for it.
Okay, so Illusion of Transparency in hindsight bias, which was the previous one, people who know the outcome of a situation believe that the outcome should have been easy to predict in advance.
So, uh, related to this one is the Illusion of Transparency, which is, we always know what we mean by our words, and we expect that others know too.
I think I've also heard this called Mind Reading, I forget if that's from, I think that's a thought distortion on the list of like the CBT skills.
It also just sounds like a popular nomenclature for like this thing, right?
Yeah.
How am I supposed to read your mind?
Oh, well, I meant this one, isn't that?
And standard rejoinder is how am I supposed to read your mind?
You know, when I look at here is what you said.
Yeah.
Well, I kind of want to dig into it more, but I'll keep summarizing.
There was an example in here.
So, June recommends a restaurant to Mark.
Mark dines there and discovers A, unimpressive food and mediocre service, or B, delicious food and impeccable service.
Then Mark leaves the following message on June's answering machine.
June, I just finished dinner at the restaurant you recommended, and I must say it was marvelous, just marvelous.
And so this was a scenario that was presented to a group of subjects.
I'm trying not to laugh.
Sorry.
It's just a funny situation.
I know.
Marvelous, just marvelous is a phrase that I should use more in my life.
So.
I think that'd be marvelous.
Just marvelous.
When this was presented to a group of subjects, 59% thought Mark's message was sarcastic and
that Jane would perceive the sarcasm, importantly.
And among the other subjects told scenario B, which by the way, they're saying the ones
who were told that he had unimpressive food thought that it was sarcastic and that Jane
would perceive this sarcasm.
And Jane, huh, there's a typo.
Maybe we should report it.
Apparently Jane and June are used interchangeably in this.
Oh.
But anyway.
I just noticed.
Yeah, the subjects that were told scenario B that he received great service and food, only
1% thought that Jane would perceive Mark's messages sarcastic.
The study seemed to indicate that an actual voice message was played back to the subjects,
which I guess is not clear.
It seemed to indicate.
And that's even the most surprising though, that people could get such different impressions
from a voice recording.
Yeah.
So I think it'd be very important that it is a voice recording because if it was just
written down, you could imagine the tone of voice to be whatever you wanted.
But if there was an actual voice recording, everyone hears the same thing.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think I like this and it's illustrating a point that we don't necessarily have to
generalize too much from this specific example, just because it's one study and all that.
But this general phenomenon stands with or without the study.
This goes to large parts of whether or not I'd assume it's being sarcastic would be
my priors on Mark's usual behavior, if he's a sarcastic person, if he's the kind of person
who's ever used the word marvelous before, little things like that.
But yeah, I think the gist is that if the group was told, hey, look, he's being sarcastic,
or rather that the food is bad, they assume that he's being sarcastic.
And of course, they would assume that they know that he believes the food is bad, but
that they also believe Jane would perceive the sarcasm.
And so what I like about this too is this was said in 1994.
If you run that into text messages today, you get to just go completely hog wild with this.
Yeah.
What emoji did they put?
It's really important to use emoji.
Is that a sarcastic wake or a serious wink?
There was another study he cited from 2002, which I thought was even more interesting
because they told a person to say an ambiguous sentence to an audience.
I think one of the examples given was the man is chasing a woman on a bicycle, and the
speaker is given a picture to show that it's a man running after a woman, that the woman
is on the bicycle, as opposed to like the woman is running and the man is on the bicycle.
But when you first hear it, it could be interpreted either way.
Anyways, they were told to say the sentence to an audience and estimate how much of the
audience understood what they were saying.
And they always overestimated how many people understood them and underestimated how many
people misunderstood them.
And I thought that was extra interesting because then the speaker had full control over how
they would utter the sentence, right?
And they're looking at the audience, so maybe they're getting some kind of feedback from
them, but they still just were wrong just on how many people actually understood them.
And as we know from talking to strangers, you can't even trust what feedback you're
getting from the audience.
Yeah.
So if you want to test this at home with your friends, I forget if I even heard this from
the last wrong community or somewhere else, but if you tap your finger on the table to
like the tune of Happy Birthday or the Star Spangled Banner or some tune that you would
expect people to know and then ask them, what song was that?
Nobody will know.
It'll sound exactly like out of Jingle Bells to you or whatever, but it's...
Yeah, it's just random tapping.
A good example.
I remember Julie Gayle mentioning that one just like five years ago and rationally speaking.
And I never forgot that.
It's another good example of like, no, no, this couldn't be more clear.
I'm clearly doing Happy Birthday.
They're like, I don't know, man, you're tapping your fucking fingers.
Is that ACDC?
So I mean, okay, this is going to be a spoiler for Harry Potter Methods of Rationality.
So if you haven't read it, skip forward two minutes.
But Eliezer intended it to be incredibly obvious whether or not Coral was Voldemort, like he
was in canon.
And I'm not going to say if he is or not for people who didn't skip forward, but it is
not at all incredibly obvious to the point where the community was...
The readership at the time he was writing was very much split as to whether or not Coral
was Voldemort until the reveal was made later on near the end of the book.
And like to Eliezer, it was just like, how are people not getting it?
This is the most obvious thing in the world.
It shouldn't even be a discussion.
In all of our defense, even if it was obvious, which I maintain that it was less obvious than
he thought it was.
But part of the reason for that is because if anything, it was too obvious, and if there's
no way it would be laid out that clearly if that's really what was going on here.
I agree, but it's a thing that happens a lot with writing, where you think the audience
is going to get something, and they don't.
And then you overcorrect and really over-explain things, and people are like, don't spill it
out like I'm an idiot.
I can read into the text a little bit.
It's a very difficult line to walk.
Yeah, that's why beta readers are really important.
Yep, yep.
That's what I'm appreciating a lot about wrapping up a ward right now, is that the
author has to tie all these loose ends together.
And I think do it to the satisfaction of the raging mob.
And the mob, at least the only mob that I see and listen to, which is like the subreddit
and the discord, they are, it's hard to summarize, but they are much more like you picture mobby
than like Reddit, where Reddit will just like, you know, is happy just to fling shit across
the fence.
I don't know if this sucked or whatever.
These ones will jump down your throat, but like, I can't believe you would say that,
you know, you would put heroic sacrifice on this pedestal.
Really, it's just like suicide.
That's terrible.
And this is awful.
This shouldn't be, you know, lauded or whatever.
It's, I can't, and Brian brought this up in the last couple of episodes if we want more,
like having to write in front of an audience that is dissecting your work while it's in
progress.
It's a whole new dimension to it.
I can't even do it when I'm just trying to like have an imaginary audience.
I end up second guessing myself.
I'm like, is this too dark?
Is this, am I talking down to my audience right now?
Is this going to be, I don't know.
The post ends on a real world example with huge consequences where two days before Germany
kicking off World War II, Chamberlain sent a letter that was intended to make it clear
Britain would fight any invasion that occurred, but it was phrased politely and in diplomatic
speak, and Hitler thought it was conciliatory.
So the tanks rolled right in.
Those polite Brits.
So yeah, the main lesson from this post seems to be when you have something in your head,
they think things are very obvious, but they are not necessarily in any way obvious.
They very much are not.
The best thing about that is that you could never really be sure someone actually understood
you.
Like the premise at the top of this is like nobody knows, like, you know what you meant
to say by your words and expect others to know it too.
Sometimes if you're not 100% sure what you meant, then like that's obvious that that
person, you know, probably won't know what you meant if you didn't.
But even if you do, and they tell you back in words that make sense to you, you might
have this kind of like double illusion of transparency, but that is like way less obvious than a like
literal double illusion of transparency where, you know, I just didn't communicate exactly
as clear as I thought.
And then you repeated my miscommunication to me.
Yeah, I don't know.
This this this can kind of go on to this weird recursive level that to me is just kind of
fun and wild to chase down.
But well, there's two.
It is.
I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
There's two different frameworks that I'm thinking of just off the top of my head where people
try to mitigate this effect.
One is the CFARS double crux communication style where and then there's also the Gottman
wrap up or intervention, which is a relationship counseling thing.
And they both have the same kind of structure where one person speaks, the other listens,
the other person has to repeat back with the other person said, but in their own words,
or like what I'm hearing is that you feel like this and that's making you feel that
way.
And I can see that you're upset about this by like your expression.
Is that right?
And you're not allowed to move forward until you feel convinced that the other person understands
you.
Like you feel like their ability to rephrase it back to you is.
Yeah, that's what I meant to say.
Or I think the double crux example, it's supposed to be like even kind of a steel man where
it's like, yeah, that's even better than what I was trying to say.
I guess that's the ideal version.
Yeah, that was in prepo pores rules of like civil discourse or something.
One of the four rules was you should be able to repeat back your opponent's argument in
such terms that they say, wow, I wish I thought to put it that way.
And I feel like if you get to that, that that is the the apex of having a good conversation
with somebody to disagree with.
It shows at the very least that you understand them well enough to simulate what they're
trying to say.
And that means you're prepared to engage them.
I think it's great.
Yeah, it's also although I've tried to have these kinds of conversations and it's it takes
a lot of practice and it's very unnatural.
First of all, it makes any conversation take like a million times as long.
So it's the reason why people don't just speak like that all the time.
Right.
I think I don't know any other reason.
I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
The other thing that I tried to do, which I've talked about before is the radical honesty
thing of especially with people close to me that, you know, there's less central distance.
Haha.
It's like a segue.
I was going to do the segue too.
Yeah, but I wasn't going to use that one.
I was I was going to say that I think that would work to resolve confusions like Mark
and Jane were having about the restaurant, right?
Because you could trust that Mark would accurately represent how he felt about the restaurant
rather than like, is he joking?
Yeah, like, is Mark a guy who's sarcastic all the time or does he never make jokes?
But most people are kind of in the middle of that.
I don't know.
I think to like, use radical honesty, say things clearly and bluntly as much as possible.
Totally.
And some of the times that the reason that we can suspect that short conversational supplies
for a long conversation is necessary because we expect short inferential distances.
Yeah, we should probably.
You can believe I didn't even write that down first.
That was a good joke.
Haha.
I can hear the audience laughing.
Give me a minyash.
All right, there.
Finally cracked a grin.
All right.
There must be a long delay between what I'm doing things to do when you're seeing them.
No, I give you guys a hard time.
That wasn't an a glorious laughter joke.
Anyway, expecting short inferential distances is one of the ones I didn't have to reread,
but I did just because it stuck with me really well when I first read it.
The short version is that basically, when you're explaining something to somebody, you
have a well grounded intuition that a short explanation will suffice because in our ancestral
environment, short explanations were all that was necessary because we all basically have
all the same prior knowledge.
Whereas now if you're trying to make a nuanced point and a difficult subject and you give
a short answer like a tweet, it's extremely reasonable to understand that somebody or
to expect now that someone will completely misunderstand what you're trying to say.
Yeah, like he gives the example that since you grew up in bands of no more than like
200 people, maybe all knowledge was passed down by speech or memory.
And so like no one was that far removed from you in knowledge.
If you discovered a new Oasis, you didn't have to explain what an Oasis is or why it's
a good idea to drink water or anything like almost everyone knew.
Everyone knew almost everything that everyone else knew.
There was not a lot of distance between you and other people that you had to bridge.
And now we have what he calls abstract disciplines with vast bodies of carefully gathered evidence
generalized into elegant theories transmitted by written books.
Their conclusions are 100 inferential steps removed from universally shared background premises.
Yeah, we have really intense specialization and everything.
Yeah, so sorry to interrupt that, but I wanted to get that out real quick before you went
to the why it's why something that's more than one inferential step away seems to be
crazy or lies or something.
No, no, you're good. And I brought up Twitter because it's always, I'm not on Twitter, but
I see tweets once in a while on Reddit or I'll hear about the fallout sometimes.
I don't know if Dawkins uses Twitter less or if he's just slightly less insane on there,
but for a while he was just totally tanking his reputation.
I think by trying to have nuanced arguments and 140 characters.
And now they've now they've up to I think the 280 to is able to get out the whole sentence like
there's every reason to expect that eugenics would work from a scientific perspective,
but that doesn't mean that we should do it or something.
And the thing is like with Dawkins and with a lot of people, they just assume everyone
knows basically the same thing that he knows.
That's my point. Yeah, that's exactly the point.
I'm speaking to an audience of my fellow scientists here, right?
And it turns out no, with Twitter you're speaking to literally everyone.
And most of them don't have that knowledge.
Yeah, so I mean, there's nothing scientifically controversial about the fact that it would be
super easy to breed in traits into people if you really want it to, right?
If aliens visited Earth tomorrow and said if humanity on average is to foot taller
in two centuries will blow up your planet, that wouldn't that would be not.
I mean, it would be an inconvenience.
It would be hard, but it wouldn't be difficult.
It wouldn't be really impossible.
I'm not going to say that it would be like super easy.
Family and inconvenience.
Yeah, right.
So it might not be.
It would be definitely an inconvenience, but it's not like that.
It's not like we would have no idea how to address this challenge, right?
It would be totally doable.
I'm not, I'm not hung up on the genetics thing.
Also, it's a very loaded word.
Yeah.
It was just, it was the idea that I think of is it always seems like Twitter people have,
you know, they try to make a nuanced point.
That's what I was on Twitter for like one summer.
And I got to talking with somebody about like female and male genital mutilation.
And I realized that we're just talking past each other and that it was impossible to have a conversation.
This is the worst platform ever for talking to people.
Why am I here?
And then you're like shit on there for like Twitter.
Yeah.
Movie reviews, jokes, I think is the absolute platform for it.
There, you know, you can get great one-liners and zingers on Twitter.
I think that's a great place for it.
But as for the rest of it, man.
Twitter was a fun social experiment that we did with the world.
And I guess the term I would use.
Yeah.
No, I don't, I don't think so either.
I worked as a social media manager for a bit and that was just like the worst two years
of my life.
Yeah.
I mean, that's an exaggeration.
I've had worse things happen than having to be on Twitter, but it was up there.
Yeah.
Just like the inanity.
I just like.
Yeah.
The, so to go back to the post, it says that in the ancestral environment there.
Anyone who said something with no obvious support was either a liar or an idiot.
Because there was no knowledge that everyone else in the band didn't already have.
Or couldn't easily get.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And conversely, if you say something that you think is blatantly obvious and the other
person doesn't see it, then that other person is an idiot.
Or they're being deliberately obstinate just to annoy you.
And, and on top of all that, if someone says something with no obvious support and expects
you to believe it and gets all indignant when you don't, then they must be totally crazy.
So this, the issue of not having this common ground between each other is, you know, a
recipe for horribleness because listeners still assume that everything should be visible
with one step, maybe two.
So they take two steps back to explain maybe three on the outside and not realizing just
how much distance there is in from universal knowledge to new knowledge.
So this is so many professors or just probably teachers in general, but I remember in college
there would be like the sign of a good professor, somebody who understands inferential distance.
I think a lot of teachers like good teachers who care about the teaching process are really
skilled at this too.
That's probably the field where you need to know it the most.
Any field, maybe where you're, the main thing you're trying to do is communicate something
to an audience that's unfamiliar with it.
But I remember just having really bad professors who are, they start their PowerPoint, you're
like, okay, you're taking notes on the first slide.
All right, I'm following.
Wait, what?
The next slide is just completely like, and then there's this vector thing.
I remember I started out majoring in environmental science.
I had this professor who did that sort of thing.
I have a page of notes, like before I dropped that major and switched it for like a bunch
of reasons, but like there was a page of notes that was just like slowly devolved into a
bunch of doodles.
And I remember Vector Kitty was flying over the environment and just like, yeah, I don't
have no idea what's even going on anyway.
Something something.
Yeah, I think, I think it was the worst teachers were the ones that didn't remember what it
was like to not know the subject of teaching.
Yeah.
And so they start talking and to them it's they've been doing over 30 years and like,
yeah, this old hat, I get this.
You guys will get it too, because it's really easy.
But I remember 30 years ago when they opened their first textbook, right?
Dude, you, it's surprising how quickly that sets in.
So taking just a stupid video game as an example, in World of Warcraft, you have to learn boss
all these little mechanics you got to do things got to watch out for it takes some practice,
right?
And before you have it down, it's freaking hard as hell.
You're learning all these new patterns and tricks and things to watch out for.
But once you have it down, it is super easy.
It is barely an inconvenience, as they say.
So once people have beaten bosses and moved on to other bosses, all the time you see people
saying, how is anybody stuck on this earlier boss?
They're super easy.
You just kind of blow through it.
Like literally maybe two weeks ago, they were in the position of, oh my God, this is impossible.
How will we ever do this?
Because it's, you know, everything is impossible until you know how to do it.
And then it's just trivially easy.
Yeah.
And it's amazing how quickly you can flip from one to the other.
That's really hard to, it's hard to get in that mindset when you're a new learner as
well.
That's something that I've kind of been reading about and struggling with.
Like when you're an adult and you're trying to learn a new skill, it's really hard to
be in the position of, I'm an idiot who knows nothing about this.
Like, I don't know, programming or art.
I'm trying to teach art to people.
And I think the sequence actually gets into this too.
But you, the teacher also can get really frustrated with people who don't understand what seem
like basic concepts to you.
There are things that seem like basic concepts to me because I learned them when I was a
kid.
Like I've been drawing forever.
Yeah.
And I remember trying to teach like some older folks at the library.
Like, okay, like here's how you draw a face.
And not under, like, that's another thing that's really funny.
Describing the anatomy of a face was like, okay, you have to like, you do the oval, you
divide the oval in half.
That's where the eyes go.
Your eyes are halfway down your head.
And like the seams, I'm trying to explain like the cognitive things going on.
I'm like, this seems unintuitive because most people look at faces and they don't look at
the rest of the head.
So you think the upper third of the face has the eyes, but actually it's the middle of
the head.
You have to draw the whole head that this part's covered with hair.
No one looks at that.
But like, even as I'm describing all this stuff and I'm trying to like go step by step
as slow as I possibly can, I'm walking around the room and people are still drawing the
eyes on the top of the forehead and like, no, bad.
Look at me.
Where are my eyes?
Are you going to put them up here?
How weird would that look?
Right?
Yeah, just bring it down.
Yeah, it's, I think, I imagine, I mean, part of it, that sounds, to me, that just sounds
like a hard subject.
I can't, since I can't draw, maybe that, maybe I'd be a good art student because I know
I suck at it, but I wouldn't be confident in my ability to do it right.
Whereas other people, the part where it could be maddening, he uses the example a lot of
like scientists trying to explain things to non-scientists and how like, simplest explanation
is a magic word of power among scientists because they've been inculcated with the
legendary history of science from Newton to Einstein.
And it's like, so you hear a biologist say, oh, it's the simplest explanation, then a
physicist who doesn't know biology can be like, oh, okay, I will add a lot of credence
to that because we are also scientists.
They know how important that is.
Yeah.
And so that's like, the annoying part is when you give like a long explanation of something
to somebody who's not in the field that you're, you're profounding from, you know, evolution
to a layperson might be a good example.
Like they, you can explain everything and they look, okay, yeah, I think I'm following you.
I think you're an idiot.
I think you're wrong.
Well, then you weren't listening and you didn't follow because this couldn't be simpler and
you're the idiot.
So that's right.
Yeah.
That's not how I feel.
I'm saying that, that, that inclination to feel that way makes perfect sense.
Yeah.
It's like very much, I think you get in this headspace easily of this person's an idiot
and they're not listening to me and the other person is thinking like, this person thinks
I'm an idiot and that I don't know like basic stuff.
Cause like the thing about drawing is that people think they know how to draw a face
and like, you know, even kids with crayons are usually drawing faces and it's like, I
know how to do like eyes, nose and mouth, you know, like come on, but like you don't.
It's so hard to get in the headspace.
It's like, actually we don't know this stuff.
Yeah.
You have to be really humble.
Yeah.
In the post that, that to a lay audience, it's the simplest explanation may be interesting,
but that's hardly a knockdown argument.
But from the biologist perspectives, they can see how, you know, it might sound a little
unintuitive, but when they reject evolution, even after they've had it explained to them
that it's the simplest explanation, they're just idiots and there's no point talking to them.
And it's clear to you that this isn't what Eliezer means here either.
He's saying that that's the feeling that one gets because they're expecting short and
differential distances.
Yeah.
When you correct for that, then you no longer view the, the unable to follow you along lay
person as an idiot.
You're like, okay, I clearly didn't actually explain myself.
Yeah.
That's why Richard Dawkins book explaining evolution is, I don't know, 350 pages long
and not five to somebody who has the, and even that it could be twice as long if you
wanted to explain, he probably does a bit.
It's been years since I've read it, but like, if you wanted to explain little things like
here's why we value short explanations, here's why we value replication, all of the, the
foundations of science.
If you wanted to dig into all that, then the book could be much longer, but I think he,
he probably does a bit.
This is meant to be a, you know, top to bottom book.
But that's my point.
It's like, you can explain evolution in three minutes, if not less depending on who you're
talking to.
But if you're starting to scratch for somebody who has no idea what you're talking about,
then sometimes you need 300 pages, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I have a, go ahead.
Okay.
The joys of Skype.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, then I guess I was going to say that he also says that if people see you visibly
attaching greater weight to an argument that is justified in the eyes of the audience
at that time, then they also think you're crazy because, you know, you shouldn't put that
amount of weight on that evidence.
So you have to go back and first explain why the evidence that you're about to explain
is as weighty and important as you're about to, you know, lay out with, and that takes
explanation in itself.
And so he's saying there's, there's a very long chain, but you can't, you can't drop
any hints that maybe you're working a dozen inferential steps away from the audience or
that you have special knowledge they don't because then they think that you're condescending
and arrogant.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's like, you know, trying to explain to somebody why astrology isn't a thing.
And if you, if somehow, you know, she believes in astrology, but we shared everything else
in common, I could just be like, you realize every physicist on earth thinks that it's
bullshit or knows that, you know, had, would bet their lives on it being bullshit.
You would immediately change your mind.
You're like, you're like, oh, I, okay, if all the physicists who actually know everything
there's no about stars or everything that humanity can know yet so far about stars
thinks that it doesn't, you know, the, the constellations don't impact my life, then
I guess I'm wrong.
I think if I were to actually believe in astrology, I would first have to not know enough of physics
to not care.
I don't know.
People are really good at compartmentalizing.
I know.
Well, once you know that stars are giant gas balls and that they're so fricking far away,
what else is there to know?
I, people are very good at compartmentalizing.
I have religious co-workers who, you know, spend their days like bioengineering cells.
Oh God, don't these bioengineered cells like intelligent lizards are designed?
It's like, yes, because we made them here in the lab.
That's not the same and you know it.
I think what this all comes down to is the punchline at the bottom he says, and if you
think you can explain the concept of systematically underestimated inferential differences between
the two, briefly, in just a few words, I've got some sad news for you, which first of
all is a reference to the fact that this entire post is pretty long, but also to the fact
that it links to three other posts that he's made beforehand.
And while he doesn't give it away in this, I think at this point, it should probably
be clear to most people that the purpose of the sequences and their, you know, several
Bibles length worth of word count is to bridge an inferential gap that he saw at the very
beginning when he was like, here's the mass audience of everybody in 2006.
And here is this conclusion I have reached and I have to convince people of this, but
oh my God, it's going to take a while.
And this is a fricking impressive project that one person set about to bridge this massive
inferential gap.
Like just, just the fact that he thought he could do it is kind of amazing to me.
And then the fact that he actually did it is just crazy.
I'm very impressed by people who try to do hard things.
I get pretty frustrated when people, I don't know, generally I dislike haters, like in
any field, but especially when people, you see themselves as critics or bad-mouthing
like some artwork or project that someone has done or like, I'm like, okay, what have
you made?
It's generally.
Yeah.
All right, I guess that is the sequences.
I do want to point out that somehow we accidentally skipped over several dozen sequence posts to
get to these.
I'm not sure how that happened, maybe an accidental pagedown or something.
So we're going to be backtracking quite a bit.
And next episode we will talk about the posts scientific evidence, legal evidence, rational
evidence, and is molecular technology, quote, scientific.
So we have skipped a few inferential steps to get here, but hopefully we can backfill
them without too much trouble.
