I mean, I see how busy they are and just like how much board games they play and
Busting out the stereotypes, are we? Hey, it's much easier. I get it. It's much easier to find people willing players when you when you're in a fucking
polycule
There's nothing wrong with that
to me, it's more like why
Go to all this effort
But when my partner is like banging other people or when I'm banging other people like both of us seem to be more interested in having sex with each
Other because there's this like a tiny little hint of like ooh like it's the other person gonna bang you better
Like maybe I should step up my game
Not everybody feels this way. I'm not saying that this is like like an inherent, you know good thing about polyamory
But for me, I really like that as a way to keep the spark alive
For much longer like I've had much longer relationships in polyamory where I'm still very interested in having sex with them
In a way that like never works back when I was monogamous
I've never looked into
I thought about like why this is but I found the same thing that just the sex is better longer as when people are seeing other people
Yeah, interesting
I think the the framing is insidious because it does
Put the put in place this
Freedom and oppression dichotomy. It's if you're poly then you're not restricting others
But if you're monogamous then you are imposing restrictions on others and everyone understands restrictions are bad
And and freedom is good. So it has this like virtuous implicit virtuousness to it
Well, I think that might be just some bullshit that we as liberal americans live with and we should embrace the fact that
Not all restrictions are bad and not all freedoms are good. Maybe
I think the question should not be like
Are we trying to avoid virtuous framing but rather is this accurate are probably people in fact placing fewer restrictions on their partners
I mean, yeah, they are but I just don't understand
Aligning it on that version doesn't like I said, it doesn't make sense. Like I am willing to bite this bullet
I think this is straightforwardly correct. I think that polyamory is morally better than monogamy
How so I think fewer restrictions is better. Okay
Also separately, I think that there are lots of ways in which it is like ridiculous to expect people to do the morally better thing
And there's like a lot of judgment
Inherent towards saying something is less good. I think there's a lot of morally better things that I could be doing in my relationships
Why do you think more people aren't poly
