Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy.
I'm Stephen Zuber, and today we have a special guest.
Hi, I'm Jess.
Hello, Jess.
And we are going to...
Well, we're going to talk about things, but we have not done any listener feedback for like four episodes now
because we keep getting, you know, too into the topic and running out of time.
So this week, we are going to do listener feedback right off the top.
So we definitely will not run out of time on that.
Solid strategy.
Did you want to start or should I pull one up?
Yeah, I've got a quick one here from Kai.
They wrote in on May 29th, and I feel like it's been unconsciously long to reply.
Basically, it was when we had an Audrey on for the teacher episode.
They said, hi, I'm Kai.
Upon listening to your recent episode about education, I found your guest's characterization of home education to be unfair and un-nuanced.
And as I've been home educated from the age of five, I thought you might be interested in having me on to discuss what it's actually like.
One, sorry if it was unfair and uncharacteristic or un-nuanced.
I imagine maybe there's a bias from like in-school teachers against homeschooling teachers.
I'm assuming there is.
There probably is.
It's the direct competition.
Yeah, they don't know how they're doing, how to do things right.
Yeah, they would probably say no.
There's no way that they could do it right there because we're all, you know, establishment stuff or whatever.
They may also have only been familiar with like, I hate to say it, but like religious home education.
Right.
It's not like unschooling or any of the...
I think she also said specifically that she gets the kids who failed at home education because their parents sucked so bad that they had to get put into the system afterwards.
Oh yeah, and that's the worst sampling bias ever.
Right.
She doesn't see any of the kids that had like the good outcomes from homeschooling.
And the only homeschooling I had ever seen in real life up until I met Max Harms was the nutty, religious kind where literally the multiple choice questions were like, how old is the earth?
10,000 years old is the correct answer.
It turns out that the cheapest for reasons that I'm sure are very intentional.
Because church subsidizes it.
Exactly.
Yeah, and there is some good religious like homeschooling.
I didn't mean to be mean.
We'd like being mean to religion as we discussed in the last podcast.
I'm okay with that too.
So yeah, I don't know.
I'm happy to talk about it more.
You're welcome to write in more or I was thinking too of doing a thing.
I was going to announce in this episode anyway where I thought it'd be fun if anyone who wants to write in stuff.
I put on a sticky thread on the subreddit.
If anyone can write in a random question or if you want, you can email us a 30 second, 90 second, maybe max sound bite.
Try and make it need as little editing as possible, but you can just record it on your phone and, you know, clip it and send us the MP3.
And then we can play that and respond to it on the episode.
Yeah, that would be pretty neat.
Cool.
All right, thanks.
In response to God, and I don't know what episode it was, but he said that
Our culture has failed to teach what activities bring meaning.
And I think that's partly because our cultures and denial about what kind of animal we are.
We tend to conflate moral actions shoulds with actions that bring meaning.
When we as animals don't naturally feel anything about what is moral in the abstract.
We seem to get meaning mostly from visible immediate positive reactions from other humans.
It's God, that's so fucking true too.
I love performing in front of other people because you get that feedback right away.
It's difficult for us to glean lasting meaning from abstract activities like donating to malaria charities.
Difficult to feel much satisfaction about a project we complete that nobody else will ever see.
And difficult to care about achieving things that don't on some level play into some kind of Hansonian status game.
On the other hand, it's pretty easy to feel meaningfulness in helping a friend move or giving a meal to homeless person,
even if those are transient actions that are utterly meaningless from a cosmic viewpoint.
You're an animal evolved for reciprocal altruism in a small band of mostly blood relatives
and your inner meaning detector doesn't really care about the cosmic viewpoint.
And yeah, that's true. I think that's very good to acknowledge.
I wish there was some way to hack that.
Yeah, I do too.
Because I've been really more and more coming to the conclusion lately
that I need to just be around people that I like in the physical world more, you know?
Because that is where I find I am happiest when I'm helping them and we are all together as a group
or as doing things which are supposedly meaningful does not seem to work.
This is probably why people have kids.
They're forced to live with you for however many years.
I sort of reject all of the nefarious motivations people have, why people have kids.
I think they do it because it is supernatural to them, right?
It really refers to that. It is very natural to them.
And it's just something they do often without giving that much thought.
It's like, I feel like I should mate now, you know?
Speaking of which, I just found out today I'm going to be uncle.
Nice, congratulations.
Yeah, unfortunately it's my sister.
But on the plus side, the dad is pretty cool.
And maybe the kid will come up to me whenever he's having issues with his mom.
She's like, she's crazy, man.
Let me tell you all about this cool rationality thing.
Also, God doesn't exist.
Or you could just be the cool uncle.
That is what the cool uncle does, right?
Sure.
Dammit, am I going to be the lame uncle?
No.
Tell dirty jokes, too.
Yeah, I think it's more like giving them candy and letting them stay up late.
Oh, I'm not sure I would give them candy.
I don't want to poison my children, but I would let them stay up late.
I mean, my nieces and nephews.
Candy is not poison.
Yeah, candy is totally poison.
Yeah, that's how we all eat it all the time and don't die.
It's basically poison, which is why I don't eat it and don't die.
The rest of us.
Yeah, we're all just dropping dead in the streets.
Yeah, there's like a dose mix, the poison roll.
I am firmly on the side of candy is bad.
That's a very less objectionable statement.
It is a good juristic, I guess.
Yeah, I've been an uncle since the middle of May, and it's great.
Cool.
Like she's already making noises other than crying.
Yeah.
Oh, like pre-speech sounds?
Yeah.
That's so cool.
At first it was just ooze, but it was fun.
You know, she's, I don't know, over 10, 11 pounds now.
Her first word is going to be Steven and they're going to be so jealous.
I don't see that much, but we'll see.
How often do you see her?
I haven't, I've only seen her once since my sister was out of the hospital.
So, but I saw her a bunch when she was in there, so.
Yeah.
But I mean, that was at the point where she was barely making eye contact.
She was just like looking towards stuff.
Now she can look at things and she can track things with her eyes.
Okay.
That's pretty cool.
Yeah.
Yeah.
She's starting to understand that these sensory inputs coming into her eyes relate to things
in the world.
Yeah, I think that's coming.
God, that's got to be so fucking weird.
Your brain just gets bombarded with stimuli and you have no idea what's happening.
No wonder they're crying all the time.
Yeah.
Yeah, kids develop so fast though.
It's scary.
I work in a library and there's a lot of little kids there who like, I feel like I will see
them and it's just my sense of time is weird too when I'm really busy, but I feel like
I'll see them and like then like I'll see them again in a little bit and it's like,
oh, they were a baby and now they're a human.
They're wearing clothes.
They're walking.
They can talk or they can make speech sounds and point to things and like it's like, whoa,
complete metamorphosis.
And it felt like no time had passed.
It's really scary, but really fascinating.
I find the weirdest part how the brain does figure out these inputs coming from your eyes
are objects.
Yeah.
I mean, at some level that probably happens.
I mean, it's got to happen in the first few weeks, right?
Well, I mean, yeah, and in our ancestors and our distant cousins, it happens immediately
without any real conscious thought.
There was a gift on Reddit last week of some lizard that came out of an egg, like it hatched
and then did a sprint and like landed around this guy's hand and stood on the finger or
something.
Like it was born running and ready to rock.
And then there was that what planet Earth volume two last year or the year before.
Well, humans are basically born like two months premature, right?
Oh yeah.
We need so much more growing once we're out of the womb, but there's a lot of species
that are just like miniature versions of the adult.
Yeah.
That like you just have to get ejected from the body otherwise you wouldn't ever fit through
the hips.
Oh, totally.
But there was that some desert lizard or something and it was born and it's like, oh, shit,
what am I?
What's going on?
And then snakes.
You saw this video on, oh, it was great.
I'll find either the gift that has those funny captions or the actual video.
The video is very stressful, but it gets okay.
Oh, cool.
Yeah.
Spoilers?
Jesus.
He dies.
I'm glad that was spoiled because I might not have wanted to watch the video if it was
sad ending.
Yeah.
And I it would have been way less fun.
I wouldn't be excited if it died tragically after being alive for three minutes to be
terrible.
The most horrifying video I've ever seen someone sent this video that was like, wow, watch
this.
And it was a snake and it was the like Ouroboros snake that was literally eating itself due
to stress.
Oh, wow.
Don't watch it.
Pass.
I'm kind of curious what happens.
I don't know because I stopped watching it.
I was so disturbed.
I checked it out.
I'd probably just get really tight and stuck.
Yeah.
All right.
Well, yeah, but it might be able to digest like it's lower half and then turn itself
inside out.
I'm sorry for bringing it up.
Okay.
He also more than a male who we are going to have on the episode again at some point.
Totally.
We had him on once and it was Matt Freeman.
He had the migraine.
I had to leave halfway through, but he's got a lot of cool shit to say.
We should have him back.
And also says under the heading fuck school.
If you take this Malcolm Gladwell article at face value and he links an article and read
between the lines, then getting into a good college and networking may do nothing or be
worse than useless.
He discusses how if you compare Harvard graduates with students who are accepted to Harvard,
but chose to go to state schools for other reasons, their life outcomes are the same.
In other words, Harvard gives you no advantages.
It doesn't improve its students.
It just selects for the type of person who can get into Harvard.
I guess I'd have to read the proper thing, but how would networking hurt there?
I don't think it would hurt.
I guess it just wouldn't help.
But if you're going to Harvard instead of a state school, you are probably paying a lot
of money.
That too.
Well, somebody is.
That can hurt.
That's true.
I mean, if your parents are really well off, then it probably doesn't matter that much.
Yeah.
But I've got to think that you'd meet business friends in Harvard where we wouldn't meet them
at your community college or something.
Maybe they're not higher quality business.
Maybe you've run into the Donald Trumps that just keep declaring bankruptcy.
Yeah.
Not without incident says, this is the second time Enesh conflated David Lynch with David
Fincher boycott the podcast.
My reply is no.
I'm sorry.
They're the same person.
I swear.
That's why you've never seen the two of them in a room together.
But no, I apologize.
That is inexcusable of me and I will start drilling with flashcards and something.
David Lynch is the director.
Who's David Fincher?
Also a director.
Oh, yeah.
They might be the same person.
M.K.
I.
M.
Cow.
A person who's I'm assuming this is a bunch of initials.
M.K.
I.
W.W.
Says good people relinquish their autonomy to systems, but good systems don't exploit
people unnecessarily.
Seems like a valued moral in our current society.
I think this is when we were talking about the movie.
Oh, yeah.
And how?
Yeah.
The kids get kicked out of the family and then come crawling back instead of, you know,
developing.
Oh, that upset me because I think Coco was the specific movie.
Yeah.
And I really loved Coco.
Okay.
And I thought about it and I was like, oh, yeah, that's that is actually a really valid
criticism of that film.
Oh, do you not love Coco as much now?
No, I still enjoy it.
I can have, you know, I can think something is problematic and still enjoy them.
Yeah.
I think, you know, this is a good point.
And I was when we were talking about the super organisms just a little bit ago, that's basically
how they work, right?
Good people do relinquish some autonomy to systems so that the systems work.
But if they're good systems, they don't exploit them unnecessarily.
And I think that that probably is a valued moral in our society because that is one of
the ways that society gets to where it is.
We drill those morals into people so that we do have these functioning super organisms.
Yeah, you need some kind of coordination mechanism.
Yeah.
You also got to make sure the system doesn't get too abusive, like the fucking old Soviet
bureaucracies that would kill people.
Yeah, you need just the right balance.
Yeah, you don't want to cult type atmosphere either.
Maybe you don't.
No, I don't.
I don't think anybody does.
I guess a cult in the God, it's that is such a loaded word.
You don't want the abusive leadership and coercive sort of social atmosphere that some cults
have.
I think that's what people usually mean when they say cults are bad.
Yeah, I think that's fairly unobjectionable.
Because I mean, for the most part, I'm like people can have whatever religion you want.
You can have stupid weird beliefs and live in a commune and be make it all the time.
I don't care.
It's just the.
If it makes you happy and you're hurting nobody.
Yeah.
Besides maybe, I don't know, you can hurt yourself if you want.
That's fine.
Right.
Like, yeah, I don't know.
I remember a lot of people had objections about less wrong in the rationality community
that it was cult like.
Yeah.
And yeah, one of the members of my local Western group in Philadelphia was a cult survivor
and had like studied cults.
And I asked him, because I was under the impression that there was like a list.
I don't know where I got this idea, but there was like a specific definition of what a cult
was and it had to meet certain criteria.
There was a list.
Apparently, that's not true.
So you like, there's kind of a nebulous definition of what a cult is.
Yeah.
I think that would be any list would be suspect, right?
Cause I mean, unless they're going to include everything that has all the, all the symptoms.
Like if they include Scientology, but don't include Mormonism, I'm wondering how they're
doing their calculus there.
Is it just like subscription level?
Is it.
When the Scientology versus Mormonism thing, I'm pretty sure it's just a level of Mormonism.
There's enough of them now that they have political power so they can.
People are like, okay, fine.
They're not a cult because we don't want to piss off the powerful people who have a lot
of followers.
Right.
But then that seems like a weird like caveat.
It wasn't on a list of cults.
It was a list of like, you know, like in the DSM, for example, a list of symptoms that
if you have a certain number of them, you probably have ADD or whatever.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But anyway, I think I'm like made that up anyway.
I don't think that really exists.
What did your friend say when you asked him about the whole cult aspect?
Um, he like explained a lot of things about cults and just, you know, my takeaway was just
that this is very complicated and I don't think I can understand this from one conversation.
I would have to actually study it.
There's a lot of different factors involved in what makes a cult like be a cult and not
other kinds of communities or other kinds of like systems that might look kind of dysfunctional
from a distance, but like not be as bad.
I don't know.
Was there a conclusion that the rationality community was a cult like or did they say,
fuck no, this was nothing like what I went?
No, he disagreed.
I like it was disagreement all around people laughing like kind of dismissal.
That would be sort of my takeaway just from what I imagine cults being like.
I mean, if we're a cult, we are one of the most anti-cults with the most anti-cult measures
in place of any cult out there.
There's been any kidnappings yet.
We're actually kind of like bad at coordinating and getting people to like join.
Cause like people actually say, was that too cult like, let's not do that.
You know, it's like, no, we're just having a barbecue.
Damn it.
But there is the fear.
I think there's a lot of people do have that background in religious fundamentalism.
Yeah.
And I'm a lot of rationalists are very high openness and high like a trust.
And so I know a lot of people that like have gotten scammed.
Well, I don't know them personally.
I've heard of them because they trusted people at their word.
That doesn't sound like the right kind of rationalist.
Then I'm thinking much more professor coral style or having read an influence science and practice or something.
I don't think there's honestly, I don't think there's that many of that kind of person in the rationalist movement.
I mean, I'm sure there's got to be some, but.
I think that's the aspirational figure.
Yeah.
Most people that I think maybe that's why we love the coral figure so much because he's like,
this is the person I could be if I wasn't such a naive boob trusting everyone.
Well, that's how I feel.
Cause I'm a naive boob.
Speaking of admiring people, though, I think that's one of the one of the concerns.
Like with Elie Izer Yutkowski is pretty charismatic and engaging.
People read the stuff and got swept up in it.
And you know, that's, that's when you just described that, that sounds culty.
That also sounds like a fandom.
Yeah.
Fandoms sometimes sound culty.
They do have a lot more hostility and aggressiveness occasionally.
Oh yeah, I've been in fandoms.
Yeah.
There's a, yeah.
I'm not going to tell stories now.
Fandoms can be the worst.
Can you tell a story that's anonymized so people aren't like hurt?
I can tell a vague like overview of the fact that there's a lot of people that form their entire community around certain fandoms.
Like all of their friends, everybody was dating each other.
They like moved in together and then there would be drama inevitably.
And it would just like, and a lot of the drama would end up being over like social justice things or like disagreements about like canon and just like, I don't know.
It was weird because like when people are, when people are so into a thing and that's like, you know, they love that thing and they make their life about that thing.
That's really cool for a while.
And it can be really strong like a bonding, you know, device.
But then once, you know, sometime passes and you like, I don't know, I'm looking at a World of Warcraft poster.
So for example, if, you know, World of Warcraft was your life for several years and all your friends are World of Warcraft people, like after a few years, you probably like change as a person, develop different interests.
And then suddenly you're living with and like living with dating, you know, only surrounded by people from this old thing that you used to love and you have nothing else in common.
Sometimes.
That's weird.
I like things a lot, but I don't like anything enough to like live with people who like that thing too, based on the fact that like that, that they like that thing.
I generally less so now, which is weird, but up until a few years ago, I had a very addictive personality.
And if I got into something, I got into it hard.
When I played World of Warcraft, that was my life.
I would work so I could pay the bills so I would have some place to play World of Warcraft when I wasn't working or sleeping.
But would you want to like, have roommates or like, okay.
My whole guilt should totally have been in a group home and we could have all just like played together, but it's so awesome.
Okay.
Up until I dropped out of World of Warcraft.
Maybe I've never known true love with a fandom then.
Oh, you must not, because I've been through that.
Like, I was always sad when I didn't have a fandom.
Like I felt kind of lost.
I mean, I saw Thor Ragnarok in theaters six or seven times.
I was a big fan of the Marvel movies, but not enough to seek out people in the movie theater.
Like do you want to go, you know, even grab a drink?
That sounds exhausting.
Maybe I don't, maybe I'm averse to people.
It's just humans that you hate.
Not hate, just they're, they're, it's
Tiring.
Yeah.
And like, I love hanging out with people.
It's just, I can't imagine like, come crash my place for a week.
We could talk more about this movie.
No, seriously.
I mean, I was into Warhammer.
But Warcraft is bigger than the MCU.
So like, there's more to talk about there.
Yeah, I was into Warhammer for a long time.
And whenever I was with other people to play Warhammer, all our conversations were almost entirely about Warhammer, you know.
I don't know enough people who like the Marvel movies.
I can't even get all my co-workers to see all of them, which is weird.
Huh.
Yeah, that is weird.
Right?
I'm a software developer.
And there are people there.
Like, there are so, there are so few people there who like play ping pong or what are
the other things that nerds do, like see nerdy movies, I guess.
I don't know.
What kind of nerds?
Play ping pong?
What was that?
Play ping pong is not what would come to my mind.
Well, because there's a flood of activity.
There's a ping pong table on the floor.
But I'm trying to think of those.
We were just having a conversation about this about how hard it was to find.
Oh, I play Pathfinder on Wednesdays.
Yeah.
And right now we're down to three of us out of like 100 developers in this building.
And I'm like, why is it so hard to find 5% of us who want to play, you know, Pathfinder
every week?
Yeah.
So that was why this was.
The original nerd pastime, D&D.
Yeah.
Yeah, come on guys.
This shouldn't be that hard.
There's, why are there so few of us there?
Oh, maybe they don't have social skills.
This is my first Pathfinder game.
We're not, you know, they're, I think we're pretty sociable.
I don't know.
That was a joke.
Oh, no.
I was talking about, you know, nerd stereotypes.
And that's a fair, I think, I mean, it's a stereotype for a reason, but the community
of people that was hired at my company tend to be pretty like, you know, chill.
They go out like bars and hang out.
They're like, they're like everybody else.
They have like normal interests.
Yeah.
Do they also like sports?
Yeah.
They go outside and everything.
It's weird.
Dude.
Yeah.
And they don't catch fire when the sun hits them.
It's weird.
Yeah.
All right.
Okay.
What's the next one?
Next one is, we got a few things about the spirituality and religion thing.
And in a mail again says, I do think it's worth distinguishing spirituality and religion.
I'll pull some definitions out of my ass here.
Always a bad first step.
Let's, let's call religion anything that requires false beliefs.
The closest thing I can get to a steel man of all this religious stuff is that humans
actually do interact with entities that you might call powerful, mysterious super intelligences,
such as the intelligence social web or your subconscious mind or the natural ecosystem.
And it might be effective for you to not even pretend you understand why bearing you
fish with your crops is a good idea.
And just say it was because God said so, because at least that will motivate you to do it.
Meta strikes again.
The text says because Thor says so.
Yeah.
I didn't want to be God, God's chauvinist.
You know, I should stick with Thor.
I mean, okay.
Just saying.
All right.
Miss quote.
Fine.
Because Thor says so.
I don't want to specifically endorse Thor because he's recently burned down somebody's house.
Yeah.
But like, I think he meant well.
That's true.
You said it was kind of possibly for the best.
Well, I was planning on selling that house and moving anyway.
And I was taking a very long time and it was stressing me out a lot.
Yeah.
So.
And the Thor is in this situation because her house was literally struck by lightning
and caught fire two days ago.
It's pretty weird, especially because I was thinking about that episode right before I left.
There had been three weeks of really bad thunderstorms in the area.
So I was looking forward to coming to Colorado and getting some of the sun.
And I was like, all right, Thor, I'm getting on the plane.
Hey, like take care of me.
Like help me.
I don't know.
I was just thinking like, hey, like, why the heck not?
Let's say a little part of Thor.
And I can't remember my exact wording now.
But yeah, then I heard that that had happened.
And I was like, no, not like that.
You apparently did it wrong.
Well, I sacrificed a beard to him last night.
So I hope he is not mad at me or anything.
So, okay.
Are we joking here?
I'm assuming we're still joking.
We are joking.
Okay.
Okay.
I'm just kidding because then that episode we had with David when he like, I thought
he was joking at first and then I was like, oh wait, he's not joking.
Yeah, I talked with him.
You, you know, sent me his friend request and I actually had a conversation with him about
that.
And I actually get the sense that he is and is not joking at the same time.
Yeah.
Which is David in a nutshell.
Not cool.
Like you can't be joking and not be joking at the same time.
I get the feeling you're trying to pull.
It's kind of like, let me read your reaction.
I need to decide if I'm joking or not.
Right.
But no, as, as more than a male was saying, I don't, I don't like that.
For the first of all, let's call a religion anything that requires false belief is, I
don't think anything requires false belief.
Well, I wrote back responding to that that I, I liked the idea of separating the two things
obviously spirituality and religion, but that seems insufficient because it doesn't feel
like it's a false belief from the inside, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think it would be a better definition might be anything that requires something met a
sort of like non science violating, you know, supernatural to happen.
And I don't think anything good requires a false belief.
Anything that can be destroyed by the truth should be as they say.
That's why I get really annoyed when there's made up arguments or rather made up, what
do you call them, lies about, you know, about people I disagree with or, or, you know, like
something comes up about, you know, the Trump administration that turns out not to be true.
There's so much real ammunition here.
You're just making us look bad because then when they disprove this, they're going to,
they're going to throw out the rest of the true shit.
So the only steelman I can think of of a false belief being a good thing would be maybe to
protect people who are really emotionally sensitive and easily traumatized.
For example, a child's pet died, the parents maybe, I don't know.
Actually, I think I disagree with that.
I could probably think of a better example if I weren't really sleep deprived, but I think
that like, you know, it might be worth maybe if somebody's friend or spouse had died in
a horrific car accident and it was really bad to kind of white lie to them about how bad
it had been or just not like, you know, let them know certain aspects.
Yeah.
There's some things where you don't need to know how horribly it was that someone died.
I think the steelman is bending over so far backwards though that it's not even worth,
you know, like I think when he said that the fish bearing fish with your crops example,
that sure, maybe it's important to get the fish with their crops no matter why you do it,
but that keeping holding onto that belief also means that you never really investigate why it's important.
It's important because Thor said it's important.
Okay, I'll keep doing it.
And then you never find out about nitrogen and the wonders that you can do with synthetic fertilizer.
Right.
Yeah, if you're just doing it the old fashioned way, there's no room for improvement.
And it turns out there's way more efficient ways to fertilize the fields than bearing fish in them.
I'm assuming I'm not a farmer, but I can only assume that there's reason we're not doing that now.
We still do that.
Still like on an industrial scale?
Oh.
Oh yeah.
I'm sure if you've got like a little farm in the backyard, you can bury whatever leftovers you've got back there
or something or dead animal, whatever parts, but you put fertilizer in the dirt,
like if you're farming large scale, right?
I don't know.
I don't know enough about agriculture.
I saw a helicopter dust cropping or dust something when I was heading down the highway a couple weekends ago.
It was kind of cool.
It was doing really low dives.
I thought it was just some guy having fun till I got close up to it and I could see that it was putting out dust.
It didn't look like dead fish, but...
He was probably also having fun.
Yeah.
It was a helicopter, not a biplane?
Yeah, it was a helicopter.
And they were definitely having fun because they were going underneath power lines.
Oh shit.
Like, yeah.
And I've got to think that that was just purely for sport.
Well, maybe if you can get closer to the crops, you don't waste as much stuff in the wind.
I guess.
Yeah.
It goes on to say similarly it might, might in emphasis, be effective to make some magical sigils to motivate and focus the
unplumbed depths of your subconscious towards certain desirable ends.
That's an empirical question.
I think you can probably use magic to do anything that could be done with a similar set of non-magical motivations,
but using magic is probably more fun.
It is definitely more fun.
I think, I think that is like the one part I do kind of agree with that we often need some sort of ritual stimuli to,
to motivate ourselves, but I also think that sucks and we should fix it.
Why are human brains so dumb?
Um, yeah.
But if it works.
Yeah, it's like weaponizing the placebo effect and then like making it like cool.
Instead of taking a sugar pill, you're like drawing a cool picture and like saying a prayer to a God of some sort or,
I don't know.
Whatever you're doing.
I mean, if it works to get you doing it, we're later going to talk about productivity hacks and that might be one of them.
Absolutely is.
Drinking your brain.
Yeah.
I actually really find thinking that I'm doing something in the cause of a greater good to be extremely motivating when I'm not motivated otherwise.
But that is for later on in the podcast.
Sorry.
Uh, oh yeah.
Someone replied saying they were going to push back on calling religion anything that requires false belief,
but I think we already talked about that, right?
Just now you were saying.
Yeah.
I'm going to say myself later on that thread, but a simula crumpet replied saying basically the same thing that it just,
it was so kind of productive that it sounds like the new word for that concept.
Right.
Oh yeah.
They said unless you're deliberately attempting to confuse people, redefining words that have well established meanings is counterproductive.
I think Matt, I don't think he did push back, but I could see someone pushing back as saying,
I don't think that religion is well defined.
Or spirituality.
You're right.
Yeah, either of those things.
They overlap a lot.
They're kind of a Venn diagram.
Yeah.
I just had something like this happen with eugenics recently on someone's Facebook wall.
They, the topic of eugenics came up.
I won't get into the details, but I was like, yeah, no, I am totally in favor of removing these genetic diseases from my children
and from myself if it was possible even, you know, I am not a big fan of this depression thing that I got going on.
And it sort of quickly devolved into people saying, you know what?
The word eugenics has a deep history of forcible sterilization and genocide and racism.
And I was like, yeah, but that's not happening today.
What's happening a day is me wanting to remove genetic diseases from my offspring and someone coming along and saying,
that's eugenics, you can't do it.
And technically that is eugenics in the sense of making genes better.
But then we got into basically a fight over the hysterosity of the definition of a word and whether it applies today.
And I'm like, this is so fucking dumb.
I want to just not use this word now because of all the baggage that comes with it.
Yeah, just don't use the word, call it gene therapy.
I hate that though, because it's an accurate word.
Yeah, but there's other accurate words that, you know, get tainted and loaded with baggage and you kind of just have to accept that language evolves and move on.
Stupid evolution.
I agree. I think like it's certainly probably too soon to try and bring that word back, right?
At the very least, if there are already other good handles to get on, then you can skip the, you know, 90% of the conversation where you explain that you don't mean Hitler eugenics.
You mean just making genes better and you can have a much shorter communication if you are willing to concede and say something like gene therapy or something, right?
Yeah, but there's people, but people always bring it back to that.
Even if you say, I just mean making genes better.
They're like, well, that's the same thing that Nazis wanted to do when you're a Nazi.
Well, then they're idiots because that's not the same thing.
You're not saying because I want to bring all the people in with depression and kill them all.
You're saying I wish that like my kids wouldn't have it, right? That's a very different thing.
I guess I just need to like strike back right away.
I'd be like, how dare you compare me to the genocidal ideology when I just want to get rid of diseases.
Yeah, you want to make the world a better place not by killing people, but by not bringing in people, you know, maybe choose something harder like Huntington's disease or something, right?
Where it's genetic on off switch.
If you've got it, you've got it and you've got what, three, four good decades before it starts eating your brain.
And it's like, you're going to tell me that me wanting to cure that is a bad thing.
You're the Nazis. You're the cycle, right? That's messed up.
Okay, based on confused David himself.
I really got to read his feedback here because I felt really bad like just crapping on him without having him here to defend himself.
So David says,
It doesn't require that you believe anything that is overtly false, but it does require that you understand that the urge for a spiritual and metaphysical understanding isn't a bug in human psychology, but in fact, one of the fundamental principles of its operating system.
My first thought on reading that was that it sounded sort of Peterson-y, right?
I'll have you read Jordan Peterson since the last episode that you said you were going to.
I said I would plan to.
Okay.
I think I probably committed to doing it. I committed to doing it at some point. I haven't read it yet.
In fact, David and I have conversations about this once in a while and he sent me this awesome meme.
There's one of those on the Sam Harris subreddit because Peterson's been retweeting global warming hoax components to articles.
It looks like he's playing the part or it's hard to tell somebody who doesn't believe in truth that global warming isn't true.
So he's playing a climate change nihilist or being one. I can't tell.
I'll just find it really quick because it was funny.
So this came across the Sam Harris subreddit.
Someone posted this little comic of a Trojan horse.
Anyway, it's a little picture of someone leading a Trojan horse into a castle.
The outside of the horse is labeled generic self-help.
The inside of the horse is labeled reactionary far-right politics.
The person pulling the horse is Jordan Peterson.
The guy walking in the gate is teenage boys or teenage guys.
He replied with a picture of Jordan Peterson from, like, pasted over the face of someone from Family Guy saying,
Have you actually read anything I've written?
And then Brian replying from Family Guy the dog.
Well, no, I haven't, but I read things other people have written about the things that you've written.
And I do not approve the things that I've read from others about the things that they've read from you.
So I was like, checkmate, you got me.
So, no, I haven't. And Peterson is my very long-winded answer to that.
So you're going to be our resident Peterson reader and report back to us.
Yeah, I'll see if I'm converted.
I've read it, but let's not talk about it.
Okay, is that another episode?
Yeah, well, I don't know if it's a whole episode. It could be.
I have a friend who is a big fan of Jordan Peterson's that might be fun to have on the podcast.
Do we really? Yes, I guess we do.
We can talk about it. Doesn't have to be a whole thing.
Yeah, I listened to an episode with him on Econ Talk.
Okay.
He seems coherent and fun half the time and, you know, a really just complete whack job the other half of the time.
That's the other half is the part that really annoys me.
I would like the people that I listen to not waste half of my time with ramblings that make no sense.
There was a great sound bite during one of Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson's live events where Peterson was apparently asked,
did Jesus rise from the grave or do you think he did?
I forget if it was because that distinction is important.
Do you think Jesus Christ rose from the grave?
And Peterson replied, it would take me 40 hours to answer that question.
And Harris was like, how about this for an answer?
Almost certainly not.
Yeah.
Like why would it take you 40 hours to say that?
Because he talks a lot.
Yeah.
But he doesn't.
And you can obfuscate a lot in 40 hours.
Exactly.
But yeah, what was your thought on David's?
Oh, my thought on David's thing was that that is true.
There's a lot of really powerful drives in humanity like sexuality is a really powerful drive to and I'm okay using them.
But also it's like summoning up the old ones.
You got to be careful when you do these things because you can very quickly devolve into magical thinking again.
Yeah.
I wouldn't want to remove the desire to have spiritual experiences or sexual feelings,
but I would want to be able to control it, like turn it on and off, use it when I need it,
and when I don't need to be distracted by it, turn it off.
He also mentioned making it safe.
Why wouldn't you try to take this and make it safe?
I'm pessimistic that you can never make it safe because I think that people are going to start taking it seriously no matter what.
Even if you started out as a funny joke and it's like a funny joke with your friends,
somebody is going to go too far because our brains are incredibly wired to start thinking this way
and it's a rabbit hole that you can fall down really easy.
Okay.
So I want to ask you about this because you went to the solstice ritual, the solstice.
What are they called?
The secular solstice.
The secular solstice.
The secular solstice.
Two years.
Two years.
And you said that it was amazing and you loved it.
Yeah.
And that's like a whole big spirituality, ritual, emotional thing, the whole experience, right?
Yeah.
That is a good description of that.
Yeah.
It is basically, it takes the structure of kind of a, I don't know, I was raised Catholic
and it feels like a little bit like a Catholic mass, but then like everything you're talking about is just science or human progress.
So the first one, if I recall, the theme was the defeat of smallpox, the triumph over smallpox
and that was like what we were celebrating.
Nice.
And then that one was a big grim and then the next year it was about like human potential.
I am actually like fine with, you know, doing all of the ritual stuff.
If you're singing songs about science, you know, like that's awesome.
You like, people were like holding hands, people were crying, like having a great like, you know,
emotional experience together because we were like thinking about how great it is that we've
defeated smallpox and that's fine.
Yeah.
I think you said it was like one of the most amazing things you did ever.
Yeah.
Having been raised Catholic, I never actually felt like the, I guess like the catharsis that
you get from, or that you're supposed to get from all those rituals.
It always felt like annoying.
Oh man, why am I like here for a couple of hours and like, what am I supposed to care
about all these people?
And but like that, that actually, I was like, Oh, I get it now.
Like this is like a really significant emotional experience that I've never had before, like
a feeling of like belonging to a community and like being a part of something bigger
and it being something that I really support and think is great.
That makes me more excited to try to attend one and also way more apprehensive.
Oh, why more apprehensive?
There's this, I'm getting this feeling of like, how do I put this?
It seems like there's room to do that so wrong and it would be impossible to tell if you're
doing it wrong or at least be really hard, you know, like we should all rejoice that
smallpox was eliminated through the power of science.
That's great.
And you know, if you're moved emotionally by that, that's, that's fine too.
But if you're holding hands and singing about it and crying, that looks just way too much
like, you know, the holy ghosting, you know, dancing religious people who, you know,
babble, you know, and all that sort of stuff.
Yeah, but it's not that it like, I don't know.
I think that like it's perfectly valid and fine to have really strong emotional feelings
about things.
I agree.
No, I think so.
I think it just, it seems, it has this air being swept away by the Holy Spirit.
And in a way, that's kind of what it is where the Holy Spirit is, you know.
I mean, that's kind of what you're going for too.
You want to get that swept away feeling.
I, so, and I, like I said, some part of that sounds really attractive.
The other part sounds like, nope, scientists keep their feet firmly on the ground, right?
It sounds interesting and I'm not opposed.
That's, that's, I don't know, if somebody was doing that and making slightly different
noises, they'd be religiously, they'd be, they would be this religious fervor, right?
But because they're making the right noises, it's okay.
And I, part of me thinks that the noises that they're making shouldn't really matter.
I don't know.
There's a lot of things that look like other things, but like aren't.
No, that's, that's a good point.
Like, it sounds like you're worried about like getting addicted to the emotional uplift.
I'm worried that it'll look like we're a religion.
Oh, so it'll look bad to other people.
Well, and it will basically be one if we're doing all the things that religions are doing,
but no, ours is true because that's what they tell themselves.
I don't know.
So part of, like, I think that's why we, I'm not saying we should go full spark and say,
no, no, no feelings allowed.
I'm a big fan of feelings and a big fan of big feelings.
I think it's, again, I, I, I'm having a mixed bag of emotions here.
You asked why the neg, you know, that's why I was having partly apprehensive ones.
And I think that's why I think it is because it's such a powerful thing.
That's worrying.
And that's also why it's super attractive.
The idea that you can, that you can get caught up in an awesome message that happens to be
true.
The fact is like, maybe that's why it's apprehensive is that this one happens to be true, but you
could be caught up by anything.
I remember I was at a,
But can you live your entire life just being skeptical of everything?
Well, I don't know if that's not, there's seems like a false dichotomy, right?
Like you can, you can get way up in it, but
It can be all about getting to ours.
Not be carried away, right?
Yeah.
I mean, like I can look at, you know, a, like, I might have teared up or actually cried watching
Falcon, one of the, one of the Elan's rockets landing again.
Right.
Like that's amazing.
If you had been in a room full of a bunch of other people that were also really into it,
that might look religious.
Yeah.
That's part of the concern.
It's okay with me, you know, looking at my phone.
So you can do it alone in the dark where no one can see you.
Yes.
No community.
Okay.
No, I don't, I having just thought of this for the first time, I don't have a very coherent
position on it, but I have this mixed bag of emotions on it.
I mean, I know since a lot of us did come from the religions, I think that's why we're
worried.
Like we've twice now talked about having a Denver solstice thing and twice now not gone
through with it because we do got a lot of people here who came from those religions
and fear that sort of thing.
And I think entirely rightly so.
And it just, it squeaks you out once you get out of here, like, oh God, I don't, I don't
want to be part of that.
I don't want to perpetuate this.
But on the other hand, it is, like he says, a powerful tool.
I don't know.
I'm really torn on the whole matter.
Yeah, I am too, honestly.
Like I enjoyed it a lot, but I also was raised Catholic and have really mixed feelings about
it.
And I thought it was worth the experiment though.
I was like, maybe I will go and see if I feel anything and then I either will reject it
or accept it.
And I decided to accept it.
I was like, it was fun, but I don't feel like, oh no, I need another hit of emotional intensity.
Well, I mean, you had such a great experience too.
Like I've, I've had, when I went to the writers of the future thing, I, it was like kind of
an almost a spiritual bonding experience with the other writers there that for that week.
And fucking Burning Man last year was just an amazing, and I mean, that's even marketed
as a spiritual thing.
And it totally was.
It was the best thing I've ever done in my life.
And I don't know, those things are great.
I just, then I, you know, hear things about making sigils to Thor.
And I'm like, ah, what happened?
Where did we go wrong?
And it wouldn't be anybody if you're making sigils to Newton.
No, no, it was just as bad.
That's my point.
Yeah.
So like it, it has this air of oddness about it.
And maybe that could be honed in a way that's maybe honed in a way that's useful, but maybe
not safe.
Right?
Yeah.
I mean, that is, that is the concern too that like you want to be able to always communicate
to people that if you're doing like a sigil to Thor, this is me joking.
This is a metaphor or I'm being ironic.
And it's hard to, you know, like people, there's people that don't understand sarcasm and that
they're really common.
And then like, there's, there's no like safe way to try to like, you know, I think people
were trying to norm for a while that you would like do slash sarcasm when you would like
write a sarcastic comment to like help people who get confused by sarcastic comments understand
what's going on there.
But I do find that helpful on Reddit.
Okay.
I was going to say that I thought they were unsuccessful at norming it.
Well, I don't know if Reddit norms anything, but it's normed on Reddit, I think.
Oh, good.
I think it's important when you're talking with strangers because strangers can't tell.
Yeah.
Well, if you're talking with friends, even if I say something like, yep, I'm going to
go murder some babies for my rashless cult now, all my friends will be like, haha, good
one.
Or as you know, as some stranger might be like, oh my God, they're subtle.
So what cult?
They're already murdering babies.
I think it's such a ridiculous over the top thing to say that nobody would think that
you were being serious.
No, that's true.
I mean, that example specifically was way over the top.
But there's some things I've said that have been kind of borderline, which everyone that
I know knows it's a joke, but someone who didn't know me might not know that it's a joke.
Like if you wanted to purify the gene pool.
Exactly.
Like, we know what you mean.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But other people have a very different connotation for that.
Yeah.
I wish there was some way we could tag like speech without it being like a weird obnoxious
thing that nobody is ever going to do.
I use a lot of emojis and text messages.
Yeah.
But like you can't do that.
And well, okay.
You can make real emotions in real life with expressions.
That sounds hard with your face.
Yeah.
With your face and your hands.
So much easier just to use a few characters.
Although some people don't get that actually.
Don't get what?
Facial expressions or gestures.
Oh, that's got to be really hard.
That said, though, I moved enough by hearing about your experience that if we have Denver
host a Solstice one that I'm invited to all go.
If I can.
We don't have to do the ritual either.
You could just have a big Solstice party where it takes place on.
Well, I mean, we've done that, but that's just a party.
I actually do want to try out the ritual.
You could start it really, really like minimal.
Yeah.
Just one candle and no dead animals.
Yeah.
Like have a toast.
I don't know.
No, no.
I think that's a good idea.
And even like a toast is sort of a ritualistic sort of thing.
But I kind of want to see what it's like to go gung-ho with it.
So we'll see what happens.
Someone else to coordinate the ritualistic part of it.
That's the problem.
Because I don't think I'd be a good host for that either.
I think a couple of people we know would be good at it.
Yeah, if I'm here, I'll help.
Perfect.
I like volunteering and organizing things.
But actually the Solstices from what I've heard were very difficult to organize and coordinate.
And it was like a lot of volunteers that were jumping in and helping that made it work.
But like I feel like, yeah, then we'll probably get people that jump in and volunteer and help too.
Sweet.
Okay.
I think we're almost done here.
Oh, yeah.
And then, then he goes on to say, now as for how much I believe in magic, I'm not telling.
And I liked your look of disapproval reaction to that.
Because I also agree.
He does say thinking about any area where there is a fringe that overlaps with the bizarre.
And you will realize that their purpose is to present ideas that may not necessarily be true,
but function to throw in contrast those parts of the established model that don't make sense.
I feel like inserting whatever hokum you have into their blank parts in the map is not the way to go.
Yeah.
But to be charitable to David, I think if it does get you to where you're trying to go,
then what is it but useful, right?
So he does close with saying instrumental rationality for the wind or something.
Yeah.
But he says down with ontological rationality.
I'm betting that part was tongue in cheek.
Okay.
I'm betting.
Yeah.
It makes me think of the Bayesians versus barbarians essay where, you know, if you're going to fight a bunch of barbarians,
you probably should just try to like become a barbarian too.
But then you have to go back to normal afterwards being the problem.
But yeah, it would be nice if you did have that switch where you could turn it on and off or have like an intensity knob.
That's what I want.
I don't want to get rid of the emotions or the ability to have fun with rituals.
But I just want control over it.
Right.
I like the idea of knobs for all these things that be great.
Once we're all robot bodies, we can turn them up and down ourselves.
Oh yeah.
And the problem is we got to live with our meat bodies until we get to that point.
And we've been outside too.
A lot of these things are so distracting and annoying that like you'd be like,
no, I'm doing great.
Why don't I want to turn up those distracting things?
I'll just stay focused and all this.
But all that aside, then yeah.
I mean, I think that's why we have the whole warrior class that we tolerate because it takes a lot to get people into that mindset
and they can't come out of it easily.
You mean warrior class of like...
I mean like...
Police officers.
I was about to say like people in the south that love their guns and shooting stop signs from their pickup trucks and stuff.
I don't think they're the warrior class that we're talking about.
They're the bands of raiders.
Displaced warrior class.
But they also are...
That sort of mentality is highly overrepresented in the military's fighting ranks, right?
I assume so because...
That's what my brother told me from being in the army.
Yeah, and I think that's a safe bet.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And, you know, we talked...
We kicked off the episode talking about giving up freedoms for...
You know, giving up some autonomy for the protection from the system, right?
Yeah.
And the first thing I thought it was just like enforcing speed limits, right?
You mentioned like to get anywhere and I was like, hey, to get anywhere, you know, like on the highway.
And yes, I want somebody telling people they can't drive 120 on the highway because they could kill me.
Yes, in some sense, we need that sort of enforcement, right?
I forget where I was going with this.
All right.
That is all I got for listener feedback.
Cool.
Me too.
Okay.
So what we're talking about today is productivity hacks.
How to get things done when you don't want to do things.
I was going to call it productivity systems because hacks has a weird connotation, but sure.
Okay.
Productivity systems.
How to get things done when you want to get something done.
Is that not a good subtitle?
You gave me sort of a dubious look.
Why don't we let...
Why don't we just subtitle it and name it?
Okay.
Yeah.
Make them up.
Actually, can I derail us just for one minute?
Please.
I am very sorry.
It just occurred to me that I wanted to say something in this episode and I think this
would be a perfect occasion to do that.
So I put together a quote unquote online anthology of rational fiction short stories.
And I am releasing it to the world today.
Yay.
Yay.
Thatficonline.website and yes, it's website not.com because that was much cheaper.
And this thing is something that I just put a dozen hours into and threw it up and I will
never touch it again.
So that is why I want to pay as little as possible for it.
But what it is is nine short stories that are, I consider rational fiction and most people
consider rational fiction and it's kind of there as like an introduction to what rational
fiction is.
This is some examples of the form.
This is, I wrote a little introduction before each one, like two, sometimes three paragraphs
before the story saying, this is why this story fits the rational fiction criteria.
And yeah, I think they're really good.
There's quite a few like professionally published ones out there that have the short story up
online so I can just link to it.
Like Exhalation by Ted Chang is on there.
I have Lord Iron and the Cambist.
Maybe it's the Cambist and Lord Iron.
I never remember what order they come in by Daniel Abraham.
It's a great fairy tale about economics.
And yeah, and I'm really happy about it.
I can't say I'm proud of it because I didn't write any of these stories, you know, but
you, you anthologize to them.
Yeah, I put, I put a list of links together.
Anthologizing is a fancy word for, I put some links together and wrote some introductions.
But there it is.
And I hope you guys enjoy.
They're quick to read and they're really fun.
Maybe it can help get some more understanding by example of what this rational fiction thing is.
I'm really glad that you did it because I thought that I was pretty well read in Rat
Vic and there's a few on there that I haven't read yet and I'm super excited about reading
them.
Cool.
Yeah.
I didn't know any of the ones that you just listed off.
So.
Oh, okay.
And I'm not that well read, but I've read some.
So if you ever do, side note, if you ever do like a related section, I know Zeke Aran
was putting together a list of things that aren't really rational fiction, but I think
we overall enjoy things like Dan Dennett's Where Am I essay, which if you haven't read,
I think it's fun.
I did read it actually.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Or like The Egg by Andy Weir.
So like cool little things like that.
So I'd reach out to him because I know he posted that like on the Facebook page and stuff
and was talking about that.
Oh yeah.
I could throw some things on that list too.
Yeah.
So maybe there's something we can throw together there too or he can put his own website together.
Well, you know, or we could just have like a special section off the Facebook group for
you know, Red Fick that we in Denver like, everyone who's not in Denver can suck it.
Sounds good.
Or they can move to Denver like Jess is doing to be part of the in crowd.
But it also included like Metropolitan Man, M-O-R and those sorts of things too.
So that sounds awesome.
Congrats.
Cool.
Thanks for doing that.
Thank you.
I hope people like it.
Is it a living list or are you going to just?
No, no, it is.
It is.
Well, you know, like any anthology, any real anthology, you actually buy the stories, put
them in a book, print it and ship it out there and then like the book is out there.
But the better anthology, the kind that can live and grow, is this one of those?
No, no, no, it's not dead, it's out there and growing happily in its little glade in
the forest.
It's not getting any bigger.
Right.
Exactly.
All right.
Yeah.
Then it gives me a chance of actually finishing it.
So that's partly why it's asking.
Oh, okay.
Yes.
Maybe someday in the far future, I can do like volume two or something.
But yeah, this one is how it is and not changing unless like I get a lot of emails saying I
really disagree with this choice.
Why is this story in here?
But I don't think that will happen.
Yeah, I don't anticipate that from what I saw based on the list.
Cool.
Okay.
Awesome.
So on to productivity.
How do we do productive things like make online anthologies when there's all these tasty
video games that we could be playing instead?
Please tell me.
Oh.
Because I've burned through a lot of, I didn't do anything, I haven't played video games
since Monday except for tonight.
So I guess I went two days, which is kind of a big deal for me because I went months
without playing and I got this fun little game for the Switch that I put like, I don't
know when I got it.
I think it'll be two weeks to go this weekend.
Now you got to tell us what the game is.
Maybe three weeks to go because I got it before I got eye surgery.
It was Octopath Traveler.
Oh yeah.
It's not that great of a game.
I was telling you guys about the other game.
No, it sounded cool to me.
It's fun.
It's like, but it's not, you know, the next, like I got Bloodborne for PS4 and I've been
playing that a lot too and that's a game I can like totally, you know, preach about.
This is just fun and time suck, but there's not like a sense of, there's not a real sense
of accomplishment you get from it.
It's just a fun grind.
So.
Dude, I played kittens for like weeks and that's just grindage.
Kittens?
Kittens.
It's really called kittens.
It's a, it's a cookie clicker game.
Okay.
You're also paid that, also played that paperclip maximizer one.
Yes, but that one actually ends.
You can beat that game in like a matter of two hours.
Oh, so you take over the universe.
It's like kind of educational.
I'm not going to spoil it for you.
Well, I'll just go in there.
If it's anything like cookie clicker, you get an achievement for going into like opening
console commands and changing the JavaScripts to give yourself infinite resources.
I don't think you get achievements for that in this one, but again, I don't have to because
you mean it.
I can read it in 30 seconds as I'm saying.
So you can just talk about how it ends.
Okay.
I guess you could.
If you're a cheater.
All right.
You don't have to tell me.
I'll just do it.
The guy who made the paperclip maximizer game was at the Solstice Unconference and he did
a whole talk on game design and it was really good.
Oh, that's awesome.
That's really cool.
Yeah.
Sorry for the aside, but I wish it had been filmed.
Maybe somebody has like a cell phone video of it.
I don't think so though.
I don't think anyone was doing that.
It's a shame that that doesn't exist somewhere that everyone can watch it though.
Yeah.
Well, maybe he'll give the talk again someday.
Yeah.
I think so.
Yeah, I remember when that game came out, it like got covered on wired and a whole bunch
of places.
Everyone was just like, this is a really cool game.
I apparently live under a rock.
So.
Well, you never check Facebook, which is where I get a lot of my link shares and where I
share links.
Yeah, but not checking Facebook is also probably smart.
It's probably one of the best productivity hacks.
Don't have Facebook.
Speaking of productivity hacks slash systems, iOS 12, which comes out for iPhone and September-ish
this fall, is going to have some limitations you can set for yourself.
Kind of like one of the tools that's going to bring up, which was.
Freedom.
Is that the one where you block certain social media sites from yourself on your browser?
There's a lot of them.
I think freedom is one of the biggest ones, where rescue time is another one.
Rescue time is one I was thinking of.
And that's where you can allot yourself some amount of time to be on Facebook or something,
right?
Yeah, or any site.
Yeah, but I think people use it to get rid of their social media addictions.
Anyway, they'll have that for your new iOS.
Excellent.
Not mine.
I have an Android.
Oh, yeah.
You have some other bizarre phone.
It's an Android.
I'm not that bizarre.
Well, last year you had that old, like.
Oh, that was just an ancient Android.
Yeah, okay.
Yeah.
So I'm the only Apple nerd in here, which at this point it is like sticking with a cult.
Right now it is just sort of sunk cost.
Today's word is cult.
Their MacBook suite of products is still very good.
Kind of.
They apparently got a lot of returns in their brand new MacBooks because they couldn't reach
the powers or the speeds of their advertising.
I still corrected.
But the other thing too is that my MacBook that I got two years ago, I guess it was a
2015 MacBook, is pretty antiquated for what I'd like to do just as mobile development.
Oh, well, that just happens within a few years, though.
2015 is three and a half years ago now.
Yeah, well, but I got it two years ago.
It was last year's model two years ago.
But the thing is was like Windows machines let you update them.
Yeah, but if you update them too much like an older machine, you can't put Windows 10
on it.
It won't work.
That was why my ancient Android phone was such a piece of shit because they pushed the
updates automatically and I just couldn't run anything anymore.
I'm like, why can't I just have the same thing that I bought without all the fancy
new bells?
Well, on the plus side for PCs, if you buy a copy of Word 2001 on a CD and put it into
your computer, it'll still work.
Apple just does breaking changes every four years.
For the most part, your hardware is completely useless by then, too.
But that said, I've got the whole Apple ecosystem at home, so getting out of it would cost me
$6,000.
That's how they get you.
Exactly, and they've got me good.
So now I'm just a happy Stockholm Syndrome subject here.
It's probably better back when Jobs was at the wheel and things were still working very
well.
That's what people say, I think.
Although he was apparently a really weird dude with park and handicap spots and stuff
and make a show of it, well, the thing is when you're billionaire, you can have a driver
take you to work or pay somebody to park your car, but I think he was just this weird power
trippy dude.
Some people got to leave subs in Argentina or Venezuela or wherever the hell it was.
Once you hit the B, maybe that's just what happens, a billion.
It's weird because he was a very effective company leader based on how aggressive he
was, but he traumatized a lot of his employees.
Yeah, like Bezos apparently too.
Jeff Bezos from, Jeff, is that the first name?
No, I'm feeling not confident.
I believe it is Jeff from Amazon though.
His last name is definitely Bezos.
He is apparently just a complete psycho to work under, and I don't know if I've thrown
the word psycho around twice, I mean asshole.
So yeah, he screams at meetings, berates people, but Amazon's wicked successful.
So what can you do?
I think there's a CEO class the same way that there is like a warrior class that you have
to kind of learn to control, but maybe is still useful.
It's a warrior in a business suit.
So yes, hacking or productivity tools.
So I don't need one to keep me off of social media, although I'll probably use it to keep
me off of Reddit if I ever decide to use it for something, assuming that fucking, because
the other thing about Apple, sorry I'll get off this in a second, they don't let you
customize anything.
No, that's why.
I don't know if it'll let me use, if it'll let me connect it to a third-party app, because
I use Apollo for...
Yeah, everything has to be within their silo.
Right, and Facebook comes on new phones, whereas Apollo doesn't, because it's a single developer
making this app, which if you read it on your phone, use Apollo.
The person who made it is amazing, they're active on the subreddit.
So what is Apollo?
It's a Reddit client for iPhone, so it's an app, but it's way better than the Reddit
app for iPhone, and the guy is super fun and awesome, and he does this all himself.
I just keep fucking going to the website, and he keeps telling me, hey, use our app,
and I'm like, no, I like the website, just fine, thank you.
Oh, I hate when websites do that.
I don't have the Facebook app, and I'm not getting it back, and I wish I could tell
it to please stop telling me to get the app.
Yeah, I have all the apps, because I'm lazy.
But still, I'm gonna shill for Apollo.
I donate, I don't know, once every few months.
Oh, you like it that much?
I bought the full version, it's like three bucks, and it comes with full functionality.
I know I'm totally shilling for this, I'm not the creator.
It's okay to promote things that you think are useful.
Yeah, I know, but now it's been, we're not on productivity at all.
Soon it'll get me back to productivity.
Honestly, we should just beep out the name every time and contact the guy and be like,
we will un-beep the name of your product, which Stephen loves so much for just $100.
Yeah, we could get some sidebar ads.
Anyway, I just love that this is the work of one person who dedicates a lot of time
to doing this, and the app is crazy popular.
Anyway, that's my shill.
Apollo for iPhone, for Reddit.
Cool, okay, sorry.
Productivity systems, I am thinking that we could probably talk about them
in like three different categories.
There's productivity systems in the sense that there are books and philosophies
about how you do productivity.
There are actual tools, like I would say like Tomato Timer,
like a tool that you can use, like an app that you can download.
And then there are hacks, which are kind of a weird gray area.
And like more about like, you know, doing things like tricking your brain.
Is the Tomato Timer the Pomodoro Technique?
Yes.
Oh, okay.
Why did you call it Tomato Timer?
Oh, that's what it's called.
That was called the Pomodoro Technique.
No, I mean, there's a website.
Oh, call it Tomato Timer?
Yeah, well, if I'm going to promote something, there's the website.
If you just Google Tomato Timer, you'll find it, and it's just a web app that does Pomodoro's.
It's really minimalist.
And it's the only one that I've been using because I don't need anything more than what
it does.
We should tell people briefly what it is.
Yes.
Oh, I've just found out I've been pronouncing the word wrong, but I'm going to keep doing
it the same way because I'm going to break my tongue if I try to do the Italian pronunciation.
Pomodoro's, I already did it, are a system where you focus for about 20 minutes and you
can adjust it.
But like that's kind of the one that everyone has found really optimal, like 20, 25 minutes.
And then you have five minutes off.
Oh, yeah.
Okay.
I've done, yeah.
There's one someone at work who has a big clock that he like drags the minute hands
to and it counts down.
Oh, it's cool that he has a physical clock.
Yeah.
And so it's like, it's impossible to miss on his desk.
It's like half the size of his monitor.
And so when it goes down, he gets up and he, he, you know, looks away and distracts himself
for a minute.
Then he gets back to work after five minutes.
We should probably quickly tell people it's called that Pomodoro, Pomodoro, now, now you
have me really worried about how he's pronouncing the tomato.
It's the Italian word for tomato.
And because it is based on an old cooking timer that's shaped like a tomato.
Yeah.
It looks just like a tomato.
You twist it.
It has a 25.
It's either 20 or 25 minutes.
That is the default setting.
I forget if it's 20 or 25.
Yeah.
And then you just work until it counts down.
It goes ding.
And then you get up and you do stuff for five minutes and you come back and you twist it
again and you do that all day.
And yeah, that's, that's what they named it after.
And yeah, a lot of people do swear by it.
I never, ever tried it because I think that would ruin everything for me.
I tend to, me personally, if I get into a project, I will like sit down and just be
in that project for hours to the point where like, I'm like, oh shit, I got to go and eat
now because I'm really hungry.
But if I would like had a ding that told me that I had to get up and break my focus
on a project, I would be really pissed off.
Apparently it actually, I mean, maybe, you know, everybody's different and that's like
a really important thing to know about productivity tools and hacks and et cetera, is that everybody's
brains are motivated different.
But if you're doing focused work for hours, you actually start like experiencing loss
in terms of your ability to focus, whether you're focusing on the right things.
And it's kind of like, you know, sleep deprivation where people all when they test them, they
all say that they feel like they're performing at 100% capacity when they've had six hours
of sleep, but you actually test them and they are not.
And I think it's the same thing where you feel like I'm really focused on in the zone.
I can't like break away from this, but actually you perform better if you do take those five
minute breaks.
I should probably give it a try, at least.
At least give it a try.
Okay.
If you hate it, don't use it.
I saw something like that on Reddit recently where it was, I think we did a study of nurses
on specifically what you just mentioned about how their performance tanks, if they fit up
for too long or didn't get enough sleep, but their self-assessment of the performance
stays consistent, which is kind of scary.
They're not aware that they're doing so much worse.
And this was just on nurses, but that's true with everybody, right?
So if you stay up late and you're like right now, I feel like I'm doing pretty okay, but
I'm a little more tired than average.
And so like, I'm probably doing worse.
And yet if you ask me how am I doing, that's like, I think I'm probably at 95%, right?
So my greatest obstacle personally to productivity is getting started.
Like getting started can take me a half hour to an hour, which is why once I get started,
I am so happy and I just keep going.
And then if like I were to stop and take a break, it takes me another half hour to get
started again.
And I just, I can't do the five minute thing.
It's the startup time that is the worst for me.
Five minutes is like enough time to give yourself that mental break that refreshes you and helps
you perform more optimally, but it's not enough that you're going to lose your focus if you
were really intently writing something.
Five minutes is just like, you take a breather, you take a drink of water.
It's still in your mind and you can pick up where you left off, at least in my experience.
And I think that's like why they chose that time interval.
I think I'm in the middle and I'll try it and see how it works.
I'll set timers.
Why not?
I'll do it tomorrow.
Well, tomorrow will be atypical.
I'm planning on being extra alert tomorrow, but because if I'm in the middle of something,
my brain is kind of handling a bunch of things at once.
I'm like, okay, now that I'm doing this, I can go grab this, I can, you know, I'm getting
all these dominoes in a row.
And if someone comes down to my desk and it's like, Hey, Steven, can I do this really quick
and talk to you?
And I look back at my computer and it's just gone.
My whole edifice that was in my head that wasn't on the computer is gone and I have
to rebuild it.
It's faster the second time, but it still takes time.
I wonder if I did that to myself, if I would just screw myself, but when I'm not doing
something particularly productive, I do get up every few minutes and wander around.
And I feel like that'd be a great, this tomato timer would probably be really good for doing
unproductive things like playing video games for hours on end.
Because honestly, just telling myself, Hey, it's been 25 minutes, you need to get up and
walk around.
Or when you get up in another 90 minutes, you know, you're going to be really uncomfortable.
So at the very least, be, be active, you know, every few minutes or something.
Yeah, that's a good entry point.
You could try it out with something that's not literally your work at your job.
Yeah, that's a good idea.
Yeah.
So if you like it, start small.
There's a tool that actually is great because it combines the promoter technique with something
that works really great for me, which is social pressure, the less wrong study hall.
Yes.
Was it somebody else mentioned this way back in the day on the show?
Okay.
It might have been Max.
Yeah.
You probably already put a link to that, but I don't think we did.
No one's listening to old episodes anyway.
So why don't you tell us what the less wrong study hall is?
Less wrong study hall is a chat where you can, you can join the chat.
Somebody whoever enters first sets the promoter timer and they're like in charge of it.
So you log in, you turn on your webcam or you share your screen, depending on what you're
comfortable with, and you just sit there and you do your work for the 20 minute interval.
You take the five minute break and then you can chat with everybody else in the group.
Talk about what you're working on, ask questions, and it keeps you focused the same way that
like working at a job and knowing that your boss is watching you keeps you focused or being
in school.
That works really great for me because I have a really hard time motivating myself to work
on things that I want to do like art or writing, but that are not like related to making money
or helping people in other ways.
Like you know, if I have a friend that needs help, I'm going to prioritize that.
Even though, you know, I will always deprioritize my own art or writing just because I feel
like, well, that I don't need that.
I don't need to do that.
Other things are more important.
I can force myself to feel like this is work by having somebody watch me.
And even if it's like somebody on a webcam or even if it, you know, I know I'm logged
into the chat and yeah, then, you know, when the promoter leader leaves the group, somebody
else picks it up and it's also a great way to meet other, you know, rationalists from
other groups.
That sounds really cool.
I think that sounds like a great idea.
And I was interested when I heard about it the first time to like, I should try that
sometime and I've gotten better, I think at actually committing to doing things since
then.
So I just made a note of it too.
I'm going to put a link to it on the episode for this or the description for this episode.
But I'm also going to try it in real life because why not?
It doesn't hurt to give it a shot.
I'm sure it's free.
So when I was writing full time, I always went to a Starbucks to write because even
though no one there is actually looking at you, it just kind of felt like they were.
I was like, I have to be good for the people, you know, that are watching me because otherwise
I'm a slack.
I'm like, I would still take a little while to get started and I would still take some
breaks now and then, but having those people there really made a big difference.
And leaving your house too, you get away from all the distractions of, oh, no, I need to
clean these dishes.
Oh, well, I'm about to go out the door and work on some writing, but oh, look, like there's
some clothes on the floor.
I need to pick those up first.
I never really had those distractions.
My biggest distraction was like, oh, look, there's a comfy bed and I am feeling mildly
nappish.
That too.
Can't do that at Starbucks.
Yeah.
And there's coffee at Starbucks.
Yeah.
Everyone sees you being productive.
And so not only are you putting on a show, but you're.
You're signaling.
My inner Robin Hansen is just like, yes, of course, they're going to look over and look
at this important person who he's been there this whole time.
He's been clicking away.
He must be doing something really important, which I really think a lot of my life is just
performance.
I think a lot of people.
That's a human thing.
I think, I think that, yes, that's a human thing.
And I think you're, you're noticing the stage, whereas many people maybe don't, right?
Okay.
Because that's how most people do stuff, right?
So I've heard a lot of people get really upset when they learn about the whole signaling
theory thing because they start looking around and go, oh my God, everybody's signaling
all the time and that's all we do it.
I'm doing it.
No, no.
How do I stop?
I actually saw somebody had posted that somewhere.
I wish I could remember where, but somebody wrote, how do I stop myself from signaling?
And people came in and they said, you, you don't, you would stop being a human being.
You're like, it's not bad to signal.
I mean, obviously.
The only way to stop yourself from signaling is to isolate yourself from all of those humans.
Yeah.
And then like, you know, that is great for your mental health.
Right.
Right.
I've been thinking about that once and it was basically like, you know, is there a way
to like do something that isn't communicated as signaling and, and no, there's not.
I don't think so.
There's at least two different kinds though.
There's like the kinds of signals that you're sending either like on purpose basically,
and there's the, there's the kinds of signals and these often overlap that people are reading
from you.
Right.
So like, I tend to wear non-descript clothing.
I wear, you know, dark colors and grays and stuff.
And I, you know, don't interact with people on the train or something, but someone looks
over, they'd be like, oh, look at him signaling his, you know, introversion or something.
I've heard people like, you know, bust on Silicon Valley programmers for wearing like
the hoodie and jeans uniform and they're like, oh, look, they're signaling so hard that they're
cool programmers.
Look, they're just walking around with a backpack and off brand sneakers and like, it's like,
you can't do anything.
You can't do anything.
That's me.
I have a hoodie at my desk.
Now you got to buy a nice three-piece suit, drop a grand on it just so people won't think
you're signaling anymore.
Although there's a couple of people at work who do that and they look like assholes.
So, um, like, I mean, well, no, no, they, no, they, they wear suits to work and it's,
it's a couple of managers and they're, they, whereas my manager has a set of orange crocs
at least at his desk and he wears those at work with his shorts and t-shirt.
I think that that's much more the vibe that I want.
And then, you know, if my boss came around my desk wearing a tie and a, you know, a jacket
and stuff and it's like, why are, that seems like he's overtly signaling, right?
And well, cause he is, and it's definitely a status thing.
Yeah.
There's partly, there's the uniform of the programmer, which is, like you said, jeans
and a t-shirt and a hoodie and usually off brand sneakers and the backpack because computer
bags are just the most useful thing ever.
I don't know why humans ever tried to go to briefcases or messenger bags or anything
else.
They're inferior.
You can access like a messenger bag or a purse more easily.
Like if you need to grab your phone, you have to kind of take one strap off of a backpack
and swing it around and like to get your wallet out.
It's a little awkward, but it's also nice to be like hands free and to be able to carry
more weight.
But children wear backpacks to school.
So because they're very useful.
No, I know.
But that's my point.
So that's, that's the reason to move away from them.
That's where I go to briefcase.
And you don't, you don't wear a, maybe also it leaves your clothes, your suits unruffled
if you're going to the office carrying a briefcase rather than having your, your straps digging
into it.
Right.
Right.
Actually, there's all kinds of great and stupid reasons for it.
But yeah.
It's a very comfortable backpack a few months ago and it's great.
So I like that you thought through reasons people would use a briefcase.
Like the whole suit thing makes a lot of sense now that you mentioned it.
I doubt that's the explanation.
I just pulled that out of my ass.
I think it's sort of a critical, your paperwork that you're putting in the briefcase.
Probably that too.
Like if you have a laptop, you can stick it in a sleeve and you can throw it in a backpack.
But like I have a folder right there in my backpack that is getting destroyed.
Yeah.
Having something rigid.
Any, any paper that I put in my backpack gets ruined too.
So yeah, if I had, if, if my, if my, you know, realtor or lawyer showed up to a meeting
and pulled out a bunch of ruffled shit from his backpack, I'd be pretty annoyed.
Right.
So we figured it out and mystery solved.
So can we start from the top?
There was three different kinds of production systems.
There was the, there might be more, but that was like kind of where my brain wanted to
separate them.
There's the, like the books, the philosophies behind productivity systems.
There's tools like the promoter timer, like an app, the lesser on study hall, a tool that's
a something that you can use.
And then there were hacks, which they're tools that aren't apps.
It's like the rituals, for example, or like doing things to trick your brain.
Okay.
Can we talk about some of those?
Yeah.
I was just going to say.
So it's hard to explain without giving an example.
A good example is I have trouble getting out of bed in the morning, or at least I used
to until I've learned that I've been using melatonin wrong.
Thank you, Scott.
But I, yeah, my alarm would go off and I would, you know, just keep hitting snooze and the
only thing that would get me up is panic of, oh no, I need to be at work or at this place.
So I, I know that I need to get up now or I will be late, but I heard someone recommended
when you, when your alarm goes off, literally jump out of bed with like the most excess
ridiculous amount of force.
I've heard that.
Yeah.
And it is like totally works.
Or at least it works some of the time anyway.
I guess it's the same concept of, you know, just jumping into the pool instead of trying
to like dip your toe in and then just slowly slide your leg in, like just, you know, pull
the bandaid off.
I totally agree that going into a pool slowly is just a stupid way to torture yourself.
Jump right in and you adjust to it within a few seconds, whereas if you're going in
slowly, you get this creeping slowly all the way up your legs, discomfort kind of, yeah.
That's how I feel if I would pull a bandaid off really slowly.
Another trick I've seen people do is they set their alarm clocks forward and they'll
set it forward 25 minutes or something.
Yeah.
But you, you adjusted that within two days.
Okay.
So I didn't know if people, at least something I've seen people do, I've never tried it.
Cause I like knowing what time it is, but your alarm clock or you mean like your, your
clock clock.
That you have like your clock that makes noise in the morning.
It's like not your, not your timepiece for the day, but your, uh, and not, not, not the
time that it goes off.
Um, yeah.
So you need to be up at seven 30 and your iPhone says it's seven 30, but your alarm clock
on your nightstand, you set, you set that 30 minutes ahead.
And so you look at that and it says it's eight o'clock and your brain wakes up and you're
like eight o'clock, I needed to be up half an hour ago and that little jolt helps get
people get up.
But you're seeing people adjusted that right away.
Oh yeah.
It's really effective like once or twice, but then as long as you have any sort of
intellect, you look over and you're like, hmm, okay, eight minus 30 is seven 30.
Okay.
It's seven 30, even while you're almost entirely asleep.
My partner has a problem of a time management.
So he actually does change all of the clocks in our house to be like five to like seven
minutes, uh, you know, uh, late.
Yeah.
But then, then he knows that it's not the actual time.
Yeah.
But he, he changes it.
Oh, he does it constantly.
So often he'll change it back to normal and then, uh, and, uh, he doesn't remember whether
or not he's changed it.
The other trick might be to like tell somebody, I did this for a while in my car.
I had my car clock a few minutes ahead, but I found it not to be at all helpful because
I would just know that it was some time ahead.
And eventually I crossed, I crossed it with a reliable clock, but I was, had my passenger
when I was looking at the road, I said, Hey, press the minute hand and the minute button
on the clock a few times less than 10, but more than, you know, a couple.
And then I, then I knew it was ahead, but not by how much.
So I would just tell my brain and I look at it and know that it was wrong, but say, tell
yourself that's the real time.
And then I, you know, I would try and be on time better or something, but I'm fairly
punctual anyway.
So it didn't really make a difference, but I gave it a shot.
But the randomness part of it, you said five to seven ish minutes means that like, if it
was three minutes fast, they would adjust probably pretty quickly.
But if they, if they know it's up a little bit, then it's easier since you can't do
the quick mental math, like, yeah, don't use multiples of five.
Sure.
So it's like randomize it.
So it's like three or seven or like 12, I don't know.
I feel like this isn't something that would be all that much help for productivity anyway,
though.
Well, it's for time management, which is important to productivity.
If you know that you're a chronically late and sane person, which is what they called
it on the wait, but why article?
That's a really good article on time management, by the way.
Then you can more reliably be on time to things.
If you're always slightly unsure what time it actually is, but like, you know, approximately
what time it is.
What are some of the, you said at the beginning, like philosophies of productivity?
There's many of them.
And there are some really well known ones.
I think one of the most respected in the field, and it's, it's been around for a bit is called
getting things done.
It's by David Allen.
And they actually call it the GTD method, which is silly GTD short for getting things
done.
Yes.
Okay.
So you can expand it into this whole thing.
There's like websites.
You can, and it's a cool productivity system.
There's a book.
There's like a planner.
There's probably a million apps, I don't know.
But you can make it about as a simple or, you know, it's like, you can scale it up or
down depending on how much you like to organize things and get really like OCD about your productivity
systems, which I like to get pretty OCD about mine.
So the philosophy is mainly about like having planners to help you plan things out.
No, the philosophy is it's based on kind of a middle manager position, but you can also
kind of use it to be the middle manager of your life with a little creativity.
You want to capture, first of all, all of your incoming tasks.
So email, you know, like requests from friends.
First of all, he says, just like, get it all out of your brain and on paper somewhere
and in the same place, use a binder or use an app, write it down and keep them all in
the same place.
Don't organize them.
Just throw them on the list.
And then once everything is captured, then you stop stressing out about, am I going to
remember to do this thing or having that constant feeling of am I forgetting something?
Because you know that the minute you hear that you have a task, you just write it down.
It's captured.
That is genius.
I have a very busy coworker who does that.
She has like a con bon board across her entire desk of sticky notes.
So she knows, oh yeah, I had this and I'm sure there's three categories.
It's like urgent and then backlog and then whenever or something like that.
And she's also the agile coach at my work.
So that's exactly where she gets this idea from.
It sounds like there's a little bit of hybridization going on there with the con bon and with the
GTD method.
Totally.
But it was just the idea of making it in a physical place and maybe that's also helpful
to remember and stuff.
But also, like you said, get rid of the anxiety of not knowing if you're forgetting something.
Yeah.
And one of the important things was always having a notebook with you or having an app
on your phone.
I like to use Google Keep, which I'll talk more about because I love it.
And also not organizing it is important too because you want to...
You're not organizing it?
Yeah.
But people will experience some resistance too.
You hear a task and if you don't write it down, you might forget it.
Or you might be like, oh, if I write this down, I'm going to have to go pull open my
task list.
That's going to cause anxiety.
There's going to be...
I'm going to have to figure out what category it goes in.
I don't want to do that right now.
I'll do it later and then you don't.
But if you just have a notebook and you just write it in there, it'll take a second and
it's easy to remember to do it and you don't experience as much resistance.
Yeah.
Then there was what Stephen was talking about where there's the separating the tasks.
I wish it was easier to have a notebook on me at all times.
And I know I have my phone on me at all times, but I always feel rude if I whip out my phone
while other people are around and start typing in things, even if it's just a task that I
need to do.
There's small pocket sized notebooks.
Yeah, but they have the same problems as the backpack, they get all mangled in my pockets
pretty quickly.
They have ones that are pretty well reinforced.
Like they have hardcover ones.
Then you have to carry a pen and stuff too.
That's okay.
I got pockets.
I don't have pocket space for a pen, even a small pen.
They have these notebooks.
I'm trying to remember a brand.
I'll have to add it back later, but there's these notebooks where the pen actually inserts
into the notebook and the notebook is made of steel to protect the pages.
I don't know.
It's very small, very compact.
It's made specifically for this purpose.
Shit.
I'm going to look that up.
Yeah, I feel bad that I forget the brand because it was something that was on my wishlist
for a really long time.
I still haven't gotten one and now it's just gone from my brain.
Well, my handwriting is terrible, so I'll stick to my phone and I'll push past the
rudeness factor.
Yeah.
It doesn't worry me.
I feel like most of the time, if somebody is like, hey, can you do this?
I'll be like, sure, let me just take a note of that and I pull my phone out and then it's
socially acceptable.
Yeah.
I've done that.
We were just at the party I had a few months ago.
I said exactly that.
Let me write this down.
I mean it ups.
I do that frequently too.
What's Google Keep?
Is that a note keeping app?
Yes.
Because I just use the notepad for iPhone and it sucks.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
I have an Android and I have Google.
The thing I love about the Google suite of products is that they're all backed up to
the cloud and they auto-save and they all sync with each other and Google Assistant's
cool too.
This has gotten so good to the point where now I can capture tasks by saying, hey Google,
remind me to go to the store and pick up milk tomorrow at 5 a.m. or hey Google, when I get
to work, remind me to tell my boss this thing and Google knows when I get to work, which
is creepy, but useful.
Well, it's got your work as a geolocation, right?
Yeah.
But I didn't tell it to save my workplace.
I just found out where my workplace was.
Well, it's the place that you go to Monday through Friday at these exact times every
day, right?
Yeah.
So I figured it out.
Google's a smart monkey.
It's not a monkey.
Smart Silicon God.
Yes.
Google Keep lets you write lists and you can check items off a list, so it's good for
your grocery list or items that you need to check off.
You could just take a bunch of notes in it and you can add a reminders feature.
So it will actually serve as like an alarm.
It'll pop up and it'll say, I'm reminding you of this thing and you can kind of snooze
the reminder to and you can like, you know, swipe it off your screen to say that that
is done or you can push the snooze alarm or you can dismiss it.
It's just really well integrated with all of Google's other, you know, suites as well.
So I'm kind of shilling Google right now.
And these are used with...
Oh, yeah.
What's up?
I have a question.
Okay.
We have a question from the audience.
Go ahead.
Our audience wants to know if you can use the Google voice command to add a task to
Google Keep.
Yes.
If you're talking about assistant, I think it's the same thing.
Yeah.
No, absolutely.
That is...
I do that all the time.
I'll be riding my bike and my phone will be in my pocket and I will tell it like, you
know, I've suddenly remembered, oh, I need milk and I'll just yell, hey, Google, remind
me to get milk when I get off of work and it does.
So for the record, iPhone does something like that.
There's a reminders app that I've got different categories.
I've got one called reminders, one called random, one called shopping list.
And it knows what those are.
So I can say, I can hold down the home button or say, hey, Siri, if I had that enabled and
do the same thing.
But I did just download the Google Keep app because the reminders app is not as fun to
look at.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, I have to go here and then go back to other ones.
That's too complicated.
It's kind of a mess.
So, yeah.
I'll try the Google Keep one.
That sounds fun.
So Google Keep integrates with this GTD getting things done system?
No, with other Google products.
Right.
I like to use it for the getting things done system.
Oh, yeah.
I like to use it as a capture system.
Although actually, what I use as my primary capture system is just a WordPad document
on my laptop.
And I've tried a bunch of other ones and that's just what works for me because what happens
is I need to dump my task list every so often.
I'll end up with a bunch of clutter on there that are tasks that I'm never going to do
or that I forget to check them off.
So I just delete that WordPad document and I start a new one.
My partner Vivian has something very similar except you get a little pixelated icon and
every time you complete something on your task list, you get gold or XP.
Oh, is this Habitica?
Yes, it's Habitica.
That's the name.
That's another really good one.
Yeah.
And then you use that gold to buy swords to fight monsters and the way you fight like
big bosses is just do lots of tasks and every time you do a task, it does some damage to
the monster or whatever.
It looked really neat.
Yeah.
It's fun because you can join a party.
Yes.
And then you've got the social pressure of like, oh, we're on a campaign with our friends
and we've got to beat this monster.
But it also, I've been hesitant about using it myself because it seems like I would get
caught up in the gamification aspect of things and then like...
Then you're putting all sorts of things on your task list and just getting all sorts
of shit done because you want to beat a monster?
Maybe.
I don't know.
You're artificially inflating the list to get stuff done to beat the monster too, right?
Yeah, but either way, you're putting something on your list and then getting it done unless
all you're doing is putting things on the list and checking them off.
Well, okay, if all you're doing is entering things and checking them off without doing
anything, sure, you suck, but then you might as well just open up the console and be like,
unite the clans.
I feel like that's what I would do.
Okay.
I'm more like customizing my avatar and like things that you know, aren't actually helping
me be productive.
Oh.
Burn a bunch of time just making yourself better at the game.
I would do that too.
I would...
There's one...
I was listening to...
Years ago, there was...
Might still be around.
There was a podcast with Camille Nanjiani and Emily B. Gordon called The Indoor Kids.
It was about video games.
And one of their friends that they had on had recently had kids and he described how he
had gamified fatherhood.
Oh, that sounds cool.
And I don't think it was so rigid as to have an app with an avatar because that would,
again, take a lot of time and energy.
Oh, man.
But I want to see the dad ever, so I want to see the tears.
But he would do where it's like every diaper he changes, he'd give himself a point or
two or something or whatever.
And when he hit a number of points, he'd reward himself by like buying a video game or watching
a movie or something, but he earned those by doing parenthood points.
So I think gamifying is one fun system.
Which one of those three would that fall under?
Would that be...
I guess...
I think that is a...
Maybe a brain hack, unless it's a tool.
I don't know.
Yeah, if you're using a spinnaker, then it might be a tool.
I guess...
Combination.
This person might have been doing it in their head or maybe like on pen and paper or something
to keep track.
But...
Yeah, it sounds like the mind hack, the productivity hacks category.
The categories aren't important, though.
That was more to just like, draw my memory of which ones I wanted to talk about.
Yeah.
They are distinct and I like that, too.
So what happens after you capture the tasks?
Then you sort them into, can I do it right now?
If so, like if you can do it in under five minutes, then you do it immediately.
And you know, is this something that I'm going to do later or is this something that I can
delegate?
So you look at it and you're like, okay, that's just the most basic tiers of organization
categorization.
So you do all your five minute tasks and you commit to doing the entire list of all the
tasks that are important enough for you to do.
And you delegate tasks that aren't good fits for tasks for you to do, either it's like
a buffer below your pay grade or somebody else could do it better than you.
And then you would save on opportunity cost.
And then there's another fourth category, which is the delete category.
So you look at a task and you're like, okay, I'm never going to get this done.
Or this isn't relevant anymore and then you delete it.
And that's basically getting things done.
The like really, really simplified version, but there's a very complicated like metagame
involved in getting things done.
When rationalists get involved, everything gets a complicated metagame, right?
It wasn't even rationalists.
This was David Allen, who was rationalist before was cool enough to have a term.
I mean, yeah.
Did you find a productivity bump doing these things?
When you started actively making an effort to be more productive?
Absolutely.
And I still use it.
I've modified my own version of it, which I think is a really important thing to do
with productivity tools again, because everybody works differently.
So what you do is there's all the philosophies, the books, et cetera, the tools.
You just, you try them out and well, first of all, you look at them and you think,
is this the sort of thing that I'm going to do?
Because the best productivity tool is the one that you are going to be able to do.
Some people love getting things done, like the super complicated version of it,
because they love super complicated things.
And that motivates them to actually like get a lot of work done because they,
it's actually kind of a game.
Yeah, it's like, it's, if it's fun for me, I like organizing all my things.
And then like feeling like I've made progress when I'm like clearing my task list
and I'm shifting like papers around in my head.
But some people hate that and they look at that and they go,
oh my God, that looks like so much work to get work done.
Like this is, you know, not something that would work for me.
So they need something simpler.
I can see that.
If it involves a lot of steps just to keep track of stuff,
I would have to add a task for do my tasking.
I make a joke about that at work.
We use an agile management tool called rally, which if you, if you use it deeply,
it can take seeming like half an hour a day,
which is not an insignificant chunk of time.
So I always joke that we should add that to our like our workload,
like add, do manage our workload to our workload.
Yeah.
I definitely want to try some of these.
So you don't, Inyash, you don't use any formal stuff,
but you, you somehow get things done.
Uh, yeah, you've been known to, I suppose.
Yeah, I haven't been known to.
So I'm trying to learn a lot from this episode because I have stuff coming up
that I want to be actually able to focus on and do.
Okay.
So I'm going to try and work together a technique for myself here.
It's, it's hard for me to give advice because I just, I mean, when,
one of the things I often tell myself,
like when I was doing the renovations in this house, I just look around.
I'm like, well, it's not going to renovate itself.
The only way things will move forward is if I physically move them forward.
So I got to do it because I want the end product.
You know, I don't know.
I, I mean, that has a real sense of urgency behind it.
Like if this isn't renovated, then you can't move in and you're just paying
for two places and you're, you know, that's true.
Yeah.
That, that sounds like there's enough motivation there that even I could get
off my ass to do it.
So like, um, you know, you wrote a book, you'd move to Starbucks every day
or most, what, five days a week for like a year.
Yeah, not quite a year, like nine months.
But like what kept you from saying, no, I'm going to take today off and do whatever.
Like I just, you wanted to do it.
Yeah, that, that, that was really it.
I mean, and the thing is there's lots of things that I do that I don't want to do.
Like when I do accounting for my boss, I don't, I don't really care, but after
a certain amount of just doing things, productivity starts to feel good in itself.
I think it's kind of like how, uh, if you're a runner, you running itself
just starts to feel good and people will, I mean, there's a wonderful, I think
it's the oatmeal.
Yeah.
The guy from the oatmeal is the runner.
He has this great comic about going on ultra marathons and by hour eight,
he thinks he's dying and he is in heaven, you know?
And once you start, get started doing lots of productive things in life, it
just feels better than video games or most other things.
And you just want to keep doing stuff.
But yeah, it is, it is important to do things you like.
Like a lot of people have asked me, I'm just going to, I might as well
announce this publicly because I've gotten a million emails saying, Hey,
are you ever going to do a podcast of, um, uh, significant digits?
The, the unofficial, yeah, sequel to, to Harry Potter methods of rationality.
And I've always answered the same way, uh, no, because it's, it's acknowledged
that it's good, but I don't feel passionate about it.
And doing these podcasts that the fiction ones anyway is about six to seven
hours of work per half hour episode.
And, and, you know, I don't get paid or anything.
So the only thing that drives me to do it is the passion.
And with Harry Potter, I had the passion for it because I love the story so much.
And significant digits is good, but I, it didn't ever spark that passion in me.
That would keep me doing it week after week for a year or a year and a half.
You know?
So I was like, I'm sorry, but, but no, it would, I would lose steam because I
don't, I don't have the enough of that.
And then whenever like I put out that, that online anthology I was just
talking about earlier, that was just like, I really want to see this in the world.
And it doesn't exist.
And by golly, it could exist if someone just sat down for one weekend and did it.
And so I did, you know?
But I do have the problem where it's really hard for me to get started on things,
even things that I love oftentimes.
I think what I'm hearing for myself so far is I'm going to try and do like a
hybrid thing because I, I don't know what my issue is.
I don't have a lot of passion lately for like, I don't know.
I've had sparks passion over like the last several years.
Like I'm passionate about things, but not like getting things done.
So I think I'll need a bit of a carrot and a stick for myself, which, you know,
like he said, accounting, you've got a carrot and a stick, you know,
pay jacks and homelessness.
So I think my, my ex-wife Melissa said this once and it really stuck with me.
She's like, everyone should have one thing that makes them awesome that like,
you know, all their other friends are like, that's the cool thing you do.
And she was like, and for you, that's your podcast.
And I was like, yeah.
And that, that was the motivating factor for me, you know,
and everyone has something that makes them awesome.
Yeah, it's good for your self-esteem.
And so it sounds like what you're talking about.
There is another productivity system.
I would say it falls into the philosophy called the procrastination equation.
What you're describing in the eyes as being a motivating factor for you is value.
And a lot of people, though, I think like particularly rationalists,
there's some debate about whether or not this is true of everyone or rationalists
are particularly bad at this and just good at noticing it.
But there's the issue of a crazier.
Should I define that?
Sure. Yeah.
I should have looked up a definition.
But a crazier is delay or feeling resistance towards doing a task.
Like you want to do a task, you know, you should do the task, you need to do the task.
And for some reason, you just can't motivate yourself to do it.
The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
Yeah. Like wanting to write a book and like, you know,
being really passionate about like the ideas and the characters in the book.
And then just like just not doing it.
Yeah. Or just like more broadly knowing what the right thing to do is and doing the wrong thing.
I had a bowl of cocoa.
I had a bowl of cocoa puffs for dinner, probably the wrong choice, right?
I don't know if that falls into a crazier, but that actually relates to the procrastination equation.
Sure.
So this is a book by Pierce Steele.
And the subtitle is How to Stop Putting Things Off and Get Stuff Done.
And there's a whole book and it's worth reading the whole book
because it gives you this really good breakdown of this very simple equation,
which is expectancy times value over impulsiveness times delay.
And someone also did a book review and went into deeper detail
on the less wrong website about the procrastination equation.
I believe there's two articles and we can link to them because that's how I found out about it.
So each of these, what are the each of these things mean?
Expectancy is how, you know, your gut reaction.
Can I do this?
Is this something that like is in my, you know, skill set?
Am I capable of doing this?
So you have high expectancy if it's a task.
Like, you know, a routine task you do every day at your work, you can practically do on autopilot.
You're not going to experience much resistance when you think about that because you're like, oh, yeah, that's easy.
But if it's like somebody has assigned you a task and you know, you're going to have to do a lot of research
and you're not sure if you can do it, you have like, actually, I'm not sure if higher low expectancies.
Well, I would say low expectancy.
I'm being able to do that task that causes anxiety and that causes you to procrastinate doing it
because thinking about it gives you a fields, which is another term.
That just means the like feeling of dread that you get or the feeling of like apathy or just badness
that makes you, oh, I should do this task.
And then your brain deletes it because your brain doesn't like feeling those unhappy feelings.
I have so much of that for my second novel.
The fields.
I know I should start it.
That's they always say the best thing you can do after you finish your first novel, start your second one.
But like, oh, my God, I don't know if I can pull this off.
It's going to be hard and there's going to be all it's sounds like expectancy.
Yes.
So value in the equation is obviously how much you value the thing.
You have the passion for it or you don't.
So you might get a lot of work done at your job that you don't give a shit about
because it's just like, I don't know, something that's not really helping the world
or that you don't personally feel passionate about.
But you have to get it done because you need to make money
and your boss is watching you and all your coworkers are judging you.
So you, you, you know, go into work and you crunch a bunch of numbers
and you do whatever it is that you do and you don't work on your novel,
which you feel very passionate about.
So value can motivate you, but also it's not a necessary part of the equation.
Impulsiveness is like deciding to, you know, eat cereal instead of having a healthy dinner
or deciding to play video games instead of working on the novel that you really want to do.
And that is just, you know, we're animals and we have like dopamine systems
and, you know, even if you really want to work on that novel, your monkey brain is going,
oh, you don't want to do that.
You're not going to get an immediate hit of dopamine from doing that.
But you will if you play this fun video game that you just downloaded on your phone.
So and then our delay is just how long is it going to take me to do this task?
How soon will I like see the rewards, like reap the rewards of having done this task?
So if you, if your friend is in need and you, you know, you know, they're in hard times
and you give them some money and then they're they're really happy
and like you get like warm fuzzies from that.
Yeah, you do that and it gives you immediate gratification
or you like to do a lot of things that give you immediate gratification.
So maybe you do prioritize stuff on your task list over and over again
because you're like, oh, yeah, but like, you know, if I do this right now,
I'm not going to see the reward for a really long time.
So your brain like can't think in that kind of scale.
Your brain just wants like immediate gratification.
And yeah, that that is the procrastination equation.
So you stare at this equation, you can write it down somewhere.
And when you're experiencing a fields and you don't know why you're like,
OK, which factors are involved and you can diagnose it.
So it's like, why am I not getting this task done?
Well, because I've been playing video games.
OK, so it's impulsiveness.
So there are tools to deal with impulsiveness that you can use.
Why, like, you know, haven't I like got a 401k yet?
Oh, it's delay because I'm not expecting to see that money.
So I just keep pushing that down on my task list forever.
Why haven't I done this task?
Because it's it's really hard and I'm scared of it expectancy.
Why haven't I done this task?
Because I don't value it.
I don't feel any passion for it.
And then, yeah, there's different tools that you can specifically use for each of those.
A lot of, you know, resistance is some mix of a lot of these.
But usually there's one that really sticks out.
Hey, Stephen, I remember you were saying not too long ago,
we were talking about the UG fields around getting together to do this podcast
and that you have a cool way of getting around them.
Oh, so, yeah, I as long as you're talking about hating doing this over on the show.
I figured it was a good example because we end up always doing it, right?
Right. So to be clear, it's not that we hate doing this.
It's that we hate getting ready to do this.
Yeah, at least I do.
Like, so it's it's always the day of I'm like, oh, man.
But the thing is, I realized that I have that about literally
about basically everything I like doing.
You know, yesterday, we're going to play Pathfinder after work
and four o'clock comes around, like, I'd really rather just go home.
Then wait around till five and do this.
And yet then we sit down and we're having fun all night.
It was great. And that that is consistently the experience.
There was this was kicked off.
I saw an Ascredit thread about Erno was whatever it was, like an AMA or something
with like a sex therapist.
And they were talking about how, you know, if you've got one partner
who has low libido and one partner has high libido,
typically the partner with low libido doesn't dislike sex.
They just don't they aren't in the mood.
They don't feel like having sex.
But once they're having sex, they're enjoying it like everybody else does.
So if you're a person with low libido and it's important to you
to try and up that for yourself to have fun, have, you know,
satisfy your partner more or something, then you can just kind of focus
in the fact like, I'll be having fun here in a few minutes.
I just need to get there.
And my my example of that is much more PG rated.
It's that I hate taking showers or rather I dread it taking showers.
I love the experience of taking showers.
It's relaxing and warm and comfortable.
And I once I'm in there, I'm immediately having a great time.
But it's less now that I'm aware of it.
But when I took it, when I made this connection, I realized immediately
like that's exactly what I do every fucking night is like, ah, I got to go
take a shower. I don't want to. I'll put it off for 10 more minutes.
And now I just tell myself like, hey, you know what?
It's going to be fun.
And in fact, now that I've done that, I haven't been having the same sort
of apprehension about doing the podcast either.
Yeah, because I'm able to like just put myself in the mindset of like,
well, I know where I'm going to be when I get there.
Why don't I just get there now?
Yeah. I mean, I always have a great time while we're recording.
And afterwards I feel good.
We got something done.
We got to hang out for a couple of hours, you know, it was good times.
And yeah, it's the same thing going into it.
I'm like, just think about how you're going to feel once you've started.
Yeah. And it helps a lot.
I think so.
I do have a question about the equation here, though, because I love
there's weaponized approach for each of these and I can I can categorize
my my apathy or my acracia into each one.
But how do you overcome expectancy when I look like, for example,
a couple of co-workers and I are going to work together on building a mobile
app or something outside of work.
And I haven't done anything to work towards that in my free time
because it seems daunting and tiresome and I just don't want to.
So I'm not asking you to solve this for me.
But there's there's a lot of things that you can try.
I'm actually thinking of the less wrong article in particular,
who recommended motivational speeches, things like watching TED Talks
or, you know, looking at Elon Musk's rocket landing or, you know,
like things that really get you amped up and motivational music.
You can it's kind of a brain hack where you can actually like kind of
rah-rah yourself into a state of I have like higher faith in myself now.
It's hard not to get amped about whatever you're doing when I have the tiger comes on.
Yeah. Was that one of the specific songs?
No, I've just everyone knows that I have the tiger gets you everything.
Right now, right now, we should put some of the tiger underneath us.
You said motivational anything before you do your task.
Yeah, like a TED Talk or something.
Yeah, or you can keep like a list of achievements that like
this is kind of related to another thing, which was just, you know,
Bayesian reasoning, updating your beliefs about certain things
when your brain is telling you one thing.
For example, I always, you know, I have really bad social anxiety.
So my brain constantly says, you're annoying people.
They hate you, your friends, you know, like and but I've,
you know, kind of done like cognitive behavioral therapy sort of tools.
Like, is this true?
What evidence do you have for this?
Like ask the friend, you know, and then like you can actually be like, OK,
so like what, you know, what is my like confidence level that this friend hates me
and you can actually keep a number on that?
That's maybe something we should talk about more in a bit
because I want to get back to, you know, the motivational things.
But if you keep like a record of here's a list of times that I felt
like I couldn't do a thing, but then I actually did it or like keep it in your head.
Just remind yourself that like I was totally about to ask you,
like, haven't you done things that you really had no clue what you were doing
when you first started, but eventually you got it done. Totally.
And that's so I got over that.
And I think that's a great technique to have.
And so I can do stuff mainly when I'm at work on this thing,
not not writing anything because then it belongs to the company
because I saw Silicon Valley.
But the, you know, I could do like research and stuff at work.
It's more just like when I'm at home and I have my free time,
like a good example of this is I've been successfully going to the gym
on average like three times a week for like eight months.
Because I haven't said this on the podcast.
I have said it to you in person, but you can totally tell if you look good.
Thank you. That's flattering.
The just so everyone knows Steven is a hottie and you should all want him.
Wow. All right.
Moving right along.
So the reason that I can do that is because there's a free gym at my in my
office at work. So I just moved from the part I moved from an apartment
that I lived in for four years with a gym in the apartment building
that I used maybe 10 times over four years because my all my stuff
is just right around the corner. Why would I go down to the gym?
But if I tell myself, if I get to work early or if I tell myself,
you can't go home until you've gone to the gym, then it's like a much
easier way to make yourself do it.
Routines. Yeah. Habits, I would say.
But this tied into what you just said and I got distracted before that.
You said something about getting over the hurdle of doing it or something
or getting into the there was getting getting past that first initial hump
to get started. Yeah. Well, dealing with your own anxiety about like,
whether or not you can do it, which also sometimes you have to like confront.
Can I actually do this and seek help if not?
Or, you know, like it can actually really help even just to have the
emotional support of asking someone like, hey, or even admitting like, hey,
I feel really like anxious about doing this.
And it's kind of freaking me out.
Do you have any advice to ask a colleague or a friend?
Even if they can't actually give you any kind of like instrumental advice
about, oh, here's how you would do it.
Like that they can kind of reassure you that like, oh, I think that you can do this.
Like, sure. No, that's yeah, that's nice way to think about it too.
I think this was a emotion that had a much, much more use in our past
when Google didn't exist.
Because before, if you didn't know how to do things, you generally just couldn't
do them. And so, you know, it was nice to have that emotion to stop you
from fucking up everything.
Whereas nowadays, when you don't know how to do something, you Google it.
And then, you know, given however much time it takes to learn the thing or the
steps, you can you can make a decent attempt at it.
Yeah. And failure isn't as costly as it would have been in a hunter gatherer
times. If you, you know, fail to hunt, then you will starve.
But if you like, you know, fail to do a task at work, then like, I don't know,
it's you're not going to die.
Yeah, nobody cares.
Well, and back then, like, didn't know how to plant corn.
You're just like, shit out of luck.
Yeah, yeah. Nowadays, you don't know how to plant corn.
10 minutes later on YouTube, you know how to plant corn.
Yeah, I'm trying to make a life skill out of Googling things that I like.
There's something that I want to like, you know, we'll be talking like, I wonder
if this is true. Yeah, that's interesting.
Like you kind of like talk back and forth for two minutes, like, no, wait,
hold on, we can just answer this right now.
Give me a second or looking up how to do stuff.
Like there's, there's one creaky board in my house and it's in the bedroom in an
area that doesn't get that much foot traffic.
Like if it was between like the bed and the door, that'd be super annoying.
But I was curious, like, what does it actually take to fix this?
And it turns out it's kind of annoying.
Yeah, if you have carpet down, it's going to be a problem.
Right. And so it was just enough to say, you know what, why would we sit
and speculate about this when we can just look at this up really quick?
Found a four minute video on YouTube and I was like, oh, yeah, screw that.
It was basically this guy was like drilling a bunch of random holes to see
if he could find the part where the joint was, like where the part where the
wood was squeaky and then use these special screws from this kit that you
can buy for cheap and then you drill those in there and then you break off the
top of this, the, the screw, uh, what you're left with is a floor with a bunch
of holes in it and presumably underneath the carpet, probably not all the way
into the wood part of a screw sticking out.
That's weird because maybe that's the shittiest way to do it.
That's the first way I found.
Yeah.
I don't know why you would break the head.
Maybe it's, yeah, generally you don't need to break the head off.
You just screw the screw in all the way down.
Maybe this was a way to like not get caught in the carpet or something too.
I'm not really, there was some,
or maybe you could putty it over so you didn't see the hole anymore afterwards.
Oh, was this, if you don't take the carpet up?
Yeah.
This was if you don't take the carpet up.
Okay.
Yeah.
Then you, I guess you would have to break off the, the head.
Yeah.
And I don't want to take the carpet up because well, I guess I could also look
up how do you put carpet back down?
Maybe that's not that hard.
So it is a little bit hard.
Okay.
I have a tool for you.
There's the, the value of time calculator, which is on clear thinking.org.
They have a bunch of tools.
I highly recommend all of them.
But this is a way that you can actually calculate how much your time is worth to
you.
And then you can, for example, watch that YouTube video, calculate how many hours
do I think that this will take me to do approximately, you know, what an hour of
your time is worth now.
So you can say, okay, it's going to cost this much to do this.
Should I do this or should I pay someone to do this for me?
Yeah.
Obviously you have to have money.
Like even if you have like, you know, very low income though, it still is going
to calculate how much you value your time.
The more money you make, you know, the more it makes sense to delegate tasks to
others, the less money that you make, the more sense it makes to do stuff on your
own.
Yeah, that would be, you know, getting things done.
That would be a task that you probably wouldn't delegate to a professional who
could do it more efficiently, faster, you know, more reliably than you.
It's also how much I care about the problem.
And yeah, and for the most part, I agree.
But there are certain tangible benefits to doing things yourself.
Like it's fun.
Absolutely.
You learn how to do it.
And afterwards you feel proud.
Like, how I did this myself and yeah, we did, we've done some minor improvements,
mainly painting and stuff.
And there's the sense of accomplishment that you get when you look around and be
like, this looks better because of us.
Yeah.
But yeah, totally.
Um, like there was a, I had an issue with my recognition that I thought about
getting fixed this summer and I looked into like how hard would this be to, how
hard would this be to do myself?
Oh, not that easy.
And then it looked into like how much it would cost to get somebody to do it.
And I was like, I can wait till next year.
But, um, but yeah, that exact same sort of thing comes up.
And if it turned out that I could do it as easy as charging a car recognition or
something, that'd be fine.
Um, but it turned out to be a bit more complicated and possibly legal.
I never figured that out.
If you can charge your own air, if you're, if you can charge your own legal hair,
if you can charge your own home air conditioners, cause Freon's, uh,
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
Um, yeah.
There's always the flip side too of a, Hey, I tried to do this thing and I did it
successfully and I feel great and I'm happy where it is.
I tried to do this thing.
I thought it would take three hours.
It has taken me nine hours.
I think I broke it.
I feel terrible about myself and my decisions.
So, uh, you have to kind of like, you know, weigh that as well.
It's always worth looking up though, cause some things that you think would be
really hard are actually surprisingly easy.
Oh, it's absolutely always worth looking at it unless you're really rich
and you just don't care.
Right.
Yeah.
If you got tons of money, we, I think I should point out that we are two hours
and 15 minutes here.
So we should probably wrap up soon.
Wow.
I mean, I do it at some point soon too.
So how long are you in town and when are you moving here?
Um, I am leaving tomorrow, but I'm hoping to come back in a few weeks.
Okay.
I don't know if it's going to, you know, how long it's going to take to deal
with insurance, people quit my job and say goodbye to everybody.
Totally.
Pack my stuff, but I want to, I want to go fast.
Well, I'd love to do this again and hang out when you get down here.
Yeah, we can do a part two and I can actually come prepared because I feel
like I barely covered anything that was in my head earlier.
Well, we could do a part two for this than a part one and two for the gender
episode.
We could do more stuff.
I feel like, I guess I've had a lot of fun hanging out and talking and we
could do more of that.
So, yeah, I'm really glad I decided to do this.
Uh, I'm running on no sleep and I felt really like low expectancy
that I was going to come off coherent or have a good time.
And, uh, that's why I'm here to make our guests look good.
If I sound like I'm out doing, yeah.
Uh, so we are going to have to call the episode here because we are running
over as it is, but we may come back and do an episode part two when you
can move here.
Oh yeah, great.
I feel like I barely covered any of the ones I wanted to talk about.
So I'll come more prepared with the whole list of, let's do.
Thanks to the, uh, our music people again.
Yeah.
Thank you to the people who provided music in this podcast, David
Gweer and Samiriki Keeper.
You guys rock.
Hell yeah.
Everyone, everyone received a lot of positive feedback for the, uh, for the
new music, including requests to go back and change the old music, which
unfortunately will never happen because none of us have the original sound
files anymore.
So it would be this horrible choppy mess.
So that'll be a testament to it's never too late to improve.
And even if we did have the sound files, that's like five, 10 minutes per
episode to do it.
And I just, I'm not going to spend 600 minutes fixing that.
That's fair.
Yeah.
Okay.
Uh, we have our Patreon supporter to thank.
Uh, thank you this week to Zachary Olpin.
Thanks Zachary for the bomb.
Yeah.
Thanks Zach.
We really appreciate it.
The reason we can do this is because of people like you helping us out.
Totally.
And finally, we would also like to thank Jess, who is, was our guest today for
providing the art that we use for our podcast.
That's where that came from.
Oh yeah.
Oh no way.
Yeah.
I'd love to do more art for you guys.
I remember we decided it came from a study named Jess.
So you guys have been in touch for a while then.
Okay.
See, I thought that this was, that you just found the local group on Facebook
because you were coming to Denver.
We've been talking for like years, right?
I think, yeah, like a year and a half, maybe two years now.
That is so cool.
Thank you so much.
I meant to ask you about that because there's no attribution on the website or
anything.
No, there, there is.
All.
Oh, but not like, oh, you're right.
It's not anywhere very visible.
That's also my fault because I don't have a website with my art on it or anything.
Like I'm, I'm a terrible freelance graphics designer and I just like use my email.
Well, I love the logo.
Thank you so much.
Yeah, I can put the logo and thank you properly.
That's awesome.
Yeah.
And again, um, you know, hit me up.
If you need art, I will do volunteer art for rationalist things.
I, you know, I did the Harvard effective altruist one and, uh,
And she did ours totally for free.
She was just like, here's the thing I like.
Donate money to you guys or I would have, you know, I think I'd give you a bit,
but I don't have very much.
So I was like, I'm, you know, happy for anything I can do to contribute
because I get a lot of value out of listening to this podcast.
Oh, well, thank you for that too.
But, uh, I, I love the art.
I, I've loved it the whole time and it looks great.
So, um, that is the one thing that never needed updating.
You know, the, we needed a better itinerary for how we handle the episodes.
We needed a different format.
We needed a new music, but the, the, the logo is staying the same forever.
It's awesome.
Thank you so much.
Cool.
You're welcome.
All right.
Thanks everyone.
And we'll see you in two weeks.
Cool.
Okay.
Bye bye.
