Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
I'm Justin Zuber.
Do you actually have the book?
No, I looked at it on Interlibrary Loan where they give you photos of it and just the photos
were intimidating.
I was like, oh dear.
That's like all Harry Potter books in one.
Is it?
Not quite that big, but it's pretty large.
Order of the Phoenix is 870 pages.
Yeah, but it's also large text.
Goblet of Fire was 734, so I think between those are probably over 900, but that's a
fantasy books.
Yeah, it's a larger print for kids and stuff, right?
It's a small print and very dense subject matter.
Exactly.
I think in the opening paragraph, he says it was academically dense and stuff, but he
read it because I'm paraphrasing it was like, people kept telling me it explained all of
American culture and it kind of does.
Yeah.
So I'm like, all right.
I'm already intrigued.
Let's read through the rest of this.
Honestly, his review was long enough.
I feel like I've read the books.
So.
It was a really good review.
Yeah.
Scott writes fantastic reviews of books.
Although the interesting, this group facts part make me want to read the book more because
a lot of the facts were really bizarre.
Yeah.
I'm like, how many aren't in this review?
Right.
I should just say, I'm nodding.
I don't know what else to say.
You can say, yeah.
I'm going to drop a couple of those.
I agree.
Someone listening, Scott will get this joke and it'll be really funny.
So yeah.
It's not a joke.
It's an inside joke.
All right.
I'll go ahead and ruin it by explaining it.
You've got to explain it now.
You can cut out the explanation if you want.
Okay.
It doesn't matter.
The Wheel of Time podcast that I've been listening to, instead of saying, yeah, one of them will
say, I'm nodding when they're agreeing with the other person because they're in a room
with each other.
Oh, okay.
Scott and I have both listened to this podcast.
My brother and I, he'll understand.
He'll be really funny.
Gotcha.
When you said Scott, I thought you meant...
Alexander.
Yeah.
Oh, then in that case...
That's why I was confused as all hell.
In that case, leave the explanation in.
I'm pretty sure Scott Alexander listened to our podcast.
He's probably annoyed at how badly we summarize his book reviews.
You think?
Let's find out.
Okay.
Scott, challenge you to write in if you hated our book, our review of your book review.
I really doubt he leads the listeners to our podcast.
He's a busy guy.
I'm sure.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, this is that in school, we tend to think of the original American colonists as Englishmen,
a maximally non-diverse group from all over the place.
Fisher's thesis is the opposite.
Different parts of the country were settled by very different groups of Englishmen.
And Fisher describes four of them.
The Puritans, who came to New England in 1620s, the Cavaliers to Virginia in 1640s, the Quakers
to Pennsylvania in 1670s, and the Borders to Appalachia in the 1700s.
We're going to go through these four groups now more or less quickly to summarize what
they were and what they brought to this country.
Spoiler alert, when I read borderlands, I think of borderlands, and I'm glad that it's not
that bad of a connection.
It's basically exactly that.
That's a good helpful mnemonic.
So the Puritans were a religious group that drew disproportionately from the most educated
and education-obsessed parts of the English populace.
The Puritans seem to have taken the classic dystopian bargain, give up all freedom and
individuality and art, and you can have a perfect society without crime or violence
or inequality.
And he gave a lot of statistics about how it was like one of the lowest crime places
in the world, and everyone was super educated.
But yeah, they lived the crazy kind of Puritan life that you think of, where they're in
church for six hours, and everyone's very strict, and you can't have any colors because
that is tempting the devil to come into your life and shit like that.
Yeah, we use the word Puritan now to describe things that are kind of stodgy and rigid.
I think it's great we could study history, because weirdly enough, it's like we can always
find examples of things that look like crazy thought experiments.
For example, when I was a kid, first learning about the Athenians and the Spartans, I was
like, really, there were actual whole societies based around wisdom and strength, like capital
W's and S's.
And it kind of adds believability to our universe as a simulation theory, because it's like
somebody playing the Sims, right?
Right, yeah, let's make a society where they actually don't feed their children for weeks
on end so that they have to steal in order to survive.
Are you referencing an actual culture?
Sparta.
Oh, that was Sparta, yeah.
And they also threw babies off cliffs, right?
Right.
If they weren't up to the physical standards, they're like, nope, must keep the gene line
pure.
Most of what we know for Sparta, we know from 300, right?
No, because both of the things you just said, I think we're in the movie 300.
Well, I mean, they were really cool facts about the society, right?
You gotta put that in.
Okay, fair enough.
You're like, these people are so badass that if their babies aren't badass enough, they
kill them.
Yeah, that movie makes me want to go home and do push-ups and get into a fight in the parking
lot and stuff.
It's just...
Does it also make you want to have slaves?
Because the reason they were such a strength-obsessed culture was because they were always worried
about the slave revolts.
No, it doesn't.
They don't show that in 300.
They're like, yes, Spartans are all about freedom.
We need our liberty and we can keep our way of life by having so many slaves that we're
terrified.
Well, they're trying to make the Spartans look cool.
Well, I mean, they did look cool.
Typically, that's the legacy of our founders as well, right?
Yes.
So, I mean, we want to be...
And the legacy of the Southern Secession, like we want to be free to have our slaves.
We want to be free, not them.
Forget about them.
Do you think the Spartans looked cool in 300?
No, I didn't like that movie.
Oh, okay.
Maybe it's a guy thing.
I liked the memes.
Yes.
They were great memes.
Does that count?
Yes.
Okay.
I just like Gerard Butler's voice, face, abs, arms, and everything, so...
Cape.
Cape?
The cape was important.
Yeah.
I think I just got really mad at the historical inaccuracy because I was in that phase.
That's exciting.
They're frowning in the theater.
My friends had dragged me to it.
I was like, that's not right.
That's not right.
They didn't actually have monsters on their side.
Not everyone was wearing eyeliner all the time.
Yes.
All right, Cavaliers.
Yeah.
Let's go on with that.
But yeah, all sorts of interesting facts about the Puritans.
If you guys read the post and you should because it's a really fantastic post that goes into
much more detail.
Yeah.
Even if you don't read the post, just read the interesting Puritan facts, Cavalier facts,
et cetera.
Yeah.
There's like a couple of bullet points of the most bizarre or like interesting things.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They are very bizarre and interesting.
Absolutely.
The Cavaliers, these were the nobles that had fought and lost the English Civil War.
They fled to Virginia as a destination for refugee nobles who did everything possible
to maintain the possession of oppressive supremacy to which they were accustomed.
So these were the slaveholders.
They brought tons of slaves with them and dentured servants.
They oppressed white people just as much as anyone else, but eventually they settled
on the black people as their slaves.
And yeah, they are the plantation and the Southern slave society that you think of when
you think of the old South.
It says Virginia was the opposite of Massachusetts.
Their homicide rate was sky high and people were actively encouraged to respond to slights
against their honor with duels for the rich and violence for the poor.
I like that distinction.
Yeah.
They were obsessed with gambling.
A lot of their fun was blood sports, hunting and the more rich you were, the bigger the
thing that you hunted was, that sort of thing.
They were not a society that I would be fond of.
And they were, as you said, people who believed they needed the ultimate freedom and the
only way you can be free from work if you have slaves and stuff.
Yeah.
I'm just kind of shaking my head and be a wilder man just imagining this hellscape and
it's kind of like Detroit 3.0, sounds like a nightmare.
Then I'm also, for every reason, hung up on the fact that only rich people got to duel
and then I'm wondering what the difference was between, you know, if somebody caught
poor people dueling, did they kick their asses or something or do you have to duel the poor
people?
Right.
I'm not going to dig into that with a duel.
Get my henchmen to beat them up.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I don't know.
Whatever.
Oh, maybe he had to be, maybe it was dueling because he had guns and pistols and poor people
didn't have those.
Oh, yeah.
Poor people just didn't have the custom of having the ritual behind the violence that
just went off and hauled someone in the face.
That's actually a good point, right?
You have to duel if you're there to make a point and that's why there's the whole strategic
missing and stuff.
I'm just here to make you what yourself or to look big, but if my goal was to kick
your ass, I'm going to just run up and hit you with a brick when you're not looking,
right?
There's nothing dueling good sport about that.
I don't think it would count as defending your honor if you hit him with a brick when
they're not looking.
I didn't say anything in here, but defending, oh, it does say, well, responding to slights
up against your honor.
Yeah.
If I have to, I don't know, I guess I don't...
You'd have to be in that culture to know.
Yeah.
And I don't know a lot about honor fighting.
I understand that it exists, but the impulse wasn't really there for me.
If you've wronged me and I want to stop you, I'm not going to challenge you to a duel and
get my ass kicked because you'll beat me up, so I'm going to just sneak up on you and take
you out, right?
Yeah.
My goal is to win, not to look good.
Yeah.
It is kind of the more rational strategy to just be like a drive by shooting than to
be like, you know, I publicly challenge you.
We're going to take this many pieces and then turn and then it's kind of just random who
shoots who.
This is not a rationalist endorsement of drive by shooting.
No, but I mean, who thought that this...
It's a compelling case for drive by shootings.
I don't like really understand, you know, who thought that this, like, who shoots first,
you know, determines who lives or dies?
Like, I don't...
Well, it's like flipping a coin.
The outlawed dueling once pistols became more accurate because people were dying in
droves back in the day, that you just turn around and shoot at each other and most of
the time there would be a miss.
But do you keep shooting until someone dies or is it just like, well, we'll see.
Yeah, shoot one bullet, honor has been satisfied, usually is how it went.
But then who wins?
It doesn't matter who wins.
The point was to uphold your honor and honor has been satisfied once you have gone through
the dual ritual.
I completely sympathize with their confusion because it's like nobody, you know, we haven't
changed anything.
We went out there...
Well, no, you showed that the guy can't just like insult you in front of your woman.
You will take him to a duel and there will be some risk of injury or death, even if it's
really small.
Every now and then the bullet lands.
So if you want to insult me, you can do that.
But there's a chance you might get shot.
And really the important part is that all the people around you see that you're willing
to also risk death to stand up to him.
You don't just like take it lying down and be like, oh, yeah, I guess I am stupid looking.
I feel like a boxing match would have solved this better.
But I guess obviously because you're nobles and you're delicate hands and soft features.
Slapfest.
Take that nerd.
Okay.
We're moving on to the Quakers.
The Quakers who I did not realize this, but are basically modern Americans, at least
in my opinion.
Well, and the Quakers, I think this is like the group that we've all heard of where,
you know, from that example from last week where we talked about is what was it Nixon
at Quaker?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So I mean, this is Stokeloquial.
Yeah.
Like the word Cavaliers around Puritan is Stokeloquial, but it's not a group you see.
I've never actually heard of the Cavaliers, like the, you know, Virginians or the specific
group of nobles being referred to as Cavaliers before this book.
Puritans and Quakers, I heard of, boarders and Cavaliers.
I weren't really terminology that I've been familiar with.
I've only heard of being Cavalier, like as an adjective, not as a group.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Not specifically this group of Virginians.
I've, you know, I've run into Cavaliers as a class you can play in various role-playing
games, but not as, yeah, as Virginians.
The new Quakers.
The new Cavalier of Jabbo 3.
Perfect.
Or are you just very polite to people until they go away?
Can I please have some loot?
You don't really need that axe.
Tell us about Quakers.
Quakers mandated universal religious tolerance, a ban, a total ban on military activity, and
a government based on checks and balances.
They also essentially invented modern abolitionism.
One of the interesting things about Quakers is they basically tolerated themselves out
existence. They were so welcoming to religious minorities and immigrants that those groups
took up shop in Pennsylvania and ended its status as a Quaker society. But on the plus side,
the Pennsylvanians became the thought leaders of the entire Mid-Atlantic region, and we can
really trace back a lot of our culture. I mean, everything I said up there is kind of what we
have right now, right? At least ideally. Yeah, we don't have a total ban on military activity,
that would be nice. Yeah, it would. But we do have a general kind of aversion to violence,
at least just seeing it. Is this why you want a high fence for entering the
rationalist community so we don't get tolerated out of existence, or so we don't tolerate ourselves
out of existence? I think you wanted a threshold, like a barrier to entry. I wanted some barrier
to entry. Yeah, it doesn't necessarily have to be like high though. I don't know how high to put
my hand to have some barrier. Right, okay. Anyway. Yeah, there's this wonderful quote that Scott wrote,
I'm just going to read the whole thing. He says, it occurs to me that William Penn might be, oh,
William Penn, founder of Pennsylvania, this first Quaker, he was responsible for them.
It occurs to me that William Penn might be literally the single most successful person in
history. He started out as a minor noble, following a religious sect that everyone despised,
and managed to export its principles to Pennsylvania, where they flourished and multiplied.
Pennsylvania then managed to export its principles to the United States, and the United States
exported them to the world. I'm not sure how much of the suspiciously Quaker character of
modern society is a direct result of William Penn, but he was in one heck of a right place
at one heck of a right time. I'm like, that is just fucking inspiring, man. Yeah, and it kind of
leads you to question the concept that the Quakers tolerated themselves out of existence,
because did they really? Or did they take over everything? It's one of those things where every
now and then, like, I hear about how, you know, Genghis Khan raped his way across Asia, and like
one third of all men now are descended from Genghis Khan's father. Was it one third of all
men, or just Asian men? Oh, sorry, one third of all Asian men are descended from Genghis Khan's
father, and I mean, that sort of seems like a big impact, but on the other hand, if one third of
all Asian men have your genetics, that's, your contribution has been so diffused that there's
really nothing left there anymore, right? And you didn't pass your ideology down, we're not, like,
one third of Asians aren't warlords. Right, it's like, what does it matter if your genes are still
there, vastly diluted across a diverse pool of humans? Whereas, like, this person has the things
that he believed in, and that he wanted to, to give to humanity, spreading out all across this
country and slowly seeping into the rest of the world. That's, that's pretty fucking awesome. And,
you know, I don't know how many kids he had, but it probably wasn't nearly as many as Genghis Khan.
And yeah, it doesn't really matter, right? The thought children that are still flourishing is
more important. Yeah. Also, so it makes me feel really good about my decision to not have biological
children. There you go. Now you just need to be as successful as William Penn or maybe his distant
second Jesus. Yeah. I was surprised that Jesus wasn't one of the most successful people, but
well, because Jesus may not have really existed. Yeah, kind of. But Jesus was always like kind of my
number one counter Genghis example before William Penn. And I was like, you know, Jesus or the
rough ideology that centered around a Jesus like character. I always liked this, like my,
my opposite of like, all right, if I want to be remembered, and I'm not going to go like the
whole, you know, conquer a route, I'd rather be like an Aristotle or Pluto kind of character,
right? Yeah. I didn't think about Jesus as an example, maybe because his legacy is not
depending on who you talk to, well, no matter who you talk to, it hasn't been clear enough to be
awesome, right? So, and I mean, it's so, there's so many different branches now that from like
the really militant Christians to the people that are more like the turn the other cheek,
you know? Yeah, very few people are actually following what Jesus says in the Bible. So
I saw a picture a few weeks ago, veteran Thanksgiving, it was like Jesus standing over
a crowd of hundred people with like a bunch of food or whatever was one of those fancy pictures.
And the caption was like, or it was at the top, it was like Republic and Jesus. And it was like,
I can't just give you this food, that'd be socialism. Yeah, not trying to give up all your
possessions and follow me. Not trying to be aggressively political, but that was something
I saw recently. On the other hand, yeah, like you say, his advice to sell everything you own
and follow him is not really good long-term life advice. It wasn't even sell. Well, it wasn't
also like they ended it with like the end is coming. Yes. That was the shtick that literally
you got maybe a few decades left here on this planet. He really seems to think that like the
world is going to end during his lifetime. Yeah. Or like during the lifetimes of people
listening to him, right? Yes. Absolutely. And they've managed to keep that going for 2,000 years too.
That's quite the commitment. I was going to say like, if you showed me a meteorite
40 years out and it's like, that's definitely coming. I'm like, all right, well, I'm not going
to work, right? Right. I can totally see if I really believe that, sure. But if you told me it's
coming in 2,000 years, like I should probably keep going to my job. With 40 years, I'd still go to
my job. My savings ain't going to last me 40 years. Yeah. But like then, I don't know, I feel like
well, you know, anarchy is going to happen. Exactly. Yeah. What are you going to buy when,
you know, you can't eat the money that you saved in your bank when, you know,
everything's gone to shtick. But now I'm getting too far a field. So, yeah.
Yeah. I want to come back to what Inie Ash was saying about the Quakers basically being modern
people. Scott actually warns us. Well, actually Scott quotes, this is a quote from the book review
Fisher warns against the temptation to think of the Quakers as normal modern people.
But he has to warn us precisely because it's so tempting. Where the Puritans seem like a
dystopian caricature of virtue and the Cavaliers like a dystopian caricature of vice. The Quakers
just seem ordinary. I find the Quakers particularly interesting because I'm descended from them.
I have an ancestor named Consider Wood. They mention all the fun Quaker names. Actually,
I think they did Scott mention the like fun names of each of the sects. Wait, you personally? Yeah.
Oh neat. And I also just sort of like them. Yeah. If I had to pick a sect of Christianity,
I'd probably be a Quaker. They're kind of like basically Christian Buddhist. Yeah.
If you're just skimming history books for aspects of their beliefs and culture,
they do seem to have highly modern values. Like people are all equal under God,
including men and women could both preach. That was pretty cool.
And way ahead of their time. Yeah. You married for love. You loved and took care of your children,
which was also pretty rare at the time. Violence is bad. But if you do any deeper reading or God
forbid try reading any primary sources, Quakers are still pretty alien compared to us. They're
like insanely bureaucratic. They have these lengthy religious and social rituals that somehow
managed to trigger all of my this is a cold red flags while I also pretty much agree with what
they're actually doing in those rituals. For example, in the interesting Quaker facts, Scott
mentions their wedding process, which has 16 stages, one of which is obtain a certification of
cleanliness. Anyway, all I'm trying to say is if you're a sci-fi writer looking for ideas,
not nearly enough sci-fi has been written about space Quakers. So there you go.
Of these like 15 minutes total, I've seen a Star Trek. It seems kind of like Space Quakers.
I meant like explicitly like Quaker. But yeah, no, that's kind of a good point.
I'm sure there's a thousand counter examples from someone who's actually
Well, there's violence.
But I mean, it's not a bad comparison at all, especially the TNG kind.
Good. Yeah. All right.
Alrighty, the borderers.
That's hard to say.
Borderers. Borderers.
Yeah. Borderers. The borderlanders.
There we go. Borderlanders.
The border. Okay. So this is they came from the border area between what was it?
Scotland and England, where there was constant invasions going back and forth between the two
countries for about 700 years. The border area was one giant cesspool of robbery and murder.
Life consisted of farming the lands of whichever brutal warlord had the top hand today,
followed by being called to fight for him on short notice, followed by a grisly death.
He also goes on to say about how since there was all this border raiding back and forth,
people started getting, you know, pissed off at the other side and they would
capture who they could and torture murder them and just the whole area was
completely fucked for 700 years.
It's a really long time.
Yeah, seriously.
The border people dealt with it as best they could and developed a culture marked by extreme
levels of clannishness, xenophobia, drunkenness, stubbornness and violence.
Eventually 250,000 of these people ended up in America.
And by comparison, there were only like 20,000 of the Puritans and I think 50,000 of the Quakers.
They were just a huge group. Nobody, nobody wanted these people around.
All three of the previous groups saw them and were like, no.
Apparently the Quakers tried to integrate them at first and then after a while they also said,
no, you can have these mountains.
Exactly. So they kicked them out to the Appalachians, which were far away from everyone
and full of fun Indians to fight.
Yay, question mark.
So they, it turns out that the Appalachians, not the Appalachians, the borderers really
liked the Appalachian Mountains.
They were already used to not having very fertile areas.
They liked having all the Indians to fight and they just took to them like fish to water.
And they were the first, one of the first groups, I think he said the first group,
to really just abandon all their previous roots and like, yeah, we're Americans.
This America is the best place for Americans now.
And we still kind of see that today.
Yeah, there was a follow up to this book review called Albion Seed Genotyped
where they did actually do questionnaires on the groups.
You can actually like divide them by genotype and trace it back to which group of
Englishmen people were descended from.
And they, one of the questions on the questionnaire was
what ethnicity are you and people would answer, you know, like I'm Irish American.
And but the borderers were always the ones that said American and completely ignored the like,
where did you come from?
Like, no, I'm American.
I don't have much doubt there that I'm just counting my lucky stars.
I wasn't born in some society where my highest calling was killing the hated enemy.
Yeah.
And apparently it was mostly the borderers that once the while the western frontier was opened
or out there be like, yeah, let's settle this land and, you know, kill off the Indians and
expand westward and do what we can do.
Yeah, I'm just picturing like it would sure be nice to imagine like, oh,
finally we're free of all this, you know, quote unquote necessary bloodshed.
Now we can finally chill out there like, no, fuck that.
Now we can finally just keep kicking ass.
Well, I mean, that's been their culture for 700 years.
Yeah, it's just, that's what I'm saying.
I was like, I'm really glad that I wasn't born there.
So it's what a bummer.
I don't know.
I kind of, it is not a society I would ever want to be a part of,
but I kind of like have this sort of romantic glow about it.
Oh, totally.
Like I am free.
I am just going down to the west and staking my claim and putting up this house and,
and Scott mentions that the towns that they that they found all had names like
shit Creek and and just all these things that sounded down like orcish, but were real names.
And there's something about it that is like that that sounds like fun.
That reminds me.
Season five of shit's Creek comes out, I think in a couple of weeks in January.
So there's a TV show with that name.
Oh, really?
It's does it take place in the border town?
It's it's in the middle of bumfuck nowhere.
It's a completely different premise.
Basically, it's Eugene Levy is like the dad and these of this family.
And they were like these multi, multi millionaires and they they're counting
fuck them or whatever and they're out of all their money,
but they bought this small town as a joke some years earlier.
So they moved there.
And it's just this little podunk.
You know, they live in a motel there and it's it's a it's a funny thing.
But when he said shit Creek, that's kind of funny.
I had something I was going to say before that that was much more relevant.
Oh, the romanticism of the whole thing.
Well, haven't you ever played like games where the orcs?
They're just fun.
That's what I was going to say.
Red Dead Redemption is a very popular video game right now.
Every like there's something, you know, a lot of the a lot of good fantasy books
take place right in that kind of time frame where it's like, sure,
you know, some foot pad could just run up and take your coin purse
and stab you in the alley.
And there's something about like that lawlessness vibe, you know,
before fingerprint identification, maybe before like, you know,
where all this before surveillance cameras and fingerprint identification
where it's maybe 50 years ago, where, you know, the idea that like
romantic might be not the right word for it, but something, you know,
you had your boys, you guys were always out together.
Yeah.
If I was filling time traveling, you know, between stars while in like
not full crowd space, because I'd be super boring unconscious, but like
playing full immersion Skyrim, I could imagine playing a full immersion
Jack Thripper era London or not being Jack Thripper.
That'd be all of you fucked up.
Unless I knew they were all not sentient, which case, go nuts, right?
I'd still, no.
I don't know.
It'd be, it'd be gross.
You've never, you never save like outside of a town in Skyrim and then
mask everybody and then.
Okay.
So like in fallout and shit, I would totally do that.
Yeah.
You blow up Megaton, admit it.
Right now, but I mean, that's slightly different from like if it was fully immersion
and I'd like some woman where I was like pulling her guts out while she was screaming.
No, that's, that's a completely fair point.
I didn't mean to misrepresent that.
I'm fully of the opinion that if you play in Westworld, you're a monster.
Right.
Unless you're just there to go hunt treasure and, you know,
I guess fight operators or something, right?
You could play a white hat.
Yeah.
Totally there.
Yeah, I'm with you.
I'm defending this and then in circles.
Now we're getting sidetracked.
All right.
So moving forward.
Okay.
Fisher puts together the argument that nowadays the Puritans and Quakers sort of merged into
a group, which is now like the Progressives or the Blue Tribe or the educated coastal elites.
And then the Cavaliers and the Borderers kind of merged into what now would be like the
Conservatives or the Red Tribe or the Rednecks.
And that is where our modern culture war, at least in the U.S. comes from those two cultures
going at it.
And it does map out on the genotyped essay as well.
Like scarily accurate map that you can draw of the genetics of each of those groups.
And I believe it was people's voting record as well as their political beliefs.
The voting map was really interesting how well it mapped onto where those places were settled.
The horrifying part is the genetic part.
Like, you don't, you know, you can get up and move if you hate where you're from,
but you can't get up and change your genes if you hate where your genes are from, right?
Right.
I certainly would like to believe, I know that it's not settled science, but I think it's,
there's enough ambiguity there, but I don't have to reluctantly settle on the claim I don't
like, which is that if you have shitty genes, you're a shitty person.
Not just like you have bad luck.
You know, if you're short, you're short, whatever.
But like, hey, you come from, you know, a long line of murderous assholes.
Congratulations, you're gonna be an asshole your whole life, right?
So.
I mean, everything is partially genetic, right?
There's nothing that is not influenced by the genes, but no, I totally agree that I don't
think it is, I don't think genes are destiny.
Yeah, you don't get to pick your culture either, though.
Right.
Which I believe was brought up in the essay.
But you kind of can now in that, like, if you hate where you're from, you know, if you have the,
some people have the mobility to get up and leave, right?
Yeah.
I mean, less so probably if you live in the Appalachians though.
Totally.
That's a good point.
Or there's the thing that I pulled, if you live in the Middle East, Scott Alexander says,
this is in the direct quote, I paraphrase a little bit.
Regression acknowledged the importance of culture when we admit that maybe making the
Middle East exactly like America in every way is more of a long-term project than something
that will happen as soon as we kick out the latest dictator and get treated as liberators.
Part of us may still want to believe that pure reason is the universal solvent,
that those Afghans will come around once they realize that being a secular liberal democracy
is obviously great, but we keep having deep culture shoved in our faces again and again,
and we don't know how to get rid of it.
This has led to reasonable speculation that some aspects of it might even be genetic,
something which would explain a lot, although not its ability to acculturate recent arrivals.
And the main thing I got out of this is that where you come from and the culture in that area
is really fucking important.
And you can't just like talk to people and reason to them and make them realize that
one way is better or another, they have this background that informs everything.
Yeah, it's really interesting and I wish that I'll be on seed groups and kind of the explanations
for the political and cultural influence was better known, so it could come up more in the
context of discussion about generational trauma, like people still discussing whether it's real
and if so how long and far reaching its effects can be.
This is usually brought up unfortunately in the context of race with black Americans who are
the descendants of slaves or Native Americans, and it also factors into more recent discussions
around immigrants and refugees, but here's a perfect example of it happening to white people,
too, the boarders, the cavaliers, a culture where there's a history of violence and trauma
that's continued to affect the education and employment rates, crime, drug use, depression,
suicide, and maybe it's a problem people don't like to talk about because kind of like religion,
maybe we tend to be over tolerant of people's culture.
Like people feel icky telling others, I would, this might be a bad culture for you,
and people who have grown up in that culture are understandably defensive of it,
like what Stephen was saying, there's something romantic about it, too.
Like, you know, as a border you can still have aspects of your culture you can be proud of,
like strength, honor, bravery, and people don't like to hear someone coming in from some other
culture and telling them, well you need to change, and how do you even change a culture,
even if you agree it's bad, like split the people up, move them away, re-educate them,
that like didn't work so well for the Native Americans and it's pretty terrible to think about.
I think it's certainly harder than like killing a lot of them and saying, all right,
you survivors, you're going to start coming to our schools and we'll show you how great we are,
we're going to put you in our clothes and whatever, that's not the way anyone should,
that's not, that's A, not the right, like morally right way to do anything and it's probably not
going to work. Yeah, it's just going to make them hate you, and cause that trauma that can
transcend generations. One of the very bad wizards wrote that book on honor cultures.
Yeah, Tamler. Yeah, I forget, I always can never put their names together. I know what
their names are but not which, not which, what, not which name belongs to which voice.
Right, right. Yeah, and I- Well I, the way I remember it is that David Navarro has a Hispanic
name and sure enough he's Hispanic. Emyash here with another correction. I said Dave Navarro,
I meant Dave Pizarro. Dave Navarro is a guitarist and sexist member of Red Hot Chili Peppers,
whereas Dave Pizarro is a professor of psychology and a very bad wizard.
And Tamler has sort of like a weird name and oh yeah, it turns out he's Jewish so, okay,
could be one of those more traditional Jewish names. Can you tell from how they sound which
one's which? Uh, yeah. Oh, I can't. Oh, okay. Like I can tell their voices apart. Oh yeah. But I
don't know which ones, I still don't know which sound belongs to which name. Okay, so Tamler
sounds more like, if you say Jewish, we've got to cut it out Emyash. No, I'm not going to say
Jewish. Good, we got to cut that out then. Tamler sounds more like what I would think of as a sort
of professorial but kind of also like put upon. His voice to me sounds like he's under some pressure
all the time, whereas Dave sounds more like kind of relaxed and he's almost got sort of a surfer
vibe a little bit to his voice, in my opinion. Whoa, Jude. Not quite to that extent but just
a little bit of surfer there. Like his surfing days are behind him but he knows how to surf.
Right, he knows how to chill. All right. Why doesn't surfer culture more prevalent?
Most of the land isn't coastal. Yeah, although I did go to a taco shop in Denver and it was surf
themed and they just had surfboards on the walls and like I was like, okay, yeah, that was it. And
I was just laughing like there's not an ocean anywhere near here, right? No. I was there with
Otto but she was like, well, there's snowboarding. That's kind of the same.
I saw like my first, like the people that I knew I've seen them before but in high school,
the some people I knew became like those cosplaying cowboys 24-7 and it'd be great seeing them get
out of there like they're Honda Civic and then step out with their boots and they've already got
their hat on because they've been driving to school with it on and I'm like, have you ever
seen a cow? But it's also as much as I dislike border or culture, I will have to admit it's
useful having those sorts of people around because they make up most of the the military
forces in the US. Yeah, totally. And a lot of manual labor too. I mean, I mean, the appellations
you think of mining. Right. Yeah, mining all that clean coal I keep hearing about.
Yeah, as long as it's useful to have soldiers and laborers, then they're people who want to fight
labor and it's nice to have them around. It's nice to have things mined for you and
wars fought for you. But yeah, totally. I'm not going to do that shit. It ends up being a kind of
weird hierarchy of the people that don't have to fight or mine and the ones that do because
that's what's available to them. Yeah. Yeah. So speaking of how discouraging it is that some
of your culture and your attitudes may be genetically predetermined. Sounds like a nice
segue into evolutionary psychopathology. Yeah. Although did you want to read your little comment
at the end there? I mean, if you if you read this on Scott Alexander's post, it's like part four,
the borderers or something. And he's got it broken up. The semicolon between or the colon
between part four and borderers. Those are all hyperlinks to civilization characters,
which I thought was kind of fun that he snuck those in. Yeah, I didn't know that I didn't either.
I need to go back and yeah, he was big on server. So yeah, evolutionary psychopathology
is the next book. And this book makes the case that that there's two major reproductive
stress. Okay, so first of all, it is already accepted that there's two major reproductive
strategies in the general animal kingdom. There's the have tons of kids that you put very little
effort into like fish do. And there's the have one kid that you put a ton of effort into,
like an elephant does or a human's do quickly to sum up the two, the two ways to reproduce.
He calls them Dell. What's his name? Delgadish? Sounds more Italian than Spanish to me. I'm
going to be going to try it. So okay, that guy, the author, the author, Del G. Let's call him
Del G, the G of the G. He has them broken up into what he calls fast and slow strategies.
The fast strategy is like live fast, die young. They're well adapted for unpredictable, dangerous
environments. Each organism has a pretty good chance of dying randomly in some unavoidable way
before adulthood. The species survives by by sheer numbers. Fast organisms grow up as quickly as
possible in order to maximize the chance of reaching reproductive age before they unpredictably
die. They should mate with anybody around to maximize the chances of mating before they
unpredictably die. They should ignore their offspring since they expect most offspring to
unpredictably die. And since they have too many to take care of anyway, they should be willing to
take risks since the downside death without reproducing is already the default. And the
upside becoming one of the few individuals to give birth to 10,000 offspring is high.
So I'm just thinking of those beautiful videos of turtle eggs hatching and dozens of turtles
just crawling towards the sea. Frantically running towards the sea while seagulls pick them up.
Yeah, I like the nice ones where you don't watch them being ripped apart by birds.
Those are all I edited not to show that. I was thinking about, this is an aggression,
but now that I'm thinking about baby turtles, here we go. The sea whirlwind videos from back in
the day where he'd be showing them trying to cross this rock or something. It's like I can't
help them because I don't want to interfere with the environment. I'm like, yeah, but humans already
kill so many turtles. Like if you help this little one, yeah, sure, there's going to be one more
coming from this beach that might not otherwise would have. But how many of the ones that just got
in the water are choking on trash right now? So I think a case can be made for helping those
turtles into the water if you ever evolved the ability to not choke on trash. He just helped
them all along. Well, you're helping them into the water. You're not helping them once they're
in the trash. Okay, so that's my turtle side point. So then slow producers are going to be the
slow strategy ones are going to be long-term investments. I think they use elephants a
lot in the book review, but humans, I guess, maybe other primates, are there a ton? I feel
like we're outnumbered by, I feel like cats are like cats and dogs are kind of...
Yeah, they have litters. These are kind of oversimplifications, these two categories.
Yeah, but they seem kind of middle because like, you know, they might raise their young for two
or three years. It's true. They invest a lot more. They invest more, they invest way less than like
fish and turtles, but more than, excuse me, but less than like elephants and people. So anyway.
Slow strategy is well adapted to safer environments or predictable, complex
environments whose intricacies can be mastered with enough time and effort. Slow strategy
animals may take a long time to grow up since they need to achieve mastery before leaving
their parents. They might be very picky maters since they have all the time in the world to choose.
We'll only have a few children each and need to make sure that each of these children has the best
genes possible. They should work hard to raise their offspring since each individual child represents
a substantial part of the prospects of their genetic line. They should avoid risks since the
downside, death without reproducing would be catastrophically worse than default. And the
upside, giving birth to a few offspring of the next generation, is what they should expect anyway.
And the interesting thing that this book brings up is that what if these life history strategies
differ not just across species, but across individuals of the same species? Specifically,
what if this theory applied within the human population? The author suggests that these traits
and predispositions to fast versus slow life history in general are caused by a gene-to-environment
interaction, which was really fucking cool. It's fun to think about, and then it goes on to make a
very compelling case for that sort of thing, but I do feel like it would be more like drawing an
analogy. I don't think it makes sense to say that some fish are slow.
Yeah, I don't think it would work for fish, but I think he made a compelling point about the human
thing. Yeah, and yet how could that possibly be the case if all of our ancestors were slow? Well,
they were slow comparative to other things. But they weren't, though. He points out the case of...
But we weren't having litters of a thousand. No, no, we weren't having litters of a thousand,
but some of us were raping our way across Asia, for example. He points out that lots of, well,
first of all, lots of women tend to find violent males attractive, which is interesting. But yeah,
the violent criminals often have had sex multiple times before they hit 20.
I did click that link. That wasn't just a disappointing stereotype. I guess what I was
getting at was like, it's not even a theory. The observation that there are fast and slower
producers, you can then, I think, model that into human behavior. But to say what if it applies here,
it's like, I don't think it is a thing that applies here, but we can use that sort of model
for this. It's kind of a nitpick. It works better as an analogy than to say that there's two discrete
subtypes of human that we can categorize. No, no, I wouldn't say there's subtypes of human at all.
Well, there's strategies that people use, and they may or may not have a genetic component,
but I'm also skeptical of the fact that they're, you know, like, what's the mechanism for this
genetic component? They talk about epigenes and the mechanism looking around at the world.
Well, I mean, that's fairly well accepted with things like if you don't have a lot of nutrition
early in life, you have more of a propensity to hoard what nutrition you do have and have a
slower metabolism. So you tend to obesity in older age. It's, yeah, it's tough and like addiction
runs in families and stuff. And yet like, it's hard to say how much of that is just like, you
know, being around drunk parents or whole life or something. But well, there's a lot of things that
are only turned on if the right environmental factor is pressured into you, right? Yeah, a lot
of people have genes for schizophrenia, but it's not necessarily activated unless something happens.
That said, there's a lot of woo surrounding epigenetics too. So yeah, there is Google Google
carefully and make sure if you talk to people that they know what they're talking about. I had
some ridiculous science teacher once. Well, she taught science, she wasn't a science teacher. I'm
not going to give her that title. She was of the opinion. She was also like a registered chiropractor.
I think of the same like original school of like, I can align your energy and cure your cancer.
Chockers. Yeah, basically. Back chockers. Yeah. But I had a friend who then died a couple years
later. He had a not cystic fibrosis. It was something else. It was some degenerate birth
disorder. I was a small kid. He was like 75% of my size and he died in his early 20s.
And I was talking to her about that because she was saying, with epigenetics, you can tune
your environment and do whatever. And I was like, you're going to tell him that with diet
exercise, he can cure his illness and live. And she's like, I asked him, I gave her a name and
gave in front of the class. I gave her his name and everything. He didn't go to that school.
Okay. I knew him in high school. So it didn't matter. She was like, Oh, yeah, I think, you know,
we could talk about that. I was like, well, then fuck you, you quack. So anyway, I'm not trying to
that's my rant on epigenetics. But there's real science there, obviously. Yeah. I mean,
there is some science with epigenetics. The thing is, I'm not trying to say it's genetic,
because my whole thesis with this episode is that culture is very important. Everything is at
least slightly influenced by genetics, right? There is nothing that isn't influenced by genetics.
But in my opinion, it's the culture that is the far more important thing. And I've just,
I've lately been reading a fair amount of books on the more impoverished parts of the country.
By a fair amount, I mean two, which is a lot of nonfiction for me. I generally only read fiction.
Which are the two? One is on the run, which is a story about living on the run from the cops,
literally in inner America, inner city America. It's really fucking interesting. I was having
a hard time feeling sympathy for these people because they do it to themselves to some extent.
There's like, yeah, they seem to act against their own interests. Yeah, they're like,
they have a beef with a guy and they start shooting at each other. Like literally,
they're just driving past each other in the street. They see him, pull a gun, start shooting.
And I'm like, yeah, when the girl in the house across the street gets hit by your bullet,
obviously you should go to jail for that. And even if no one gets hit, you shouldn't just be
just start charging your guns in the street. I understand why the cops are after you. But on
the other hand, they're driven to it because if they don't do that, then people will see that
they're weak and abuse them and take their stuff and keep picking on them. There's this whole,
they have to maintain this facade of like, if you do something to slight me, I will come back
with a lot of violence to you. And oh, it's this horrible cycle of poverty and shit.
Honor cultures, man. Yeah. Yeah, it's, it's not a recipe for happiness. I mean, I'm saying that
from a comfortable position of not living there. But how happy can you be when you're afraid that
somebody's going to shoot up your house or retaliate and kill your family or your friends or
whatever, right? Yeah, it's got to be a really high stress environment. I would think so.
And it's really high stress for all your family members because the police regularly raid your
house, knock over all your shit, bust down your door looking for your son or your brother or your
lover. And you didn't do anything. But the police know if they can keep putting pressure on you and
making your life miserable, you'll try to get him to turn himself in or just, you know, turn him
out and be like, look, you got to stay somewhere else. I'm sick of the police destroying my life.
And it's the whole, the whole thing is fucked up. Anyways, um, what was booked to book to was
fuck was the name of it now, days of, I think it was like days of destruction, days of revolt,
something like that. And that one like just painted the grimest ass picture of a life on
a Indian reservation. Oh man. When did that take place? Now. Modern. Contemporary. Yeah, it was
due just the amount of drug abuse and drinking and child neglect and how no one has any future.
And they really just can't do anything about it. So what else are they going to do?
I know crushing hopelessness. Yeah, I know a guy. I mean, my brother met a guy in the military who
came from Indian reservation and he was like, yeah, that is the worst place in the world. I
am so glad for this opportunity to have gotten myself out. I met a guy when I went to the
writers of the future for the one week in Los Angeles. He was also came from an Indian reservation.
His mom actually renounced her Indian tribal status. Yeah, status. And he, he works now and in a
drug rehab facility and he's like, got his life on point, you know, he, but he still came from
that and he talked about some of that shit. And I'm like, that is just, I'm really fucking proud
of you that you managed to pull yourself out of that and your mom because, you know, you couldn't
have done it without her doing, doing her part too. Yeah, that's consistent with everything I hear
about life there. And it's one of those things to where like, I don't know, an untradable person
could say that they've chosen that life for themselves to like anyone could just get up and
walk away. But I mean, it's a bit of a walk to like the next place and be nothing's that simple,
you know, it, you've got ties, you've got, you know, your friends and family, you've got obligations.
And what are you going to do? Just walk into the city and be like, look, I've never held a job.
I don't have a driver's license. Can I, can I have an apartment and a job, please? Yeah, come on.
And I mean, that's, that's where I see like the fast life strategy thing making sense. You live in
an unpredictable, dangerous environment. You aren't going to put that much effort into planning for
the next 20, 40 years. You're much more concerned about, you know, just getting through the next
month or two and living these more risky fast life strategies. Yeah, you might as well get
teen pregnant and do some drugs because what else is going to make you happy or fulfilled?
Right. What else is there to do? You might like, you know, have a kid that you can,
I mean, sometimes it's just, I don't care. I'm not using protection, whatever. But sometimes,
you know, like this kid will give me some joy and some meaning in my life.
And that's really my, my thing that I was going to drive out with this episode today is that
culture is really fucking important. And it's, I'm not really that surprised with the culture wars
being as virulent as they are, because everyone seems to realize this on some level. I kind of
feel like this is like the steel man of racism, that racists are looking at it wrong. They're like,
black people are dumb and violent or, you know, Indians are all drunks or whatever,
because it's in their genes. Whereas the white genes are so much better. Look at what we've
done with this country, right? Yeah, look at the appellations. Yeah, exactly. It's got nothing to
do with genes. You've seen Neil deGrasse Tyson, right? There are tons of people with black genes
that are successful and good, slow life strategy people. The problem is with culture. And when
you're raised in that sort of culture, it's going to shape everything you do. Even if you do manage
to get out of it, it'll, it'll shape your life outlook for quite a while. And it's, it's self
perpetuating. So I kind of understand what like wanting to limit immigration a bit, because
it takes a while to assimilate different cultures, right? And I'm not saying that necessarily bad,
like every first generation immigrant I've ever met has the most insane work ethic ever. My parents
are first generation immigrants. My dad, I basically never saw him and don't have a good
relationship with him because he would work 12 hour days, weekdays and like 10 hour days on
weekends. There was never a time when I would see him. The I was married to a Hispanic girl,
my first marriage. Her dad was from Mexico and he had the same thing. He managed to create his own
company, same as my dad, because he just worked all the goddamn time to provide for his family. So
there's a very strong work ethic, but I can also see people being scared that like,
we don't want our culture tainted that much because culture is very important and it takes
a while to assimilate people into cultures. I've got a lot to respond to there because you said a
lot of things, but I'll pick an easy one first. And that's, do you think the, the intense work
ethic from many first generation immigrants comes from like the fact like, Hey, if I don't make it
here, they're going to send me home and home sucks. That's why I'm here. Not necessarily. I think
it's more of an innate thing because my parents were here on the, in the 80s, there was the whole
cold war going on. So they, they came from a Soviet country. So they got refugee status.
You know, they were in for as long as they didn't like commit any felonies or anything,
but no, they just wanted a better life. They were tired of living how it was back then and they
wanted their children to have more. That's awesome. I can, I can dig that. You know, it's a drag that
has the downside of like, I want my kids to have more. I won't see them until they're 30, but
right. I wanted to mention, and there's plenty of hard working, you know,
American, it's not just immigrants that work hard. There's plenty of Americans that work hard too.
Right. Did you happen to listen to episode 144, the newest episode of Sam Harris's podcast,
Conquering Hate? Yes. Yeah. So this is, this is related. He had a Dia Khan on and she made some
good documentaries, which I'm planning on seeing because they're on Netflix, but they talked about
how she, because she went to like, what was one of them called white, right? She went to like
the Charlottesville rides and stuff with the Nazis. And she's, she's a Muslim immigrant. She was
there. They knew she was making a documentary and stuff. But her whole thing was, I would almost
call it an absurd level of reaching across the aisle and to try and humanize people and talk with
them and whatever. But mostly your average run of the mill racist asshole, isn't your stereotypical
standard racist asshole. They're, for the most part, making arguments of like, you know, no,
it's genetic or, you know, no, it's, it's, it's not me. They're couching it like these, these
positions of kind of like what you were saying, the steel man of racism and, and you certainly
weren't either. I don't think endorsing that it was accurate, but that's, that's where they're
coming from. I wish I could just grab racists and be like, it's not about the genetics, you stupid
motherfucker. It's about the culture. And you would be the same way if you were raised in that. Maybe
I'll ask a racist at some point, like what they actually think, because I don't know. I guess
I don't know any racists who have any actual genetic knowledge. I only know like pre-racists.
My dad's a racist. He absolutely wouldn't couch it either in the, well, I don't know. I think he
would actually make the genetic argument. I don't know if he like understands genetics. He wouldn't
call it that, but he would just say there's something about them that makes them worse or
something. Yeah, I like that. You know, some people are born this way and then some aren't.
I think that's what my dad would say too. And yet like, he's not educated in genetics either,
but I don't really know. I guess it'd be interesting to have a talk with somebody where
this didn't fall apart in three minutes. Like, I don't know. I was reflecting on this lately,
because not that I don't have enough racist friends, but that like, I think I have one Muslim
friend and he's not a practicing Muslim. And then I was thinking like, is that like bigoted?
Should I reach out more? And I was like, well, I have like, you know, two dozen friends and I
can't think of any religious friends I have. Let me rephrase that. After digging, I thought of,
I have one Christian friend and one Jewish friend. And I don't think the Jewish friend is actually a
practicing Jew. Or I think he's a practicing Jew. I don't think he's a believing Jew. So I was like,
okay, my lack of Muslim friends doesn't mean that like I, I should probably have more friends in
the first place. But I don't think it's like I'm weeding people out. It's that I just don't know.
It's not like there's a big Muslim population in the area. There kind of is. I mean, I live
three minutes from a mosque, but like, I guess how am I going to make friends? Like,
just walk up and talk to people. That sounds scary. Right. I don't do that in real life. Like,
I'm not going to go try to make friends. I guess what I came to is that I somehow live in a bubble
where I have like no religious friends, even though most people in the country are religious.
The dark matter conservative world. Yeah, I love that. This is sort of how I think about
concern or what young earth creationists or something, where he there's like a one he did
this fun. This is a Slate Star Code X post where he talked about like, the absurd math of like the
sheer odds of the what a couple hundred people he knew or something. Now none of them were
young earth creationists, but they make up like 40% of Americans. So they're like,
the odds of this happening by chance are vanishingly small. So what the hell is going on here?
Do you remember which one that was? I'm sure if we looked up dark matter and creationist.
Right. We'll find it and put a link to it because it's a fun one. Yeah.
I didn't want to say that kind of a counter argument to your still man of racism.
Please. You know, the concept of we shouldn't bring immigrants in because they're going to dilute
the American culture that we shouldn't bring them in. Well, that yeah, we should be like,
I can see how some people might want to throttle it. I think I think you're
and also there's a temptation that I had to I had to resist to breathe life into your
steel man argument. Yeah. I think you're understanding the position. I'm not sure
of what you're if you're what your endorsements are what your actual convictions are.
But like if that was an actual threat, I would be worried. But I think we have
over like what 300 million people in the US and taking a few tens of thousands of immigrants
every year isn't going to alter that that much. Just to be clear, I didn't mean to cut you off.
I just wanted to make sure that you weren't standing up like here's why I'm here's why
racist arguments are valid. No, no, but I mean, I just want to I don't want to leave anyone
someone could be against open borders and still be a good person. I just didn't want to let anyone
quote mine and take this the wrong way. So yeah, that was a good clarification. I actually
understood that as just literally here's a steel man of this position. Not this is my position.
But like how did the Quakers do it though? The Quakers sort of aren't around. But I think
their ideas were just so good and worked so well that they managed to propagate when that,
you know, maybe I'm biased, but they're the sustainable ones, right? If you browbeat and
burn all your time in penance and church and whatever and your bad parents, whatever you're
going to weed out. If you're, I mean, the orders are still around to basically, we have an entire
subculture of that in the US. We do, but they're not like flourishing that they're not. Let me
think of flourishing. They're not the maybe they are. That's why I said maybe I'm biased, but I'm
maybe in office. Maybe there's yeah, maybe there's there's two
memetically fit ways to survive. And one is to like kick ass and take names. And the other one
is to say like, Hey, look, here's here's who we are here, whatever the passive, not pacifist per
say, but the the elitist. Yeah, I don't know. Elitist even sounds different. But I just the
here's the culture. Here's here's all the cool stuff we can do when we settle down and build
things. Don't you guys want some of this too? But we can give you the tools for it. Huh? That's
a slow slide. Yeah, exactly. Talking about fast and slow. And that's my point. Yeah, you're right.
Yeah, that neither of them evolutionarily or evolutionarily speaking, they're both
successful strategies. It depends on your circumstances, whether you're in an unpredictable
environment or a predictable stable environment. Yeah, so I wouldn't actually say maybe the
Quakers were more memetically fit. So what did they do that one though? I think they made society
more stable, so that their still life strategy was more fit. Yeah, if you change the environment.
And of course, like, that's not an easy thing to do. That'd be great, you know, run for office,
I'm going to change everything and make it better. But now we see that our goal is to make society
more stable, right? Well, and they did too, they founded the country with with the idea of keeping,
you know, a monarchy at bay and but we don't want any general chaos is what I'm saying.
Right. Keep things predictable, stable. Yeah, I agree. I mean, it's nice and relaxing to be able
to have a plan, right? I mean, you know, a microcosmic example of this that some people might be able
to relate to is like having a work schedule that isn't eight to five. And you get your work schedule
sometimes a few days before you go before your shift starts. So like, you know, hey,
are you free, you know, next Saturday? Oh, I don't know yet. Schedules not posted to Monday.
So like, just even that little level of like, you can't plan for stuff. And I know this is like
the dumbest example when we're talking about the the stakes involved, but I'm trying to think of
something that the average person can relate to. And having had a fairly stable life in a
fairly progressive area, my guess, very progressive area, I don't know. Denver. Denver is very
progressive. Okay. Yeah, I mean, compared to the compared to the hell scapes of, you know, the
Appalachian, whatever. Well, yeah, even compared to, I think, the average city in the United States.
Probably. But in any case, that's like the smallest examples of just like, the kind of
uncertainty you get when not being able to plan stuff. And so if your if your life is that chaotic,
then things are stressful and weird, right? So there was a whole other thing here about the four
strategies that we see commonly, and maybe in a future episode, we'll get to those because
they're really fun. And I would like to talk about them. But I think I covered basically what I
wanted to and we're at a good point here to move on to the less wrong or whatever.
Yeah, unless you had any final thoughts, Jess. No, this is a good spot. And yeah, we should
save the four categories for later, because there's a lot to talk about here. You can kind of map
them onto turtles too. Can map them on all kinds of things. Yeah. Okay, less wrong posts. Let's do it.
Alrighty. Our first one was policy debates should not appear one sided, which I know we've talked
about explicitly at least twice. So we can I want to go over it again, because it's one of the best
post. Well, it's hard to pick the best. If I was making a list of top 10, it would definitely make
it. Let's put it that way. Agreed. And it's really relevant. Yeah, it's really relevant. It was
relevant more than two years ago, though, too. Before everything went crazy and policy debates
were super one sided. So the idea is that Robin Hansen had this kind of thought experiment of
the black, the black market store or something. The band things store. That's right. Yeah, we've
talked about this more than once on the podcast. Yeah. And so the idea you can go in and buy guns,
poisons, whatever, fake drugs, real drugs, anything things that have been I'm not sure about guns
necessarily, not things that are illegal, but things that have been banned for you know, safety
reasons or whatever. Things that would protect you from yourself. Yes. Anything, any law that's
designed to protect you from yourself, you could go ahead and buy it at the store. Cool. Like you
couldn't go in there and buy rocket launchers. That's why I can't have a rocket launcher, right?
No, that's to protect other people from you. All right, fair enough. Yuckaski just pointed
out that some poor, honest, not overwhelmingly educated mother of five is going to walk into
one of these stores and buy a Dr. Snake oil sulfuric acid drink for arthritis and die,
leaving her orphans to weep on national television. People took this as like a I'm against this for
this reason. Yeah. Here's my heart wrenching example thought experiment of why this is a bad idea.
And I'm not sure if this is Eleizer at this point when he made that argument
failing to model other humans or just maybe his audience or maybe it was deliberate setup to
make this awesome post. I have no idea. Right. Yeah, I'd lean more towards the ladder. Me too.
He's playing one level higher than us, right? So his thing was like, no, I was thinking a
simple factual observation. Why did some people think this was an argument in favor of regulation?
Right. It's like, well, because you're talking about orphans and dead, you know, dead nice moms
and stuff. This is this is the line that maybe top five slogans of the of the sequences,
what might be politics is the mind killer arguments are soldiers, the costs and drawbacks
you for favorite policy or enemy soldiers to be taxed by any means necessary. This is so pointing
out that your policy, even if you really like it, has a drawback is something you can't do. You
must attack that. Yeah. And that I mean, you see this, if you make any argument that and we've
talked about this before, and I know I keep saying that and then talking about it again,
but I'll stop apologizing then for talking about it again. I'm trying to think of anything that I
haven't used before, you know, guns or drugs, speed limits. What's what's that like a energy
supplement that might give you a heart attack? I guess that's a drug. No, but that's that's a good
example because like a fed has been banned on and off, it seems like a few times in this country.
And there's still some form of legal way to get it. But yeah, basically people take enough and
their hearts would explode and they would die. So someone who's in favor of that might say, look,
it gives me energy. I understand the danger. And I'm trying to find a good argument to shoot in
the back here. I guess I'm saying like, yeah, sure, have it, but somebody's going to get killed,
right? Yeah, for all the people that are actually using it in the correct dosage and
cycling it and whatever you might have to do, there's people that are taking it with five other
things with like coffee and then like two beers and then go into the gym and grinding it up and
snorting it. Yeah, you can't stop them. I mean, they make I remember what years ago, they were
selling a crystallized caffeine on thinkgeek.com where you could buy those cool nerdy things.
Yeah, they sold a lot of caffeine related products, which is cool because, you know,
nerds are tired. We need all the caffeine we can get. But I was just thinking the point where
it was abusive. Well, that's my point is like the first time when I saw that the salt shaker full
of caffeine, some kid is going to post a video of himself crushing that and doing a line of it on
YouTube. And, you know, when it comes out that three minutes later, that kid died, they're going
to take this thing off the market was the first thing I thought of. I don't think I'm arguing
against during favor regulation there. I was just pointing out like some kids going to die doing
this. It was much less sophisticated version. It wasn't even related. It was just the thought that
like, yeah, some kids going to die taking that stuff. There are some people that are way too proud
of their caffeine habit. And I'm like, dude, it's a problem. Don't be that proud of it. I've never
been I guess I've met those people. Yeah, it's like I need my three cups in the morning. I definitely
know that guy actually I'm thinking of one guy at work. But I happen to have a caffeine dependency.
I'm not proud of it. It's just like, it sucks. But I need to I need one next long vacation. I'll
get all ween myself off of it like I always do. But that's just how it goes after the months at
work. It's like, all right, you know, one caffeine pill, one extended release caffeine pill used to
be enough. Now it's a cup of green tea in the morning too. All right, now it's a cup of black
tea in the morning and a cup of green tea at lunch. And now it's now it's two teabags of chai in
the morning. Progressing up the colors of tea. Exactly. Eliozer basically says, well, he asks
in the post, why do we want our policy debates to be one sided? And actually answers it like
because we didn't evolve to go into political discussions rationally. That's not how our brains
work. I remember this being pretty eye opening for me when I first read it. Because previously,
if someone had asked, I would have said, of course, policy debates should be one sided,
because they're the same as questions of fact. After all, you can do science on policy,
propose a new policy idea, defend it with evidence of how well a similar policy worked
before lay out the present cons and then make a rational choice. Then you can do it and study it
and see how well it's doing and then maybe update in favor of it, of keeping it or changing it.
But of course, Eliozer is right here. First of all, most people would just never think of policy
as something that can or should be treated like science. And I wish I could remember the name of
it. I was trying to Google this before the show, but Scott had wrote an essay about this thought
experiment where what if we divided elections into the fun elections, which are about status
things? Which colors do we get to wear and who gets to be on TV and then about serious policy
things? And you pointed out a lot of policy is actually about determining which side gets the
status and the respect instead of what is the best choice here or what is going to benefit the
most number of people. Which side is right can be a matter of which values and ethics you have,
who you think deserves respect. You can't really study that.
I like that Eliozer also pointed out in this post that there's some people that will think that,
well, you just got to be tough. If someone went ahead and got that and then died from it,
it's their own damn fault. They shouldn't have been so stupid. They were using a dangerous
product. They didn't do their research. They deserve to get hurt. And Eliozer says that saying
that is not being tough-minded. I've definitely heard that argument in real life. Yeah. Whenever
people talk about the downside of guns, that people use them to get killed. Right. Or let me
rephrase that. People get killed on accident or they kill somebody on purpose. If someone
is being an idiot, I can think of interesting examples. But actually, this is a good one.
I can't dig it up because I wouldn't even know what to Google. But it was somebody,
the passenger was taping it. They were driving back from like a, they picked up their guns
and they're waving them around the car. And this was like, fuck you Obama kind of stuff.
And the person shot some, I forget whether the driver was brandishing the gun and shot the
passenger or the passenger shot the driver. But I think they crashed. And I'm not sure,
they must have lived because someone posted the video. So someone might, someone definitely
would have said about that incident. Oh, they're just fucking dumb. They deserved it. And I'm sorry,
but I wanted to reject that this isn't a straw man. This isn't a, this is a real people make all
the time. Yeah, I would even. I heard this a lot too. Yeah. I know some people who, if you told them
the dead mom story, they would be like, well, you know, that was her fall. Like not my problem.
Yeah. She, she didn't read the warnings or whatever. And it's kind of like,
you do have to have some empathy for people up to a point. You don't know their story.
Yeah. The stupid orphan should have been smarter and had a, had a smarter mom.
Yeah. They specifically said like, this is an uneducated woman. She's probably like impoverished.
Like, again, I don't know what her backstory is or whatever, but like, she's in pain from arthritis
and she didn't know which thing to take. Yeah. Eliezer says that is not being tough minded.
That's just closing your eyes and refusing to live in an unfair universe, pretending that it is
fair that they deserved it, right? That a real tough mindedness is saying, yes, sulfuric acid
is a horrible, painful death. And no, that mother of five didn't deserve it, but we're going to keep
the shops open anyway, because we did this cost benefit calculation. And ask, can you see a politician
saying that? And no, I cannot, because it's really hard to say, yes, this person died, and they didn't
deserve it. It's horrible. But the benefits outweigh the cost of that person dying and people
like them dying occasionally. And that is how the hell do you say that? Like in front of cameras,
you would be eviscerated. Well, and he, he puts a finer point on this and for a real life example,
the next post with speed limits. And it's, you know, I think the speed limit between here and
Fort Collins, which I take at least once a month is 75 miles an hour. When you get to like the
real part of the interstate, not going through the city, I pass an accident, at least half the
trips, I usually travel more on the holidays. And then I've passed three or four on the same trip,
especially when it's snowy out or something, right? If it was against a lot of manufactured cars
that went over 50 miles an hour, accidents would plummet. And yet that would never fly, right?
Because we've done this, we as in nobody has done this cost benefit analysis of saying we'd rather
go faster than live longer. The market has decided. Yeah, I guess, right? As the next essay would
say. Yeah, that's that's actually a good point. Actually, before we move on to the next one,
can I quote his ending lines from this one, which I found just inspirational as all fuck?
Absolutely. I didn't want to push push on. And I had one more thing to say on this, too,
before the last line. I still wanted to talk about this one. Yeah, I just thought we were
moving on. I saw a good teaser there. Sorry. No problem. Just to re re hit that beat of,
you know, people who buy dangerous products are stupid and deserve to get hurt.
Isn't tough minded. That's refusing to deal with living in an unfair universe.
I mean, if that landed right away and everyone got it, then good. It took me a couple of
readings to like really have that that sink in that like you're right. If I feel like it's okay
because that happened, I'm not really facing it. That's pretending that the universe is just.
Yeah. And maybe it was when I read the next post that it because that's the that's the whole next
post is about that point. I think it's kind of protecting yourself to like, Oh, well,
that can never happen to me because I would never be that stupid. Right. Yeah, that that too. And
and protecting yourself emotionally from the fact that like, you know, if you acknowledge how
bad things are, then it hurts, right? Yeah, well, like that could have been my mom. Yeah.
Oh, totally. I mean, not the same as this mom of five dying of sulfuric acid poisoning,
but my grandma got scammed by some computer conners a couple years ago. Only like 160 bucks,
but that's a very substantial part of her income or of her money. And I was furious. I'm not a
violent person, but I had fantasies about like tying this person to a chair and breaking their legs.
Like this was just someone defrauded my poor old grandmother. She's in her 80s. She hasn't.
And how do you, how do you justify that to yourself? I'm just going to steal this money
from this grandma. It's fucked up. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Sorry. Oh, she was stupid enough to
fall for my scam. That's enough to push a grandma into a fast reproductive strategy.
That's enough to make me give you a side long look, even though you just all you did was
model them correctly. I think Jess, I'm like, fuck you first. But that's a job well done.
And I have already forgiven you because I realized you were just making a very good point.
I won't make fun of your grandma again. Thank you. She's a sweetheart. Even pretending to be a
scammer. Yeah, I have to admit, I struggle with the ethics of permissiveness. Well, it seems obvious
that there should be laws preventing people from harming others. I really like swung back and
forth throughout my life about whether it's right to have laws protecting people from themselves.
I mean, seatbelt is a great example. That's the one I was going to bring up to.
There's a seatbelt law. And if you don't wear your seatbelt, basically the only person who's
going to suffer is you. But there's still a lot about it. I worked in volunteer EMS for a couple
of years. And I started working right at the point where seatbelt technology had gotten really good.
The people that have been in EMS for a really long time kept commenting on how fewer deaths
there were or like really terrible injuries. I hadn't seen it before, but it used to be.
Was the seatbelt shitty before? Yeah, the technology got a lot better. And a lot of things,
a lot of technology and cars got better. But it's just a belt. How does that hold
hard technology? There's engineering. And wait, was it this podcast or was something else I was
listening to about how seatbelts were designed by like men of like average stature? And it turns
out that if they're going around a woman's form, when they let the older models would just like
snap their necks. Oh, not every time. But it was it was way more likely because none of the
crash dust on me had a female figure. That certainly wasn't our podcast. No, you're right.
I'm thinking this was on Reddit somewhere. Yeah, I hadn't heard that, although it makes perfect
sense. I'm like five three and seatbelts don't fit me correctly. For a while, I had to wear one of
those like completely humiliating things that adjust your seatbelt smaller. But now I just
have a Korean car and it's run solved. What was I talking about? When I think about it from a
personal perspective, I'd still like to have someone out there smarter than me making guidelines.
Like scientists say this food is unhealthy and recommend not eating it for these reasons.
And then I could read the paper and choose what to do for myself.
Yeah, for that to be an effective method, you have to have access to the scientist recommendations
and the education necessary to understand why you should listen to them,
which goes back to the whole unfairness of it all because you can make a law banning the Dr.
Snakey snake oil, or you could have lots of warnings on the label. They brought that up in
the essay to this might kill you and they might train the staff in the store to like,
I really recommend against you taking this for these reasons. But this is also why we need to
avoid label creep. Like if you start putting a label for everything, people just stop paying
attention to labels because it doesn't give you any information. In my opinion, that's the one
really good argument against slapping. This is a GMO labels on things because it doesn't matter.
And it makes all the other labels less valuable. Like nowadays, when you buy a prescription bottle,
do you look at any of the labels at all? Yes. Okay, most people don't. We're savvy consumers,
but the rest of it, I mean, yeah, on average, I don't like every single medication causes dizziness.
Yes, I know. Why is that a label on this thing? Especially because in 98% of people,
it doesn't actually cause dizziness. Yeah, I was gonna use the GMO example thing too, because it
it dilutes. Yeah, exactly. Once you get the feeling that most of these labels are
inexplicable and are just kind of there because of bureaucracy and to cover someone's ass,
you stop paying attention to them. Yeah, I do agree with that. I think the point this essay is
trying to make is that in the course of raising the sanity waterline, we need to recognize and
not flinch from the fact that the far greater benefits of promoting individual liberty doesn't
cancel out the fact that there'll still be costs, which will include sad things like dead moms.
But the dead mom example does really upset me, which I think was the point. It makes me kind
of mad that we as a species get so busy fighting about politics that we prevent ourselves from
trying to do better. Taking the banned items store example, I could imagine a world where the blue
and the green party are fighting over like harmful things should be banned and individual
liberty must be promoted. And meanwhile, the uneducated dead mom never had a chance because
she was uneducated. And we actually live in a world where harmful things are banned,
but you can still choose to kill yourself by going to a faith healer or using homeopathic
medicine instead of opting to use science based medicine. And maybe if politicians really cared
about preventing dead moms, they'd be focusing on making education and science based healthcare
more accessible. That's something I could see a politician saying with a bit of politicizing to
the phrasing, right? You'd have to change the science based medicine. You know, consumer protection
through education, right? Yeah, we're not going to tell you guys what to do. We're going to just
tell you what we know. And we're going to institute programs that'll better our schools, flags,
children, bibles, I don't know, all of the stuff politicians say. But no, I like that analysis
a lot. I feel like I put myself down, but it's really not. I'm not an in depth enough reader to
have gotten that deep of an analysis out of it. So I appreciate that. Thank you. Well, I had to
think about it a lot too, because I just kept going back to the dead mom example and why it
bothered me. And then I had to tease that out. What was your badass quote you wanted to shut on?
Okay, he ends, Eliezer ends this saying, it's not always helping people to save them from the
consequences of their own actions. But I draw a moral line of capital punishment. If you're
dead, you can't learn from your mistakes. Unfortunately, the universe doesn't agree with me.
We'll see which one of us is still standing when this is over. I like that one a lot too.
That is such a badass Harry Potter James Evans Varys sort of quote. I love that ending. I think
when I was learning moral philosophy and trying to just I don't know why opinions were on things,
and I've showed you a lot to them since, but one of them was was capital punishment. I didn't
really have a good grounding on like to me as a kid kind of made sense, like let's kill the bad
people. And by the time I was in my late 20s, I think I was sufficiently utilitarian to be against
it. But this this might have given me my one sentence. And I've used this sentence to target
against couple capital punishment in the last few years, or in the whatever year since I've
read this, which is like, if you're dead, you can't get better prison system aside, whatever,
you know, how bad it is, how expensive, whatever, if there's no hope for you to ever become a better
person, that's the most that's the biggest tragedy there is, right? So speaking of tragic universes,
Birch's law is our next less wrong post. All right. The law is a quote from a guy named Birch,
he was talking about SUVs. He says, I think people should have a right to be stupid. And if
they have that right, the market's going to respond by supplying as much stupidity as can be
sold. Eleazar says Birch's law is a special case of a more general rule. Just because your ethics
require an action doesn't mean the universe will exempt you from the consequences. If the universe
were fair, like a sympathetic human, the universe would understand that you had overriding ethical
reasons for your action and would exempt you from the usual penalties. The judge would say justifiable
homicide instead of murder and exempt you from the usual prison term. Well, the universe isn't fair,
and won't exempt you from the consequences. That was always my thing. And this, this is
kind of maybe part of the transhumanist manifesto, but the, the punishments seem to really outweigh
the crimes in the universe. For one second, I was checking my phone and then I get plowed over by a
bus. Like that's hardly fair. I'm usually very attentive, right? Or, you know, I am a peasant
in the 16th century who hasn't invented the smallpox vaccine. Now I get to dive smallpox.
Thanks, universe. It's just that the, the punishment scale is so severe in reality,
1.0, that I like the inspirational message from the last one. Like, all right, fine,
we'll see which one of us is still here. Yeah, it's also decoupled from, to some extent,
what you did wrong. I mean, like, in a just universe, there will be karma as well,
where if you did good things, good things would happen and bad things, bad things would happen.
But that would be dope. Yeah. I mean, to some extent, it does, but only to the extent that
you're either like, you know, building things that pay you back later or, you know, doing good
things and then the people that you helped are helping you in return and vice versa. But like,
only to an extent. Yeah, the universe isn't doing any of that and it doesn't care, you know,
what you did while no one's watching. Right, now that's a good point. And if the people are around,
like you said, I, there was somebody, somebody I know who was, he's been wheelchair bound for
35 years. He's got limited use of his hands, like enough to be online and I think do some online
gaming, but he was driving a drunk friend home and got hit by, I think somebody who, you know,
ran a red light or something, whatever it was, like this guy went out to go stop his friend from
driving drunk and he's been in a wheelchair for the rest of his life. Yeah, so it should be nice if
like, instead of that, he like found $50 the next day. Or something commensurate to being hit by a
bus, like something really awesome. Oh, yeah, totally. Yeah, right. So I guess I was trying to
think of, I mean, I was thinking of something commensurate until like picking up a friend,
right? Right. So, yeah, it'd be kind of cool if, I don't know,
he realized he was whatever, sitting a half of an oil well or something. I do like that the
example he picked is where we were literally just talking about people have a right to be stupid.
We cannot interfere with everyone's lives to that extent. And then the very next post is pointing
out, yeah, as if you're really believe that and you're going to stick to your ethical principles,
the market's going to sell people all these SUVs or homeopathic remedies or homeopathic remedies.
Yeah, like you can't escape the consequences of sticking with your ethical views here.
Yeah, as much as you don't want it to result in homeopathy, that's what you're going to get.
So that's why we sure you're good with those ethics. Yeah, that's why we should have classes
in school that teach you that homeopathy doesn't work and that faith healing doesn't work. And
this is, you know, they don't explicitly do that. Maybe they do now. They probably don't.
They don't. At least, yeah, it depends. Maybe if you get a nice private school education or
something, but I feel like private school tends to teach you about every single thing that is going
to be predating on ignorance like that. There's just too many of them in school. That's what they're
supposed to do. Who knew about Nigerian Prince scams when we were in school, right? We know about
them now. Yeah, I mean, you do know about them now, but I might have gotten some cursory guarding
against internet scams when I was in school. I got it from somewhere. The internet wasn't really
a big thing yet when I was in school. Certainly, there were no Nigerian princes yet.
It was budding when I was in school, too. I mean, this was right around the birth of Wikipedia,
maybe. So in any case, yeah, I'm torn on this, right? So here's another good quote to pull out
here, which was like, we don't send automobile manufacturers to jail, even though manufactured
cars kill an estimated 1.2 million people per year worldwide, roughly 2% of the death rate.
If you're going to do the response from the first post, while those idiots drive better,
he very quickly points out, not everyone who dies in an automobile accident is someone who
decided to drive the car. The tally of casualties includes pedestrians, includes passengers,
it includes the people you hit in the other cars, right? So really, all you and I are guilty of,
if we get hit by a car, is being dumb enough to live in a society that has cars. And that's to
really try and swallow the pill of, well, all the victims are stupid, is getting harder and harder
as the bodies pile up, right? We have so many cars in America because we value individual
freedom so much. Yeah, that's the thing. Sensible countries have trains. Yeah, he has this line
in here. He's like, well, oh yeah, it includes minor children who had to be pushed screaming
into a car on the way to school. He's good at driving some of those emotional beats.
But he says, and yet we still manufacture automobiles because, well, we're in a hurry.
And you're right, it should be nice if we had easy access to transportation or something.
In fact, even in Denver, they're raising the rates for the light rail, not much,
but it's going to be like seven or eight bucks for a day pass instead of, what, 580?
So almost the cost of a lift or a little under the cost of a car. But that's just kind of an
aside that, well, you'd be nice if we were going the other way and we're getting more
towards free transportation. Again, I like how even he is here, quote,
I don't even disagree with this decision to drive cars. Yeah, I drive a car myself. The point is
that the consequences don't change no matter how good the ethical justification sound. People who
died automobile accidents are still dead. End quote. I guess I'm now more hemming and hawing on this,
the distinction you brought it from the last post. It super pisses me off that I could be killed
because someone else says I have the right to be an idiot, right? Cool, you can buy all the
homeopathy you want, but you shouldn't be allowed to drive a car that's big enough to kill three
cars with the people in front of you on the highway. And yet you are. Yeah, the comments of
this less wrong post kind of devolved for a bit into an argument about whether SUVs are
particularly unethical. Yeah, I don't know enough about the safety. I know that all I know is that
my fiance drives a Forester and when my previous car was totaled by a Forester,
the guy who hit me cracked his license plate cover and he was completely fine. I don't think he
needed to take his car to the shop and my car was destroyed. So that SUV seems like a great
safety choice for him. Not so great for me. I turned out to be fine because he had the back of
my car, but I know this is like the essence of like liberty. So we're not going to solve this
dilemma at the end of our show, but I don't really know how to come down. The John Stuart Mills,
you know, on Liberty quote was my freedom to swing my fist ends where your face begins.
It sure is nice when you put it that neatly, but if I don't know where my fist is and I
can't quite see your face, how do I know if what I'm doing is impacting other people, right?
Yeah, who's to blame? Yeah. Is it the car manufacturers? Is it the civil engineers who
didn't design the roads to be as safe as they could be? Is it the individual driver?
So you put the blame where you can and if the driver was clearly doing something wrong,
then you blame them. If the car was defective, you blame the manufacturer.
So the fact that fucking God put us in these flimsy meat suits instead of indestructible
golem bodies. God.
If we could take God to court, we certainly would have by now, right?
Yeah. Yes, I guess the takeaway is to take it easy until you can upgrade out of your
flimsy meat suit and get some cool, shiny metal suit.
Or at least we get self-driving cars.
Yeah, that's the shorter term goal, maybe.
Self-driving cars get that death rate way down. That'd be pretty cool.
Yeah.
So who is Greg Burch? There's a link in the post which leads to an empty,
this domain maybe for sale page. So I'm assuming he is a guy who had a blog at some point.
We should jump on that domain.
Yeah, and I also don't see this one brought up very much, especially compared to the
post we talked about before the debate shouldn't be one-sided.
Why do you think that is? Usually when things have a cool name like
Burch's Law, they get brought up.
I have no idea.
I think because he coined it and it didn't take off.
Well, he coined a lot of things which it did take off.
Yeah, but this one maybe didn't catch traction.
Yeah. Which one will or won't.
And this one's not as a sink to some of the other things, right?
People have a right to be stupid and if they do, the market's going to respond by
supplying as much stupidity as can be sold.
That's pretty succinct actually.
It's succinct to us, but it's not as succinct as Occam's razor or
Hanlon's razor or something that you can summarize to non-rationalist and
they don't have to understand markets or anything like that, right?
Even in the rationality sphere, I don't see this one brought up though.
That's true.
And maybe because it's really depressing that you stick to your principles and the
market's still going to fuck you because it doesn't matter.
Yeah, it could just be random too, which things ended up getting quoted.
He does end it with saying we can suspend the jail penalty, but we can't suspend
the laws of physics.
Humanity hasn't had much luck suspending the laws of economics either,
which is a bit of a recurring theme throughout the sequences that
economics is pretty darn important and we understand a fair bit of it and you
aren't going to stop economic things from happening.
Yeah.
Like the market's supplying stupidity if you allow that.
And maybe it's not a good idea too either.
There might be an argument to be made that the positive externalities of having
cars outweighs the negative.
I don't know that I wouldn't endorse that, but I haven't done the math.
I almost would.
I don't know.
I only know at my office anyway one person who walks to work.
No, it used to be two.
So maybe there's the 200 people that work in my...
Well, maybe 3% of them walk to work, right?
All of us own cars, right?
Yeah. Well, except for actually one of them doesn't.
Because he lives near work, he lives near a store, so he's got his stuff figured out.
But yeah, the rest of us have cars and one large benefit is that I can work somewhere
that's more than a few miles away.
Yeah, we have mobility.
Yeah.
And I think anyone who owns a car has kind of revealed where they fall on this.
Well, what you do and what you want might be different, right?
I don't want to keep us going here, but I have a car because it would be radically
inconvenient for me not to.
Right.
And not because I think that they're great and everyone should have them, but because...
You're willing to risk your own death and the death of others for the convenience it provides,
especially because it's such a small risk.
Yeah. Okay.
And I try to mitigate that risk as much as possible.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
I do try to be a good driver.
That's driving is one of those things that for some reason feels like an
intensely personal thing to attack somebody on their skill of how good they are.
Okay.
Like, hold on, I think that I couldn't dig this up.
It's been 10, 15 years since I've read this, but attacking someone's ability to drive
is taken deeply personally, like attacking their sense of fashion.
Or their intelligence.
Or their intelligence.
It's like, if you say you're a bad driver, people take that personally.
Like, you have a bad sense of humor.
You have a bad sense of beauty or something.
On the flip side, everyone rates themselves as being an above average driver.
That's exactly...
Yeah, that's on the same side, not even, right?
People think that they're great at it.
And because if they're not, they see that as a personal attack.
That's weird.
Yeah.
Anyway.
Our less wrong posts for next time are The Scales of Justice, The Notebook of Rationality,
that's one, and Blue or Green on Regulation.
And we will have links for it at TheBazingConspiracy.com, like we always do.
Listener feedback on the last post, not last post, last episode that we aired was...
What did you call it?
Truth and winning.
Truth and winning, yeah.
We got a fair bit of feedback on that one.
De-Lind?
De-Lind?
De-Lined?
I'm not sure.
Posted, we're somewhat like the capes from Worm.
Our triggering events, usually related to losing religion and or having strained family
relationships, happened in our childhoods, speaking of rationalists.
Losing that source of easy happiness we managed to not join or be expelled by many other communities,
sowing in the seeds of introversion and the distrust of the authority.
Whatever powers we got, they cut both ways.
Seeing all the inadequacies and not being able to enact change on anything but the
smallest systems is basically a form of psychological torture.
There's a reason for our community lacking L-S-O-A-Bs, I don't know what that is.
That was the Lucky Sons of Bitches.
And having plenty of people struggling with depression, also not great for PR.
We are unable to combine our forces and act like a political movement.
It would be really hard to unite the group that regularly questions its founder
and is hyper-aware of the possibility of becoming a cult.
Anyway, everyone loves rational atheists with the appreciation of science and uncertainty,
just look at the Congress.
Interesting things to point out about, you know, some of our failings and shortcomings.
There's the PS here, which, PS, Eneosh, not to put pressure on you,
but you are actually a rationalist and a writer.
So if you want to promote rationality, aim for New York Times' number one bestseller.
It doesn't feel like what lies dreaming is a result of rationally creating the book
with widest appeal possible, which, first of all,
that was the sneakiest way to insult a writer I've ever seen.
Well done, sir.
But no, you're absolutely correct.
And the thing is, I don't want...
Okay, it's not true that I don't want to be a New York Times bestseller
because obviously that would be awesome and I would love the prestige and I would love the money.
But I don't want to write a New York Times bestseller if you can understand the difference.
You don't want to be a sellout.
You would love to have sold out, but since you don't want to sell out.
I would love to be that successful.
I don't want to sell out.
Like when I'm writing, well, when I wrote What Lies Dreaming,
I wrote what like I really wanted to write and what was on my mind and in me emotionally.
And I realized that that's going to be a bit of a niche audience
and that it takes, you know, also some time to build up.
But this is not going to appeal to the majority of people and I understand that and I am okay with that.
Because I have read, oh my God, I reviewed this book once called Red Rising.
And it is a number one New York Times bestseller.
The guy is wildly successful.
When I read it, I despised it.
I was like, this is crass bullshit sellout.
Like I don't know if people who don't read a lot could see this,
but when you're going through it, he is hitting every single note.
He's like, yep, the downtrodden oppressed heroic figure of the working class.
And he's got the four houses that, you know, the people are sorted into
and his house always gets shit on, even though it's the best house.
And then when he actually wins the thing for his people,
the evil people and the government take it away anyway and we're like,
no, we're going to give to the Slytherin House because we like them better.
And they just, every single thing is just obvious,
blatant exploitation of what's popular in the moment.
It just felt super tropey.
Oh my God, not just that it felt tropey, it felt soulless.
This guy did not care about putting forth any sort of vision or revealing himself on the page.
All he wanted to do was sell a lot of books and he managed to sell a lot of books,
but God, it was an empty soulless piece of writing.
And I don't want to write that.
Yeah. And if this is going to be a rationalist book,
I don't know if that's going to be a New York Times bestseller either.
Well, I mean, I guess he's trying to say that you could aim for New York Times
bestseller and rationalist to get the word out there.
Yeah, I just don't think that rationalist book is going to be a bestseller for the
reasons that you were just mentioning.
That's not like, it doesn't tend to be the sort of thing that people enjoy.
No, I read it the other way that I read it the way write a soulless book,
become super famous and say, I did this because I'm a rationalist.
Look at him. Look at how successful I am because of this.
Okay. You don't have to be a rationalist to
hit that formula, though. You just nail the three X structure and you hit all the right beats
and you throw in the four houses and the Harry Potter references and divergent or whatever it is.
Did you ever read The Drunkard's Walk, How Rightedness Rules Our Lives by Leonard Miladnov?
I didn't read it, but I read about it.
Then you read the premise and you're either on board or you're not,
and you probably are because it's unassailable.
And then the rest are just fun examples.
But he gives lots of examples of actors and writers and whatever.
And it's just such a crap shoot.
I think he talked about how Bruce Willis was trying to act for years and years before he
finally landed some job in a movie that happened to be noticed. I forget the whole story.
But it's like, everyone knows Bruce Willis and he's super famous,
but he could so easily have not been picked up.
And there's probably a million of him running around Hollywood right now.
I'm pretty sure that every person who gets successful in the arts
realizes just how much it's complete luck.
There's also the skill to enter your artwork.
It has to be of a certain quality, but yeah, we know.
They probably see themselves passed up by talented people,
or saw them audition next to more talented people and somehow they got picked.
Right. You see more talented people being neglected.
You see less talented people rising the ranks.
You see it the other way too. It goes both ways because there is some level of filtering,
but it is still very random.
Yeah.
And who you know.
Yes, that too.
Yeah. And I very seldom watch behind the scenes stuff,
but I saw stuff for Muslim and Thor Ragnarok.
Oh, I watched a lot of that because Taika Waititi is a treasure, the director.
Okay.
Did you ever see what we do in the shadows?
No, but I've heard it's fun.
It's amazing. I think you'd love it.
Cool.
It's not, it's like kind of like The Office where there's a camera walking around and stuff.
But with vampires.
Yeah. And it's just like he's showing them around their flat and whatever.
So he's the main vampire in that movie, the guy who directed Thor Ragnarok.
Oh, neat.
He also directed Hunt for the Wilder People, which you can see on Hulu,
I think, or Amazon, I forget.
In any case, Loki audition, or what's his name?
The guy who played Loki. Don't tell me.
Tom Hiddleston.
Nice.
I know all the Avengers names because for a complete idiot.
So Tom Hiddleston applied or auditioned for the role of Thor.
And then when they was talking about this, they showed some footage of him
acting Thor parts when he was auditioning for Thor originally.
And then what?
He doesn't look like a Thor.
Although I guess, you know, put him through a personal trainer work out for a few months.
Yeah.
Maybe they'll give him a blonde wig or something.
And then Chris Hemsworth, when he got the role, apparently he was turned down first,
and then his brother auditioned, and then his brother got turned down.
Then they went back to Chris and gave him the thing.
So, like, it was just such a crap shoot.
And now we look at, like, we can never imagine,
I could never imagine anyone else being Thor, right?
So I guess that was a really long-winded and unnecessarily detailed explanation of an example of
how randomness can play a big role in ways that seem to, like, make perfect sense in hindsight.
But at the time, it was just whatever one of the people judging the audition hadn't had lunch
yet or something, right?
Yeah.
Well, I mean, and the amount of randomness that went into just Harry Potter becoming successful
is huge, too.
It was a large part of it was just scholastic deciding, yeah, we'll pick up Harry Potter.
Yeah.
How apocryphal is that story of, you know, it sat at the main publisher, wait,
reviewer's house for months, and he wasn't touching it.
Or he tried it, like, for the first chapter and gave up.
And then the daughter read it.
It was like, dad, you have to do this one.
So he tried it again.
Yeah.
Is that true?
Probably.
Whether or not it's true, something like that could have happened.
And that's how random that shit was, right?
Sure, stuff like that happens all the time.
Exactly.
But yeah, no, I realize it's not bestseller material, but it's what I want to write.
Yeah, there was the, what was Sailor, I forget the name of the person who wrote that post.
So yeah, Sailor Vulcan had mentioned, why aren't more rationalists betting on prediction
markets and winning, you know, and being successful at business.
And again, it's like, well, I don't want to run a business and I don't really want to gamble.
Those like aren't fun to me.
So that goes back to the whole like, how do you define success or winning for yourself
as an artist, probably making the art of the story that you want to write.
Which I think takes us very succinctly into Rockham's comment.
Sorry.
Rockham says, another big reason why it does not look like rationalists are winning risk appetite.
Let's say I offer you a choice between either a thousand dollars cash or a hundred coin flips,
where you get 15 bucks for each heads.
The lump sum has the higher expected payout, but there will be some cases where the risky
coin flips get the better result.
Looking at the people with the most success, musk, etc.
and asking why we got less than them is classic survivorship bias.
The expected utility of the winners could have been lower.
Risk averse rational agents, even perfect ones, will never gain world dominance,
but they will likely lead happy, slightly above average lives.
Why aren't rationalists winning?
Maybe we already are.
And I really like that.
I think the survivorship thing has a good point.
If you're living the high-risk strategy, 9,999 of your offspring aren't going to live,
but the one that makes it is going to be hugely successful,
and everyone's going to be like, why aren't we successful like him?
It's like you didn't see all the other people that crashed and burned.
I also like it because it's kind of a cop-out,
and I'm just taking over the world now to prove how successful I am.
But no, I think that's a really good point.
Did we touch on this about what can allow you to be so risk-indulgent?
Is that it's not really a risk?
If daddy gives you $2 million and you're like,
I'm going to go buy a bunch of shit and I don't know what I'm doing,
oh no, I'm bankrupt, can I have more millions of dollars?
And the answer is yes every time.
You kind of have to just keep throwing losing throws to not win something, right?
If you're gambling in Vegas and you have an unlimited bank account
and you don't win some money, even if it's not more than you came in with,
if you never win a hand, you just suck.
There's something to the idea that with the 15 coin flips versus the 100 bucks,
if 100 bucks would make or break my month, I would take that in a hot second.
I wouldn't gamble any of it, right?
But if I was like, yeah, fuck it, 30 bucks and 150 bucks is the emotional salient to those
is the same to me right now.
I'll go ahead and take the coin flips.
So it varies from where you're at as the agent too.
I know this is an understood problem.
I'm just kind of reemphasizing it.
So yeah, I like the idea of a large group of people eating happy above average lives.
That's a good goal to aim for.
If we end up higher than that, that's cool.
But like even if we just achieve that, that's still winning in our book.
I had a last quick one that we can phase out if we want to take it longer.
Because neither of us watched the 20 minute video on the AMA post on the subreddit.
User Fidel, I don't know, P-H-E-I-D-L, said thoughts on Patreon's decision to ban Carl Benjamin.
And I watched the first 10 minutes of it and I didn't finish it.
So I didn't get the full context.
But I thought that I know that Patreon and other places have been banning some users over the
last year or so.
I know nothing about this.
I don't know who Carl went.
Benjamin.
Yeah, I don't know who that is or what's going on, so I cannot speak to it at all today.
Yeah, let's save the big one for later.
But I think my thoughts and this will probably generate some kickback.
I'm okay with Patreon banning some people.
I liked when Alex Jones was de-platformed.
I think that he should be allowed to pay for his own website and host his own stuff and say
whatever he wants.
And he can go to a street corner and hold signs or shout or whatever he feels like doing.
But it's not up to iTunes or YouTube or whatever to host his belligerent nonsense, right?
I have some qualms.
I see how it's like it's like silencing somebody if they're not allowed to use the platform
that everyone else is allowed to use.
And yet how bad do you have to be before someone's like,
I'm going to take your microphone away that I own.
Well, I mean, maybe you have to be like not a Christian.
That's pretty bad, dude.
I see what you're doing.
You're right.
So, but the, all right.
So we'll say that later.
Yeah, we'll talk about it next time.
Deal.
Or the time after.
Yeah.
All right.
Our patron that we're thinking this week is Ivan.
Thank you, Ivan, for helping contribute, keeping this going and, you know, making us feel appreciated.
Thanks, Ivan, you rock.
Thanks, Ivan.
You're awesome.
And we love you.
Trying to think of something to say besides thanks name.
Yeah.
But that might have just been creepy.
Sorry, Ivan.
We know your full name and address and a thank you gift is on its way.
Right.
I don't know.
That's even creepier.
That's even creepier.
That's even creepier.
That's also not true.
Totally not true.
People might subscribe more if we like give them random thank you gifts.
I, you know, I thought about doing stickers or something.
They're just super easy.
I don't know if anyone wants them, we could make them.
I could draw stickers.
We've got, we've got your awesome drawing that we could put on stickers.
The podcast art, right?
Yeah.
That's true.
Then I won't have to draw anything new.
Or if you want to, you're obviously welcome to.
But yeah, I don't know if, if there's literally one person who says,
I think it might be interesting.
I'll look into it.
How's that sound?
Sounds great.
All right.
Well, in that case, you know, keep an eye on posting review on iTunes if you want.
You know, you can join the discussion on the website.
You can look at the subreddit or email us directly at the Bayesian Conspiracy Podcast
at gmail.com.
Or wait, no, Bayesian Conspiracy Podcast at gmail.com.
Yes, that's right.
You'll be in that one.
It's also on the contact us page on the website, which is the Bayesian Conspiracy.com.
Yes.
And, you know, you don't even have to do any of those.
You can just tell a friend about it.
Say, these guys are cool.
Listen to this thing.
Yeah.
Maybe, you know, have them trapped in a car and then turn it on.
Inflict us upon your friends and family.
It's always my go to.
Yeah.
No, don't make yourself unpopular among people on our behalf.
But, you know, if you, if you, I'm done now.
Okay.
Goodbye, everybody.
Thanks, everyone.
Good night.
