The check-in table was pretty friendly vibes.
It sounds intimidating with two security people,
but I think it was jokes and good times all around.
And then, yeah, the coat check woman is really smiley,
really friendly and would make anyone feel comfortable
and safe to come ask questions and be themselves.
Mm-hmm.
And then everybody, I believe,
gathers in an anti-chamber beforehand to have, like, a talk.
Yeah, there was a milling about, which I had a lot of fun.
Some of the fluffers were feeling shy, but I was like,
this is great.
I interviewed, like, half these people.
I want to come meet everyone.
I didn't realize that you were out there
in the pre-area chatting with people.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, I thought it was just the dudes
kind of milling about waiting for things to start.
No, I chatted with everyone.
I had so much fun.
That's so cool.
Yeah.
How long did that last?
A good long time, 20, 30 minutes, I want to say.
And then we all went to the backyard.
Wait, wait, wait, wait.
Before we go on.
What was it like chatting with the guys?
What was fun?
I recognized some people from the interviews
and some people recognized me.
And then, you know, everyone was, a bunch of people flew in.
So it was all the small talk.
It was sort of like, oh, where are you in from?
Who interviewed you?
Is this your first gang bang?
Cool.
How do you know, Ayla?
How many guys did you talk to?
And was it like one-on-one, or was there, like,
when several people talked to you once?
No, we were kind of standing in big circles
and people grouped off naturally.
And there was also some kind of techie talk.
I would say, like, the overwhelming subculture
that these people belonged to was sort of, like,
nerdy techie something.
So a lot of people worked in AI or something
adjacent to that.
And I heard a lot of conversations in that vein.
Very cool.
I wonder if any professional connections were made.
I'm imagining the networking opportunities.
When I, oh, I guess I'm going to give you my phone number,
but yeah, we don't have our phones.
Later outside, we'll exchange phones.
I mean, that's got to be a really special connection
if you make with someone, you know?
You see each other mostly naked.
You both were inside the same person.
Maybe at the same time.
I just love seeing strangers come together
and kind of form a connection in that way.
The way people were so collaborative and cooperative
is like this shared sense of community
with people who mostly didn't know each other.
And everyone was there mostly for Alah
to fulfill one of her dreams.
It really felt that way.
It felt like everyone there really cared about Alah
having a great time.
And some people even said that in their applications
or interview, like their main objective was like,
okay, gangbanging sounds interesting,
but I just want Alah to have a nice time.
I want to make sure everyone's having a nice time.
If you're volunteering to only be inside
for someone for three minutes in a room full of dudes,
it's mostly for that person.
For sure.
And so many people traveled in for it.
It was a real commitment to-
